Independence of the Soul
========================

The verse clearly states that the angels take, and carry off the soul
of man from his body; which implies that, death is not annihilation or
non-existence. The angels will take the soul of the deceased, which is
in fact his real existence, and the principle and main part of him, to
another world to live there until resurrection.

وَمَن يُهَاجِرْ فِى سَبِيلِ اللهِ يَجِدْ في الاَْرْضِ مُرَغَماً
كَثِيراً وَسَعَةً وَمَن يَخْرُجْ مِنْ بَيْتِهِ مُهَاجِراً إِلَى اللهِ
وَرَسُولِهِ ثُمَّ يُدْرِكْهُ الْمَوْتُ فَقَدْ وَقَعَ أَجْرُهُ عَلَى
اللهِ وَكَانَ اللهُ غَفُوراً رَّحِيماً(( 100 ))

100- WHOEVER EMIGRATES IN THE WAY OF ALLAH, WILL FIND IN EARTH MANY
REFUGES AND ABUNDANCE. AND WHOEVER LEAVES HIS HOME, EMIGRATING TO ALLAH
AND HIS MESSENGER, AND DEATH OVERTAKES HIM, HIS REWARD IS FALLEN ON
ALLAH, AND ALLAH IS THE FORGIVER. THE COMPASSIONATE.

**THE COMMENTARY
EMIGRATION IS A CONSTRUCTIVE ISLAMIC INSTRUCTION
(VERSE NO. 100)**

Following the argument about those, who, due to their short comings,
failed to perform the commandment of emigration, and consequently were
undergone many difficulties and misfortunes, here again with
decisiveness the importance of emigration is notified to them in two
phases: The verse firstly points at the material bounties and blessings
that the emigrant may obtain in this present life: \`\`Those who
emigrate in the way of Allah will find many refuges and safe and secure
places to live in, and they also may find extensive provisions and
facilities for living.''

[ 578 ]

In the second stage, the verse gives an account of the moral and
spiritual consequences of their emigration: \`\`Whoever leaves his house
to emigrate in the way of Allah and His Messenger, and death overtakes
him, God is responsible for him; and his reward is fallen upon
Allah.''

In any way or any case, the emigration is a victory and a high gain for
the emigrant. Emigration is a common natural law observed by a great
many of the creatures. There are so many emigrant birds in the nature
that when they find their life in danger somehow, they move on, and
emigrate to another place where they can be safe and secure. It is also
worthy of note that emigration (HIJRAT) from Mecca to Medina has become
the origin of the current dating system for giving dates of the Islamic
era.

From Islamic point of view; emigration is not limited to the movement
from a local position to a distant place. It rather includes all the
useful changes from one state and situation to another. First of all the
emigration must occur in our innerside, by which we must move from bad
to good, and from wrong to right. We must keep away from evil company
where we cannot put him down; but we then have to organize a position
from which we may assault evil and its darkness. We must emigrate from
sinning and go to the rank and position of doing good through our
migrations.

وَإِذَا ضَرَبْتُمْ فِى الاَْرْضِ فَلَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ جُنَاحٌ أَن
تَقْصُرُوا مِنَ الْصَّلَوةِ إِنْ خِفْتُمْ أَن يَفْتِنَكُمُ الَّذِينَ
كَفَرُوا إِنَّ الْكَـفِرِينَ كَانُوا لَكُمْ عَدُوّاً مُّبِيناً(( 101
))

101- AND WHEN YOU TRAVEL IN THE EARTH, THERE IS NO FAULT IN YOU TO
SHORTEN SOME OF THE PRAYER, IF YOU FEAR THE UNBELIEVERS MAY AFFLICT YOU,
THAT THE INFIDELS ARE OPEN ENEMY TO YOU.

[ 579 ]

**THE COMMENTARY

TRAVELLER'S PRAYERS (VERSE NO. 101)**

Permission is given to Muslims to shorten their prayers when they are
on journey. The practice of the prophet shows that; danger is not an
essential condition for shortening the prayers during the journey. It
might have been so in the first cases, because almost all the journeys
of Muslims during the prophet's life time were full of danger!

Some commentators believe that the permission at first was due to fear
and danger, and later it was extended and became a common instruction to
cover all sorts of journeys with fear, or without. After all, the
commandments about such prayers that are performed in fear and dangerous
states, are issued through the next verse. Now almost all sects of
Muslims shorten their prayers when they are on journey. The apostle
himself used to reduce the prayers of noon, after noon, and night, from
their usual four units to only two units, when he was travelling. This
is an order, and a favour of God to passengers on their journey.

وَإِذَا كُنتَ فِيهِمْ فَأَقَمْتَ لَهُمُ الصَّلَوةَ فَلْتَقُمْ طَآئِفَةٌ
مِّنْهُم مَّعَكَ وَلْيَأْخُذُوا أَسْلِحَتَهُمْ فَإِذَا سَجَدُوا
فَلْيَكُونُوا مِن وَرَآئِكُمْ وَلْتَأْتِ طَآئِفَةٌ أُخرى لَمْ يُصَلُّوا
فَلْيُصَلُّوا مَعَكَ وَلْيَأْخُذُوا حِذْرَهُمْ وَأَسْلِحَتَهُمْ وَدَّ
الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَوْ تَغْفُلُونَ عَنْ أَسْلِحَتِكُمْ وَأَمْتِعَتِكُمْ
فَيَمِيلُونَ عَلَيْكُم مَّيْلَةً وَحِدَةً وَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ إِن
كَانَ بِكُمْ أَذىً مِّن مَّطَر أَوْكُنتُم مَّرْضَى أَن تَضَعُوا
أَسْلِحَتَكُمْ وَخُذُوا حِذْرَكُمْ إِنَّ اللهَ أَعَدَّ لِلْكَـفِرِينَ
عَذَاباً مُّهِيناً(( 102 ))

102- AND WHEN YOU ARE AMONG THEM CONDUCTING THEIR PRAYER, LET A PARTY
OF THEM STAND UP WITH YOU TAKING THEIR ARMS WITH THEM. WHEN THEY
PROSTRATED (HAVE THEIR PRAYER FINISHED) LET THEM TAKE THEIR POSITION IN
THE REAR OF YOU, AND LET ANOTHER PARTY WHO HAVE NOT PRAYED, COME UP AND
PRAY WITH YOU. THESE TOO,

[ 580 ]

SHOULD TAKE THEIR ARMS AND PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES. THE INFIDELS WISH
YOU TO BE HEEDLESS OF YOUR WEAPON AND YOUR BAGGAGE TO MAKE AN ASSAULT ON
YOU AT ONCE.

THERE IS NO BLAME ON YOU IF YOU PUT AWAY YOUR ARMS WHEN YOU ARE ANNOYED
BY RAIN, OR IF YOU ARE SICK, BUT HAVE WITH YOU, YOUR PRECAUTIONARY
MEANS. (SUCH AS YOUR HELMET AND YOUR CHAIN MAIL) ALLAH HAS PREPARED FOR
THE UNBELIEVERS A HUMILIATING PUNISHMENT.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION. (VERSE NO. 102)**

The prophet in accompany with a great many Muslims, set out of Medina
with the intention of performing the rites of pilgrimage in Mecca. When
they reached a land named HUDAYBIYEH, near the sacred town, the Meccan
idolaters became aware of the prophet's approach, and decided to prevent
them coming nearer.

They mobilized a battalion, consisting of two hundred warriors
commanded by KHALID- IBN- VALID, to stop Mohammad and his followers to
come closer. KHALID concealed his forces behind the hills and beyond the
rocks, waiting for the afternoon prayer to keep the Muslims busy in
worship of God, so that they might make an assault on them at once to
defeat them unexpectedly and by surprise attack. To this effect the
above verse which is known as the verse of fear, revealed.

**THE PRAYER IN FEAR**

The congregational prayer in danger and fear and close to enemy, rests
on the principle that the congregation should be divided

[ 581 ]

into two parties. Then those prayers that consist of four units
(RAK'AT) are reduced to only two units. One party prays while the second
party watches the enemy or attends the fights. The first party rehearse
one unit of the prayer with the Imam, (HE WHO CONDUCTS THE PRAYER) and
for the second unit they do it themselves and individually. When their
prayer is finished they return urgently to the battle field, to release
another shift to come and do the prayer in the same way.

They all perform half of their pryer congregationally and the other
half individually. Other methods of performance have also been
recommended according to circumstances, that was actually done by the
prophet at different times, but the above mentioned method is the most
common way of doing that. Anyhow, in such prayers, all precautions are
to be observed to prevent a surprise attack by the enemy.

Therefore it is ordered that even in the prayer the armour and arms
should be on, except when rain and illness is likely to cause
inconvenience.

فَإِذَا قَضَيْتُمُ الصَّلَوةَ فَاذْكُرُوا اللهَ قِيَـماً وَقُعُوداً
وَعَلَى جُنُوبِكُمْ فَإِذَا اطْمَأْنَنتُمْ فَأَقِيمُوا الصَّلَوةَ إِنَّ
الصَّلَوةَ كَانَتْ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ كِتَـباً مَّوْقُوتاً(( 103 ))

103- THEN WHEN YOU HAVE FINISHED THE PRAYER, REMEMBER ALLAH STANDING,
SITTING, AND ON YOUR SIDES. THEN WHEN YOU ARE SECURE, PERFORM THE
PRAYER, THAT THE PRAYER IS A DUTY INCUMBENT ON THE BELIEVERS, TO BE
PERFORMED AT APPOINTED TIME.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE IMPORTANCE OF PRAYER (VERSE NO. 103)**

The prayer is so important a duty made incumbent upon the believers
that even in the warfare it is not raised. After performing his

[ 582 ]

reduced prayer in fear and danger, the warrior has to remember his Lord
in his various condition of standing, sitting, or laying on his sides.
It then implies that it is not fit for man to forget his Lord at any
time even after his prayer. He has to celebrate the praise of God also
in his rest and leisure; and during his working too, he should be hand
in work and heart with God.

Some people have objected saying: \`\`True, that the prayer is a useful
deed both for body and soul, and a good means of connection and moving
nearer to God; but why would it be performed in a stated time, and not
in man's leisure?'' Such people should know that in every phase of life,
especially in educational, and spiritual training, order and discipline
is a main factor, and an important principle.

وَلاَ تَهِنُوا فِى ابْتِغَآءِ الْقَوْمِ إِن تَكُونُوا تَأْلَمُونَ
فَإِنَّهُمْ يَأْلَمُونَ كَمَا تَأْلَمُونَ وَتَرْجُونَ مِنَ اللهِ مَا لاَ
يَرْجُونَ وَكَانَ اللهُ عَلِيماً حَكِيماً(( 104 ))

104- AND SLACKEN NOT IN FOLLOWING THE ENEMY. IF YOU HAVE SUFFERED, THEY
TOO HAVE SUFFERED, AND YOU EXPECT FROM ALLAH THAT THEY DO NOT EXPECT,
AND ALLAH IS THE WISE KNOWER.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION. (VERSE NO. 104)**

At the end of the battle of Ohud, when the Muslims fled in confusion
and disorder, so that seventy of them were martyred and many wounded,
the prophet, and a few of his companions who had not run away, stationed
on the hill.

It then so happened that ABUSOFYA"N the commander of the heathens stood
at the foot of the hill and shouted:

O, Muhammad! A day was for you, and to-day is for us! In the battle of
Badr you killed my people, and to-day I killed yours.''

The prophet ordered one of his companions to answer him. The

[ 583 ]

Muslims shouted in answer to him: \`\`Never is our conditions alike!
Our Murders are in Paradise and your murders are in Hell!'' ABUSOFYAN
shouted again: \`\`The great idol, OZZA, belongs to us, and you have no
idol to support you.'' The Muslim answered with the prophet's
instruction: \`\`Allah is our Lord and protector while you have no one
to protect you.''

The lesson that we may take here is: \`\`When in to- day's world we see
Muslims so much afflicted under the pressures of their enemies, with so
many troubles and misfortunes, we ought not abandon to despair. We
rather have to commit ourselves to the care of Allah and strive harder,
and make use of the same means and weapons that our enemies use against
us, and be hardy and active in solving our own problems.'' What a nice
poem is composed by Shakespeare in this relation:

Cease to lament for that thou canst not help, And study help for that
which thou lament, est.

**COMMENTS**

Following the verses of strive (JIHA"D) and emigration, we come to the
verses of prepration and encouragement. If we have to endure some
hardship in our affairs, the faithless too has to suffer that much of
hardship, and more than that for having no faith in receiving divine
support.

In all our affairs, our faith in God, is a source of power for us and
we expect some mysterious help from the heavens!

إِنَّآ أَنْزَلْنَآ إِلَيْكَ الْكِتَـبَ بِالْحَقِّ لِتَحْكُمَ بَيْنَ
النَّاسِ بِمَآ أَرَكَ اللهُ وَلاَ تَكُن لِّلْخَآئِنِينَ خَصِيماً(( 105
)) 105- WE HAVE SENT DOWN THE BOOK TO YOU IN TRUTH, IN ORDER TO JUDGE
BETWEEN THE PEOPLE BY MEANS OF THAT WHICH ALLAH HAS SHOWN YOU, AND
ADVOCATE NOT THE BETRAYERS.

[ 584 ]

وَاسْتَغْفِرِ اللهَ إِنَّ اللهَ كَانَ غَفُوراً رَّحِيماً(( 106 )) 106-
AND BEG ALLAH'S PARDON, THAT ALLAH IS COMPASSIONATE FORGIVER.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION. (VERSE NO. 105 & 106)**

The chain mail of a Helper was stolen in a battle- field. A nominal
Muslim, named Ta'ima from the tribe of BANIABRIGH, who was given to all
sorts of evil deeds was accused of the theft, and he had indeed stolen
the armour. The case was referred to the prophet for judgement. When
Ta'ime felt the danger of infamy and public disgrace; he planted the
stolen armour into the house of a Jew, where it was found by Ta'ima's
hint. The Jew denied the charge, but due to the testimony and open
attestation of some of the elders, the real thief was acquitted of the
theft, and the poor guiltless Jew was accused and condemned! After that
the above verse came down and disclosed the truth, so that the Jew was
acquitted according to the principles of justice guided by Allah, and
the real thief was condemned.

**DON'T SUPPORT BETRAYERS**

Through this verse, God informs His Messenger that He has sent down the
book in truth to him to judge between people with justice. It also warns
the prophet not to support or advocate a traitor who betrays confidences
and trusts. Though the immediate addressing of the verse is to the
Messenger of God, yet it is evident that the verse consists of a general
commandment to all people, in order to observe justice in their
judgements, because to do it otherwise, is to leave justice.

وَلاَ تُجَـدِلْ عَنِ الَّذِينَ يَخْتَانُونَ أَنفُسَهُمْ إِنَّ اللهَ لاَ
يُحِبُّ مَنْ كَانَ خَوَّاناً أَثِيماً(( 107 )) 107- AND DO NOT PLEAD ON
BEHALF OF THOSE WHO BETRAY THEMSELVES, THAT ALLAH LOVES NOT THE SINFUL
BETRAYER.

[ 585 ]

يَسْتَخْفُونَ مِنَ النَّاسِ وَلاَ يَسْتَخْفُونَ مِنَ اللهِ وَهُوَ
مَعَهُمْ إِذْ يُبَيِّتُونَ مَا لاَيَرْضَى مِنَ الْقَوْلِ وَكَانَ اللهُ
بِمَا يَعْمَلُونَ مُحِيطاً(( 108 ))

108- THEY HIDE THEIR (EVIL DEEDS) FROM PEOPLE, BUT HIDE IT NOT FROM
ALLAH, AND HE IS WITH THEM WHEN THEY MEDITATE AT NIGHT DISCOURSE, THAT
WHICH HE LIKES IT NOT; AND ALLAH ENCOMPASSES ALL THAT THEY DO.

هَـأَنتُمْ هَـؤُلاَءِ جَـدَلْتُمْ عَنْهُمْ فِى الْحَيَوةِ الدُّنْيَا
فَمَن يُجَـدِلُ اللهَ عَنْهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَـمَةِ أَم مَّن يَكُونُ
عَلَيْهِمْ وَكِيلا(( 109 ))

109- HERE YOU ARE THOSE WHO PLEAD FOR THEM IN THIS WORLD'S LIFE, BUT
WHO PLEADS FOR THEM WITH ALLAH, ON RESURRECTION DAY, OR WHO WILL BE
THEIR DEFENDER?

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 107ِ109**

These verses are to forbid us to support those who betray themselves
and souls. In the cause of the revelation that was mentioned above, the
betrayal was charged on others, and Ta'ima had put the blame that he
deserved, upon a guiltless Jew, but here the verse turns, THE OTHER -
to - THEMSELVES, which implies that whatever of bad or good we do, its
reflection will return back to our own self and soul. If we do good to
others, as a matter of fact, we do it to our own self and soul, and if
we do bad to others, its consequences will be reflected back to us.

Another point that is worthy of note here is that; those who have
betrayed themselves, or others, for the first time, must be given a
chance to repent and an opportunity to amend themselves. But if they
were found continuing with betrayal, then they are to be dealt with

[ 586 ]

otherwise, and according to the principles of justice, which is taught
by Allah. This is the stage wherein the betrayers are not ashamed of
God, but they are ashamed of people! of course their plots are fully
known to God, and if He allows them to betray, is not because God has
not full control over them. It may rather depend on the general plan of
God of which we may see only a small part.

وَمَن يَعْمَلْ سُوءاً أَوْ يَظْلِمْ نَفْسَهُ ثُمَّ يَسْتَغْفِرِ اللهَ
يَجِدِ اللهَ غَفُوراً رَّحِيماً(( 110 )) 110- AND HE WHO DOES EVIL, OR
OPPRESSES HIS SOUL, THEN HE BEGS ALLAH'S PARDON, HE SHALL FIND ALLAH
COMPASSIONATE FORGIVER.

وَمَن يَكْسِبْ إِثْماً فَإِنَّمَا يَكْسِبُهُ عَلَى نَفْسِهِ وَكَانَ
اللهُ عَلِيماً حَكِيماً(( 111 )) 111- AND HE WHO EARNS A SIN, HE ONLY
EARNS IT AGAINST HIMSELF AND ALLAH IS THE WISE KNOWER.

وَمَن يَكْسِبْ خَطِيئَةً أَوْ إِثْماً ثُمَّ يَرْمِ بِهِ بَرِيئاً فَقَدِ
احْتَمَلَ بُهْتَـناً وَإِثْماً مُّبِيناً(( 112 )) 112- AND HE WHO EARNS
A FAULT OR A SIN, AND CHARGES AN INNOCENT WITH IT, HE HAS CARRIED A
CALUMNY AND MANIFEST SIN.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 110ِ112**

Following the arguments about betrayal and calumny; in these three
verses; three cases are considered, and three general instructions are
issued on them:

1- The way to repentance is always open, and if you do wrong and evil,
but cease and repent, the Lord God who is the Most Compassionate
Forgiver will pardon you.

[ 587 ]

2- If you do ill and evil, but stop not doing that, and repent not, you
will have to suffer the full spiritual and material consequences of your
deeds.

3- Calumny is counted as a very great and heinous sin. If you do
something bad, and impute it to another one who is innocent, your
original guilt remains with the addition of the consequences of your
false accusation, and the offense that you have maliciously charged on
the other.

**THE CRIME OF CALUMNY**

Slander, or accusing some body of calumny, is one of the ugliest deeds
condemned by Islam. The prophet Mohammad (AS) has said: \`\`Whoever
makes a false statement, intending to damage the reputation of a
believing man or woman, or who says something untrue about them, in
Dooms Day, Allah will set him upon a hill of fire, to get rid of the
responsibilities of what he has forged.''

وَلَوْلاَ فَضْلُ اللهِ عَلَيْكَ وَرَحْمَتُهُ لَهَمَّت طَّآئِفَةٌ
مِّنْهُمْ أَن يُضِلُّوكَ وَمَا يُضِلُّونَ إِلاَّ أَنفُسَهُمْ وَمَا
يَضُرُّونَكَ مِن شَىْء وَأَنزَلَ اللهُ عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَـبَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ
وَعَلَّمَكَ مَالَمْ تَكُن تَعْلَمُ وَكَانَ فَضْلُ اللهِ عَلَيْكَ
عَظِيماً(( 113 ))

113- AND WERE IT NOT FOR ALLAH'S GRACE UPON YOU AND HIS MERCY, A PARTY
OF THEM TRIED TO LEAD YOU ASTRAY; BUT THEY WILL ONLY LEAD THEMSELVES
ASTRAY, AND THEY WILL HARM YOU NOT ANYTHING. AND ALLAH HAS SENT DOWN TO
YOU THE BOOK AND WISDOM, AND TAUGHT YOU WHAT YOU KNEW NOT; AND ALLAH'S
GRACE ON YOU HAS BEEN GREAT.

[ 588 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 113**

This verse points to another phase of the advent of Ta'ima of ABIRAGH
who, imputed his theft upon a Jew. \`\`A party of them tried to lead you
astray, but they only lead themselves astray, and they can harm you
nothing.'' They intended to charge a guiltless Jew with their own guilt,
through the judgement of the prophet, but due to the Grace and Mercy of
God upon His Messenger, the calumniators failed to do so. Among the
Grace of God upon His prophet and His Mercy, is the Book and Wisdom that
Allah has taught him what he knew it not, and whatever he needed for his
guidance and leadership. They did try to mislead the prophet in the
judgement but they failed because, God was with His Messenger, and the
Messenger with his Lord. So their evil turned upon themselves, and they
led only themselves to the wrong way, and could not harm the prophet the
all.

**THE INFALLIBILITY OF THE PROPHET.**

The above verse is among those that are used to prove the innocence and
the infallibility of the prophets. Because of their critical duty of
guidance and leadership, Allah bestows on them His Grace and Mercy. God
Keeps them aloof of sinning and doing wrong or to judge with unjustice.
Allah Has given them the Scripture and Wisdom, and has taught them what
they knew it not; and by His especial care, God has insured them against
all sorts of erring and evil: \`\`They tried to lead you astray, but
they will lead themselves astray.''

لاَّ خَيْرَ فِى كَثِير مِّن نَّجْوَهُمْ إِلاَّ مَنْ أَمَرَ بِصَدَقَة
أَوْ مَعْرُوف أَوْ إِصْلَـح بَيْنَ النَّاسِ وَمَن يَفْعَلْ ذَلِكَ
ابْتِغَآءَ مَرْضَاتِ اللهِ فَسَوْفَ نُؤْتِيهِ أَجْراً عَظِيماً(( 114 ))
114- NO GOOD IS THERE IN MUCH OF THEIR CONSPIRACIES, (AND THEIR PRIVATE
MEETINGS) EXCEPT FOR HIM, WHO BADE TO CHARITY OR GOODNESS, OR
RECONCILIATION BETWEEN PEOPLE. AND WHOEVER DOES THAT SEEKING ALLAH'S
CONSENT, SOON SHALL WE GIVE HIM A GREAT REWARD.

[ 589 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
WHISPERS (VERSE NO. 114)**

The Arabic \`NAJWA' literally means whisper, with other shades of
meaning such as conspiracy and secrecy, and generally to speak covertly
in criticism or plots. Usually it is used for evil purposes, acts, or
motives, because the person who insists to hide his words and acts, must
be ashamed, or in fear, of revealing them! So has the Glorious Qura"n
disapproved it saying: \`\`There is no goodness in much of their
whispers or conspiracies.'' There are exceptions in this case too, as
there are most probably in most of the affairs: As an instance given in
the verse; doing a deed of charity in which publicity may damage the
prestige and reputation of the recipient, whom you have to consider his
feelings. Another case of exception here, is where there is a delicate
question of reconcilition between people, when the case is nervously
sensitive and irritable. After all, whispering, and secrecy in the
presence of a number of people may raise suspicions and even create
pessimism with the effect of depressing the others. Therefore, Islam
disapproves of secrecy and enjoins all our consultations and acts, to be
open and frank.

وَمَن يُشَاقِقِ الرَّسُولَ مِن بَعْدِ مَا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُ الْهُدَى
وَيَتَّبِعْ غَيْرَ سَبِيلِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ نُوَلِّهِ مَا تَوَلَّى
وَنُصْلِهِ جَهَنَّمَ وَسَآءَتْ مَصِيراً(( 115 ))

115- AND WHOEVER CONTENDS WITH THE MESSENGER AFTER THE GUIDANCE HAS
BECOME CLEAR TO HIM, AND FOLLOWS A WAY OTHER THAN THAT OF THE BELIEVERS,
WE SHALL LEAD HIM IN THE WAY THAT HE HAS FOLLOWED, AND JOIN HIM TO THE
HELL, AND A BAD HOMECOMING.

[ 590 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION. (VERSE NO. 115)**

We related in the case of the last verses, the event of Ta'ima of
ABIRAGH, who imputed his theft on a guiltless Jew! After his social
disgrace, instead of repenting and returning to the straight path, and
amending his deeds through penitence; he recanted and became apostate,
and openly abandoned his religious belief and hence the verse
revealed.

**COMMENTS**

When a person goes wrong, and does evil deeds; he has two ways in front
of him to follow: Either to repent and amend his way and words and
deeds, or else; obstinately insist and hold his wrong conduct firmly.
Those who don't mind to ponder over their destiny and end, will
naturally remain firm and steadfast in their errings. This will have bad
consequences that reflect as misfortune upon them, and they have no one
to blame for what their own hands send forth for them: Whoever contends
with the Messenger, after the guidance has become clear to them, and
follows a way other than that of the believers, we shall lead him in his
chosen way of evil, until he joins the Hell, which is the worst abode
and refuge.''

**REASONING BY CONSENSUS (COLLECTIVE OF OPINION)**

Our religious jurisprudents deduce our religious laws from four main
sources namely, 1) QURA"N 2) Prophet's methodical way or saying. 3)
Wisdom and 4) Consensus. The above verse (No. 115) is among those that
confirms the use of consensus for deriving a religious law where it
says: Whoever follows a way other than that of the believers, we shall
lead him in the way that he has chosen, and join him to the Hell and a
bad homecoming.'' Therefore, according to the verse, the way or the
method that the believers have taken, and agreed collectively upon, is a
basic principle of Islamic jurisprudents. In religious technical terms,
this reasoning is based on consensus or collective opinion, and is
called EJMA"E.

[ 591 ]

إِنَّ اللهَ لاَ يَغْفِرُأَن يُشْرَكَ بِهِ وَيَغْفِرُ مَا دُونَ ذَلِكَ
لِمَن يَشَآءُ وَمَن يُشْرِكْ بِاللهِ فَقَدْ ضَلَّ ضَلَـلا بَعِيداً(( 116
)) 116- ALLAH WILL NOT FORGIVE POLYTHEISM, AND FORGIVES LOWER THAN THAT
(OF MAJOR SINS) FOR WHOM HE WILL.

AND HE WHO ASSOCIATES ANYTHING WITH ALLAH, HE HAS INDEED STRAYED A FAR
STRAYING.

**THE COMMENTARY POLYTHEISM IS AN UNFORGIVABLE SIN (VERSE NO. 116)**

In the same chapter, the same matter and meaning was brought with a
little literally difference in verse No. 48: Allah will not forgive that
partners be associated with Him, but forgives whatever under that for
whom He will. And he who associates any with Allah, has indeed forged a
great sin.'' Sins are similar to diseases by nature. As far as the
sickness has not attacked the central point, and the capital of the
body, which we take it to be the brain, our natural defensive power of
the body may overcome the illness. But when the microbes manage to
attack and vanquish the original point of resistance, the patient has no
other way but to die! So is the blasphemy of polytheism which will
disable the most sensitive point or centre of the soul, rendering it
motionless.

The foolishness of puting up God's creatures in rivalry against Him,
and associating partners with the creator of the universe, will attack
the source and essence of our spiritual life.

But if the blasphemy is due to ignorance, and is followed by sincere
repentance and amendment, God's Mercy is never closed. We know that
almost all the foremost Muslims were polytheists, heathens, and
idolaters. But through the guidance of Mohammad the Messenger of God,
they sincerely repented, and amended themselves, and testified the
oneness of God.

[ 592 ]

إِن يَدْعُونَ مِن دُونِهِ إِلاَّ إِنَـثاً وَإِن يَدْعُونَ إِلاَّ
شَيْطَـناً مَّرِيداً(( 117 )) 117- THEY CALL NOT BESIDES HIM EXCEPT
FEMALES, (DEITIES) AND PRAY NOT BUT TO THE REBEL SATAN.

لَّعَنَهُ اللهُ وَقَالَ لاََتَّخِذَنَّ مِنْ عِبَادِكَ نَصِيباً
مَّفْرُوضاً(( 118 )) 118- ALLAH CURSED HIM. AND HE SAID I WILL TAKE A
CERTAIN SHARE OF YOUR SERVANTS. (TO SERVE ME)

وَلاَُضِلَّنَّهُمْ وَلاَُمَنِّيَنَّهُمْ وَلاََمُرَنَّهُمْ
فَلَيُبَتِّكُنَّ ءَاذَانَ الاَْنْعَـمِ وَلاََمُرَنَّهُمْ
فَلَيُغَيِّرُنَّ خَلْقَ اللهِ وَمَن يَتَّخِذِ الْشَيْطَـنَ وَلِيّاً مِّن
دُونِ اللهِ فَقَدْ خَسِرَ خُسْرَاناً مُّبِيناً(( 119 )) 119- AND I WILL
LEAD THEM ASTRAY, AND I WILL FILL THEM WITH VAIN DESIRES, AND I WILL
COMMAND THEM AND THEY WILL SLIT THE EARS OF THE ANIMALS. I WILL COMMAND
THEM AND THEY WILL ALTER ALLAH'S CREATION. AND WHOEVER TAKES SATAN FOR A
FRIEND INSTEAD OF ALLAH, HE HAS INDEED SUFFERED A MANIFEST LOSS.

يَعِدُهُمْ وَيُمَنِّيهِمْ وَمَا يَعِدُهُمُ الشَّيْطَـنُ إِلاَّ
غُرُوراً(( 120 )) 120- HE PROMISES THEM, AND EXCITES IN THEM VAIN
DESIRE, AND SATAN DOES NOT PROMISE THEM BUT VANITY. (DECEPTION/
DELUSION)

أُوْلَـئِكَ مَأْوَهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ وَلاَ يَجِدُونَ عَنْهَا مَحِيصاً(( 121
)) 121- THOSE ARE THEY WHOSE ABODE IS HELL, FROM WHERE THEY CAN FIND NO
WAY TO ESCAPE.

[ 593 ]


**THE COMMENTARY

SATAN'S PLOTS (VERSE NO. 117- 121)**

Here again the argument is on the polytheism and polytheist, who mainly
worship two deities - Females, and Rebel Satan. Some commentators have
understood the female here to mean some of the idols that were called by
female names. Some of the Pagan Arabs had chosen for their worship some
idols with names in feminine gender, like, OZZA - MANAAT - NA", ILEH, or
like the famous deity, Venus, who was the goddes of sex, beauty, and
carnal pleasures. The next verse points at satan and his plots and
purposes who deceives man by vain desires, superstitions, and false
fears. Satan managed to obtain God's permission to tempt and deceive
man, and this leave was due to the Free Will that God has granted to
man. So if man intentionally and willingly do not obey and follow Satan,
the devil will have not any force- majeure, or compelling authority over
man.

In the next verse we read that God has cursed Satan, and has him
outcasted and expelled from the realm of God's Grace and Mercy; because
he was so puffed up with arrogance and vanity that he intentionally
disobeyed his creator!

The verse then implies that; Satan has sworn to take a certain share of
God's servants from among the mankind, assigning them to himself! Other
verses elsewhere confirm that Satan's boasting is on that account that
the portion of mankind seduced by him will be so corrupted in their
nature that they will behave as if they are Devil's servants, and
worshippers! Satan has not indeed the power of seducing sincere servants
of God, or whom he intends to seduce. He may only lay his trap on the
way of some weak minded and capricious persons, who themselves have made
a ground for Satan to sow his seeds of evil. He may deceive people with
false and vain desires, or delude them to superstitions that proceed
from ignorance, unreasoning fears of the unknown, or mysteries. He may
entice and allure them by a belief in magic or chance, or the like.

The phrase of the verse (No. 119): \`\`I will command them to slit the
ears of the animal.'' Points at some superstitions that some of the
Pagan
[ 594 ]

Arabs had. They used to slit the ears of some domestic animals as a
mark that they belonged to the idols, and no one had to make use of them
or even to touch them!

As for the phrase: \`\`I will command, and they will alter Allah's
creation.'' It may refer to the fact that, man, by his nature through
his instinct has been created a Monotheist, and the worshipper of the
Only One true God, Who is the creator of the universe. But by various
superstitions such as astrology, magic, chance, vain belief in things
that do not exist, he is turned away from his one true Lord God! Thus so
many natures have been stunted and hindered from normal growth, and are
perverted from their original instinct by ignorance- by superstition and
by cruel customs. God has created man pure, sincere and godly but devil
defaces man's beautiful image.

وَالَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّـلِحَـتِ سَنُدْخِلُهُمْ جَنَّـت
تَجْرِى مِن تَحتِهَا الاَْنهَـرُ خَـلِدِينَ فِيهَآ أَبَداً وَعْدَ اللهِ
حَقَّاً وَمَنْ أَصْدَقُ مِنَ اللهِ قِيلا(( 122 ))

لَّيْسَ بِأَمَانِيِّكُمْ وَلاَ أَمَانِىِّ أَهْلِ الْكِتَـبِ مَن
يَعْمَلْ سُوءاً يُجْزَ بِهِ وَلاَ يَجِدْ لَهُ مِن دُونِ اللهِ وَلِيّاً
وَلاَ نَصِيراً(( 123 ))

123- (SUCH GRACES AND SUPERIORITIES) ARE NOT BY YOUR DESIRES AND NOR BY
THE DESIRES OF THE PEOPLE OF THE BOOK. HE WHO DOES EVIL, WILL BE
REWARDED FOR IT, AND WILL NOT FIND FOR HIM, APART FROM ALLAH, ANY
GUARDIAN, AND NOR A HELPER.

[ 595 ]

وَمَن يَعْمَلْ مِنَ الصَّـلِحَـتِ مِن ذَكَر أَوْ أُنثَى وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ
فَأُوْلَـئِكَ يَدْخُلُونَ الْجَنَّةَ وَلاَ يُظْلَمُونَ نَقِيراً(( 124 ))
124- AND HE DOES RIGHTEOUS DEEDS, BE IT A MALE OR A FEMALE, AND IF HE
(OR SHE) IS A BELIEVER, THEY SHALL ENTER PARADISE, AND THEY WILL NOT BE
OPPRESSED AS MUCH AS A SINGLE DATE- SPOT. (i.e. THE LEAST)

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION. (VERSE NO. 123- 124)**

In MAJMAULBAYA"N and other commentaries, it has been narrated that
Muslims and the people of the Scriptures waxed pride and bestowed glory
upon one another; the Jew said; we are the elects of God, and the
Christian said: our Book GOSPEL and our prophet are older than yours,
and the Muslim boasted that the prophet Mohammad is the Seal of the
prophets, and our Qura"n is not tampered with like yours, and will
remain unaltered until the Day of Doom, and that our religion and sacred
Book is of a higher class and the most advanced of all the scriptures.


