Why Did Iblis (satan) Oppose?
=============================

Satan is a common NOUN, that denotes the first devil, as well as all of
them or the devilish power; but IBLIS is a PROPER NOUN, including that
very devil who tempted and seduced ADAM and EVE. He was not one of the
angels but was a JINN in their line as QURA"N testifies. (According to a
definition by OXFORD, JINN is supposed to be s suppernatural being that
is able to appear in human and animal form). The following verse shows
that IBLIS was a JINN, and not an angel:

\`\`And when WE said to the angels prostrate yourselves for ADAM. They
prostrated except IBLIS, who was one of the JINNS, who disobeyed his
Lord.'' QURA"N - S 18: 50

His denial and rejection was due to false pride and arrogance, thinking
that he was higher than ADAM, in creation and position, and due to such
a haughtiness he rejected and disobeyed the commandments of his Lord,
and as a result of that; he lost faith and burnt out a life- time of
service and worship that he had piled up!!

[ 63 ]

**WAS THE PROSTRATION FOR ADAM OR FOR GOD?**

Prostration which is the act of laying face downwards in submission and
worship, belongs only to God, as \`\`praise belongs only to Allah, the
Lord of all the worlds.'' Here in this case Adam must have been some
sort of a QIBLEH, towards which the angels have prostrated themselves to
God, and this is what is meant by the MONOTHEISM OF WORSHIP. Therefore
there is no doubt that the angels did not prostrate themselves to
worship ADAM, but rather to praise and glorify God, for having created
such a wonderful creature and learned teacher, as ADAM was.

Even if we want to admit that they prostrated themselves before ADAM,
in the classical form of prostration, that was of surety, merely a sign
of their humility and respect, an exclusive of worship. Imam Reza (AS)
has said:

\`\`The angels by their prostration worshipped God and esteemed ADAM,
appreciating his worth and merits.'' VERSE NO. 35

After the mentioned events and affairs. ADAM and his wife were ordered
to dwell in the GARDEN OF BLISS: \`\`And we said: O, ADAM! Dwell you and
your wife, in the Garden, and eat of the bountiful things therein,
wherever you wish, but approach not this tree, lest you be of the
transgressors.'' (ZA"L¤MIN ROOTED IN ZOLM)

(The Arabic word ZOLM, (TRANSLATED TRANSGRESSION)implies harm, wrong,
injustice, or transgression, a symbol of which might be darkness. When
wrong is due to others, it implies tyranny and oppression)

We understand from the verses in QURA"N, that ADAM was created with the
purpose of living on earth, but at first, God settled him in a green,
fruitful garden, for the Time being. That garden was one, on, this, our
earth. ADAM was not acquainted with the KNOW-HOW of the life on the
globe, and he had to ADAPT himself some how to meet the new condition of
living on earth. He was therefore told to dwell in that said garden on
probation for sometimes, to get himself and his wife ready for their new
life and residence. Earth would actually be their home.

[ 64 ]

VERSE NO. 36

Adam submitted to divine commandments, but SATAN who was the power of
evil with the root of perversity and enmity, tempted them (HE & HIS
WIFE) and caused them to slip down from a higher to a lower state,
bringing them out of the GARDEN! \`\`And We said to them: Get you all
down, some of you enemies to some other, and on earth will be your
dwelling-place, and your means of livelihood for a life time.''

God's decree was the result of ADAM'S deeds and actions. He soon
noticed that he had done wrong to his ownself. Although, as an apostle,
entitled to Divine Inspiration he was innocent, and free from major sin
or guilt; he still had to pay that high price as a penalty for his
failure to obey the approved rules and regulations of the GARDEN, and
the direct commandments given him.

**WHICH GARDEN WAS IT?**

Was the garden in which ADAM and EVE dwelt, the promised paradise that
is rewarded to the believers? Obviously not; because the promised GARDEN
OF PARADISE is an eternal ABODE, and one who enters it, is once and for
ever, and he will not be given the sack. The garden in which ADAM and
EVE dwelt, must have been a beautiful GARDEN of Abundance and affluence,
somewhere on the earth. Emam Sadiq (AS) was asked about that Garden and
he said: \`\`It was a garden of those that were on the earth whereupon
the sun and the moon shone. Had it been the promised paradise, ADAM
would not be discharged of it.''

**WHY DID GOD CREATE SATAN?**

Some people ask: \`\`Why did God create Satan to seduce and tempt, and
persuade man in doing evil?'' To answer that, we say: Satan was not
created a Satan as he is now with the devilish power. For many years he
was a companion and associate of the the angels. He misused his position
and power, and began to rebel against goodness and truth, and started
doing wrong and evil and finally turned to what it is now. On the other
hand; SATAN can systematically not harm or seduce a

[ 65 ]

believer unless he is obeyed. As for those who wish to tread the path
of truth SATAN is a means of manifesting, and bringing to action the
possibilities and hidden power of man; for evolution always establishes
through contraction and conflicts!

فَتَلَقَّى ءَادَمُ مِن رَّبِّهِ كَلِمَـت فَتَابَ عَلَيْهِ إِنَّهُ هُوَ
التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ(( 37 )) 37- THEN ADAM RECEIVED SOME WORDS OF HIS
LORD (BY WHICH HE REPENTED) AND HE TURNED TOWARDS HIM BECAUSE HE IS OFT.
RETURNING MOST MERCIFUL.

قُلْنَا اهْبِطُواْ مِنْهَا جَمِيعاً فَإِمَّا يَأتِيَنَّكُم مِّنِّى
هُدىً فَمَن تَبِعَ هُدَاىَ فَلاَ خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلاَ هُمْ
يَحْزَنُونَ(( 38 )) 38- WE SAID: \`\`GET DOWN OUT OF IT, ALTOGETHER.
THERE COMES TO YOU GUIDANCE FROM ME, THEN WHOEVER FOLLOWS MY GUIDANCE,
NO FEAR SHALL BE ON THEM, NOR SHALL THEY GRIEVE,

وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ وَكَذَّبُواْ بِـَايَـتِنَآ أُولَـئِكَ أَصْحَـبُ
النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَـلِدوُنَ(( 39 )) 39- AS FOR THE UNBELIEVERS WHO
BELIE OUR SIGNS, THEY SHALL BE COMPANIONS OF THE FIRE, AND THERE THEY
SHALL ABIDE FOR EVER.

**THE COMMENTARY
ADAM'S RETURN TO GOD. (VERSE NO. 37)**

After SATAN'S temptation, and ADAM'S being enticed to evil, he observed
that he had done wrong and oppressed his very self and soul. He
seriously began to think of compensation and correcting his wrong, and
therefore, whole hearted and with utmost sincerity he turned to

[ 66 ]

God, and asked HIS help through a deep repentance. God's Mercy and
Favour came to his help, and as it is said in QURA"N, he received some
words of his Lord, and the Oft-Forgiving Lord turned to him in Mercy and
pardoned him.

**REPENTANCE**

The Arabic word TAUBA (TRANSLATED TO REPENTANCE) means TURNING, and in
QURA"NIC language, it is turning back to God from sinning. The intensive
word TAWWAB for God's forgiveness is from the same root, that we have
translated; Oft-Returning, (to His servants in mercy and forgiveness.)
VERSE NO. 38

Although ADAM'S repentance and return to God from sinning was accepted
and God forgave him, the effect and consequences of his wrong deeds
stood firm and did not change, and he fell from the GARDEN upon the
earth and he fell from a higher state of life to a lower state. God said
to them both - ADAM & EVE: \`\`Get down all of you from the Garden!
There shall come to you guidance from ME. Whoever follows my guidance,
he will be free of fear and shall not grieve - fear of the present and
future, and grief and sorrow of the past.''

VERSE NO. 39

But as for those who disbelieve and belie our signs, they shall be
companions of the fire, abiding therein for ever. If a soul in spite of
the Mercy of the Oft-Returning God goes on sinning against the Divine
Light, the inevitable consequence of such a sin and rebellion and open
resistance, shall be the blazing fire of Hell. Because his rejection is
deliberate, its consequences too, must be of an abiding nature.

[ 67 ]

يَـبَنِى إِسْر ءِيلَ اذْكُرُواْ نِعْمَتِىَ الَّتِى أَنْعَمْتُ
عَلَيْكُمْ وَأَوْفُواْ بِعَهْدِى أُوفِ بِعَهْدِكُمْ وَإِيَّـىَ
فَارْهَبُونِ(( 40 )) 40- O, CHILDREN OF ISRAEL! CALL TO MIND THE FAVOUR
I HAVE BESTOWED UPON YOU, AND BE FAITHFUL TO YOUR COVENANT WITH ME; I
WILL BE TRUE TO MINE, AND HAVE AWE OF ME. (BY PERFORMING YOUR DUTIES,
AND OBSERVING THE COVENANT)

**THE COMMENTARY
CALLING TO MIND GOD'S FAVOURS (VERSE NO. 40)**

The course of events of the children of Israel, then their PASS OVER,
and bringing them out of hand of bondage and their settlement in peace
and order in the promised land (CANAAN), is in many aspects and
respects, similar to that of ADAM and EVE, and therefore God addresses
them here saying: \`\`O, Children of Israel! call to mind the favours
that I have bestowed upon you, and be faithful to your covenant with Me,
I will fulfill my promise to you.''

\*\*\*\*\*

**WHY ARE THE JEWS CALLED \`THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL?'**

Israel is an alternate name of JACOB. Non-Muslims have given some false
and superstitious description about it: \`\`Then a man came and wrestled
with JACOB until before daybreak. When the man saw that he was not
winning the struggle, he struck JACOB on the hip, and it was thrown out
of joint. The man said: \`\`Let me go; daylight is coming.''

\`\`I won't unless you bless me! answered JACOB. What is your name?''
The man asked. \`\`JACOB'' he answered. The man said: \`\`Your name will
no longer be JACOB! you have struggled with God, and with man, and you
have won! So your name will be ISRAEL''. (GENESISِ32:26ِ28) TRANSLATOR'S
NOTE

[ 68 ]

Obviously the above mentioned struggle of Israel with God which is
quoted from the BIBLE, is a childish false story which is fabricated,
and a Divine Scripture cannot contain and carry such false tales. Our
famous commentator - TABARSI - has said: \`\`ESRA'' means servant, and
IL is from the root Allah, and therefore it means the Servant of
Allah.

وَءَامِنُواْ بِمَآ أَنزَلْتُ مُصَدِّقاً لِـمَا مَعَكُمْ وَلاَ
تَكُونُواْ أَوَّلَ كَافِر بِهِ وَلاَ تَشْتَرُواْ بِـايـتِى ثَمَناً
قَلِيلاً وَإِيَّـىَ فَاتَّقُونِ(( 41 ))

41- AND HAVE FAITH IN WHAT I HAVE SENT DOWN (THE QURA"N) CONFIRMING
THAT WHICH IS WITH YOU, AND BE NOT THE FIRST TO DENY IT, AND SELL NOT MY
SIGNS FOR A LITTLE PRICE, (CONCEALING THE SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS OF QURA"N
AND MOHAMMAD WHICH IS FOUND IN YOUR SCRIPTURES, FOR A LITTLE INCOME!)
AND FEAR YOU ME.

وَلاَ تَلْبِسُواْ الْحَقَّ بِالْبَـطِلِ وَتَكْتُمُواْ الْحَقَّ
وَأَنْتُم تَعْلَمُونَ(( 42 )) 42- AND COVER NOT TRUTH WITH FALSEHOOD,
NOR CONCEAL THE TRUTH WHILE YOU KNOW IT.

وَأَقِيمُواْ الصَّلَو ةَ وَءَاتُواْ الزَّكَو ةَ وَارْكَعُواْ مَعَ الرَّ
كِعِينَ(( 43 )) 43- AND PERFORM THE PRAYER, AND PAY THE ALMS-TAX, (THE
TITHE) AND BOW DOWN WITH THOSE WHO BOW DOWN. (CONGREGATIONAL PRAYER)

[ 69 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION**

It is narrated from Imam Baghir (AS) that: \`\`HAY - IBN - AKHTAB,
KAAB - IBN ASHRAF, and a small group of what they called themselves
RABBINS, and teachers of the LAW; were respected by the JEWISH LAYMEN,
and were entertained in an annual religious festival and banquets. They
did not want to lose even that trifling and unimportant advantage by
confirming the prophet's mission. On such a basis, they tampered with
the verses in their scriptures, misinterpreting the words and the names,
in order to deny and negate the signs and symptoms of our prophet that
was, and is, in the BIBLE! this was what they have sold for a little
price.

**THE JEWISH PROFITEERING (VERSE NO. 41)**

The revelation says: \`\`And have faith in what I have sent down
confirming that which is with you.'' That is to say that, you have
received REVELATION before; and now has come a new revelation cofirming
the previous one which is with you. Are you then, going to be the first
one to reject it? If the pagan Arabs, reject my revelations, it is not
so strange as your rejection by the people of the Book, as I have
informed them in my scripture that, I will send a prophet of such that
qualifications.

If the Jews were not so much stubbron and obstinate, they should have
been among the first people to convert and to cofirm the Divine Mission
of Mohammad.

Then the revelation continues saying: \`\`Sell not my signs for a
little price.'' In His fourth commandment, Allah calls them to fear HIM
alone; i.e. don't be afraid of your sustenance being barred, or some of
the hard liners of the jews to raise their hands against you; only fear
Me and obey ME.
VERSE NO. 42

In a fifth commandment through verse NO. 42, Allah says: \`\`Cover not
truth with falsehood.'' in order to cause people to err and mistake; nor
conceal the truth while you know it.

[ 70 ]

VERSE NO. 43

And finally God's seventh, eighth, and ninth commandments are the
perfomance of the prayers, paying the alms-tax (TITHE), and bowing down
with those who bow down. (IT IS WORTHY OF NOTE THAT THE CHIEF FEATURE OF
JEWISH WORSHIP WAS AND IS, THE BOWING OF THE HEAD-TRANSLATOR'S NOTE) It
is remarkble in this verse that it does not say: \`\`Recite you or
rehearse the prayer and by using the imperative verb PERFORM, calls to
give the prayers a general applicability in your society by performing
it congregationally.''

The latter three instructions consist of having relation and spiritual
connection with God through the Daily Prayers - having communication
with other people through alms and charity, and finally connection of
the individual to every body else through congregational prayers, and
bowing down with those who bow down.

أَتَأْمُرُونَ النَّاسَ بِالْبِرِّ وَتَنْسَوْنَ أَنفُسَكُمْ وَأَنتُمْ
تَتْلُونَ الْكِتَـبَ أَفَلاَ تَعْقِلُونَ(( 44 )) 44- WOULD YOU ENJOIN
RIGHTEOUSNESS ON OTHERS, AND FORGET YOURSELVES, WHILE YOU READ THE
SCRIPTURE. DO YOU NOT UNDERSTAND?

وَاسْتَعِينُواْ بِالصَّبْرِ وَالصَّلَو ةِ وَإِنَّهَا لَكَبِيرَةٌ إِلاَّ
عَلَى الْخَـشِعِينَ(( 45 )) AND SEEK YOU HELP THROUGH PATIENCE AND
PRAYER. (BY PERSEVERANCE AND CONTROLING INTERNAL CAPRICES AND PASSIONS,
AND RESORTING TO GOD. YOU WILL OBTAIN THE NECESSARY POWER)

IT MAY BE HARD THING EXCEPT FOR THE HUMBLES.

الَّذِينَ يَظُنُّونَ أَنَّهُمْ مُّلَـقُواْ رَبِّهِمْ وَأَنَّهُـمْ
إِلَـيْـهِ رَ جِعُونَ(( 46 )) 46- THOSE WHO KNOW THAT THEY WILL MEET
THEIR LORD, AND THAT TO HIM THEY WILL RETURN.

[ 71 ]

**THE COMMENTARY YOU ENJOIN ON OTHERS, AND FORGET YOURSELVES!**

The Rabbis and Jewish teachers of the LAW, used to make the Jews to
wait for Mohammad to appear as their expected king and saviour before
Mohammad was born. So, in the beginning of the prophet's mission, they
advised their converted families to have patience, and be steadfast in
their belief in Islam, but they refrained themselves from testifying
Mohammad's (AS) prophethood! For such twofold acts and roles, God has
admonished them in the Holy QURA"N saying: \`\`Would you enjoin
righteousness (Islam) on others, and forget yourselves, while you read
the scriptures. Do you not understand?''

These rabbis and preachers and teachers, were afraid of losing their
rank and position through their open conversion, and therefore began to
misinterpret the marks and signs of the promised prophet in their
scripture! As a matter of fact, the best way for priest or rabbi or any
preacher is to show what he says practically and through his good deeds.
Emam Sadiq (AS) said: \`\`Call people to us by your deeds and conduct,
and not by your tongues!''

VERSE NO. 45

To enable man to overcome and control his internal caprices and harmful
passions, particularly his blinding wishes for rank, power, and wealth;
QURA"N, advises him to seek help through patience and prayer, though it
might be difficult a thing, except for the humbles. (The Arabic word,
SABR, translated patience, is a very comprehensive word that implies
many shades of meaning, such as patience, constancy, resistance,
firmness in purpose and aim, steadfastness. Even the FASTING OF RAMAZAN,
is some how called SABR in the BOOk, for needs of suffering and
patience.

VERSE NO. 46 In this, verse it is pointed out as who the HUMBLE ONES
(mentioned in the last verse) are. They are described as those who know
that they will meet their Lord, and that to HIM they return!

[ 72 ]

**HOW CAN ONE MEET GOD?**

The phrase MEETING ALLAH, has frequently been revealed in QURA"N, to
mean being present in the scenery of Doom's Day which is the day of
final judgement. Evidently, and necessarily, meeting Allah is not seeing
Him by the sense of sight, as we do in case of seeing one another. God
is not a material body, so as to be felt or seen by the senses. He can
never be seen by human eyes, though He can see the eyes and whatever
else. In the field of resurrection day all may evidently see and come to
know HIS power, mercy, and judgement. We may clearly see His rewards and
punishments, but not his very essence and substance.

Meeting HIM might also mean some sort of visit through internal and
spiritual power of vision, because many a time happens that MAN comes to
know the existence of God with utmost surety and certitude, as a fact
unquestionably established.

**HOW TO OVERCOME DIFFICULTIES?**

To overcome most of our difficulties, two strong elements or
foundations are recommended by Holy QURA"N - an internal and one
external - these two are PATIENCE AND PRAYER. PATIENCE is constancy,
perseverence, and being steadfast in pursuit of an under-taking or an
aim. PRAYER is a stronghold, or an asylum - a state of retreat and
security which establishes our connection and communication with our
Merciful Creator.

Imam Sadiq (AS) has said: \`\`When you have a deep sorrow or grief,
perform the ablution and go to the mosque and rehearse the prayer, and
through supplication, entreat your Merciful Lord to remove your anguish,
because He, Himself has said: And seek help through patience and
prayer.''

يَـبَنِى إِسْرَ ءِيلَ اذْكُرُواْ نِعْمَتِىَ الَّتِى أَنْعَمْتُ
عَلَيْكُمْ وَأَنِّى فَضَّلْتُكُمْ عَلَى الْعَـلَمِينَ(( 47 )) 47- O,
CHILDREN OF ISRAEL! CALL TO MIND THE FAVOUR WHICH I BESTOWED UPON YOU,
AND I EXALTED YOU ABOVE THE NATIONS.

[ 73 ]

وَاتَّقُواْ يَوْماً لاَّ تَجْزِى نَفْسٌ عَن نَّفْس شَيْئاً وَلاَ
يُقْبَلُ مِنْهَا شَفَـعَةٌ وَلاَ يُؤْخَذُ مِنْهَا عَدْلٌ وَلاَ هُمْ
يُنصَرُونَ(( 48 ))

48 - AND GUARD YOURSELVES AGAINST A DAY WHEN ONE SOUL SHALL NOT AVAIL
ANOTHER, AND NO INTERCESSION SHALL BE ACCEPTED FROM IT, NOR ANY
COUNTERPOISE BE TAKEN, NEITHER SHALL THEY BE HELPED.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE JEWISH FUTILE CONJECTURES (VERSE NO. 47)**

A general account of God's favours to the children of Israel is given
here, through a series of successive verses starting thus: \`\`O,
Children of Israel! call to mind the favour I bestowed upon you, and I
exalted you above the nations.'' Such favours were very extensive,
consisting of God's Guidance, relieving them from the bondage of Egypt,
which was indeed a tremendous trial - and the PASS OVER - and being
exalted among and above the nations!

VERSE NO. 48

Hereby, God nullifies the Jewish false and futile conjectures by
saying: \`\`Be on your guard, or guard yourselves against the Day of
Doom, and the Day of Final Judgement!''

This is to say: \`\`Don't think that My Especial Favours will exempt
you from your personal responsibilities, or you can escape my punishment
if you mischief or do wrong. The Jews were, and are, of opinion that
they would be saved of God's chastisement through the intercession of
their ancestors who were prophets or apostles, such as ABRAHAM, ISRAEL
or ISAAQ.''

They may also think that they can offer counterpoises or some sort of
redeeming, in order to be delivered from sins and its due punishments,
just as they could do so in this life with the aid of

[ 74 ]

BRIBERY! Qura"n, plainly admonishes them not to rely on false and
superstitous conjectures, and to fear the day of judgment in which no
intercession shall be accepted, and no redeeming or counterpoise will be
taken, and no one save God can help.

To make it short; the judge in the Dooms Day is One who will accept
nothing but pure faith and good deed. In this world, the sinners may
resort to different means for rescue, such as paying ransom, or seeking
help through intercessions, or giving bribes, or finally they may seek
to indemnify or compensate losses. But QURA"N proclaims that the rules
and regulations of judgment is of a different nature in the Resurrection
Day, and means of salvation is pure belief, and the measure of judgment
is our good or bad deeds, and resorting to God.

In order to clear and clean themselves from their sins, the Jews used
to resort to superstitious acts, or sacrificing some sheep, goat, or a
couple of pigeons!

**QURA"N, AND THE PROBLEM OF INTERCESSION**

Obviously God punishes not for vengeance, nor mere shortcoming. There
are degrees in good and evil deeds. God's punishment is also a shade of
His infinite Mercy, and some sort of a guarantee to stop miscarriage or
non-fulfilment of the LAW and commandments' which may result in
evolution and developement of MAN. So also the doors of return of the
SINNER should not be entirely and sternly closed. They should have
access to some chances, and means to amend and correct themselves and
return to salvation.

The intercession, in its most correct form is to look after such a
balance, and be a means for urging the sinner to repent and return to
God and piety; though some think that it may embolden the guilty to
increase his making mischief. Some people take intercession as a sort of
partnership to intercede for a wrong doer with a king or a tyrant
ruler!

[ 75 ]

**INTERCESSION HAS ITS OWN CONDITIONS**

The intercession made known by the HOLY QURA"N is not without formal
conditions. There are degrees in good and bad deeds; the interceders or
intercessors, are in different rank and classes. For example the sin,
such as oppressions are out of the order and realm of intercession, and
Qura"n says that: \`\`Oppressors have no intercessors.'' The following
verse which is revealed to this effect may put light upon some dark
shades of intercession:

\`\`They (intercessors) speak not before HE speaks, and they act by
God's command - and they offer no intercession except for those who are
acceptable, and they stand in awe and reverence of HIS GLORY!'' QURA"N -
S 21: 28

That is to say: The apostles, saints, or truthful servants, of God who
are in a position to intercede for some one; will never say anything
before they receive God's order to say it. Those servants who intercede
have conformed themselves to the will of God, and for intercession they
first win the approval of their Lord. Therefore, the interceded for;
should have some spiritual connection with their intercessor, and this
might be a factor of construction and development for the sinner.

وَإِذْ نَجَّيْنَـكُم مِّنْ ءَالِ فِرْعَوْنَ يَسُومُونَكُمْ سُوءَ
الْعَذَابِ يُذَبِّحُونَ أَبْنَآءَكُمْ وَيَسْتَحْيُونَ نِسَآءَكُمْ وَفِى
ذَ لِكُمْ بَلاَ ءٌ مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ عَظِيمٌ(( 49 ))

49- (AND REMEMBER) WHEN WE DELIVERED YOU FROM THE FOLK OF PHARAOH, WHO
SUBJECTED YOU TO SEVER TORMENT, SLAUGHTERING YOUR SONS AND SPARING YOUR
WOMEN, AND IN THIS THERE WAS A GREAT TRIAL FROM YOUR LORD.

[ 76 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
FREEDOM; THE GIFT OF GOD**

In this verse, (NO. 49) God points at another valuable GIFT, and
important FAVOUR of HIS, bestowed on the Israelites, and that was their
freedom: \`\`When we saved you from the folk of PHARAOH, who subjected
you to severe torment killing your males and sparing your females, to be
used in their services.''

The bondage of the folk of Pharaoh was indeed a tremendous trial and
torment for them.

**THE SLAVERY OF GIRLS IN THE PAST AND PRESENT**

Qura"n has named the Egyptain's wish to spare the lives of Israel's
females, when their males were on the altar, a severe torment. It was
through Allah's favour that they were freed from that tremendous trial,
and bitter agony. Freedom is a bounty and a gift from God. It is as if
Allah wants here to advise man to obtain his freedom in any possible
price. To this effect HAZART Imam Ali (AS) has said: \`\`For you, living
and being subjected, is in fact being dead, and your death in the way of
obtaining freedom, is life and living.''

The difference of present and past in this relation is that:
\`\`Pharaoh; through his particular despotism and tyranny, would take
the males, and leave free the females of his opposition group. In our
time, the spirit of manliness is slaughtered in the male bodies, and
females are maintained to serve in satisfying the passion of dirty men
of rank, power, and wealth!'' (About slaughtering the males and sparing
the females we read in the Holy Bible: \`\`Finally the king issued a
command to all his people: Take every new born HEBREW boy and throw him
into the Nile but let all the girls live.

TRANSLATOR'S NOTE - EXODUS - 1 :22

وَإِذْ فَرَقْنَا بِكُمُ الْبَحْرَ فَأَنْجَيْنَـكُمْ وَأَغْرَقْنَا ءَالَ
فِرْعَوْنَ وَأَنتُمْ تَنظُرُونَ(( 50 )) 50- (AND REMEMBER) WHEN WE
PARTED THE SEA FOR YOU, AND SAVED YOU, AND DROWNED PHARAOH'S FOLK, WHILE
YOU WERE WATCHING.

[ 77 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE PASS-OVER AND RESCUE**

In the last verse, there was only a hint of the rescue, and now more
detail is given of that incident saying: \`\`Remember you, when We
divided the sea for you, and saved you, and drowned Pharaoh's people
within your sight.The event of PASS-OVER and RESCUE has been mentioned
through many verses in different chapters of QURA"N, such as: S 7: 136 -
S 8:103 - S 63,66 - s 42:55 and s 44: 17''

In these chapters, the event that; the Israelites escaped from Egypt,
and were pursued by Pharoah and his host, and then by a miracle, the sea
parted, and Israelties crossed it, but Pharaoh and his host were
drowned; is mentioned with different aspects and specifications. But in
this verse here (NO. 50) it is merely refered to as a favour of Allah to
the Israelties, in order to encourage them to believe in the new
revelations. It also may teach a lesson to MAN, that if he relies upon
God and has confidence in HIM; He will help man in his most dangerous
and critical conditions and affairs.

وَإِذْ وَ عَدْنَا مُوسَى أَرْبَعِينَ لَيْلَةً ثُمَّ اتَّخَذْتُمُ
الْعِجْلَ مِن بَعْدِهِ وَأَنتُمْ ظَـلِمُونَ(( 51 )) 51- (AND REMEMBER)
WHEN WE APPOINTED WITH MOSES FORTY NIGHTS, (TO GET THE COMMANDMENTS)
THEN YOU TOOK THE CALF (FOR A GOD) AFTER HIM, AND YOU WERE OPPRESSORS
(TO YOURSELVES)

ثُمَّ عَفَوْنَا عَنكُم مِّنْ بَعْدِ ذَ لِكَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ((
52 )) 52- THEN WE PARDONED YOU AFTER THAT PERHAPS YOU MIGHT GIVE
THANKS,

وَإِذْ ءَاتَيْنَا مُوسَى الْكِتَـبَ وَالْفُرْقَانَ لَعَلَّكُمْ
تَهْتَدُونَ(( 53 )) 53- (AND ALSO REMEMBER) WHEN WE GAVE MOSES THE BOOK,
AND DISTINCTION (BETWEEN TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD) PERHAPS YOU MIGHT BE
GUIDED ARIGHT.

[ 78 ]

وَإِذْ قَالَ مُوسَى لِقَوْمِهِ يَـقَوْمِ إِنَّكُمْ ظَلَمْتُمْ
أَنْفُسَكُم بِاتِّخَاذِكُمُ الْعِجْلَ فَتُوبُواْ إِلَى بَارِئِكُمْ
فَاقْتُلُواْ أَنفُسَكُمْ ذَ لِكُمْ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ عِندَ بَارِئِكُمْ
فَتَابَ عَلَيْكُمْ إِنَّهُ هُوَ التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ(( 54 ))


**THE COMMENTARY
ISRAELITE'S GREATEST DEVIATION. (VERSE NO. 51)**

Through this verse (NO. 51) QURA"N mentiones of the greatest swerve of
the Israelites in the FAITH, saying: \`\`When we appointed with Moses
forty nights, and in his absence you took the calf for worship!'' This
was when Moses was asked up into the Mount Sinai, and he was there for
forty days and forty nights, but the HEBREWS got impatient of his delay,
and one of them named SAMARITAN made a calf of melted gold, and they
offered worship and sacrifice to it.

VERSE NO. 52

God pardoned them their major and heinous sin, to render them thankful,
but the forgiveness was not given that easy! VERSE NO. 53

Here in this verse God reminds them of another important gift of HIS,
saying: \`\`And call to mind when We gave Moses the scripture and
criterion, perhaps you may be guided aright. (FORGHAN - translated to,
distinction or criterion, is some signs. and

[ 79 ]

standards for distinguishing between truth and falsehood - TRANSLATOR'S
NOTE) VERSE NO. 54

In this connection, and to prepare the background for a truthful
repentance for the Hebrews, God says: \`\`Moses said to them: O, My
People! you have indeed wronged yourselves by worship of the calf. So
turn in repentance to your creator, and slay one another! that will be
better for you in the sight of your creator. And after that incident
Allah turned towards you in forgiveness, for HE is Oft,returning, Most
Merciful.''


