The Jew's Plan For the Explotation of the Common People
=======================================================

The two above translated verse divide the Jews into two main groups or
classes of people: 1) The common and illiterate Jews; 2) and the sly,
deceitful learned ones. The group of the unlettered and ignorant laymen
who knew not their own scriptures, and their knowledge was confined to
their inner desires and conjectures. These are introduced by Holy QURA"N
thus: \`\`And some of them are illiterate men who know not the BOOK,
save desires, and they are none but those who merely conjecture. VERSE
NO. 79

The second group consisted of those who were learned and had some
knowledge of the BOOK, but cunningly perverted the verses to their own
benefit and advantage. This group of the Jews are addressed by the verse
NO 79: \`\`Woe to them who write the book with their own hands, and then
say: This is from allah,.'' They do so with the aim of selling it for a
little price - a trifle! The verse also imply that they used unholy
means, and reached to a dishonest result!

وَقَالُواْ لَن تَمَسَّنَا النَّارُ إِلاَّ أَيَّاماً مَعْدُودَةً قُلْ
أَتَّخَذْتُمْ عِنْدَ اللهِ عَهْداً فَلَنْ يُخْلِفَ اللهُ عَهْدَهُ أَمْ
تَقُولُونَ عَلَى اللهِ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ(( 80 ))

[ 101 ]

80 - AND THEY SAID: FIRE SHALL NEVER TOUCH US, BUT FOR A FEW DAYS.

SAY: HAVE YOU TAKEN WITH ALLAH A COVENANT? IF SO, ALLAH WILL NEVER FAIL
IN HIS COVENANT. OR IS IT THAT YOU SAY OF ALLAH WHAT YOU DO NOT KNOW?
بَلَى مَن كَسَبَ سَيِّئَةً وَأَحَـطَتْ بِهِ خَطِيئَتُهُ فأُوْلَـئِكَ
أَصْحَـبُ النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَـلِدُونَ(( 81 ))

81- YEA! WHOEVER EARNS EVIL, AND IS ENCOMPASSED BY HIS FAULTS, THEY ARE
COMPANIONS OF THE FIRE; THERIN, THEY SHALL ABIDE FOR EVER.
وَالَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ وَعَمِلُواْ الصَّـلِحَـتِ أُوْلَـئِكَ أَصْحَـبُ
الجَنَّةِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَـلِدون(( 82 ))

82- AND THOSE WHO BELIEVE AND DO GOOD DEEDS, THEY ARE THE COMPANIONS OF
THE GARDEN (PARADISE) THEREIN THEY SHALL ABIDE FOR EVER.

**THE COMMENTARY
EXTRAVAGANT AMBITIONS AND HOLLOW CLAIMS**

(VERSE NO. 80) The verse NO. 80 applies to one of the vain and futile
claims of the Jews, that arises from their dark, deep arrogance, and
which is an effective cause of their deviation from the path of truth.
They said: \`\`Whatever the terror and dreadfulness of the blazing fire
of Hell may be for other people, it has nothing to do with us, because
our sin will be forgiven and we are exempted from that terror, because
we are the children of ABRAHAM.'' Their bubble is pricked here, by God
that says to them:

[ 102 ]

\`\`Have you taken with Allah a covenant? If so; of course, Allah will
never fail in HIS promise; Or is that you say of Allah what you do not
know? VERSE NO. 81

Here in this verse (NO. 81) a reasonable law with general application
is decreed that if unbeliever claims for some special prerogative such
as racial discrimination, historical record, or else, these will avail
nothing in the sight of God, and the evil doers will be punished
accordingly: \`\`Those who seek gain in evil, and are encompassed by
their sins, are the companions of the FIRE, therein they shall abide for
ever.

VERSE NO. 82

As to the virtuous believer who do good deeds, there is also a common
law with general application that God's promise is sure for those who
seek God in faith, and by their good conduct they prove that they are
indeed faithful. - \`\`All those who believe and do good deeds, they are
companions of the GARDEN (IN PARADISE) abiding there for ever.

**THE JEWISH RACIALISM**

The said verses show that the spirit of Racialism which is deeply
penetrated in the jews of our time, causing so much troubles and
misfortune for MAN, has also been the same in the lifetime of Mohammad
(AS). They too, claimed for some imaginary prerogative and false and
void privileges for themselves - we are the elect people of God - We are
the beloved children of ABRAHAM - our sins are forgiven - Fire of Hell
will not harm us more than a few numbered days, and such and such!
Unfortunately the elapse of 14 centuries has not removed such false
conjectures from their minds, so that such conjectures has been the
cause of development of the usurped country - Israel.

وَإِذْ أَخَذْنَا مِيثَـقَ بَنِى إِسْر ءِيلَ لاَ تَعْبُدُونَ إِلاَّ
اللهَ وَبِالْوَ الِدَيْنِ إِحْسَاناً وَذِى الْقُرْبَى وَالْيَتَـمى
وَالْمَسَـكِينِ وَقُولُواْ لِلنَّاسِ حُسْناً وَأَقِيمُواْ الصَّلَو ةَ
وَءَاتُواْ الزَّكَو ةَ ثُمَّ تَوَلَّيْتُمْ إِلاَّ قَلِيلاً مِّنكُمْ
وَأَنْتُمْ مُّعْرِضُونَ(( 83 ))

[ 103 ]

83- AND WHEN WE MADE A COVENANT WITH THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL, (TO THIS
EFFECT:) WORSHIP NONE BUT ALLAH, AND DO GOOD TO YOUR PARENTS, AND
KINDRED, AND ORPHANS, AND TO THE NEEDY, AND SPEAK FAIRLY TO PEOPLE, AND
PERFORM THE PRAYER, AND PAY THE ALMS-TAX. THEN YOU ALL TURNED BACK
EXCEPT A FEW OF YOU AND YOU BACKSLIDE. (EVEN NOW)

وَإِذْ أَخَذْنَا مِيثَـقَكُمْ لاَ تَسْفِكُونَ دِمَـآءَكُمْ وَلاَ
تُخْرِجُونَ أَنْفُسَكُمْ مِّن دِيَـرِكُمْ ثُمَّ أَقْرَرْتُمْ وَأَنْتُمْ
تَشْهَدُونَ(( 84 ))

84- AND WHEN WE MADE A COVENANT WITH YOU: (TO THIS EFFECT) DO NOT SHED
YOUR BLOOD, NEITHER EXPEL YOURSELVES FROM YOUR HABITATIONS YOU CONFIRMED
IT, AND YOU BEAR WITNESS. (TO THIS COVENANT)

ثُمَّ أَنْتُمْ هَـؤْلاَ ءِ تَقْتُلُونَ أَنْفُسَكُمْ وَتُخْرِجُونَ
فَرِيقاً مِّنْكُمْ مِّنْ دِيَـرِهِمْ تَظَـهَرُونَ عَلَيْهِمْ بِالاِْثْمِ
وَالْعُدْوَ نِ وَإِنْ يَأْتُوكُمْ أُسَـرَى تُفَـدُوهُمْ وَهُوَ مُحَرَّمٌ
عَلَيْكُمْ إِخْرَاجُهُمْ أَفَتُؤْمِنُونَ بِبَعْضِ الْكِتَـبِ
وَتَكْفُرُونَ بِبَعْض فَمَا جَزَآءُ مَنْ يَفْعَلُ ذَ لِكَ مِنْكُمْ
إِلاَّ خِزْىٌ فِى الْحَيَو ةِ الدُّنْيَا وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَـمَةِ
يُرَدُّونَ إِلَى أَشَدِّ الْعَذَابِ وَمَا اللهُ بِغَـفِل عَمَّا
تَعْمَلُونَ(( 85 ))

85- THEN THERE YOU ARE KILLING ONE ANOTHER, AND BANISH A PARTY OF YOU
FROM THEIR HOME, BACKING EACH OTHER UP AGAINST THEM IN SIN AND ENMITY,
AND IF THEY COME TO YOU AS CAPTIVES, YOU RANSOM THEM, WHILE

[ 104 ]

THEIR EXPULSION WAS UNLAWFUL FOR YOU.

DO YOU THEN BELIEVE IN PART OF THE BOOK AND DISBELIEVE IN PART? WHAT
THEN IS THE REWARD OF THOSE OF YOU WHO DO THAT, EXCEPT DISGRACE IN THIS
LIFE, AND ON THE DAY OF JUDGEMENT THEY SHALL BE CONSIGNED TO THE MOST
GRIEVOUS PENALTY, AND ALLAH IS NOT NEGLIGENT OF WHAT YOU DO.

أُوْلـئِكَ الَّذِينَ اشْتَرَوُاْ الْحَيَوةَ الدُّنْيَا بِالاَْخِرَةِ
فَلاً يُخَفَّفُ عَنْهُمُ الْعَذَابُ وَلاَ هُمْ يُنصَرُونَ(( 86 )) 86-
THOSE ARE THEY WHO HAVE PURCHASED THE PRESENT LIFE AT THE PRICE OF THE
LIFE TO COME. THEIR PENALTY SHALL NOT BE LIGHTENED, NOR SHALL THEY BE
HELPED.

**THE COMMENTARY BREACH OF PROMISE (VERSE NO. 83)**

The previous verse referred to a covenant that was made with the
Israelites. Here they are severely reproached for their breach of
promise, which consisted of the following terms:

1) Worship no one but Allah.

2) Do good to your parent.

3) Do good to your kindred; to the orphans, and to the needy.

4) Speak fairly to people.

5) Perform the prayer.

6) Pay the TITHES (The alms-tax which is the right of needy and poor)

7) Do not shed your blood.

8) Do not expel yourselves from your habitation.

[ 105 ] VERSE NO. 84

And we made a covenant with you not to shed your blood and not expel
yourselves from your homes. 9) If any of you was taken a captive in a
battle, All of you should help him to obtain his freedom, and pay for
his ransom. VERSE NO. 85

You all violated the covenant with God, except a few! Killing one
another, banishing a party of you from their homes, backing and
supporting each other up against them through your heinous sin and
enmity. And if some of them returned to you as captives, you ransom
them, while their expulsion was unlawful for you. Strange enough, you
rely on the BOOK for that ransom which you are getting for them! Do you
believe in part of the book and disbelieve in part? What then can be the
reward of those who do so, but disgrace in this mortal life, and being
consigned to the most grievous chastisement in the life to come?!

VERSE NO. 86

And through this verse the main cause of their mental conflict is
defined and explained saying: \`\`Those are they who have purchased the
present life at the price of the life to come. Their penalty shall not
be lightened, nor shall they be helped.''

\*\*\*\*\*

**THE TEN COMMANDMENTS**

The terms of the COVENANT entered into with the HEBREWS by ALLAH, was a
universal moral law, known as the TEN COMMANDMENTS. The Jews of MEDINA,
also made a special covenant with Mohammand (AS) which is given in the
SIRAT-AL-RASUL written by IBN-HISHA"M. The ten commandment which are
written in the existing scriptures are as follows:

1) I am the Lord your God: Worship no God but ME.

2) Do not make for yourselves images out of any thing in heaven or
earth or in the water under the earth. Do not bow down to any IDOL.

[ 106 ]

3) Do not use God's name for any evil purpose.

4) Observe the SABBATH and keep it holy.

5) Respect your father and mother.

6) Do not commit murder.

7) Do not commit adultery.

8) Do not steal.

9) Do not accuse anyone falsely.

10) Do not desire another man's wife or whatever he owns.

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE
EXODUS - 20: 1-17
DETERONOMY - 5: 1-22**

وَلَقَدْ ءَاتَيْنَا مُوسَى الْكِتَـبَ وَقَفَّيْنَا مِنْ بَعْدِهِ
بِالرُّسُلِ وَءَاَتَيْنَا عِيسَى ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ الْبَيِّنـتِ
وَأَيَّدْنَـه بِرُوحِ الْقُدُسِ أَفَكُلَّمَا جَآءَكُمْ رَسُولٌ بِمَا لاَ
تَهْوى أَنفُسُكُمْ اسْتَكْبَرْتُمْ فَفَرِيقاً كَذَّبْتُمْ وَفَرِيقاً
تَقْتُلُونَ(( 87 ))

87- AND WE GAVE MOSES THE BOOK AND FOLLOWED HIM UP WITH A SUCCESSION OF
MESSENGERS. AND WE GAVE JESUS SON OF MARY CLEAR EVIDENCES, AND
STRENGTHENED HIM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT. AND WHENSOEVER THERE CAME TO YOU
A MESSENGER WITH WHAT, NOT AGREEABLE WITH YOUR DESIRES, YOU PUFFED UP
WITH PRIDE - THEN SOME OF THEM YOU BELIED, AND SOME OTHERS YOU SLAYED!

وَقَالُواْ قُلُوبُنَا غُلْفٌ بَلْ لَّعَنَهُمُ الله بِكُفْرِهِمْ
فَقَلِيلا مَّا يُؤْمِنُونَ(( 88 )) 88- AND THEY SAID: \`\`OUR HEARTS ARE
COVERED.'' RATHER ALLAH HAS CURSED THEM FOR THEIR BLASPHEMY. LITTLE IS
WHAT THEY BELIEVE.

[ 107 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE HEARTS THAT ARE COVERED (VERSE NO. 87)**

In this verse, and the verses to come the Jews are still addressed to
especially, but as usual the verses have a wider meanings which might be
common to all. That is because some people of all ages and all nations
may close the doors of their hearts to any extension of knowledge or any
new idea, because they may think the fragment of knowledge that they
might have is the whole of God's truth, and of course such a thought
arises from arrogance and ignorance. The verse says: \`\`We gave MOses
the BOOK and sent after him a succession of Messengers such as: David,
Solomon, Joshua, Zachariah, and John. We then gave Jesus son of Mary,
clear signs and evidences, and strengthened him with the Holy Spirit.
But, because the Messenger's teachings were not agreeable with your
false desires and caprices, you puffed up with pride and vanity, and
belied some of My apostles and some others you slayed.''

**WHAT IS THE HOLY SPIRIT?**

Different comments are given about the HOLY SPIRIT by commentators:

1) Some take it to be the Arch Angel GABRIEL, and the verse may mean
that; Allah strengthened Jesus through Gabriel.
2) Some commentators understand it to be the MYSTERIOUS UNSEEN POWER of
Allah by which Jesus Christ (AS) healed the sick and raised the dead.

VERSE NO. 88

The Jews in their arrogance, claimed to have the whole wisdom and
divine knowledge; but their claim was void of any truth and was rooted
in their arrogance and blasphemy. QURA"N reveals their state of mind
saying: \`\`They say our hearts is covered in the sheath and we don't
follow what you mean.'' And indeed it was so, for God had cursed them
for their arrogance and blasphemy, turning them away from HIS MERCY.

**THE IGNORANT AND COVERED HEARTS**

The Jews of Medina stood firmly against the propagations and

[ 108 ]

preachings of the prophet, rejecting his call and message severely.
They; every now and then brought another excuse for their denial; such
as our hearts are covered, and we don't understand what you mean, and
such and such! Of course they said that their heart was covered as an
ironical utterance and in mockery; but Allah confirmed their assertion
that their hearts was really covered and sealed, because Allah had
cursed them for their blasphemy.

وَلَمَّا جَآءَهُمْ كِتَبٌ مِّنْ عِندِ اللهِ مُصَدِّقٌ لِمَّا مَعَهُمْ
وَكَانُواْ مِن قَبْلُ يَسْتَفْتِحُونَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ فَلَمَّا
جَآءَهُم مَّا عَرَفُواْ كَفَرُواْ بِهِ فَلَعْنَةُ اللهِ عَلَى
الْكَفِرِينَ(( 89 )) 89- WHEN THERE CAME TO THEM A BOOK FROM ALLAH,
CONFIRMING WHAT WAS WITH THEM, AND AFORETIMES THEY PRAYED FOR VICTORY
OVER THE UNBELIEVERS, AND WHEN THERE CAME TO THEM THAT WHICH THEY
RECOGNIZED (QURA"N AND THE PROPHET) THEY DISBELIEVED IT. THEN THE CURSE
OF ALLAH IS UPON THE UNBELIEVERS.

بِئْسَمَا اشْتَرَوْا بِهِ أَنْفُسَهُمْ أَن يَكْفُرُوا بِمَآ أَنزَلَ
اللهُ بَغْياً أَن يُنَزِّلَ اللهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ عَلَى مَن يَشَآءُ مِنْ
عِبَادِهِ فَبَآءُو بِغَضَب عَلَى غَضَب وَلِلْكَفِرِينَ عَذَابٌ
مُّهِينٌ(( 90 ))

90- EVIL IS THAT FOR WHICH THEY HAVE SOLD THEIR SOULS - THAT THEY
SHOULD DENY WHAT ALLAH HAS REVEALED, OBJECTING THAT ALLAH SHOULD SEND
DOWN OF HIS GRACE TO ANY OF HIS SERVANTS THAT HE WILLS. THUS THEY HAVE
DRAWN ON THEMSELVES THE WRATH OF ALLAH ONE AFTER THE OTHER, (WRATH UPON
WRATH) AND FOR THE UNBELIEVERS AWAIT HUMILIATING CHASTISEMENT.

[ 109 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 89-90)**

It is narrated from HAZRAT IMAM SADIQ (AS) that: \`\`The Jews knew from
their scriptures that the promised prophet would emigrate to somewhere
in between two mountains, namely OHUD & EER. so they set out wandering
to find that very place they sought. They then reached at the foot of a
mountain which was called HADDAD, and they mistook it for OHUD. They
therefore dismounted there; and scattered round about. Some of them
chose the land of TEAMA, for living, some of them dwelt in KHAIBAR, and
some other chose FADAK for residence.'' Those who stayed in TEAMA, took
an Arab for their guide, who said he could settle them between the two
mountains that they were looking for; i.e. OHUD AND EER. (Here was
called YASRIB, and later in the life time of the prophet the town was
given the nickname: MEDINAT-AL-NABI which means the city of the
prophet.)

The Jews lived in Medina until a king named TABAA, surrounded Medina,
and when the Jews surrendered, the king gave them respite and amnesty,
and said that he would like to stay there and develope that town, making
it a capital.

They said to the king: \`\`Your plan will ultimately fail, because
sooner or later, a prophet will emigrate here that no, human being can
overcome him. The king said: If so, I shall then settle there a group of
my family and men, in order to help the promised prophet when he
comes.'' Thereafter three groups or three main tribes dwelt there: 1)
the tribe of AWS. 2) the tribe of KHAZRAJ 3) and the Jewish tribe. When
the prophet emigrated from Mecca to Median, AWS and KHAZRAJ joined him,
and were called the HELPERS, but the Jews who pretended to be superior
to the people without faith- the Gentiles - and who should have been the
first to recognize the truth which was Mohammad's mission to bring, they
became the first to reject and belie it, and did their best to
extinguish the light!

**THE PREACHER DISBELIEVED!**

The Jews eagerly dwelt in Medina, in order to help their promised
prophet, and to welcome Mohammad's teachings; but when he came to them,
they took up an attitude of arrogant rejection; and to

[ 110 ]

this effect the verse revealed that: \`\`When there came to them a BOOK
from Allah, confirming what was with them, (being similar in form and
language to what they had already received) they refused to believe in
it, and so the curse of Allah fell upon them.''

VERSE NO. 90

Their racial arrogance rendered them averse to the revelation of truth,
when it came to a servant of God, who was not from their race! They were
jealous too, objecting that Allah should send down his grace to one of
His servants other than a Jew; thus wanting to set bounds to God's
choice and grace! By such vanity and arrogance, they incurred the wrath
of God upon themselves - wrath upon wrath.

وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ ءَامِنُوا بِمَآ أَنزَلَ اللهُ قَالُواْ نُؤْمِنُ
بِمَآ أُنزِلَ عَلَيْنَا وَيَكْفُرُونَ بِمَا وَرَآءَهُ وَهُوَ الْحَقُّ
مُصَدِّقاً لِمَّا مَعَهُمْ قُلْ فَلِمَ تَقْتُلُونَ أَنبِيَآءَ اللهِ مِن
قَبْلُ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ(( 91 ))

91- AND WHEN IT IS SAID TO THEM BELIEVE IN WHAT ALLAH HAS SENT DOWN;
THEY SAY WE BELIEVE ONLY IN THAT WHICH WAS SENT TO US; AND THEY REJECT
WHAT IS BESIDES THAT, WHILE IT IS THE TRUTH; AND CORROBORATING THAT
WHICH IS WITH THEM.

SAY: \`\`WHY DID YOU THEN SLAY THE PROPHETS OF ALLAH, IN TIMES GONE BY
IF YOU WERE BELIEVERS?''

وَلَقَدْ جَآءَكُمْ مُّوسَى بِالْبَيِّنَتِ ثُمَّ اتَّخَذْتُمْ الْعِجْلَ
مِن بَعْدِهِ وَأَنْتُمْ ظَلِمُونَ(( 92 ))

92- AND THERE CAME TO YOU MOSES WITH CLEAR SIGNS (EVIDENCES), THEN YOU
TOOK THE CALF (FOR A GOD) IN HIS ABSENCE, AND YOU WERE OPPRESSORS.

[ 111 ]

وَإِذْ أَخَذْنَا مِيثَقَكُمْ وَرَفَعْنَا فَوْقَكُمُ الطُّورَ خُذُواْ
مَآءَ اتَيْنَكُم بِقُوَّة وَاسْمَعُواْ قَالُواْ سَمِعْنَا وَعَصَيْنَا
وَأُشْرِبُواْ فِى قُلُوبِهِمُ الْعِجْلَ بِكُفْرِهِمْ قُلْ بِئْسَمَا
يَأْمُرُكُم بِهِ إِيمَنُكُمْ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ(( 93 ))

93- AND WHEN WE MADE A COVENANT WITH YOU, AND WE RAISED ABOVE YOU THE
MOUNT SINAI, SAYING: \`\`HOLD FIRMLY WHAT WE HAVE GIVEN YOU AND HEAR.
(OUR COMMANDMENTS) THEY SAID: WE HEARD AND WE DISOBEYED, FOR THEIR
BLASPHEMY THEY DRANK THE CALF INTO THEIR VERY HEARTS! (i.e. THEY LOVED
THE CALF WITH ALL THEIR HEART)

SAY: \`\`BAD IS THAT TO WHICH YOUR FAITH ORDERS YOU, IF YOU ARE INDEED
BELIEVERS.''

**THE COMMENTARY
RACIAL ARROGANCE OF THE JEWS (VERSE NO, 91)**

In the previous verse we read that the Jews rejected the prophet, for
not being one of them racially, and also for endangering their personal
advantages, that was as flimsy and hollow as their faith was! There is
the question that; did they not reject the apostles of their own race
such as Jesus?

QURA"N says: \`\`When it is said to them believe in what Allah has sent
down; they say we believe only in that which was sent to us!'' They say
so but their assertion is merely a hollow pretext that they believe
neither in their own scriptures nor in QURA"N. Though they can easily
know that Qura"n is mere truth, corroborating that which is with them.
If their excuse for rejecting Mohammad was because he was not of their
race, QURA"N says: \`\` Why did you then slay the prophets of Allah in
times gone by if you were believers.''

[ 112 ]

The real trouble with them was their selfishness, that made them to
resist against anything which could run against their personal profit
and advantages.

VERSE NO. 92

Had they been faithful to the BIBLE, which strictly forbids them to
commit murder; they should have never tried to kill the prophet of God,
and in particlular to slay Jesus who was of the same race with them.

There came to them Moses with so many clear signs, and bright
evidences, but at last they took the calf for their god, and worshipped
it, and loved it whole hearted. If they really did believe in their own
prophet - Moses - in spite of so much emphasis and stress upon the
tenet; Monotheism, why did they renew the idolatry and calf worshipping
during their prophet's short absence?!

VERSE NO. 93

Once again the verse reminds them of the solemn covenant under the
towering height of Mount Sinai, saying: \`\`And when we made a covenat
with you, and We raised above you the Mount Sinai (TOOR); This covenant
they broke, because from the beginning they did not mean to observe it.
Yea! their hearts were watered with their love for the calf, and other
sort of idols! What sort of a belief or faith was that which they
claimed to have!? A belief that conforms to slaying the prophet of God!?
A faith that admits them to worship the calf!? A religion that allows
them to neglect their covenant made with their creator!? This is why
QURA"N says here in the verse NO. 93:

\`\`Bad is that to which your faith orders you, if you, are indeed
believers.''

قُلْ إِن كَانَتْ لَكُمُ الدَّارُ الاَْخِرَةُ عِندَ اللهِ خَالِصَةً مِّن
دُونِ النَّاسِ فَتَمَنَّوُاْ الْمَوْتَ إِن كُنتُمْ صَدِقِينَ(( 94 ))

[ 113 ]

94- SAY: IF THE LAST ABODE WITH ALLAH (AS YOU CLAIM) IS YOURS ALONE,
AND NOT FOR OTHER PEOPLE, THEN WISH FOR DEATH IF YOU ARE TRUTHFUL. وَلَن
يَتَمَنَّوْهُ أَبَدَا بِمَا قَدَّمَتْ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَاللهُ عَلِيمٌ
بِالظَّلِمِينَ(( 95 )) 95- BUT THEY WILL NEVER DESIRE IT, BECAUSE OF
WHAT THEIR HANDS HAVE FORWARDED; AND ALLAH KNOWS WELL THE OPPRESSORS.

وَلَتَجِدَنَّهُمْ أَحْرَصَ النَّاسِ عَلَى حَيَوة وَمِنَ الَّذِينَ
أَشْرَكُوا يَوَدُّأحَدُهُمْ لَوْ يُعَمَّرُ ألْفَ سَنَة وَمَا هُوَ
بِمُزَحْزِحِهِ مِنَ الْعَذَابِ أَنْ يُعَمَّرَ وَاللَّهُ بَصِيرٌ بِمَا
يَعْمَلُونَ(( 96 ))

96- AND YOU WILL INDEED FIND THEM THE GREEDIEST PEOPLE FOR LIFE. (FOR
THIS MORTAL LIFE AND ITS WEALTH) EVEN MORE THAN THE POLYTHEISTS. EACH OF
THEM LOVES TO LIVE A THOUSAND YEARS, AND THAT (LONG LIFE) WILL NOT SAVE
THEM FROM THE CHASTISEMENT, AND ALLAH SEES WELL ALL THAT THEY DO.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE SELF SATISFIED GROUP (VERSE NO. 94)**

[ 114 ] \`\`If what you claim is true, and the last home with Allah is
made especially for you, and not for any body else, then wish you for
death if you are sincere.''

Evidently, their claim that paradise was exclusively made for them was
a mere flimsy and hollow assertion by which they meant to discourage
Muslims and render them indifferernt to their religion; but Qura"n took
the curtain aside and showed that they never wish to leave this mortal
life and die for the paradise that they claim to own it, even after a
thousand year of living down here.

VERSE NO. 95

It adds here that they shall never desire death because of what their
hands have sent on before them, of sin and evil deeds. They knew well,
what had they sent forth for the next life, of nasty and evil deeds, and
God, too, knows all that, and therefore their last abode could be
nowhere but a place of chastisement, torture and infamy.

VERSE NO. 96

This verse implies how greedy are they; and how avaricious and grasping
they are to this mortal life, and in particular to rank and wealth.
\`\`You will indeed find them the greediest people for life, even more
than the pagans and idolaters; so much so that, each one of them wished
that he could be given a life of a thousand years, but even the grant of
such life will not save them, and Allah sees whatever they do.

قُلْ مَن كَانَ عَدُوَّاً لِّجِبْرِيلَ فَإِنَّهُ نَزَّلَهُ عَلَى
قَلْبِكَ بِإِذْنِ اللهِ مُصَدِّقاً لِّمَا بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ وَهُدىً
وَبُشْرَى لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 97 ))

97- SAY WHOEVER IS AN ENEMY TO GABRIEL, THEN IT IS HIM WHO BROUGHT IT
DOWN UPON YOUR HEART BY ALLAH'S PERMISSION; CORROBORATING WHAT WAS
BEFORE IT, AND GUIDANCE, AND GLAD TIDINGS FOR THE BELIEVERS.

[ 115 ]

مَن كَانَ عَدُوّاً لِّلَّهِ وَمَلَـئِكَتِهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَجِبْرِيلَ
وَمِيكَئلَ فَإِنَّ اللهَ عَدُوٌّ لِّلْكَفِرِينَ(( 98 )) 98- WHOEVER IS
AN ENEMY TO ALLAH AND HIS ANGELS, AND APOSTLES, AND GABRIEL, AND
MICHAEL, THEN OF SURETY, ALLAH IS THE ENEMY TO THE UNBELIEVERS.

**THE COMMENTARY

OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 97)**

When the prophet emigrated to Medina; one of the Jewish Rabbis, namd
IBN-SURIA, accompanied by a group of his followers, paid a visit to the
prophet Mohammad Mustafa and raised many questions such as: \`\`How did
the prophet sleep?'' to which the prophet answered: \`\`My eyes sleep,
while my heart is awake!'' They finally asked another question; adding
that if they got the right answer for it, they would be Muslims. What is
your question? asked them the prophet. We want to know who brings the
revelations down to your heart? said IBN\_SURIA. \`\`It is the Arch
angel GABRIEL who does that.'' the prophet answered.

A long pause! Some pretence to pondering, and then the RABBI said:
\`\`GABRIEL is our enemy and his vision inspires fear and terror of war!
But Michael is a friend of us! If he was the medium of your
inspirations, we could easily submit, and adhere to your revelations and
religion''

\*\*\*\*\*

(This excuse may refer to what DANIEL has narrated of his vision
saying: \`\`GABRIEL came and stood besides me, and I was so terrified
that I fell to the ground! DAN - 8: 17'' \`\`And at that time the great
angel, MICHAEL, who guards your people, will appear. DAN - 12: 1''
(TRANSLATOR'S NOTE) DANIEL - 8: 17 & 12: 1

[ 116 ]

**COMMENTS**

Referring to the above mentioned cause of the revelation, we may come
to know, how excuse seekers, and men of futile pretext the Jews were!
Here, their only excuse for their disbelief and faith rejection was:
\`\`Why instead of Michael who is our friend, should GABRIEL, who is an
enemy to us; bring down the revelations to your heart?! In answer to
their childish objection God says through the Holy QURA"N: \`\`Whoever
is an enemy to GABRIEL, (let him know that) it is him who brings down
this revelation to your heart by Allah's permission; confirming what is
before it, and also as a guidance and glad tidings for the
believers.''

VERSE NO. 98

Then the subject is once again referred to, with more stress and
emphesis and with a speech filled with menace that: \`\`Whoever is an
enemy to Allah and HIS angels, and apostles, and to GABRIEL and MICHAEL;
(they should understand that) Allah is an enemy to those who disbelieve
and reject faith.''

وَلَقَدْ أَنْزَلْنَآ إِلَيْكَ ءَايَت بَيِّنَـت وَمَا يَكْفُرُبِهَآ
إِلاَّ الْفَـسِقُونَ(( 99 )) 99- AND WE HAVE SENT DOWN TO YOU CLEAR
SIGNS, NONE WILL DENY THEM EXCEPT EVIL DOERS.

أَوَكُلَّمَا عَـهَدُوا عَهْداً نَّبَذَهُ فَرِيقٌ مِّنْهُم بَلْ
أَكْثَرُهُمْ لاَيَؤْمِنُونَ(( 100 )) 100- (IS IT NOT SO THAT) WHENEVER
THEY MADE A COVENANT; SOME OF THEM MUST CAST IT ASIDE? RATHER MOST OF
THEM DO NOT BELIEVE

وَلَمَّا جَآءَهُمْ رَسُولٌ مِّنْ عِندِ اللهِ مُصَدِّقٌ لِّـمَا مَعَهُمْ
نَبَذَ فَرِيقٌ مِّنَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَـبَ كِتَـبَ اللهِ وَرَآءَ
ظُهُورِهِمْ كَأَنَّهُمْ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ(( 101 )) 101- AND WHEN THERE
CAME TO THEM A MESSENGER FROM ALLAH CONFIRMING WHAT WAS WITH THEM, A
PARTY OF THE PEOPLE OF THE BOOK, THREW THE BOOK OF ALLAH BEHIND THEIR
BACKS AS IF THEY KNEW NOTHING OF IT.

[ 117 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 99)**

IBN-ABBASS, the famous commentator of Qura"n, has narrated that:
\`\`IBN-SURIA the Jewish Rabbi, through his arrogance and pertinacity,
said to the prophet: you have brought nothing comprehensible to us, and
God HAS not sent down any clear sign or manifest evidence to you, so
that we may catch it and follow you! In answer to SURIA's statement, it
was revealed that: \`\`We have indeed sent down to you clear signs which
none may deny them except the evil doers.''

**COMMENTS**

The verse implies that sufficient proof and clear signs have been sent
down to the prophet, and those who deny it have either not understood it
or their rejection and denial has a personal or especial reason. VERSE
NO. 100

Then one of the bad qualifications of the Jews is mentioned that:
\`\`Whenever they made a covenant, some of them broke their promise, and
cast the covenant aside, and that was because most of them were
unbelievers.''

God made a covenant with them at the foot of Mount Sinai, in order to
observe the law and fulfill the commandments, but they violated the law
and disobeyed the commandments. Again a covenant was made with them
through their scripture to follow and support the promised prophet,
whose marks and symptoms they had in their BOOKS, but in its appropriate
time, that promise too, was not carried out, and worse; they did their
best to quench the flame of the new message!

VERSE NO. 101

This is the continuation of the same argument, with more emphasis and
very explicit, that if the Israelites had looked into their own BOOKS
honestly and sincerely, they would have found enough proofs in them to
show that the new Message was true and from God. But they even ignored
their own BOOK, or if they referred to it, they

[ 118 ]

deliberately perverted the words of God, according to their own
fancies: \`\`And when there came to them an apostle from Allah,
corroborating the Scriptures that was with them, a party of them threw
the book of Allah, which is the HOLY QURA"N behind their backs; as if it
had been something that they did not know.''

وَاتَّبَعُواْ مَاتَتْلُواْ الشَّيَـطِينُ عَلَى مُلْكِ سُلَيْمَـنَ وَمَا
كَفَرَ سُلَيْمَـنُ وَلَـكِنَّ الشَّيَـطِينَ كَفَرُواْ يُعَلِّمُونَ
النَّاسَ السِّحْرَ وَمَآ أُنزِلَ عَلَى الْمَلَكَيْنِ بِبَابِلَ هَـروتَ
وَمَـرُوتَ وَمَا يُعَلِّمَانِ مِنْ أَحَد حَتَّى يَقُولاَ إِنَّمَا نَحْنُ
فِتْنَةٌ فَلاَ تَكْفُرْ فَيَتَعَلَّمُونَ مِنْهُمَا مَا يُفَرِّقُونَ بِهِ
بَيْنَ الْمَرْءِ وَزَوْجِهِ وَمَاهُم بِضَآرِّينَ بِهِ مِنْ أَحَد إِلاَّ
بِإِذْنِ اللهِ وَيَتَعَلَّمُونَ مَايَضُرُّهُمْ وَلاَ يَنفَعُهُمْ
وَلَقَدْ عَلِمُواْ لَمَنِ اشْتَرَهُ مَالَهُ فِى الاَْخِرَةِ مِنْ خَلَـق
وَلَبِئْسَ مَا شَرَوْا بِهِ أَنفُسَهُمْ لَوْكَانُواْ يَعْلَمُونَ(( 102
))

102- AND THEY (THE JEWS) FOLLOWED WHAT THE SATANS RECITED (TO PEOPLE)
OVER SOLOMONS' KINGDOM, SOLOMON DISBELIEVED NOT, (NEVER PRACTISED
SORCERY) BUT SATANS DISBELIEVED; TEACHING PEOPLE SORCERY, AND THAT WHICH
WAS REVEALED TO THE TWO ANGELS HARUT AND MARUT, IN ABYLON, (THE TWO
ANGELS TAUGHT SORCERY, IN ORDER TO TEACH THE WAYS OF NEUTRALIZING IT)
THEY TAUGHT NO ONE WITHOUT SAYING: \`\`WE ARE HERE FOR TRIAL ONLY; SO DO
NOT BLASPHEME.'' (MISUSE NOT OUR TEACHINGS) BUT THEY (THE JEWS) LEARNED
FROM THE TWO, THE MEANS TO SOW DISCORD BETWEEN MAN AND HIS WIFE; YET
THEY COULD NOT HURT ANY ONE THEREBY, EXCEPT BY ALLAH'S PERMISSION.
THEY

[ 119 ]

LEARNED WHAT HURT THEM, AND NOT WHAT PROFITTED THEM! AND THEY KNEW THAT
THE BUYERS (OF SUCH THINGS AS MAGIC) WOULD HAVE NO SHARE IN THE LIFE TO
COME. EVIL WAS THAT FOR WHICH THEY SOLD THEMSELVES IF THEY HAD BUT
KNOWN.

وَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ ءَامَنُواْ وَاتَّقَوْا لَمَثُوبَةٌ مِّنْ عِندِ اللهِ
خَيْرٌ لَّو كَانُوا يَعْلَمُونَ(( 103 )) 103- HAD THEY BELIEVED IN
ALLAH, AND AVOIDED EVIL, FAR BETTER HAD BEEN THE REWARD FROM THEIR LORD
IF THEY BUT KNEW.

**THE COMMENTARY
SOLOMON AND THE BABYLONIAN SORCERERS (VERSE NO. 102)**

It is narrated that, in the reign of SOLOMON, a group of people
practised sorcery and magic. Solomon worked against that, and ordered
the sorcerer's notes and scripts be collected and stored in a safe. When
SOLOMON died some people got access to the notes and documents, and
started with teaching and publishing the occult knowledge. Some of the
unbelievers availed themselves of the opportunity, and propagated that;-
\`\`king SOLOMON was not an Apostle of God, and he rather was a
magician!'' They composed and published many tales of occult powers, by
which they attributed the power that SOLOMON had, to magic! while
SOLOMON dealt in no arts of sorcery, which to him such arts, seemed evil
and blasphemy.

Some of the Israelites too, instead of sticking to the plain BOOK OF
REVELATION, and seeking to do the will of God, ran after all sorts of
sorcery and occult knowledges which were mostly false and evil.

When our prophet Mohammand (AS), declared through the verses of QURA"N
that; SOLOMON too, was an apostle of God; the Jews were

[ 120 ]

amazed, and asked each other: \`\`Is that not strange that Mohammad
introduces SOLOMON as a prophet of God, and not a king and magician?!''
In fact this assertion of the Jews, was a grave scandal on SOLOMON the
apostle of God, as well as excommunicating the apostle, and accusing him
of heresy.

Any how! This was another phase of mischiefs and evil deeds of the Jews
who accused the apostle of Allah of being a magician. The HOLY QURA"N,
reveals through the verse NO. 102:

\`\`The Jews followed what SATANS recited to people in the reign of
SOLOMON, who never disbelieved, and never practised sorcery and magic to
reach a goal; but SATANS disbelieved and taught people sorcery and
magic. The Jews also followed that which was revealed to the two angels
Harut and Marut, while the two only meant to teach people how could they
averse and neutralize magic power, and the effect of sorcery. Therefore
they taught no one without saying: \`We are here for trial! So do not
blaspheme, and misuse not our teachings.''

To make it short, the two angels came down in such a time that the oven
of sorcery and magic was very hot, and the power of evil pretended to
force the laws of nature and the will of God - a pretence that was mere
heresy and bare blasphemy, and the two angels tried to save the plain
hearted people of falling into the snare of the magicians, and
sorcerers.

But the Jews who were among the evil doers learned from the two angels,
that which they thought they could use it in mischievous ways, for
causing injury and sowing discord between sexes. On the other hand,
God's power was over all the powers, and they could not hurt anyone
thereby, except by Allah's permission. Therefore their magical power was
limited to the extent to which God permitted the evil to work. Then
God's Grace protected all who sought HIS Guidance and who repented and
returned to HIM.

As a matter of fact, the Jews learned what hurt them and not what
profitted them! They knew this fact that those who practised magic had
no share in the life to come; and that was the evil to which they sold
their souls!

[ 121 ]

VERSE NO. 103 And so the Jews deliberately turned away from salvation
and prosperity. If they had kept their faith and guarded themselves from
evil, far better had been the rewards that they would get from their
Lord, if they but knew!


