Persons For Negation of Children
================================

The idea that God may beget a child, comes from the ignorance and the
weak minds of the men that measure everything with their weak and small
scale! If a man needs to have a child it is because of his limited life
on this earth, and also his natural instinct for procreation, to keep
his race on and continuing. On the other hand man's power is limited,
and gradually decreases, so that in his declining ages he needs his
children to give him a hand. He also is spiritually in need of some
intimate friends and associates, and for this purpose his children will
do.

But none of such needs and necessities can be proved for God.

[ 133 ]

After all having a child requires having a material body, which God is
far from it. If we want to put it other way and take the idea in a
spiritual sense, every body may call himself the son or the daughter of
God, because the Compassionate and Merciful Lord loves his servants and
creatures more than a father or a mother may love their children. This
is why the Christian doctrine here is emphatically repudiated.

وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ لَوْلاَ يُكَلِّمُنَا اللهُ
أَوْتَأْتِينَآ ءَايَةٌ كَذَلِكَ قَالَ الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِهِم مِّثْلَ
قَوْلِهِمْ تَشَـبَهَتْ قُلُوبُهُمْ قَدْ بَيَّنَّا الاَْيَـتِ لِقَوْم
يُوقِنُونَ(( 118 ))

118- AND THOSE VOID OF KNOWLEDGE SAID: \`\`WHY DOES NOT ALLAH SPEAK TO
US? OR A SIGN (FROM HIM) COMES NOT TO US? SO SAID THOSE WHO LIVED BEFORE
THEM, THE LIKE OF WHAT THEY SAY, THEIR HEARTS ARE MUCH ALIKE. BUT WE
HAVE MADE CLEAR THE SIGNS TO THOSE WHO MAKE SURE.

إنَّآ أَرْسَلْنَـكَ بِالْحَقِّ بَشِيراً وَنَذِيراً وَلاَ تُسْئَلُ عَنْ
أَصْحَـبِ الْجَحِيمِ(( 119 )) 119- WE HAVE SENT YOU WITH TRUTH. A BEARER
OF GLAD TIDINGS AND A WARNER (TO ALL THE PEOPLE OF THE WORLD) AND YOU
SHALL NOT BE QUESTIONED ABOUT THE COMPANIONS OF THE BLAZING FIRE (AFTER
CONVEYING GOD'S MESSAGE)

**THE COMMENTARY
WHY DOES NOT GOD SPEAK TO US?! (VERSE NO. 118)**

In parallel to the childish excuses and flimsy pretexts of the Jews,
the PAGAN ARABS too, who were unlettered and indeed void of

[ 134 ]

knowledge; questioned the prophet: If so; why then, God does not speak
to us? Qur?n answers them thus: \`\`So said those who lived before
them - their hearts are much alike;'' that is to say, if they really
want to know and understand the new truth, we have made our signs and
our message clear enough.

VERSE NO. 119

The prophet is addressed in this verse, that he is not responsible for
what other people do, as far as he has done his duties as a Perspicuous
Warner, and BEARER OF GLAD-TIDINGS: \`\`We have sent you in truth as a
bearer of glad-tidings, and a warner. Your duty is only to convey our
Message to all, and to show them our signs and miracles. If after you
carried our Message and signs to them, they closed their eyes and ears
and did not believe, then you are not responsible for their deeds, and
no one will question you about the companions of Hell, who have ruined
their souls.

وَلَن تَرْضَى عَنكَ الْيَهُودُ وَلاَ النَّصَـرَى حَتَّى تَتَّبِعَ
مِلَّتَهُمْ قُلْ إِنَّ هُدَى اللهِ هُوَ الْهُدَى وَلَئِنِ اتَّبَعْتَ
أَهْوَآءَ هُم بَعْدَ الَّذِى جَآءَكَ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ مَالَكَ مِنَ اللهِ
مِن وَلِىٍّ وَلاَ نَصِير(( 120 ))

120- NEVER WILL THE JEWS BE SATISFIED WITH YOU NEITHER THE CHRISTIANS;
UNTIL YOU FOLLOW (THEIR PERVERTED) RELIGION. SAY: THE GUIDANCE OF ALLAH
IS THE ONLY GUIDANCE; AND IF YOU FOLLOW THEIR CAPRICES, AFTER THE
KNOWLEDGE THAT HAS COME TO YOU, THERE SHALL BE NONE TO HELP OR PROTECT
YOU FROM (THE WARTH OF) ALLAH.

الَّذِينَ ءَاتَيْنَـهُمُ الْكِتَـبَ يَتْلُونَهُ حَقَّ تِلاَوَتِهِ
أُوْلَـئِكَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ وَمَن يَكْفُرْبِهِ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ
الْخَـسِرُونَ(( 121 ))

[ 135 ]

121- THOSE TO WHOM WE HAVE GIVEN THE BOOK, (THE JEWS AND CHRISTIANS)
READ IT AS IT SHOULD BE READ. THEY ARE THE ONES THAT BELIEVE THEREIN.
AND THOSE WHO DISBELIEVE IN IT, THEY ARE THE LOSERS.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 120)**

IBN-ABBASS has narrated that: \`\`The Jews of Medina, and the
Christians of NAJRAN; were expecting the prophet to continue with the
old QIBLA, towards JERUSALEM. But as per order of God, the prophet made
a new QIBLA, of the cubic house of God constructed by ABRAHAM in Mecca.
The change of QIBLA increased the rage and dislike of the people of the
BOOK. Perhaps there were also some conservative Muslims who believed
that they should not displease the people of the BOOK, through such
matters as the change of QIBLA.''

**IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO SATISFY SUCH GROUPS!**

In the previous verses the prophet was divested of responsibility in
relation to the obstinate disbelievers, and here the argument is
continued saying: \`\`Don't insist so much on satisfying the people of
the BOOK, because they will never be satisfied with you, unless you
follow them, and submit thoroughly to their caprices. Just tell them:
the true guidance is the guidance of Allah. Not a sort of guidance which
is mingled with superstitions, and deviated and astray thoughts, and
caprices.'' Then God threatens HIS APOSTLE (AS) in this verse by saying:
\`\`And if you follow their desires after the knowledge which has
reached you from us; then you will have neither a protector, nor a
helper against Allah. VERSE NO. 121

Some of the Commentators believe that this verse was revealed about
those who came from ABYSSINIA (ETHIOPIA) in accompany to JAAFAR,
[ 136 ]

the prophet's cousin. They were forty men among whom 32 were
ABYSSINIANS, and the other eight were Christians monks and priests of
SYRIA. One of the monks, it is said, was BOHAIRA, the famous monk, who
had visited the prophet in his childhood. Some other commentators say
that the verse was revealed about some famous Jewish Rabbis, like
ABDULLAH-IBN-SALAM, TAMAM-IBN-YAHUDA and SAEED-IBN-OMAR who recognized
the prophet and accepted Islam and became truthful Muslims.

**COMMENTS**

As for the Jews who converted and became true Muslims, hereby Qur?n
proceeds to exclude them from the other Jews, who were previously blamed
for their rejection and opposition: \`\`Those to whom we have given the
scripture read it as it should be read - the ones who believe
therein.''

**TO PLEASE THE ENEMY, HAS A LIMIT**

It is true that man should call the enemies and the oppositions to
accept the truth by kind attractive morals; but this method of
invitation may be useful and effective in the case of flexible people.
As for those stubborn and obstinate men who never submit to reason and
truth, one should not think of pleasing them. If they don't believe,
don't worry - Let them go to Hell and join the fire. Don't waste your
time on them.

**WHAT IS THE RIGHT READING OF THE BOOK?**

It is narrated that in a commentary about this verse; HAZRAT IMAM SADIQ
(AS) said: \`\`Read the verses carefully. Seek to know and understand
the meaning. Fulfill the commandments and carry them into effect. Have
hope in the promises. Beware of the warnings. Take lessons of the
stories. Follow the instruction. Upon my Lord God! a good reading is not
only a correct rehearsal, or committing the pharases and sentences to
memory.''

[ 137 ]

يَـبَنِى إِسْرَ ءِيلَ اذْكُرُوا نِعْمَتِىَ الَّتِى أَنْعَمْتُ
عَلَيْكُمْ وَأَنِّى فَضَّلْتُكُمْ عَلَى الْعَـلَمِينَ(( 122 )) 122- O,
CHILDREN OF ISRAEL! CALL TO MIND MY FAVOUR WHICH I BESTOWED UPON YOU AND
EXALTED YOU ABOVE THE NATIONS (FOR CARRYING MY MESSAGE)

وَاتَّقُوا يَوْماً لاَّتَجْزِى نَفْسٌ عَن نَّفْس شَيْئاً وَلاَ يُقْبَلُ
مِنْهَا عَدْلٌ وَلاَ تَنفَعُهَا شَفَـعَة وَلاَهُمْ يُنصَرُونَ(( 123 ))
123- AND BEWARE OF THE DAY IN WHICH, NO SOUL SHALL AVAIL ANOTHER SOUL;
AND NO COUNTER BALANCE SHALL BE ACCEPTED FROM HIM, NOR ANY INTERCESSION
WILL PROFIT IT, NEITHER SHALL THEY BE HELPED. (BY ANY ONE)


**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 122**

Once again the Israelites are addressed and called to remember the
favours that allah had bestowed upon them, preferring them to all others
for carrying through them his message. VERSE NO. 123

But any bounty and favour would involve some sort of responsibility. In
this verse Allah advises the Jews, to guard themselves against a day
when their souls cannot avail each other, and it is of no use to resort
to any one for help or intercession.

وَإِذِ ابْتَلَى إِبْرَاهِيمَ رَبُّهُ بِكَلِمَـت فَأَتَمَّهُنَّ قَالَ
إِنِّى جَاعِلُكَ لِلنَّاسِ إِمَاماً قَالَ وَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِى قَالَ
لاَيَنَالُ عَهْدِى الظّـلِمِينَ(( 124 ))

124- AND WHEN HIS LORD TESTED ABRAHAM WITH CERTAIN

[ 138 ]

WORDS, (A SERIES OF VARIOUS HARD DUTIES) AND HE FULFILLED THEM. HE SAID
(TO ABRAHAM): I AM GOING TO MAKE YOU AN IM?M (LEADER) FOR THE PEOPLE. HE
SAID: \`\`AND WHAT ABOUT MY OFFSPRING? ALLAH SAID: \`MY PROMISE SHALL
NOT REACH THE OPPRESSORS.''

THE COMMENTARY

**IMAMAT (LEADERSHIP) THE SUMMIT OF ABRAHAM'S HONOURABLE PROGRESS**

The argument now proceeds on the line of ABRAHAM the champion of
MONOTHEISM, and the constructor of the Cubic House of God, KAABA. It is
also about the importance of this focus of point of Monotheism, which is
now a days, a universal center of worship for all Islamic the world.
Such matters have been discussed through eighteen verses which follows
from hereafter. The said verses serve a three fold purposes. 1) An
introductory and plot laying for the change of QIBLA.

2) The people of the book claim to rely and depend thoroughly upon
ABRAHAM, while they feel full of rancour against Islam, which is
complete submission to the Will of God, this was the most loved and
adhered to by ABRAHAM, who laid the foundation of Monotheism. These
verses show how far they are from what they claim to be near it!

3) The pagan Arabs too who had turned to idolatry and polytheism,
claimed the same thing - that HAZRAT ABRAHAM was their progenitor
through Ishmael, and of course both of the parties are right in their
claims, for, indeed HAZRAT ABRAHAM and his son ISHMAEL THE SACRIFICE,
together built the House of God in Mecca, long before the temple of
JERUSALEM was built. (The Israelites too, are indeed the offspring of
HAZRAT ABRAHAM through his son ISAAQ.) In the following verses, the
greatest phases and aspects of

[ 139 ]

ABRAHAM'S life and its most important events are discussed in some
details; beginning thus: \`\`And call to mind when the Lord tried and
tested ABRAHAM with certain words, (COMMANDS) which he fulfilled all in
the best of ways. And after his success in the examination Allah said to
him: \`\`I am going to make you an IMAM for the people. ABRAHAM pleaded;
and what about making Imams from my offspring? God answered him: \`\`I
don't promise that for the oppressors and wrong doers of them.'' The
above verses denotes that Imamat, (LEADERSHIP) is a higher rank and
position than prophethood.

When HAZRAT ABRAHAM got the glad-tidings of being an Imam, and was
promised the leadership of the world, he was so excited with happiness,
that he pleaded the high position of Imamat for his progeny; and his
prayer was granted with the limitation that those among his offspring
who were Godless and oppressors; would not have it.

**NOTES

1- WHAT IS MEANT BY \`KALAM?T'?**

The ARABIC KALAMAT which HAZRAT ABRAHAM was tested by them; literally
means \`WORDS' but here it is used in the mystical sense of God's Will
or Decree, or Purpose; and that was a series of hard and very difficult
duties assigned to him, and in everything HAZRAT ABRAHAM did his best to
fulfil God's wish, and he succeeded in all.

WHAT WERE THE KALAM?T (WORDS)?

These can be understood from the various verses, throughout the Holy
Qur?n, that mainly consisted of: \* ِ Taking his lonely wife (H?JAR) and
child (ISHMAEL) and settle them in that wilderness round KAABA, which
was a region uncultivated and uninhabited by human beings.

\* ِ Making himself ready to sacrifice his beloved son (ISHMAEL) for
the sake of his only one Lord God.

\* ِ Standing so firm against the idolaters, destroying their idols,
the punishment for which was to enter that huge blazing fire which every
body has heard of.

[ 140 ]

\* ِ Leaving his house and home town and family and emigrating to
elsewhere, leaving the land of idolaters behind.
\* ِ Building the sacred refuge of KAABA and purifying GOD'S HOUSE, for
worship of Monotheists.

**2- WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PROPHETHOOD AND IM?MAT
(LEADERSHIP)?**

ARABIC "IMAMAT" has the primary sense of being foremost, and hence it
may mean religious leader - the leader of the congregational prayers -
model - pattern - and example. But as for the especial meaning that here
may be intended; by studying different verses in QUR?N we may conclude
that: Those who carry God's Meseages may have various levels and
positions; such as the position of prophethood, the duty of which is to
convey and communicate God's Message to HIS servants. To teach and train
and purify people. A prophet in his realm of assignment tries for a
revolutionary change of minds, thoughts, cultures, and in particular the
morals and ethics for living. The prophet communicates and convey the
message, LAW and the commandments; but an IMAM'S duty is to put them
into force and practice, and encourage and urge people to perform and to
fulfil, while Imam himself is a pattern and an example for that
performance and fulfilment.

**3- ABRAHAM'S HIGHEST EVOLUTIONARY STAGE**

From the preceeding argument we may conclude that an Imam is higher in
rank and position than an Apostle. To reach that high spiritual rank,
needs having special merits and qualifications - those that HAZRAT
ABRAHAM attained through hard and difficult trials.

وَإِذْ جَعَلْنَا الْبَيْتَ مَثَابَةً لِلنَّاسِ وَأَمْناً وَاتَّخِذُوا
مِن مَّقَامِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ مُصَلَّى وَعَهِدْنَآ إِلَى إِبْرَاهِيمَ
وَإِسْمَـعِيلَ أَن طَهِّرَا بَيْتِىَ لِلطَّآئِفِينَ وَالْعَـكِفِينَ
وَالرُّكَّعِ السُّجُودِ(( 125 )) 125- AND (CALL TO MIND) WHEN WE MADE
THE HOUSE (KAABA)

[ 141 ]

A PLACE OF REFERENCE FOR PEOPLE, AND SAFE. (AND FOR MEMORANDUM) MAKE
THE POINT WHERE ABRAHAM STOOD, A PLACE OF WORSHIP. AND WE MADE COVENANT
WITH ABRAHAM AND ISHMAEL, TO PURIFY MY HOUSE FOR THOSE WHO ENCOMPASS IT
ROUND; THOSE WHO RETREAT IN IT FOR DEVOTION, AND FOR THOSE WHO BOW AND
PROSTRATE THEMSELVES.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE HOUSE OF GOD**

(VERSE NO. 125) The argument now proceeds from ABRAHAM (AS) to KAABA
the house of God; the foundation of which goes back to HAZRAT ABRAHAM
(AS) by Arab tradition.

\`\`And when We made the house (KAABA) a place of reference for people
and safe.'' It was then a center to which all the Arab tribes resorted
for trade, for poetic contest, and for worship of Allah. It is also
announced by Allah to be held a safe and secure place. And so was it
taken as a sacred territory, and was respected by friends and foes
alike. In a certain season fighting was and is forbidden within its
limits, and no game is allowed to be hunted or killed. The verse
continues saying:

\`\`(AND FOR MEMORANDUM) Make the point where ABRAHAM stood, a place of
worship.'' There was a point in front of KABBA, and within the
enclosure, wherein HAZRAT ABRAHAM stood in his prayers, and even now
that every place is held as a station of prayer for memorizing this
great prophet of Allah. Then the verse points at the covenant made with
ABRAHAM and ISHMAEL to keep the House of God pure and clean:

[ 142 ]

\`\`And we made a covenant with ABRAHAM & ISHMAEL, to purify My HOUSE
for those who encompass it round, those who retreat in it for devotion,
and for those who bow and prostrate themselves.'' Here the purpose of
purifying \`\`My HOUSE'' is to keep it clean physically as well as
spiritually; like repudiating the polytheism which defiled it, before it
was purified by HAZRAT MOHAMMAD (AS)

**WHY THE HOUSE OF GOD?**

Here in this verse the house is called \`\`MY HOUSE'' while we know
that God has not a physical body, and is not a material entity to need a
room or to contain in space or time. This possessive pronoun, is used
here only for emphasizing the importance of the House, and the personal
relation of the only one true God, to it. Things are thus related to God
in order to show their importance, such as the HOUSE OF GOD, or,
RAMAZAN, which is the MONTH OF GOD, or else all the house and the months
belong to God unexclusively.

وَإِذْ قَالَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ رَبِّ اجْعَلْ هَـذَا بَلَداً ءَامِنَاً
وَارْزُقْ أهْلَهُ مِنَ الَّثمَرَتِ مَنْ ءَامَنَ مِنْهُم بِاللهِ
وَالْيَوْمِ الاَْخِرِ قَالَ وَمَن كَفَرَ فَأُمَتِّعُهُ قَلِيلا ثُمَّ
أَضْطَرُّهُ إِلَى عَذَابِ النَّارِ وَبِئْسَ الْمَصِيرُ(( 126 ))

126- AND WHEN ABRAHAM SAID: \`\`MY LORD! MAKE THIS A LAND SECURE, AND
PROVIDE IT'S PEOPLE WITH PRODUCTS - THOSE OF THEM WHO BELIEVE IN ALLAH
AND THE LAST DAY.'' HE SAID: (YOUR PRAYER IS GRANTED AND BELIEVERS SHALL
HAVE MY GRACE AND BOUNTY) BUT AS FOR THOSE WHO REJECT FAITH, I WILL
GRANT THEM THE PLEASURE FOR A LITTLE WHILE; AND THEN DRAG THEM TO
SCOURGE OF HELL AND BAD DESTINATION.

[ 143 ]

THE COMMENTARY

ABRAHAM'S REQUESTS OF HIS LORD (VERSE NO. 126) Through the verse
ABRAHAM prays for two important requests to be granted. the first
request was also hinted to, in the preceeding verse: \`\`And when
ABRAHAM said: My Lord! Make this land safe'' Here worthy of note is that
the first thing which is probably the most important to him, that HAZRAT
ABRAHAM (AS) pleaded with God, and asked it earnestly, was safety -
security - peace. Secondly he requested: \`\`And provide its people with
products.''

This was because the territory of Mecca is barren and rocky, so a
prayer for prosperity of Mecca includes a prayer for products - fruits -
and good things of material life.

وَإِذْ يَرْفَعُ إِبْرَاهِيمُ الْقَوَاعِدَ مِنَ الْبَيْتِ وَإِسْمَـعِيلُ
رَبَّنَا تَقَبَّلْ مِنَّا إِنَّكَ أَنتَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ(( 127 ))
127- AND WHEN ABRAHAM AND ISHMAEL RAISED THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE HOUSE:
OUR LORD! ACCEPT (THIS SERVICE) FROM US, FOR YOU ARE THE ALL-HEARING,
THE ALL-KNOWING.

رَبَّنَا وَاجْعَلْنَا مُسْلِمَيْنِ لَكَ وَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِنَآ أُمَّةً
مُّسْلِمَةً لَّكَ وَأَرِنَا مَنَاسِكَنَا وَتُبْ عَلَيْنَآ إِنَّكَ أَنتَ
التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ(( 128 ))

128- OUR LORD! AND MAKE US SUBMISSIVE TO YOU, AND OF OUR PROGENY A
NATION SUBMISSIVE TO YOU AND SHOW US OUR HOLY RITES AND TURN TO US (IN
MERCY), FOR YOU ARE OFT-FORGIVING, MERCIFUL. رَبَّنَا وَابْعَثْ فِيهِمْ
رَسُولا مِّنْهُمْ يَتْلُوا عَلَيْهِمْ ءَايَـتِكَ وَيُعَلِّمُهُمُ
الْكِتَـبَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَيُزَكِّيهِمْ إِنَّكَ أَنتَ الْعَزِيزُ
الْحَكِيمُ(( 129 ))

[ 144 ]

129- OUR LORD! AND RAISE UP IN THEM AN APOSTLE OF THEIR OWN, WHO SHALL
REHEARSE TO THEM YOUR SIGNS, (VERSES OF SCRIPTURE) AND TEACH THEM THE
BOOK, AND WISDOM, AND TO SANCTIFY THEM, FOR YOU ARE ALL-MIGHTY, THE
ALL-WISE.

**THE COMMENTARY

ABRAHAM BUILDS KAABA (VERSE NO. 127)**

We may understand from various verses and traditions that: KABBA was
built before HAZRAT ABRAHAM, and its foundation goes back to Adam and
Eve. In the flood of NOAH, it was ruined, and then God showed to HAZRAT
ABRAHAM the foundations of the temple, and he rebuilt it with the help
of his son. By chance the verse which is the subject of our discussion,
alludes to this incident; and gives a hint that the foundations of KAABA
already existed when ABRAHAM decided to raise it up and rebuild it:
\`\`And when ABRAHAM and ISHMAEL, raised the foundation of the house,
(THAT ALREADY EXISTED) and then prayed saying: Our Lord! accept this
(CONSTRUCTION) from us, for You are the All-Hearing, the
All-Knowing.''

ABRAHAM and his son Ishmael, built the KAABA again, and established the
rites and usage of the sacred town.

VERSE NO. 128

In their prayer, they asked their wishes in successive stages that:

\`\`1) Our Lord! Make us submissive to you.''
2) \`\`And make our progeny a nation submissive to Yourself.''
3) \`\`And show us our HOLY RITES.'' They ended their prayer in
pleading with God for repentance and HIS Forgiveness.

VERSE NO. 129

Their fifth request in that fervent and beautiful prayer was: \`\`Our [
145 ]

Lord! Raise up in them an apostle \`\`OF THEIR OWN'' who shall rehearse
to them your signs and teach them the book and wisdom and to sanctify
them.''

**A PROPHET OF THEIR OWN**

Here HAZRAT ABRAHAM (AS), foresees a prophet for teaching the people of
Mecca, that were to increase gradually, and were of surety, his own
offspring. He asks his Lord to raise up in them a prophet \`\`of their
own'' and their own Arabic language. (In fact he asked for Mohammad's
ministry, appealing to the power and wisdom of God). Here the phrase:
\`\`OF THEIR OWN'' points out that the apostles, and the spiritual
leaders of MAN. Should be of his Kind, (NOT ANGELS OR SPIRITS) having
all the instincts, passions, and nature of Man, in order to be able to
teach their ideas and doctrines practically. Being of other KINDS, such
as angels or else, neither the teacher can apprehend the problem of his
disciple, nor the disciple can follow the teacher and make an example of
him.

وَمَنْ يَرْغَبُ عَنْ مِّلَّةِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ إِلاَّ مَن سَفِهَ نَفْسَهُ
وَلَقَدِ اصْطَفَيْنَـهُ فِى الدُّنْيَا وَإِنَّهُ فِى الاَْخِرَةِ لَمِنَ
الصَّـلِحِينَ(( 130 ))

130- AND WHO TURNS AWAY FROM THE RELIGION OF ABRAHAM, EXCEPT HE BE A
FOOLISH-MINDED? AND WE HAVE CHOSEN HIM IN THIS WORLD, AND IN THE WORLD
TO COME HE IS AMONG THE RIGHTEOUS.

إذْ قَالَ لَهُ رَبُّهُ أَسْلِمْ قَالَ أَسْلَمْتُ لِرَبِّ
الْعَـلَمِينَ(( 131 ))

131- WHEN HIS LORD SAID TO HIM: \`\`SUBMIT'' HE SAID: \`\`I HAVE
SUBMITTED TO THE LORD OF THE UNIVERSE.

وَوَصِّى بِهَآ إِبْرَاهِيمُ بَنِيهِ وَيَعْقُوبُ يَـبَنِىَّ إِنَّ اللهَ
اصْطَفَى لَكُمُ الدِّينَ فَلاَ تَمُوتُنَّ إِلاَّ وَأَنتُم مُّسْلِمُونَ((
132 ))

[ 146 ]

132- AND ABRAHAM ENJOINED THIS (SUBMISSION TO ALLAH) TO HIS SONS, AND
SO DID JACOB SAYING: MY SONS! ALLAH HAS CHOSEN FOR YOU THIS RELIGION.
THEN YOU DIE NOT UNLESS YOU ARE MUSLIMS. (SUBMITTING THOROUGHLY TO THE
WILL OF ALLAH.)

**THE COMMENTARY
ABRAHAM AN INSTANCE OF HUMANITY (VERSE NO. 130)**

In the previous verses some of ABRAHAM'S services, prayers, and
requests, which are spiritual as well as physical, were mentioned. All
these may prove that the school of this great prophet, can be used as a
school for making developed human beings. On this basis the verse here
implies that: \`\`And who turns away from the religion of ABRAHAM,
except a foolish-minded who has debased his soul with folly?'' Is this
not mere folly; to leave aside a religion that may bring forth all the
goods of this life, and Here after, and grasp doubtful manners and
methods, which are against human nature, enemy to wisdom, and
destructive to morality? \`\`And We have chosen ABRAHAM in this life,
and in the life to come, in dignity and rank, among the RIGHTEOUS.''
VERSE NO. 131

This verse puts the emphasis on another qualification of him, which in
fact, it is the root of the others: \`\`When his LORD said to him:
"SUBMIT" he said: I have submitted to the LORD of the UNIVERSE.'' VERSE
NO. 132

His final advice, and legacy to his children, in his death-bed (i.e.
HIS LAST WORD) was also an example, and an instance to be followed:
\`\`And when ABRAHAM enjoined this, (FULL SUBMISSION TO ALLAH) to his
sons, and so did Jacob in his death-bed, saying: \`\`My sons! Allah HAS
chosen for you a religion. Then you die not unlss you are Muslims.
(SUBMITTED THOROUGHLY TO THE WILL OF GOD)''

[ 147 ]

أَمْ كُنتُمْ شُهَدَآءَ إِذْ حَضَرَ يَعْقُوبَ الْمَوْتُ إِذْ قَالَ
لِبَنِيهِ مَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِن بَعْدِى قَالُوا نَعْبُدُ إلَـهَكَ وَإِلَهَ
ءَابَآئِكَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْمـعِيلَ وَإِسْحَـقَ إِلَـهاً وَحِداً
وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُسْلِمُونَ(( 133 )) 133- WERE YOU WITNESSES WHEN DEATH
CAME TO JACOB? WHEN HE SAID TO HIS SONS: WHAT WILL YOU WORSHIP AFTER ME?
THEY SAID: WE SHALL WORSHIP YOUR GOD, (ALLAH) AND THE GOD OF YOUR
FATHERS - ABRAHAM - ISHMAEL - AND ISAAC: ALLAH THE ONLY ONE AND THE TRUE
GOD; AND TO HIM WE SUBMIT.


تِلْكَ أُمَّةٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ وَلَكُم مَّا كَسَبْتُمْ
وَلاَ تُسْئَلُونَ عَمَّا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ(( 134 ))

**THE COMMENTARY

OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 133)**

A group of the Jews were of opinion that Jacob, in his death-bed
enjoined on his son the necessity of following the present Jewish
religion which has been tampered with, and is a deviation of the origin,
and only the ruins of the palace which was constructed by Moses.

\*\*\*\*\*

(The death-bed scene is described in Jewish tradition so that one may
think it is far from what it is expected to be! Let us read a quotation
of the last words of Jacob from the GENESIS IN THE BIBLE, and then
continue with our commentary: \`\`JACOB called for his sons and said:
Gather round me and I will tell you what will happen to you in
future....

[ 148 ]

JUDA is like a lion who kills his victim and returns to his den!

ISSACHAR is no better than a donkey....

DAN will be a poisonous snake at the side of the road....

NAPHTALI is a deer that runs free.

JOSEPH is like a wild donkey by a spring....

BENJAMIN is like a vicious wolf, morning and evening he kills and
devours.... 28- These are the twelve tribes of Israel as introduced by
their father. What the Holy QURA"N narrates of the death-bed scene is
far different. We read: \`\`Were you witnesses when death came to Jacob?
When he said to his sons: What will you worship after me? They said: We
shall worship your God, (ALLAH) and the God of your fathers; ABRAHAM -
ISHMAEL and ISAAC the only one and true God.'' TRANSLATOR'S NOTE -
JACOBِGENESIS 49 .

VERSE NO. 134 This verse seems to seek to correct one of the many
mistakes of the Israelites who rely so much upon their ancestors, and
depend on their forefather's honour and sanctity! It says: \`\`That was
a people that had passed away. They shall reap the fruit of what they
did, and you of what you do! Of their merits there is no question in
your case.''

Therefore, instead of boasting that you are the offsprings of such and
such, try to purify your faith and heart, and correct your morals and
deeds, because on the Day of Doom, no one will ask about what your
progenitors did, rather each soul has to answer for its own deeds.

وَقَالُوا كُونُوا هُوداً أَوْ نَصَـرَى تَهْتَدُوا قُلْ بَلْ مِلَّةَ
إِبْرَاهِيمَ حَنِيفاً وَمَا كَانَ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ(( 135 )) 135- AND
(THE PEOPLE OF THE BOOK) SAID: \`\`BE JEW OR CHRISTIAN TO BE GUIDED.
SAY: RATHER THE CREED OF ABRAHAM, (AND NOT ANY OF THESE PERVERTED AND
MISINTERPRETED RELIGIONS) WHO WAS A MAN OF PURE FAITH (HANIF), AND WAS
NOT OF THE POLYTHEISTS.

[ 149 ]

قُولُوا ءَامَنَّا بِاللهِ وَمَآ أُنزِلَ إِلَيْنَا وَمَآ أُنزِلَ إِلَى
إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْمَـعِيلَ وَإِسْحـقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ وَالاَْسْبَاطِ وَمَآ
أُوتِىَ مُوسَى وَعِيسى وَمَآ أُوتِىَ النَّبِيُّونَ مِن رَّبِهِمْ لاَ
نُفَرِّقُ بَيْنَ أَحَد مِّنْهُمْ وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُسْلِمُونَ(( 136 ))

136- SAY YOU: \`\`WE BELIEVE IN ALLAH, AND THAT WHICH IS SENT DOWN ON
US, AND SENT DOWN ON ABRAHAM, ISHMAEL, ISAAC, JACOB, AND ON THE TRIBES,
AND TO THAT WHICH WAS GIVEN TO MOSES AND JESUS, AND TO THAT WHICH WAS
GIVEN TO THE APOSTLES FROM THEIR LORD. WE MAKE NO DISTINCTION BETWEEN
ANY OF THEM, AND TO HIM WE SUBMIT. (PERSONAL MOTIVES, PRIVATE INTERESTS,
AND RACIALISM, DO NOT PERSUADE US TO MAKE DISTINCTION BETWEEN ANY OF
THEM)

فَإِنْ ءَامَنُوا بِمِثْلِ مَآ ءَامَنتُم بِهِ فَقَدِ اهْتَدَوا وَّإِن
تَوَلَّوْا فَإِنَّمَا هُمْ فِى شِقَاق فَسَيَكْفِيكَهُمُ اللهُ وَهُوَ
السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ(( 137 ))

137- THEN IF THEY BELIEVE AS YOU BELIEVE IN, THEY ARE RIGHTLY GUIDED.
BUT IF THEY TURN AWAY, THEY ARE CLEARLY IN SCHISM, AND VERY SOON ALLAH
WILL SUFFICE YOU OF THEM; AND HE IS ALL-HEARING THE ALL-KNOWING.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 135)**

It is narrated from IBN-ABBASS that some of the learned Jews, and some
of the NAJRAN'S CHRISTIANS, in a hot dispute with Muslims, claimed

[ 150 ]

to be nearer to God, and one denied another. The Jews said: Our prophet
Moses, is the greatest of all. Christians said, Jesus Christ is the
greatest and the best of all. Then both parties preached Muslims to
recant, and be a Jew or a Christian to be guided to the path of truth
and salvation. To this effect the following three verses revealed.


