Section 6: The Divine Mercy Precedes the Wrath
==============================================

Surah Yunus – Verse 54
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ أَنَّ لِكُلّ نَفْسٍ ظَلَمَتْ مَا فِي الأَرْضِ لافْتَدَتْ بِهِ
وَأَسَرُّوا النَّدَامَةَ لَمَّا رَأَوُا الْعَذَابَ وَقُضِي بَيْنَهُم
بِالْقِسْطِ وَهُمْ لا يُظْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***54. “And if every soul that has done injustice had all that is on
earth, he would assuredly give it in ransom, and they declare (their)
remorse when they see the Penalty. But the judgment between them will be
with justice, and they will not be dealt with unjustly.”***

The proper magnitude of this punishment is particularly emphasized in
this verse concerning the Day of Judgment, where it implies that the
divine punishment is so awe-inspiring and horrible that if each of the
oppressors owned the entire wealth of the world, he would have paid all
of it so as to be relieved from the harsh punishment awaiting him.

The verse says:

***“And if every soul that has done injustice had all that is on earth,
he would assuredly give it in ransom...”***

In fact they are ready to offer the greatest bribes imaginable in order
to relieve themselves from the divine chastisement and to diminish the
slightest possible portion of His punishment. However, it will never be
accepted from them.

Some of these Divine punishments are particularly spiritual in nature;
that is, when they behold the punishment, they would declare their
regret[^1].

The verse continues saying:

***“…and they declare (their) remorse when they see the Penalty...”***

Then the Qur’an stresses that despite everything, justice will prevail
and will be administered fairly among them and no oppression will be
inflicted upon them.

The verse says:

***“…But the judgment between them will be with justice, and they will
not be dealt with unjustly.”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 55
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلآ إِنَّ لِلَّهِ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ والأَرْضِ أَلآ إِنَّ وَعْدَ
اللَّهِ حَقٌّ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَهُمْ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***55. “Behold! Verily to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and
the earth. Behold! Verily, Allah’s promise is true, but most of them do
not know.”***

Then for the reason that people may consider these Divine promises and
threats seriously and know that Allah is not unable to do such things,
the Qur’an says that whatsoever is in the heavens and on the earth are
His, His Lordship and His realm of administration encompasses the world
of existence in its entirety and no one can be excluded from His zone of
jurisdiction.

The verse says:

***“Behold! Verily to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the
earth...”***

And again, beware that Allah’s promise (concerning punishment of the
wrongdoers) is just, though many people (whose unconscious ignorance has
darkened their souls) do not know this fact.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Behold! Verily, Allah’s promise is true, but most of them do not
know.”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 56
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ يُحْيِي وَيُمِيتُ وإِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***56. “He (it is Who) gives life and causes to die, and to Him you
shall be returned.”***

This verse also lays again an emphasis upon the problematic issue of
life. It indicates that it is Allah Who enlivens and makes one die.

Therefore, He is able to cause death unto the servants as well as having
the power to enliven them on the Day of Resurrection for the Court of
Judgment.

The verse says:

***“He (it is Who) gives life and causes to die...”***

And ultimately, all of you will return to Him in order to receive the
reward of all your deeds there.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and to Him you shall be returned.”***

And you will receive the rewards for all the deeds you have done then
and there.

Surah Yunus – Verse 57
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أيُّهَا النَّاسُ قَدْ جَآءَتْكُم مَوْعِظَةٌ مِن رَبِّكُمْ
وَشِفَآءٌ لِمَا فِي الصُّدُورِ وَهُدًي وَرَحْمَةٌ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***57. “O mankind! There hath come to you an admonition from your Lord
and a healing for what is in your hearts, and a guidance and a mercy for
the believers.”***

The Arabic term /mau‘izah/ (preaching) means to restrain intermingled
with warning and awakening. The Arabic phrase /šifa’-is-Sudur/ refers to
the purification of spirit and heart from spiritual evils. The spiritual
defects are more grievous than the diseases of the body. The Qur’an’s
advantage lies in this very healing the spiritual diseases.

The verse says:

***“O mankind! There hath come to you an admonition from your Lord and a
healing for what is in your hearts...”***

The verse seems to allude to the four kinds of stages that shape
education and development, that is:

1. The preaching stage against visible acts.

2. The purification stage for purging the soul from ethical and social
evils.

3. The self-guiding stage towards those objectives which signify worldly
happiness and the happiness and prosperity in the Hereafter.

4. The stage of receiving divine blessings which is forgiveness and
Paradise. In the meantime, the Qur’an is wholly preaching on a general
level, however, only those groups that seek will be covered by the
divine blessings.

The verse says:

***“…and a guidance and a mercy for the believers.”***

Finally, the cure for all pains must be sought after in the school of
the Qur’an; not from the schools of the East and West.

***“…and a healing for what is in your hearts...”***

This is the reason why, Allah’s Prophet (S) in a tradition states:

*“When afflictions, like a dark and terrible night, invade you, seek
refuge in the Qur’an.” It is simultaneously full of preaching as well as
being a remedy, a source of illumination and blessing all at the same
time.”*

Surah Yunus – Verse 58
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ بِفَضْلِ اللَّهِ وَبِرَحْمَتِهِ فَبِذَلِكَ فَلْيَفْرَحُوا هُوَ
خَيْرٌ مِّمَّا يَجْمَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***58. “Say: ‘In the grace of Allah, and in His mercy – in that let them
rejoice; it is better than that which they hoard’.”***

What is apparently revealed in this verse, if we consider the previous
verse about the Qur’an as a source of healing and preaching, is the
appeal to the Qur’an which is the purpose of Allah’s grace and mercy. As
Imam Ali (as) says:

*“On the Day of Resurrection, a voice will be heard that every farmer
will be busy with some kind of pest except those who had sowed in the
field of the Qur’an. Thus, sow your seeds in the field of the
Qur’an.”*[^2]

The Prophet (S) said:

*“He who has been honoured by Allah to be introduced to the blessings of
Islam and the understanding of the Qur’an, but feels miserable is
miserable indeed, and will be labeled so until the Day of
Resurrection”*, then he recited this verse.[^3]

This is meant to say that once a person benefits from the blessings of
Islam and the Qur’an, he is no longer poor and he enjoys the greatest
wealth. Likewise, it has been narrated from the Prophet (S) who said:

 *“Refer to the Qur’an so that your life becomes enriched like the lives
of happy people and your death becomes similar to those of the martyrs
and you are saved from the terror on the Day of Resurrection.*

*For the Qur’an, is surely the word of the Compassionate (Allah) which
guards against Satan, and* *favourably* *balances one’s acts during the
Day of Judgment”*[^4]

Incidentally, ‘grace’ and ‘mercy’ mentioned in the Qur’an have been
interpreted as prophethood and Imamate.[^5] Also the former has
sometimes been interpreted as the general divine blessings and the
latter has been interpreted as His specific blessings.

According to an Islamic tradition, divine grace has been pointed out as
Islam and His mercy is the Qur’an. Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“Divine grace consists of /salawat/ and His mercy is Ali-ibn-Abitalib
(as).”*[^6]

The verse says:

***“Say: ‘In the grace of Allah, and in His mercy...”***

Finally, we must be happy for all the divine blessings, especially the
fact that He has blessed us with prophethood of Muhammad (S) and Imamate
of the Immaculate Imams (as) and we must know that spiritual blessings
are superior to all the material ones.

The verse continues saying:

***“…in that let them rejoice, it is better than that which they
hoard’.”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 59
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُم مَآ أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ لَكُم مِن رِزْقٍ فَجَعَلْتُمْ
مِنْهُ حَرَاماً وَحَلاَلاً قُلْ ءَآللَّهُ أَذِنَ لَكُمْ أَمْ عَلَي
اللَّهِ تَفْتَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***59. “Say: ‘Have you considered what (things) Allah has sent down for
you of sustenance, then you made some of it unlawful, and (some of it)
lawful?’ Say: ‘Has Allah permitted you, or do you forge a lie against
Allah?’”***

There have been mentioned in Surah Al-Ma’idah, No. 5, verse 103 some
examples of those unreasonable prohibitions which the polytheists
invented. They used to lay aside part of their crops for their idols and
idol-temples, thus making it forbidden for them.

They also used to forbid whatever was in the wombs of animals for women
while making them lawful for the use of men. The Qur’an completely
rejects all these superstitions.

The verse says:

***“Say: ‘Have you considered what (things) Allah has sent down for you
of sustenance, then you made some of it unlawful, and (some of it)
lawful?’ Say: ‘Has Allah permitted you, or do you forge a lie against
Allah?’”***

The main general principle upon the edible things is that they are
lawful to be eaten, except those whose being unlawful is proved by
religion.

We should also know that divine legislation is particular to Allah, the
legislator, and no one is right to precede the lawgiver. Similar to the
case no divine unlawful thing can be changed into a lawful one, the
lawful things cannot be counted unlawful either.

However, to legislate an innovative law is a crime, and to forge it
against Allah is another crime.

Surah Yunus – Verse 60
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا ظَنُّ الَّذِينَ يَفْتَرُونَ عَلَي اللَّهِ الْكَذِبَ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَذُو فَضْلٍ عَلَي النَّاسِ وَلَكِنَّ
أَكْثَرَهُمْ لاَ يَشْكُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***60. “And what imagine those who forge lies against Allah, on the Day
of Resurrection? Verily Allah is the Lord of bounty to mankind, but most
of them are not thankful.”***

In the previous verse, the act of certain prohibitions done by some
people was criticized. In this verse we encounter Allah’s superiority
and His uncountable Divine favors that deserve our gratitude, and at the
same time, we are also criticized in all those cases where thanksgiving
is lacking and false accusations are directed towards Allah.

The verse says:

***“And what imagine those who forge lies against Allah, on the Day of
Resurrection? Verily Allah is the Lord of bounty to mankind...”***

To ascribe false accusations towards Allah (s.w.t.) is a sin deserving
of punishment. One must not make light the chance and respite that Allah
has provided man in this world; neither must we forget and be oblivious
to the Court of Justice which will be established on the Day of
Judgment.

Prohibition of Divine blessings is a repulsive act and leads one to
deprivation in this world and brings shame and devastating consequences
on the Day of Resurrection.

Almighty Allah has done the utmost in being forgiving and kind towards
man, though most people turn a blind eye to all those favors. They
rarely engage in thanksgiving, thus paving the way for the utter denial
and refutation of the fact that it is He who has provided all those
favors.

The verse says:

***“…but most of them are not thankful.”***

[^1]: Some of the commentators have translated the Qur’anic word
/’asarru/, mentioned in the verse under discussion, by its first lexical
meaning which is: ‘To conceal’, while referring to the explanations of
the Arabic Dictionary: Mufradat by Raqib, and also Lisan-ul-‘Arab, it is
realized that this word has opposite meanings: ‘to conceal’ as well as
‘to express, declare and appear’. Keeping the whole verses of the Qur’an
in mind, this fact is clear that on the Day of Hereafter everything is
manifest and no one will be able to conceal a thing from others, (here,
their regret), or to behave so that he can escape from the reality. That
is why the latter meaning has been chosen for the word /’asarru/ in this
verse.

[^2]: Nahjul-Balaghah, Sermon 17.

[^3]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, the

[^4]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, vol. 89, p. 19

[^5]: Tafsir-ul-Burhan, vol. 2, p. 187

[^6]: Tafsir-us-Safi, vol. 2, p. 407


