Section 10: Jonah’s People
==========================

Surah Yunus – Verse 93
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ بَوَّأْنَا بَنِي إِسْرَآئِيلَ مُبَوَّأَ صِدْقٍ وَرَزَقْنَاهُم
مِنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ فَمَا اخْتَلَفُوا حَتَّي جَآءَهُمُ الْعِلْمُ إِنَّ
رَبَّكَ يَقْضِي بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فِيمَا كَانُوا فِيهِ
يَخْتَلِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***93. “And certainly We lodged the Children of Israel a goodly lodging,
and provided them with good things, so they did not differ but after the
knowledge came to them, Verily your Lord will judge between them on the
Day of Judgment concerning that in which they used to differ.”***

The ultimate victory of the Children of Israel and their eventual return
to the Holy Land after their liberation from the men of Pharaoh, are
explained in this verse as follows:

***“And certainly We lodged the Children of Israel a goodly
lodging...”***

The objective meaning of the phrase /mubawwa’a sidqin/ (a goodly
lodging) can be considered as alluding to the land of Egypt or the lands
of Syria and Palestine.

Then the Qur’an adds that Allah provided them with the good things to
eat but they did not appreciate the real value of this blessing.
Contrarily, they sowed the seeds of discord and quarreled with each
other, and this they did not until the knowledge was made available to
them.

The verse says:

***“…and provided them with good things, so they did not differ but
after the knowledge came to them...”***

Eventually, Allah will arbitrate among them as to what they disagreed
upon on the Day of Resurrection. If they do not experience the
punishment for their discord today, they will experience it in the
future.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Verily your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Judgment
concerning that in which they used to differ.”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 94
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِن كُنْتَ فِي شَكّ‌ٍ مِمَّآ أَنْزَلْنَآ إِلَيْكَ فَسْأَلِ الَّذِينَ
يَقْرَءُونَ الْكِتَابَ مِن قَبْلِكَ لَقَدْ جَآءَكَ الْحَقُّ مِن
رَبِّكَ فَلاَ تَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الْمُمْتَرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***94. “So if you are in doubt as to what We have revealed unto you,
then ask those who read the book (sent)*** ***before you.*** ***The
Truth hath indeed come to you from your Lord, so be not of the
doubters.”***

How is it that the Qur’an implies: O! Prophet, if you have any doubts
about the Qur’an, ask the People of the Book, despite the fact that he
(S) had never had any shadow of a doubt in this respect? Reason does not
admit that a prophet might doubt the revelation sent to him.

However, its meaning can be gathered in the same Surah, verse 104. Here
Allah, the Exalted, has addressed the Prophet (S) while this meaning
addresses the whole people. The implication of it is that if the people
are hesitating, they must ask those who have read the Qur’an.

To support this argument, there is a verse at the end of the current
Surah in which Allah, the Gracious, addressing the people from the
tongue of the Prophet (S), says:

*“O you people if you are in doubt as to my religion.”*

With this verse, Allah, the Gracious, made it transparent that the
Prophet (S) had not been skeptical and His objective in addressing the
Prophet (S) is really intended for other people.

Likewise, there are other verses that apparently address the Prophet (S)
although, in reality, the addressees are people other than the Prophet
(S) as well.

The verse says:

***“So if you are in doubt as to what We have revealed unto you, then
ask those who read the book (sent)*** ***before you...”***

Incidentally, some of the great commentators of the Qur’an have stated
that this doubt is of the type which is based upon supposition and
probability and not upon certainty and through defining rules, like the
verse which says:

***“If the Beneficent (Allah) had a son...”***[^1]***.***

Although the verse, ***“He begets not, nor is He begotten…”,***
categorically rules out the issue of Allah having a child. This
proposition is in fact a conditional proposition.

That is, were you to have the slightest doubt in this respect, you
should ask those knowledgeable People of the Book, because they are sure
that you tell the Truth.

Imam Sadiq (as) is narrated who said that Hadrat Muhammad (S) never
doubted and never asked the People of the Book.

And finally, besides the explanation offered in the above, the verse
demonstrates the fact that the reasons for the appointment of the
Prophet (S) and whatever is revealed to him are not confined to his call
to prophecy and his offering of miracles.

There are allusions made to him in the Books of the preceding prophets
and though those books are misrepresented and their authenticity
questionable, there are numerous tidings here and there, amounting to
sixty cases which are available to the People of the Book.

The holy sentence which says: ***“…The Truth has indeed come to you from
your Lord...”*** signifies: by means of the revelations and exhaustive
proofs it has been proved to you that what has been passed to you is an
authentic and genuine truth which leaves no room for any sort of
skepticism.

Thus, be firm in your beliefs in which case you should have no doubts,
not refuting and denying the Divine verses, and continue your course.
The verse continues saying:

***“…The Truth hath indeed come to you from your Lord, so be not of the
doubters.”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 95
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِاَيَاتِ اللَّهِ فَتَكُونَ
مِنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***95. “Nor be of those who belied the Signs of Allah, (for) then you
shall be of the losers.”***

The previous holy verse advised against maintaining any skepticism about
the Qur’an. This noble verse addresses itself to refutation of the
verses.

Many a time if skepticism remains unchallenged, it will lead to
refutation. The verse says:

***“Nor be of those who belied the Signs of Allah, (for) then you shall
be of the losers.”***

All investigation and analysis that had been applied to skepticism in
the previous verse, may equally propound here as well, for refutation is
worse than skepticism. There have been numerous verses and traditions
which inform of the certainty the Prophet (S) possessed.

Therefore, the target and the addressees of such warnings are mankind,
and not the Prophet (S) in person. How can someone, who has led others
to believe in something with certainty, be himself a skeptic, or refute
that same thing?

Surah Yunus – Verses 96 - 97
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ حَقَّتْ عَلَيْهِمْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ لا يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ جَآءَتْهُم كُلُّ ءَايَةٍ حَتَّي يَرَوُا الْعَذَابَ الاَلِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***96. “Verily those against whom the Word of your Lord has proved true
will not believe,”***  
***97. “Even if every Sign come unto them, until they see the painful
chastisement.”***

Allah tells the Prophet (S), here, that there is a group among his
opponents who are fanatic and obstinate and who cannot be expected to
become believers.

They have become so brainwashed in their thinking, and have been led
astray to such an extent that they have lost their human consciences,
becoming individuals who may not be impressed or influenced.

However, explaining the subject with this connotation, the Qur’an says
that Allah’s commandment had been proven and was unequivocal to them,
though they will not become believers.

The verse says:

***“Verily those against whom the Word of your Lord has proved true will
not believe,”***

Even if all Allah’s verses and symbols had dawned upon them, they would
not become believers unless they witnessed the Divine Punishment with
their own eyes, at which time, their faith would be of no avail.

The verse says:

***“Even if every Sign come unto them, until they see the painful
chastisement.”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 98
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَوْلاَ كَانَتْ قَرْيَةٌ ءَامَنَتْ فَنَفَعَهآ إِيمَانُهَآ إِلاَّ
قَوْمَ يُونُسَ لَمَّآ ءَامَنُوا كَشَفْنَا عَنْهُمْ عَذَابَ الْخِزْي
فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَمَتَّعْنَاهُمْ إِلَي حِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***98. “Why was there not a township which believed, so that their
belief should have profited them, except the people of Jonah (Yunus)?
When they believed, We removed from them the Penalty of Ignominy in the
life of the world, and gave them enjoyment for a while.”***

Allah, the Gracious, had said in the previous verses, Pharaoh’s
repentance when he witnessed the Punishment was not accepted.

In line with this account, the Qur’an recounts the story of the nation
of Jonah before the Punishment was imposed, asking the question why is
it that the people of every settlement do not become believers when
their faith would bring them dividends and is to their advantage?

Allah, the Gracious, likewise has declared that accepting faith at the
time when the punishment is imposed and death is near is of no avail.
However, when the nation of Jonah witnessed the early signs of the
Punishment they started to believe, and Allah relieved them from it, and
allowed them to enjoy their lives until the end of their lifetimes, and
reap the fruits of His blessings.

The verse says:

***“Why was there not a township which believed, so that their belief
should have profited them, except the people of Jonah (Yunus)? When they
believed, We removed from them the Penalty of Ignominy in the life of
the world, and gave them enjoyment for a while.”***

According to Hadrat Sadiq (as), Hadrat Jonah (as) had been preaching for
33 years, starting at the age of 30 until the age of 63. However, he
only was successful in converting two people to the religion of
monotheism. He then cursed the people for their recalcitrance.

One of these two believers was a sage and philosopher. When he noticed
the prophet’s cursing the people and his departure, he went up to them
and warned them in a loud voice.

The people who were impressed, under his guidance, left the town
distancing themselves from their children, and they cried and repented
before Allah until they were forgiven. On his return, Jonah (as) had
noticed that township had not been annihilated. He asked the reason and
was told the story.[^2]

Therefore, faith and repentance in sufficient time removes Divine
Punishment, while prayer and supplication both removes the Punishment
and generates success and happiness. (Regarding the occasion of
revelation)

Surah Yunus – Verse 99
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ شَآءَ رَبُّكَ لأَمَنَ مَنْ فِي الأَرْضِ كُلُّهُمْ جَميعاً
أَفَاَنْتَ تُكْرِهُ النَّاسَ حَتَّي يَكُونُوا مُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***99. “And if your Lord had willed, whoever is on the earth would have
believed, all of them, all together. Will thou then compel the people
till they become believers?”***

Man is free and faith is based upon one’s voluntary choice; it is not to
be accepted under compulsion or by imposition.

Allah is Omnipotent and Omniscient, employing His power in such a way
that it does not run contrary to His Knowledge. And as His omniscience
requires mankind to be free, He never compels them to accept faith by
force.

The Prophet (S) has compassionately insisted that people accept the
faith on the basis of voluntary acceptance and not through compulsion.

The verse says:

***“And if your Lord had willed, whoever is on the earth would have
believed, all of them, all together. Will thou then compel the people
till they become believers?”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 100
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لِنَفْسٍ أَن تُؤْمِنَ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ ۚ وَيَجْعَلُ
الرِّجْسَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ لَا يَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***100. “And it is not for a soul to believe except by the Will of
Allah, and He appoints uncleanness (of infidelity) on those who do not
ponder.”***

People are neither compelled to accept the faith (according to the
previous verse) nor can they succeed in accepting the faith without His
guidance and Divine Providence.

The verse says:

***“And it is not for a soul to believe except by the Will of
Allah...”***

Divine favor and Divine Providence shine their light upon the sage and
those people who use their reasoning and he who does not meditate and
reason under his own volition, will suffer His Punishment and will abide
in wretchedness.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and He appoints uncleanness (of infidelity) on those who do not
ponder.”***

Sound reasoning provides the basis for faith and having no faith
exhibits ignorant and irrational behavior.

Surah Yunus – Verse 101
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلِ انْظُرُوا مَاذَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ وَمَا تُغْنِي
الاَيَاتُ وَالنُّذُرُ عَن قَوْمٍ لاَّ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***101. “Say: ‘Observe you what is in the heavens and the earth! But
neither Signs nor warnings avail a people who do not believe’.”***

In the previous verses the issue in question was that faith is a
voluntary matter; it is not a matter that springs up in emergency
situations, nor is it compulsory. It is for this reason that the means
of acquiring faith is shown in this verse.

Addressing the Prophet (S), the Qur’an implies that he should say to the
unbelievers to carefully observe the wonderful, profound system at work
in the skies and on the earth each part of which exhibits the magnitude,
power, knowledge and wisdom of Allah.

The verse says:

***“Say: ‘Observe you what is in the heavens and the earth!…”***

The above sentence explicitly rules out the issue of fatalism and the
lack of freedom of will. It indicates that accepting faith is
consequential upon studying the world of existence which is a task left
entirely in our hands.

The Qur’an adds, however, that despite all these verses and clues to the
Truth, is it not surprising that some groups do not become believers,
for those verses and clues, warnings and admonishments not only are of
no benefit to those who lack preparedness for embracing the Truth, but
they are not useful for those obstinate people who will not become
believers either.

The verse continues saying:

***“…But neither Signs nor warnings avail a people who do not
believe’.”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 102
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهَلْ يَنْتَظِرُونَ إِلاَّ مِثْلَ أَيَّامِ الَّذِينَ خَلَوْا مِن
قَبْلِهِمْ قُلْ فَانْتَظِرُوا إِنّي مَعَكُم مِنَ الْمُنتَظِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***102. “Do they then expect (anything) but the like of the days of
those who passed away before them? Say: ‘Wait you then, verily I also
with you, will be of those who wait’.”***

This verse is in the form of a question with a threatening tone. It
declares that obstinate and faithless people expect to see a destiny
other than that of former nations which suffered the painful Divine
Punishment; the doom of Pharaohs, the Nimrods, Shaddads, and their
assistants and advocates.

The verse says:

***“Do they then expect (anything) but the like of the days of those who
passed away before them?...”***

Towards the end of the verse, in order to warn them, Allah commands the
Prophet (S) to tell them that now they are on such a track, and are not
ready to reconsider their fate, that they should wait and look out for
it as he was.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Say: ‘Wait you then, verily I also with you, will be of those who
wait’.”***

They wait in order to avoid and deny Allah’s call, and we wait for the
evil and painful destiny which awaits them like that of the former
oppressive nations of the past.

Surah Yunus – Verse 103
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ نُنَجّي رُسُلَنَا وَالَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا كَذَلِكَ حَقّاً
عَلَيْنَا نُنْجِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***103. “Then (when Our wrath fell) We deliver Our messengers and those
who believe. Thus it is binding on Us (that) We deliver the
believers.”***

Our common sense tells us and we witness the fact that the good and evil
are sometimes placed in the same category indiscriminately.

The Qur’an warns us also in verse 25 of Surah Al-Anfal that we must fear
the calamities which not only are inflicted upon the oppressors but also
upon the faithful as well. How is it, then, that this verse states that
Allah saves the faithful in time of trouble?

The verse says:

***“Then (when Our wrath fell) We deliver Our messengers and those who
believe...”***

The answer to this verse is that if the faithful remain silent when they
are among the disbelievers and the guilty, Allah’s punishment will
encompass all of them. However, if the believers act according to their
divine duty, which is forbidding the wrong, Allah may save them in time
of trouble.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Thus it is binding on Us (that) We deliver the believers.”***

[^1]: Surah Al-Zukhruf, No. 43, verse 81

[^2]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan, and As-Safi.


