Section 11: Profit or Loss Caused by Allah - Unavoidable by Anyone
==================================================================

Surah Yunus – Verse 104
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَآ أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنْ كُنتُمْ فِي شَكّ‌ٍ مِنْ دِيني فَلآ
أَعْبُدُ الَّذِينَ تَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ وَلَكِنْ أَعْبُدُ
اللَّهَ الَّذِي يَتَوَفَّاكُمْ وَاُمِرْتُ أَنْ أَكُونَ مِنَ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***104. “Say: “O you people! If you are in doubt as to my religion, then
(know that) I do not worship those whom you worship other than Allah!
But I worship Allah Who causes you to die and I have been commanded that
I should be of the believers’.”***

Do not allow the skepticism of others to influence you. Decisiveness is
the primary condition for leadership.

Any reconciliation and agreement with the unbelievers is prohibited. You
must expel the unbelieving front from among yourselves, making them
despair. Beware that the enemy envies the leaders of Islam.

You must declare your ostracism and position of differentiation from the
unbelievers. Allah Who is in command of life and death is more suitable
to be worshipped than idols, oppressors, and insignificant powers and
puppets. Therefore, the holy Prophet (S) and, by extension, the
believers have been commanded to be faithful and testify to monotheism.

The verse says:

***“Say: “O you people! If you are in doubt as to my religion, then
(know that) I do not worship those whom you worship other than Allah!
But I worship Allah Who causes you to die and I have been commanded that
I should be of the believers’.”***

Surah Yunus – Verses 105 - 106
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْ أَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدّينِ حَنِيفاً وَلاَ تَكُونَنَّ مِنَ
الْمُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا تَدْعُ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ مَا لاَ يَنفَعُكَ وَلاَ يَضُرُّكَ فَإِن
فَعَلْتَ فَإِنَّكَ إِذاً مِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***105. “And (I have also been commanded) that ‘Set your face towards
the Religion uprightly, and never be of the polytheists.’”***  
***106. “And do not call other than Allah on that which will neither
profit you nor hurt you: for if you do, then verily you will on that
case be of the unjust.”***

In the last verses of this Surah, Allah, the Supreme, has designated the
responsibilities of the Messenger (the Prophet) as to what he must do in
case the people did not follow him or hesitated in accepting his
mission.

The verse says:

***“And (I have also been commanded) that ‘Set your face towards the
Religion uprightly, and never be of the polytheists.’”***

The Prophet’s responsibility is to get the people to desist from the
worship of self-styled gods and induce the sincere worship of the one
Allah, “Allah”, to inculcate an honest faith in Him and to execute His
Commandments whether apparent or hidden.

They should not worship other gods and man-made idols, for by doing this
they would be oppressing themselves because these false deities are of
no advantage or disadvantage to them. He Who is really the only source
of benefit and loss is no one but “Allah”.

The verse says:

***“And do not call other than Allah on that which will neither profit
you nor hurt you: for if you do, then verily you will on that case be of
the unjust.”***

Man’s submission to idols and those manufactured deities he has made as
partners with the Creator, is injustice to himself. If he does this, he
will lose his identity which is one of the most precious endowments he
is blessed with, and if he tries to persuade others to follow this road
this can also be considered as oppressing the people by misleading them
in their thinking.

Though this speech is addressed to the Prophet, in reality it is
targeted at the people.

Surah Yunus – Verse 107
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن يَمْسَسْكَ اللَّهُ بِضُرّ‌ٍ فَلاَ كَاشِفَ لَهُ إِلاَّ هُوَ وَإِن
يُرِدْكَ بِخَيْرٍ فَلاَ رَآدَّ لِفَضْلِهِ يُصِيبُ بِهِ مَن يَشَآءُ
مِنْ عِبَادِهِ وَهُوَ الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***107. “And if Allah afflicts you with any hurt, none can remove it but
Him. And if He intends any good for you, none can repel His favor. He
causes it to reach whomsoever of His servants He pleases, and He is the
Forgiving, the Merciful.”***

If Allah causes you pain in cases of calamities or brings you hardships
or sufferings, no one but He is able to release you by removing them,
and if He gives you well-being in matters of health, blessings or
affluence and so forth, no one can hinder Him or block His way.

The verse says:

***“And if Allah afflicts you with any hurt, none can remove it but Him.
And if He intends any good for you, none can repel His favor...”***

Allah’s beneficence, which is always appropriate, extends in different
circumstances for whom He pleases from among His servants and according
to His wise Judgment and realistic evaluation. He is forgiving of the
sins committed by his servants and He is compassionate towards them.

The verse says:

***“…He causes it to reach whomsoever of His servants He pleases, and He
is the Forgiving, the Merciful.”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 108
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَآ أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ قَدْ جَآءَكُمُ الْحَقُّ مِن رَبّكُمْ فَمَنِ
اهْتَدَي فإِنَّمَا يَهْتَدِي لِنَفْسِهِ وَمَن ضَلَّ فَإِنَّمَا يَضِلُّ
عَلَيْهَا وَمَآ أَنَاْ عَلَيْكُم بِوَكِيلٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***108. “Say: ‘O mankind!*** ***(Now) the Truth has come to you from
your Lord.*** ***Therefore, whoever is guided, he is guided for (the
good of) his own self, and whoever strays, he strays only against it;
and I am not a warden over you’.”***

This verse and the one following it are admonishments to mankind in
general and to the Prophet (S) in particular. They complement the
commandments that Allah has explained throughout this Surah and with
that, the Surah of Yunus comes to an end.

At first, as a general instruction, Allah commands the Prophet (S) to
say to mankind that the Truth has now reached them from their Lord.

These instructions, this Heavenly Book, this program and this Prophet
along with his miracles are all true and the evidence of their
truthfulness is explicit and obvious.

The verse declares:

***“Say: ‘O mankind! (Now) the Truth has come to you from your
Lord...”***

In the light of this reality, he who is led by the light of this truth
has been guided and will reap his own advantages while he who refuses
and fails to submit himself when facing truth would have taken steps
towards his own destruction.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Therefore, whoever is guided, he is guided for (the good of) his
own self, and whoever strays he strays only against it;...”***

The Prophet (S) is instructed to say that he is not their agent; he does
not act on their behalf as an advocate, nor is he their guardian.

The verse says:

***“…and I am not a warden over you’.”***

That is, neither is he commissioned to force them to accept the truth
for accepting faith under compulsion is meaningless not could he save
them from the Divine Punishment in case they did not accept the Truth.

His duty is to call them to Islam, to bring Allah’s message to them, to
guide them on the Straight Path, to lead them, and to serve them as
their leader.

Surah Yunus – Verse 109
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّبِعْ مَا يُوحَي إِلَيْكَ وَاصْبِرْ حَتَّي يَحْكُمَ اللَّهُ
وَهُوَ خَيْرُ الْحَاكِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***109. “And follow (only) what is revealed unto you, and be patient
till Allah judges, and He is the best of the judges.”***

In this noble verse, Allah sums up the duties of the Prophet (S) in two
sentences: the first one says that he should act according to what has
been revealed unto him.

The verse says:

***“And follow (only) what is revealed unto you...”***

The direction or his path has been fixed by what Allah has revealed to
him and he is not allowed to make the slightest deviation from it.

Secondly there are numerous trials and tribulations facing him on this
path and he must not let himself be distracted by these difficulties.

He must wait, practice fortitude, and maintain his position until Allah
issues His verdict concerning his success over his enemies, for Allah is
the Best of those who decide because His decision is identical with the
Truth, His wisdom is based on justice and His promise is never to be
broken. The verse continues saying:

***“…and be patient till Allah judges, and He is the best of the
judges.”***

**The End of Surah Yunus.**


