Surah Hud, Chapter 11
=====================

**Surah Hud (Hud)**

**No.11 (Revealed in Mecca)**

**123 verses in 10 sections**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful**

The Contents of Surah Hud
-------------------------

This holy Surah was revealed during the last years of the Prophet’s stay
in Mecca, during which the Muslims were experiencing very hard times
because of the passing away of Hadrat Abu-Talib and Hadrat Khadijah.

The blessed Prophet (S) once said: “*Surah Hud made me age*”, for the
verse recommending perseverance and persistence has been revealed within
this Surah. It says:

“*Persevere and persist as you have been ordered and your followers with
you.* ”

However, the impatience and lack of perseverance of the companions of
the Prophet (S) annoyed him.

The contents of this Surah, which comprises 123 verses, deal with the
history of the prophets; in particular, the story of Hadrat Noah (as).
It also focuses upon economic problems.

Attention is devoted to the history of the prophets, presenting their
message as a continuous historical process, and not as some isolated
affairs. It insists on the fact that the history of the prophets is
governed by laws, the study of which reveals the secrets of the rise and
fall, the glorification and degradation of nations.

This indicates that religion is not separate from society, and society’s
destiny depends entirely upon people’s religion and way of life.

The name of Hadrat Hud (as) has been repeated five times in this Surah
which equals the number of its recurrence throughout the rest of the
Qur’an.

As for the virtues implied in this Surah, there is a tradition narrated
from the Prophet (S) who has said:

*“He who recites this Surah, will reap rewards, the size of which would
equal the number of all those who believed in Hud and the other prophets
as well as those who refuted them, and he will be elevated in rank equal
to those of the martyrs on the Day of Resurrection, and thus everything
would be easy for him.”*

Obviously, a mere cursory reading of the Surah would have not such a
result; rather reading, meditating upon it and later combining it with
practice, would place man along with the former believers and distance
him from the rejecters of the prophets.


