Section 3: The Ministry of Noah
===============================

Surah Hud – Verses 25 - 26
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا نُوحاً إِلىَ قَوْمِهِ إِنّي لَكُمْ نَذِيرٌ
مُبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَّ تَعْبُدُوا إِلاَّ اللَّهَ إِنّي أَخَافُ عَلَيْكُمْ عَذَابَ
يَوْمٍ أَلِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***25. “And verily, We sent Noah to his people, (saying:) ‘I am a plain
warner for you’.”***  
***26. “That you serve none but Allah; verily, I do fear for you the
penalty of a painful day.”***

Hadrat Noah is the first prophet among those possessors of determination
/’ulul ‘azm/ i.e., among the major prophets, who stood up against
polytheism and idol worship, and as the human generation traces its
genealogy back to him after the drowning of the unbelievers, he is
addressed as the second Adam and, since his life-time was longest
comparing that of other prophets, he is called Master of the Prophets.

Allah, the Gracious, has told the story of the prophets of the past to
warn the unbelievers and to soothe the Prophet (S). Taking up the story
of Noah, the Qur’an says that he was sent to his people so as to warn
them against worshipping other than Allah.

The verse says:

***“And verily, We sent Noah to his people, (saying:) ‘I am a plain
warner for you’.”***

He started His call in a sincere manner inviting them to accept
monotheism because it was the most supreme ideal, for no other act of
worship would be accepted before the All-knowing Allah, the sole and
only Creator of the world.

The verse says:

***“That you serve none but Allah; verily, I do fear for you the penalty
of a painful day.”***

Surah Hud – Verse 27
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَالَ الْمَلأُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِن قَوْمِهِ مَا نَرَاكَ إِلاَّ
بَشَراً مِثْلَنَا وَمَا نَرَاكَ اتَّبَعَكَ إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ هُمْ
أَرَاذِلُنَا بَادِيَ الرَّأْيِ وَمَا نَرَي لَكُمْ عَلَيْنَا مِن فَضْلٍ
بَلْ نَظُنُّكُمْ كَاذِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***27. “Then the chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people said:
‘We do not see (in) you but a man like ourselves, nor do we see that any
follow you but those who are the meanest among us, at first thought, nor
do we see (in) you any excellence over us; nay, we think you are
liars!’”***

The opponents of the truth sometimes belittle and endeavor to weaken the
Divine leaders. They claim that prophets are men like others and not
superior to them.

The verse says:

***“Then the chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people said: ‘We
do not see (in) you but a man like ourselves...”***

At other times, humiliating the prophets’ followers, they claim that
they are some unimportant and insignificant people.

The verse continues saying:

***“…nor do we see that any follow you but those who are the meanest
among us, at first thought...”***

At other times, they despise the entire school claiming that the
adherents of this school are naive and superficial who lack any depth of
vision.

The verse says:

***“…nor do we see (in) you any excellence over us; nay, we think you
are liars!’”***

Arrogant people often detest being equal with the masses, especially
with those who are deprived. Usually, the aristocrats have always allied
themselves with the opponents of the prophets but those who take less
interest in worldly affairs, become believers more quickly and are more
decent.

Therefore, the opponents of the prophets lack reasoning and whatever
they claim is based on conjecture, speculation and on hallucinations.

Surah Hud – Verse 28
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِن كُنْتُ عَلَي بَيّنَةٍ مِن رَبّي
وءَاتَانِي رَحْمَةً مِنْ عِندِهِ فَعُمّيَتْ عَلَيْكُمْ
أَنُلْزِمُكُمُوهَا وَأَنتُمْ لَهَا كَارِهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***28. “He said: “O my People! Bethink you, if I be upon a clear proof
from my Lord, and He has grant me mercy from His Presence, but has been
obscured for you; shall we compel you to (accept) it while you are
averse to it?”***

This holy verse provides answers to two objections of the unbelievers
which were raised in the foregoing verse.

The unbelievers used to say that Noah (as) was a man like themselves.
This verse answers that although in appearance the prophets are like the
unbelievers, they have merited Allah’s particular approbation since they
receive revelations and perform miracles.

The unbelievers would say that the followers of Hadrat Noah (as) were
some simple minded, short sighted, and naive people. The verse answers
that such was not the case, although apparently they were weaker than
the unbelievers, they had become believers through witnessing the proofs
shown to them by their prophet. Their conviction, indeed, was not
baseless and without reason.

Despite all the false accusations and groundless protests, the prophets
have always displayed a tolerant attitude towards their foes and they
still took recourse to logic, reasoning and appeal to their emotions.

Of all the things required of the prophets, offering proofs to the
people and performing miracles combined with decisive reasoning leave no
room for any excuses. Nothing must withhold people from exercising their
free choice. Once they stick to their beliefs, they will prosper and
once they refuse to do so they will be tormented. There is no compulsion
in that.

The verse says:

***“He said: “O my People! Bethink you, if I be upon a clear proof from
my Lord, and He has grant me mercy from His Presence, but has been
obscured for you; shall we compel you to (accept) it while you are
averse to it?”***

Surah Hud – Verse 29
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَا قَوْمِ لآ أَسْأَلُكُم عَلَيْهِ مَالاً إِنْ أَجْرِيَ إِلاَّ عَلَي
اللَّهِ وَمَا أَنَاْ بِطَارِدِ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا إِنَّهُم مُلاَقُوا
رَبّهِمْ وَلَكِنّي أَرَاكُمْ قَوْماً تَجْهَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***29. “And O’ my People! I ask you no wealth for it. My reward is only
upon Allah, and I will not drive away those who believe, (for) verily
they shall meet their Lord, but I see you are an ignorant people.”***

The secret of a preacher’s success is his lack of over expectation with
regard to people and not letting himself be stymied by the objections of
the wealthy corrupt classes.

If the prophets were seeking illegitimate profits, they would call on
the aristocrats and not the poor, on the princes not on the paupers. The
followers of the prophets are the oppressed people and they never
neglect them.

The prophets are never greedy for the people’s property. Their sole
purpose, according to their mission is to save the people from their
ignorance and from the Divine punishment.

The verse says:

***“And O’ my People! I ask you no wealth for it. My reward is only upon
Allah, and I will not drive away those who believe, (for) verily they
shall meet their Lord, but I see you are an ignorant people.”***

Surah Hud – Verse 30
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَا قَوْمِ مَن يَنصُرُنِي مِنَ اللَّهِ إِن طَرَدتُّهُمْ أَفَلاَ
تَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***30. “And O my people! Who will help me against Allah if I drove them
away? Will you not then reflect?”***

The Qur’an further explains the situation in this verse, and from the
tongue of the prophet to his people, it implies that if he cast out this
group, who in this world can come to his assistance in that great Court
of Justice?

The verse says:

***“And O my people! Who will help me against Allah if I drove them
away?...”***

Driving out the righteous and faithful believers is no easy matter. They
can bear witness against the prophet on the Day of Resurrection and no
one will be able to defend him then, while, at the same time, the Divine
punishment might also face him in this world. And contemplating this
would lead to knowledge that whatever the prophet said was identical
with the truth.

The verse says:

***“…Will you not then reflect?”***

Surah Hud – Verse 31
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلآ أَقُولُ لَكُمْ عِندِي خَزَآئِنُ اللَّهِ وَلآ أَعْلَمُ الْغَيْبَ
وَلآ أَقُولُ إِنّي مَلَكٌ وَلآ أَقُولُ لِلَّذِينَ تَزْدَرِي
أَعْيُنُكُمْ لَن يُؤْتِيَهُمُ اللَّهُ خَيْراً اللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا
فِي أَنفُسِهِمْ إِنّي إِذاً لَمِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***31. “And I do not say to you (that) Allah’s treasures are with me;
nor do I know the Unseen, nor do I claim to be an angel; nor do I say,
about those whom your eyes do despise, (that) Allah will never grant
them any good. Allah is well aware of what is in their hearts; (for)
verily then I should be of the unjust.”***

Knowledge of Unseen, regarding anything and every condition, is
absolutely with Allah. The Qur’an says: ***“And with Him are the keys of
the Unseen. None but He knows them...”***[^1] which means that the keys
to the invisible world are in His Own authority.

However, due to Divine Providence and according to the Divine Will, men
of Allah will sometimes find windows opened up for them. The Qur’an in
regard to this fact says:

***“These are of the tidings of the Unseen which We reveal unto
you...”***[^2]

Therefore, Allah’s prophets are knowledgeable about the invisible world
as the Qur’an states:

***“The Knower of the Unseen! So He does not reveal His secrets to
any,”***

***“Except to him whom He chooses as an apostle…”***[^3]***.***

This verse means that He is knowledgeable about the invisible world, and
no one is aware of this knowledge of the invisible except those whom He
has selected from among His prophets.

Not only the knowledge of the invisible world is His own prerogative but
the power to perform extraordinary works also rests with Him, though
Allah can and will bestow something of whatever aspect of His power
which He deems worthy upon anyone He chooses and to the extent that He
wishes. For example, it is mentioned in the Qur’an that death and life
are in His Power:

***“Verily, it is He who makes one die and live”.***[^4]

However, the Qur’an also says that Hadrat ‘Isa (as) made the dead live
with His permission;

***“I make the dead live with His permission.”***[^5]

Although Allah takes lives ***“Allah takes the souls…”***[^6] yet angels
take lives with His permission:

***“The angel of death shall cause you to die...”***[^7]

And although He is the sole Creator of all, ***“Allah is the Creator of
every thing...”***[^8], But Hadrat ‘Isa creates, however, with His
permission:

***“…and when you did make of clay a thing like the shape of a bird, by
My leave...”***[^9]

Theological research has shown that no one individual existing among the
jinn and mankind can have access to the science of the invisible world
apart from a limited amount of it which depends upon their
potentialities.

This type of knowledge in relation to them is not a science of the
invisible after it is bestowed on them although it might be so for
others. On the other hand, Allah has made the prophets and the Imams
knowledgeable about the invisible world and aware of the past and
future.

For example, the blessed Prophet (S) had foretold the news of the
‘Imamat’ of twelve persons, the sufferings inflicted on them, the
intentional disappearance of Hadrat Mahdi (as) and his reappearance, the
events occurring during the last days, the establishment of his
government, and the resurrection of the dead on the Day of Judgment,
other similar matters have also been passed down to us from the other
Imams (as).

Without doubt whatever has not been given to us in this respect is due
to the lack of capacity on the part of the average man or has been
withheld for reasons known only to Allah.[^10]

At the end of the verse, the Qur’an goes back to the subject of
oppressed believers, emphasizing that the prophet cannot say that those
whom the disbelievers despise will not be rewarded by Allah.

On the contrary, the blessings of this world and those of the next
belong to the oppressed even though they are empty handed in this world.
It is the wrongdoers who in their infatuation with the world consider
goodness to be confined to wealth, position, youth, and the like,
demonstrating their lack of knowledge of the truth and its true meaning.

Even if one assumes that the oppressors are right and that the oppressed
are indeed wretches, still Allah is more aware than us of what is in
their minds, for we know nothing about them except what is indicative of
their good faith and sincerity, and thus we are obliged to accept them.

I am only required to judge and relate with men based on their outward
behavior, judging a man on the basis of his inward nature belongs to
Allah alone, and if I act otherwise, I will certainly be among the
oppressors.

The verse says:

***“And I do not say to you (that) Allah’s treasures are with me; nor do
I know the Unseen, nor do I claim to be an angel; nor do I say, about
those whom your eyes do despise, (that) Allah will never grant them any
good. Allah is well aware of what is in their hearts; (for) verily then
I should be of the unjust.”***

Surah Hud – Verse 32
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا يَانُوحُ قَدْ جَادَلْتَنَا فَاَكْثَرْتَ جِدَالَنَا فَأْتِنَا
بِمَا تِعِدُنَآ إِن كُنْتَ مِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***32. “They said: ‘O’ Noah! You have disputed with us and multiplied
disputation with us. Bring us then what you have promised us (of divine
punishment), if you are truthful.’”***

Disputes are only valuable whenever they are honestly in pursuit of the
truth and done in a respectful and polite manner; as the Qur’an says:

***“…and argue with them in the best manner.”***[^11]

If the dispute is based on what is wrong, it is of no value, as the holy
Qur’an says:

***“…and they disputed by means of the falsehood in order to stamp out
the truth thereby...”***[^12]

Thus, as the unbelievers did not have logic on their side and accepted
no logical arguments, they sought to bring the debate to and end by
telling him to bring unto them what he had promised.

The verse says:

***“They said: ‘O’ Noah! You have disputed with us and multiplied
disputation with us. Bring us then what you have promised us (of divine
punishment), if you are truthful.’”***

Therefore Hadrat Noah (as) cursed them after they had made their
declaration that they wanted him to send down their destruction.

Surah Hud – Verse 33
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ إِنَّمَا يَأْتِيكُم بِهِ اللَّهُ إِن شَآءَ وَمَآ أَنتُم
بِمُعْجِزِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***33. “He said: ‘Verily Allah will bring it to you, if He wills, and
you will not be able to frustrate (it).’”***

Noah replies that the realization of the punishment for their
heedlessness and obstinacy is not up to him but it is dependent upon the
Will of Allah. He himself is only a messenger and a sincere servant of
the Almighty.

They should beware, however, that when the command for the punishment is
issued they cannot escape His power for they are at His mercy and they
will not be able to take refuge anywhere.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘Verily Allah will bring it to you, if He wills, and you
will not be able to frustrate (it).’”***

Surah Hud – Verse 34
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ يَنفَعُكُمْ نُصْحِي إِنْ أَرَدْتُّ أَنْ أَنصَحَ لَكُمْ إِن كَانَ
اللَّهُ يُرِيدُ أَن يُغْوِيَكُمْ هُوَ رَبُّكُمْ وَإِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***34. “And my advice will not profit you, should I intend to give you
advice, if Allah wills to lead you astray. He is your Lord and unto Him
you will be returned.”***

Noah said that his advice would have been of no use to them even though
he sincerely wished to counsel them.

The punishment and retribution of the evildoers is up to Allah, and
prophets are nothing but agents for conveying the Divine message and
admonishing the people.

There is no way for man to resist or escape Divine justice and
punishment, for Allah’s Will overcomes all other wills. Even if one is
not punished in this world, Allah will deal with him on the Day of
Resurrection, and then he will see the final result of his deeds.

However, the Arabic word /nush/ refers to the saying or deed by which
sincere reformation is achieved, and the Arabic word /qayy/is called to
that kind of ignorance which has its roots in corrupt and evil
convictions.

The difference between /’idlal/ and /’iqwa/ is that the doer of the
former knows the destination but he has lost the way, while with respect
to /’iqwa/ the aim and intention are both unknown.

Attributing the actions of /’idlal/ and /’iqwa/ to Allah is in the way
of punishing those who are misled because of the obstinacy and
corruption of their character. It does not mean that from the beginning
and without prior premise Allah goes on leading one astray.

Surah Hud – Verse 35
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ يَقُولُونَ افْتَرَاهُ قُلْ إِنِ افْتَرَيْتُهُ فَعَلَيَّ
إِجْرَامِي وَأَنَاْ بَرِيءٌ مِمَّا تُجْرِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***35. “Or they say: ‘He has forged it.’ Say: ‘If I have forged it, upon
me is my sin, and I am quit of the sins you commit’.”***

Some of the unbelievers among the Quraysh claimed that these stories of
the prophets had been fabricated by the Prophet himself (S) which he
then attributed to Allah.

The Almighty instructs him to tell them that if he had fabricated them,
it would be he alone who would suffer the consequences and they would
not be held responsible, but the converse is also true with respect to
their transgressions, that he is just as free of responsibility for
their sins and offences.

His duty is only to convey the message and nothing else, whether or not
they accepted or rejected it.

The verse says:

***“Or they say: ‘He has forged it.’ Say: ‘If I have forged it, upon me
is my sin, and I am quit of the sins you commit’.”***

Apparently because of the Qur’anic word /qul/, which means ‘say’, and
owing to the news about the unbelievers of Mecca and the Prophet of
Islam, the verse relates to the Apostle of Islam (S).

Anyway, he who commits an act will only be held responsible and it is no
one else’s fault. The Prophet (S) will not be involved in their sins
either.

The fact that they did not accept the faith and attributed false
accusations to the Qur’an, calling the Prophet a liar, all together
resulted in grievous consequences while on his part, he had performed
his mission in admonishing and conveying the message to them.

The Arabic term /’ijram/ and /jurm/ mean the picking of unripe fruits
and which thereafter have been referred to whatever indecent behavior or
offence or sin.

[^1]: Surah Al-An‘am, No. 6, verse 59

[^2]: Surah Hud, No. 11, verse 49

[^3]: Surah The Jinn, No. 72, verses 26, 27

[^4]: Surah An-Najm, No. 53, verse 44

[^5]: Surah ’Al-i-‘Imran, No. 3, verse 49

[^6]: Surah Az-Zumar, No. 39, verse 42

[^7]: Surah As-Sajdah, No. 32, verse 11

[^8]: Surah Ar-Ra‘d, No. 13, verse 16

[^9]: Surah Al-Ma’idah, No. 5, verse 110

[^10]: Refer to Bihar-ul-’Anwar, vol.35 p.420, ’Usul ul Kafi, vol.1,
p.225 Yanabi‘ ul Mawaddah, vol.1, p.605; Kashf-ul Ghumma, vol.3, p.340,
Safinat-ul-Bihar ‘Uyun Akhbar-ur-Rida, vol.2, p.237; Kitab al Sirat ul
Haqq, vol.3 p.340, ‘Uyun-i-Akhbar-ur-Rida, vol.2, Nahjul Balaqah and
Haqayiq by Ibn Shahr-’Ashub, and other books regarding the ‘Knowledge of
the Imams.

[^11]: Surah An-Nahl, No. 16, verse 125

[^12]: Surah Ghafir, No. 40, verse 5


