Section 4: The Fate of Those Who Disbelieved Noah
=================================================

Surah Hud – Verse 36
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاُوحِيَ إِلَي نُوحٍ أَنَّهُ لَن يُؤْمِنَ مِن قَوْمِكَ إِلاَّ مَن
قَدْ ءَامَنَ فَلاَ تَبْتَئِسْ بِمَا كَانُوا يَفْعَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***36. “And it was revealed unto Noah: ‘None of your people will believe
except those who have already believed, so do not grieve as to what they
used to do’.”***

The previous holy verses thoroughly covered the stage of inviting the
people to the religion on Divine unity and Noah’s indefatigable
propagation and dissemination of the Divine message which he
accomplished using all the devices he had available. This verse deals
with the second stage of the campaign; the final stage of the
propagation phase.

Here, the second phase of the campaign has not been dealt with, it is
the end of the propagation stage, and the second stage is the
preparation for the Divine purge.

At first, we read that it was revealed to Noah that no one else except
those who had already adhered to him would become believers.

The verse says:

***“And it was revealed unto Noah: ‘None of your people will believe
except those who have already believed...”***

Reference is here made to the fact that alignments had already been made
and finalized and no further call or reformation would have been useful,
hence a state of readiness for the upheaval and the purge must be
declared.

Towards the end of the verse, consoling Noah, the Qur’an implies that he
should not despair at all despite whatever wrongful deeds they used to
do.

The verse says:

***“…so do not grieve as to what they used to do’.”***

In the meantime, one can infer from this verse that Allah made those
aspects of the knowledge of the secrets of the Unseen that He had deemed
necessary, accessible so that His prophet should know.

Surah Hud – Verse 37
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاصْنَعِ الْفُلْكَ بِاَعْيُنِنَا وَوَحْيِنَا وَلا تُخَاطِبْنِي فِي
الَّذينَ ظَلَمُوا إِنَّهُم مُّغْرَقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***37. “And make you the Ark under Our eyes, and as We reveal; and
address Me not about those who are unjust; verily they shall be
drowned.”***

At any rate, this unruly and obstinate group must be punished with the
kind of punishment that would remove their polluting existence from the
entire world, thus liberating the faithful believers from their yoke.

At first, the Qur’an implies that Allah commanded Noah to build an Ark
according to His order and in His presence.

The verse says:

***“And make you the Ark under Our eyes, and as We reveal;...”***

Towards the end of the verse, Noah is warned against any form of
mediation on behalf of the oppressors. Saying to him that he should not
ask for any amnesty or clemency for they are certainly condemned to
chastisement and to be drowned as soon as they are convicted.

The verse says:

***“…and address Me not about those who are unjust; verily they shall be
drowned.”***

One can very easily infer from this sentence that taking up the act of
mediation requires certain preconditions which, when they are lacking in
someone, even Allah’s prophet is not rightful to mediate on his behalf.

Surah Hud – Verse 38
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَصْنَعُ الْفُلْكَ وَكُلَّمَا مَرَّ عَلَيْهِ مَلأٌ مِن قَوْمِهِ
سَخِرُوا مِنْهُ قَالَ إِن تَسْخَرُوا مِنَّا فَإِنَّا نَسْخَرُ مِنكُم
كَمَا تَسْخَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***38. “And he began making the Ark; and whenever the chiefs of his
people passed by him they scoffed at him. He said: ‘If you scoff at us,
we (too) shall surely scoff at you, as you scoff ’.”***

Let us briefly discuss the situation of Noah’s People. Instead of taking
Noah’s call seriously for a moment, and allowing some room for accepting
the probability of the truth of his repeated calls which might have had
their origins in Divine Providence and that the subject of punishment
through storms might be serious, Noah’s people went on mocking and
ridiculing as is the case with all arrogant and vainglorious people,
however he went on building the Ark.

Whenever some of his people passed by him they would watch Noah and his
companions struggle to prepare the timber, nails and other ship-building
instruments, and they would laugh and ridicule them. The verse says:

***“And he began making the Ark; and whenever the chiefs of his people
passed by him they scoffed at him...”***

However, Noah pursued his goal with an extraordinary persistence whose
origins lay in his faith, and paying no attention to what they said, he
made rapid progress in his efforts. Day after day, the structure of the
ship came closer and closer to completion. Noah would sometimes raise
his head, and told them this short out expressive statement:

“*You ridicule us today, but we will surely do the same thing to you
soon, the day when you are caught, lost and wandering in the storm,
terrified, running in all directions with no shelter, crying in the
midst of the waves, begging for mercy, the believers then and there will
laugh at your negligence, and ignorance.*”

The verse says:

***“…He said: ‘If you scoff at us, we (too) shall surely scoff at you,
as you scoff ’.”***

Surah Hud – Verse 39
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسَوْفَ تَعْلَمُونَ مَن يَأْتِيهِ عَذَابٌ يُخزِيهِ وَيَحِلُّ عَلَيْهِ
عَذَابٌ مُقِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***39. “So you shall know soon to whom a Penalty (that) will confound
him comes, and upon whom there shall fall a lasting Penalty.”***

The meaning of the punishment which is modified by the term /yuxzihi/ is
the devastating worldly punishment, i.e. their being drowned which would
humiliate and belittle them, whilst the meaning of the term /‘aŏabun
muqim/ is the punishment to be imposed on the Day of Resurrection.

The verse says:

***“So you shall know soon to whom a Penalty (that) will confound him
comes, and upon whom there shall fall a lasting Penalty.”***

In some Islamic narrations, one reads that forty years prior to the
appearance of the storm, a type of disease had spread among the women of
the People of Noah which had prevented them from giving birth to
children. This event, in fact, marked the beginning of their punishment.

### Noah’s Ark

Noah’s Ark, undoubtedly, was not an ordinary ship and its manufacture in
those days with the technology of the time was not easily accomplished.
It was a large vessel which, in addition to the believers, accommodated
pairs of an extremely wide variety of animals, it also carried a large
amount of food supplies for the human passengers, as well as food for
the animals which was unprecedented for that time.

In particular, this ship had to be safely navigated through a sea that
covered the entire world with mountain-sized waves and still remain
intact. In their commentaries, some Qur’an commentators have expressed
their admiration for the magnitude of the ship. Refer to the comments of
Majma‘-ul-Bayan for further information.

Surah Hud – Verse 40
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتَّي إِذَا جَآءَ أَمْرُنَا وَفَارَ التَّنُّورُ قُلْنَا احْمِلْ
فِيهَا مِن كُلّ‌ٍ زَوْجَيْنِ اثْنَيْنِ وَأَهْلَكَ إِلاَّ مَن سَبَقَ
عَلَيْهِ الْقَوْلُ وَمَنْ ءَامَنَ وَمَآ ءَامَنَ مَعَهُ إِلاَّ قَلِيلٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***40. “(Thus it was) till, when Our Command came, and the oven gushed
forth (water)! We said: “Embark therein, of each kind a pair, and your
family (apart from your wife and a son) – except for those him against
whom the Word has already passed – and whoever believed. But there
believed not with him but a few.”***

The Onset of the Flood
----------------------

In the previous verses, we noted how Noah and the true believers became
occupied in building the Ark of Salvation and, while subjected to all
kinds of difficulties and sarcasms of the arrogant unbelieving majority,
they prepared themselves for the flood.

Here, the Qur’an expounds upon the third highlight or the climax of the
story which relates to the punishment inflicted upon this oppressive
nation.

First of all, it says that this situation continued until Allah’s
command was issued and the dawning of the divine punishment appeared,
and waters of the earth gushed forth. The verse says:

***“(Thus it was) till, when Our Command came, and the oven gushed forth
(water)!...”***

Those people who were inattentive and unaware probably noticed the
bubbling water in their wells, but, as usual, they did not heed these
Divine warnings much less try to understand their meaning. They probably
did not pay any attention to it at all to see if a cataclysm was about
to occur, and maybe to at least entertain the possibility that Noah’s
warnings might be real.

At this time, the Command was issued to Noah that he should put a pair
of each animal on the Ark so that they would not be exterminated in the
flood. And that he, his family, except those for whom word had already
had been marked for their punishment, and the believers should board the
Ark of Salvation. However few were those who had believed in him.

The verse says:

***“…We said: “Embark therein, of each kind a pair, and your family
(apart from your wife and a son) – except for those him against whom the
Word has already passed - and whoever believed. But there believed not
with him but a few.”***

This verse, on the one hand, refers to the wife of Noah and his son
‘Kan’an’, who, deviating from the path of belief and being in
collaboration with the sinners, had broken off their relationship with
Noah and were not entitled to embark on the Ark.

On the other hand, it refers to the limited success that Noah (as) had
had in persuading people to follow his way of life during his long years
of continuous struggle that had resulted in getting only a small number
of believers.

Surah Hud – Verse 41
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ ارْكَبُوا فِيهَا بِسْمِ اللَّهِ مَجْريهَا وَمُرْسَاهَا إِنَّ
رَبّي لَغَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***41. “And he (Noah) said: ‘Embark in it! In Allah’s Name shall be its
sailing and its berthing. Verily my Lord is the Forgiving, the
Merciful.’”***

Noah assembled his relatives and companions quickly and as the time of
the devastating storm and the striking Punishment approached, he ordered
them to embark in the name of Allah and to remember Allah both when the
Ark was in motion or standing still for He is the All Forgiving, the All
Compassionate.

The verse says:

***“And he (Noah) said: ‘Embark in it! In Allah’s Name shall be its
sailing and its berthing. Verily my Lord is the Forgiving, the
Merciful.’”***

Owing to His blessings, Allah had made these instruments available to
you, His faithful servants, and because of His forgiveness, He may
pardon your offences.

Surah Hud – Verse 42
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهِيَ تَجْرِي بِهِمْ فِي مَوْجٍ كَالْجِبَالِ وَنَادَي نوحٌ ابْنَهُ
وَكَانَ فِي مَعْزِلٍ يَا بُنَيَّ ارْكَبْ مَعَنَا وَلاَ تَكُن مَعَ
الكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***42. “So, it sailed with them amid waves like mountains. And Noah
called out to his son and he was aloof: ‘O my son! Embark with us and be
not with the unbelievers.’”***

At long last, the final moment arrived and the Command for the
punishment of this unruly nation was issued. Dark and ominous clouds
darker than the darkest night covered the entire sky, massing on top of
each other in an unprecedented manner. There was the terrible clap of
thunder and the flash of lightning ceaselessly filled up the sky. They
informed of a great disaster mounting in magnitude and terrible in
character.

It started raining. The droplets grew bigger and bigger in size. The
level of underground water rose and gushing fountains emerged
everywhere.

The surface of the earth was soon turned into an ocean, and with the
wind howling, mountain-like waves raged over this ocean, rising over
each other, to come crashing down upon the surface of the stormy sea.
Noah’s Ark parted the mountain-like waves and made headway.

The verse says:

***“So, it sailed with them amid waves like mountains. And Noah called
out to his son and he was aloof:...”***

Addressing his son, who was standing on the side and not far from him,
Noah shouted:

***“...‘O my son! Embark with us and be not with the unbelievers.”***

 However, his son’s companionship and association with evil company had
overtaken him to such an extent that his father’s compassion against
annihilation made no impact upon him.

Surah Hud – Verse 43
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ سَاَوِي إِلَي جَبَلٍ يَعْصِمُني مِنَ الْمَآءِ قَالَ لاَ عَاصِمَ
الْيَوْمَ مِنْ أَمْرِ اللَّهِ إِلاَّ مَن رَحِمَ وَحَالَ بَيْنَهُمَا
الْمَوْجُ فَكَانَ مِنَ الْمُغْرَقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***43. “He said: ‘I will take refuge in a mountain; it will save me from
the water.’ Said he (Noah): ‘Today, there is no protector from Allah’s
decree but (of whom) He has mercy.’ And the waves came between them, and
he was among the drowned.”***

This obstinate and shortsighted son, thinking that he could escape
Allah’s anger, shouted implying that his father should not be worried
about him. He would take to the mountain which could never be overtaken
by flood-waters, and it would shelter him.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘I will take refuge in a mountain; it will save me from the
water.’...”***

Noah still did not despair. He advised his son once more, so as to lead
him onto the True Path and overcome his son’s shortsightedness and
arrogance. He said to him that no power was able to save anyone from
Allah’s command. The only hope of being saved remained for him who was
covered by Allah’s blessing.

The verse says:

***“…Said he (Noah): ‘Today, there is no protector from Allah’s decree
but (of whom) He has mercy.’...”***

At this time, a wave, coming between them, overwhelmed his son,
uprooting him as if he was a straw, and placed him among the drowned
ones.

The verse continues saying:

***“…And the waves came between them, and he was among the drowned.”***

### The Educational implications of Noah’s Flood

As we notice, the main aim of the Qur’an is to teach us lessons by
recounting the didactic teachings of past history, from which one can
draw the following inferences:

#### 1- Purging the Face of the Earth

It is true that Allah is Compassionate and Kind. However, one must not
forget that He is at the same time Wise. Whenever a nation becomes
corrupt and does not answer the call of His messengers He judges it
appropriate that that nation has no right to continue to live.
Ultimately, their system will be overthrown through some natural or
social revolutions.

This has not been confined to the Noah’s nation, nor has it been
confined to a particular time and place. As a result of the Divine
Providence this has taken place throughout all ages and among all
nations up to our time. The first and the second World Wars might be
regarded as examples of such a purge.

#### 2- Why Punishment Was Inflicted by a Flood

It is true that a corrupt nation must be exterminated, but their means
of annihilation can vary. The holy verses of the Qur’an provide evidence
that punishments are commensurate with sins of the nations punished.

The Pharaoh relied on the River Nile which was the backbone of his
power, and, interestingly, it became the source of his annihilation.

The People of Noah was an agricultural and a livestock-breeding nation.
That ungodly nation had relied upon rainfall for everything, and
ultimately that very nation was wiped out by rainfall.

If we notice that our contemporary fellow human beings are being
devastated with their most modern arms and ammunitions, we must not be
surprised, for the advanced industries which they relied upon for the
exploitation of oppressed nations, would be eventually used for their
own destruction.

#### 3- Unreliable Shelters of Straw

It is usual for everyone to take shelter to something when in need. Some
take refuge in their wealth, some find shelter in their position, some
rely upon their bodily strength, and finally, some rely upon their power
of thinking.

However, as the above verses show, and as history has demonstrated for
us, none of these can resist the command of the Almighty, and they will
easily disappear just like a spider’s web standing in the storms.

The ignorant and stiff-necked son of the prophet Noah committed the same
fault. He thought that the mountains could protect him from Allah’s
Wrath. But, what a grave mistake! The sweep of a wave put an end to his
life.

#### 4- The Ark of Salvation

As it has been quoted from the blessed Prophet (S) which is found in
Shi‘ah and Sunni books, the Prophet’s family, which are the Imams and
Ahl-ul-Bayt (as), as well as the content of the school of Islam, have
been designated as ‘the Ark of Salvation’.

That is, when tremendous changes occur in the mental, ideological, and
social spheres of the Islamic community, the only means of salvation is
to take refuge in the School of the Ahl-ul-Bayt (as).

The tradition which talks about this ‘Ark of Salvation’, the tradition
of /safinah/ (ship) has been generally accepted by the consensus of the
Imamiah scholars and by more than 100 Sunni scholars as well. It has
been narrated as follows:

“Abuthar, the great companion of the Prophet (S), while holding the knob
of the door of the Ka‘bah, said with a loud voice:

‘*O you people! I heard the Prophet (S) saying with my own ears, that
the Prophet (S) said ‘The similitude of my Ahl-ul-Bayt (family) is like
Noah’s Ark; he who embarks upon it is rescued, and he who distances
himself from it, will perish.*’

Certainly, other great personalities at the dawn of Islam like Abu Sa‘id
Khedri, Ibn Abbas, Abdullah-Ibn Zubayr, and Anas Ibn-Malik have also
quoted this tradition of the Prophet (S) which has been mentioned in the
known books of the Ahl al Sunna.[^1]

If we place this sequential ‘Hadith” (tradition) alongside another
sequential ‘Hadith’ which says: “*The Muslims will be divided into 73
sects, out of which only one will be saved,”* it would become evident
that the Prophet (S) himself considered this sect to be the one that
follows the Ahl-ul-Bayt, (as) and where he says *‘He who embarks upon it
will be saved,’* he means the same term /najiyah/ (saved).

Surah Hud – Verse 44
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقِيلَ يَآ أَرْضُ ابْلَعِي مَآءَكِ وَيَا سَمَآءُ أَقْلِعِي وَغِيضَ
الْمَآءُ وَقُضِيَ الأَمْرُ وَاسْتَوَتْ عَلي الْجُودِيّ وَقِيلَ بُعْداً
لِلْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***44. “And it was said: ‘O earth! Swallow down your water, and O sky!
Withhold (your rain)!’ And the water abated, and the matter was ended,
and it (the Ark) rested on the (Mount) Judi, and it was said: ‘Away with
the unjust people!’”***

### The End of an Adventure

Noah left the ship up to Allah to take the rudder in His own hands. The
waves had taken the ship in an undesignated direction. It has been
quoted that the ship drifted for six months, passing by various places,
including Mecca and the area surrounding the House of the Ka‘ba.

Eventually, the decree ending the punishment and the return of the earth
to its original state was issued. This verse explains the details and
the conditions as well as the ensuing consequences in a concise, and at
the same time, extraordinarily beautiful and eloquent manner in a few
sentences.

The earth was commanded to absorb all its water and the sky was ordered
to stop raining; the water subsisted and the work was accomplished.

The verse says:

***“And it was said: ‘O earth! Swallow down your water, and O sky!
Withhold (your rain)!’ And the water abated, and the matter was
ended...”***

The ship came to rest on the slopes of Mount Judi, which is a famous
mountain near Mosul and it was at this time that it was proclaimed that
off with the oppressors!

The verse says:

***“…and it (the Ark) rested on the (Mount) Judi, and it was said: ‘Away
with the unjust people!’”***

According to a number of Arab men of knowledge this verse is counted as
the most eloquent and the most fluent of the Qur’anic verses.

According to the narrations and the books of Islamic history it is said
that some unbelievers of the Quraysh, starting a campaign against the
Qur’an, decided to fabricate verses like those of the Holy Book.

Their supporters provided them with the best food and drink for forty
days including the kernel of a particular type of wheat, mutton, and old
wine, so that their minds would be free of every kind of anxiety in
order to compose the verses.

However, when they arrived at the above verse, they were so moved by it
that they gazed at one another in surprise, saying:

“*These are words unsurpassed and unequalled by all means, and they do
not resemble those made by human beings.*”

Saying this, they abandoned their decision and dispersed in despair.

Surah Hud – Verse 45
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَادَي نُوحٌ رَبَّهُ فَقَالَ رَبّ إِنَّ ابْنِي مِنْ أَهْلِي وَإِنَّ
وَعْدَكَ الْحَقُّ وَأَنتَ أَحْكَمُ الْحَاكِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***45. “And Noah called unto his Lord, and said: “O my Lord! Verily, my
son is of my family, and certainly Your promise is true and You are the
Most just of Judges.”***

### The Tragic Story of Noah’s Son

In the foregoing verses, we noted that Noah’s son did not listen to his
father’s advice, and did not stop being obstinate and stiff-necked to
the last moment.

Another part of this same story is being dealt with here. That is, when
Noah noticed his son buffeted by the waves, his fatherly emotions were
provoked and he was reminded of Allah’s promise that his family would be
saved.

Facing Allah’s sanctuary, he cried: that his son was a member of his
family and He had promised him that He would save his family from the
storm and His promises are always true. Allah is superior to all rulers,
and He is a staunch keeper of His promise.

This promise refers to the same subject that was discussed in the
fortieth verse of this Surah.

The verse says:

***“And Noah called unto his Lord, and said: “O my Lord! Verily, my son
is of my family, and certainly Your promise is true and You are the Most
just of Judges.”***

Surah Hud – Verse 46
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ يَا نُوحُ إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ مِنْ أَهْلِكَ إِنَّهُ عَمَلٌ غَيْرُ
صَالِحٍ فَلا تَسْأَلْنِي مَا لَيْسَ لَكَ بِهِ عِلْمٌ إِنّي أَعِظُكَ
أَن تَكُونَ مِنَ الْجَاهِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***46. “He (Allah) said: ‘O’ Noah! Verily he is not of your family.
Verily he is (of) conduct other than righteous. So do not ask of Me that
of which you have no knowledge! I admonish you, lest you should be among
the ignorant.’”***

However, the thought provoking answer was provided, recalling a stern
reality and the secondary status of the family relationship as separated
from religious school of thought.

Allah tells Noah that he was not of his kind, on the contrary, he was an
evil doer; a man of misdemeanor, whose family relationship was of no
value and kinship of no avail owing to the fact that he was cut off from
Noah’s school of thought, as such Noah should not make any requests
about which he had no knowledge and therefore he should not be among the
ignorant.

The verse says:

***“He (Allah) said: ‘O’ Noah! Verily he is not of your family. Verily
he is (of) conduct other than righteous. So do not ask of Me that of
which you have no knowledge! I admonish you, lest you should be among
the ignorant.’”***

Imam Rida (as) has been quoted as saying that one day he asked his
friends:

“*How do the common folk comment on this verse, which says:*

***‘…Verily he is (of) conduct other than righteous.’…”***

One person from among the audience replied:

“*Some believe that it means that he who is referred to as Noah’s son,
that is, Kan‘an was not his real son*.”

The Imam (as) said:

*“No it is not so, he was his real son, though Allah refused him his
kinship when he committed sins and disobeyed, leading himself astray.
Those who also belong to our school but refuse to obey Allah should not
be considered as of us.”*

Surah Hud – Verse 47
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبّ إِنّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ أَنْ أَسْأَلَكَ مَا لَيْسَ لِي بِهِ
عِلْمٌ وَإِلاَّ تَغْفِرْ لِي وَتَرْحَمْنِي أَكُن مِنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***47. “He (Noah) said: ‘O my Lord! Verily I seek refuge in You, lest I
should ask You (for) that of which I have no knowledge. And unless You
forgive me and have Mercy on me I should be of the losers’.”***

Noah discovered that his request for Allah’s sanctuary had been out of
the question, and that he should have never considered the salvation of
such a son as being covered by Allah’s promise to save his family
members.

Therefore, turning to Him, he said that he would do seek refuge in Him
for whatever good and evil he had no knowledge of, and so of making
wrong requests. And unless He forgive him for having made such a
request, and pardon him, he would be among the losers, indeed.

The verse says:

***“He (Noah) said: ‘O my Lord! Verily I seek refuge in You, lest I
should ask You (for) that of which I have no knowledge. And unless You
forgive me and have Mercy on me I should be of the losers’.”***

Surah Hud – Verse 48
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قِيلَ يَا نُوحُ اهْبِطْ بِسَلاَمٍ مِنَّا وَبَرَكَاتٍ عَلَيْكَ وَعَلَي
اُمَمٍ مِمَّن مَعَكَ وَاُمَمٌ سَنُمَتّعُهُمْ ثُمَّ يَمَسُّهُم مِنَّا
عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***48. “It was said: ‘O Noah! Debark in peace from Us, and blessings
upon you and on the nations of those with you; and nations whom We shall
afford provision, then there shall afflict them from Us a painful
chastisement’.”***

Noah disembarked from the Ark safely. In this verse allusions are made
to Noah’s disembarkation, as well as to the regeneration of the earth.

Firstly, the holy Qur’an implies that Noah was addressed saying: that he
should disembark from the Ark safely with Blessings from Allah to him
and to those with him.

The verse says:

***“It was said: ‘O Noah! Debark in peace from Us, and blessings upon
you and on the nations of those with you;…”***

Obviously, the storm had devastated all signs of life, it destroyed
cultivated lands, green pastures, and the orchards that had once
flourished, and everything had been rendered infertile and arid.

At this time, Noah and his companions were in grave narrowness as far as
their lives and nutrition were concerned. However, Allah reassured this
group of believers that the Divine blessings would not be withheld from
them and therefore, they should stop worrying about their livelihood
because an appropriate and a blissful environment awaited them.

Then it adds that there would descend from this faithful group, nations
of people on whom We Allah would bestow different kinds of Blessings
although some of them would become arrogant and negligent, and
consequently a grave punishment would be inflicted upon them.

The verse says:

***“…and nations whom We shall afford provision, then there shall
afflict them from Us a painful chastisement’.”***

Surah Hud – Verse 49
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ مِنْ أَنبَآءِ الْغَيْبِ نُوحِيهآ إِلَيْكَ مَا كُنتَ تَعْلَمُهَآ
أَنتَ وَلاَ قَوْمُكَ مِن قَبْلِ هَذَا فَاصْبِرْ إِنَّ الْعَاقِبَةَ
لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***49. “(O Prophet!) these are of the tidings of the Unseen which We
reveal unto you. Before this, neither you nor your people knew them.
Therefore, be you patient, verily the end is for the pious ones.”***

This verse, by which ends the story of Noah in this Surah, sums up what
had been covered previously. It implies that all this comes from the
world beyond your powers of perception that Allah has revealed to the
Prophet which neither he nor his people knew of before.

The verse says:

***“(O Prophet!) these are of the tidings of the Unseen which We reveal
unto you. Before this, neither you nor your people knew them...”***

The gist of what was revealed to the Prophet (S) about Noah was that
amidst all those difficulties he had encountered in the course of his
calling, still he persevered. The Prophet too, should persevere because
the final victory is reserved for those who are pious.

The verse says:

***“…Therefore, be you patient, verily the end is for the pious
ones.”***

One can infer from this verse that contrary to what some people think,
the prophets were aware of the invisible world with condition that their
knowledge had its source in the Divine will, and was confined to the
extent that Allah wanted.

We shall now leave the story of Noah at this point, despite all the
wonders and didactic lessons that can be drawn from it, and take up
another great prophet, that is Hud, in whose name this Surah has been
entitled.

### The Feature of Noah in the Qur’an

The story of Noah (as) is mentioned in six of the suras of the Qur’an:
Al-A‘raf, Hud, Mu‘minun, Shu‘ara, Qamar, and Nuh but, it is most
extensively discussed in the current Surah, Hud.

The appointment of Noah to prophecy was made after Adam (as) and during
the time of the spread of unbelief, idol worship and oppression, his
agenda consisted of enforcing and spreading monotheism and the daily
prayers, encouraging people to decent conduct, dissuading them from
committing the forbidden, and preaching justice, honesty and remaining
faithful to one’s own words.

The duration of Noah’s prophecy extended for 950 years. When, at the end
of his period, Allah told him that no one would accept his faith, he was
discouraged and cursed the people. As a result, his wife and son, who
did not belong to his school of thought, were drowned along with the
other unbelievers.

He was the first prophet with a universal mission, a Book and a shari‘ah
(a specific religious law). The story of Noah (as) has also been
mentioned in the Torah, as well in the Books of the Chaldeans, the
Hindus, the Chinese, the Greeks and the Zoroastrians.

They have all regarded the Flood of Noah as a sign of Allah’s anger
because of people’s oppression and corruption.

Noah’s mission was universal. As the planet earth cannot remain without
a savior, the drowning of all the people was due to Noah’s (as) curse
when he said:

***“…My Lord! Leave not upon the earth any dweller from among the
unbelievers.”*** [^2]***.***

The holy Qur’an testifies to the fact that the flood did occur. On the
other hand, if that great man’s mission had been regional and the area
where the flood occurred was also limited to that region, there would
have been no need for putting a pair of each animal onto the Ark in
order to preserve generations of the animal kingdom on the earth.

### The Story of Noah (as)

Noah’s story is that of a life spanning a one thousand year history
embodying the story of a world-devastating flood, the account of the
extermination of an entire generation of man and the beginning of a new
chapter in human history on this earth.

It reflects the victory of truth against ‘untruth’ and Allah’s
acceptance of the prophets’ curses. It is an example of how the
relationship between a father and son can be broken for ideological
reasons and it is a sign of the submission of existence in its entirety
with respect to Allah’s command.

It shows the importance of the conservation and preservation of animal
life and also indicates the extent to which man may be so despicable
that he may not be moved by the admonitions of the prophets, on the
contrary, he can disrespect their followers as villains, and think he
could escape Allah’s wrath by taking refuge in physical structures like
mountains.

[^1]: Refer to Tabari’s Al Mu‘jam al Kabir, Hakim Neyshaburi in
Al-Mustadrak, Ibn-Kathir in his Commentaries; Suyuti’s
Tarikh-ul-Khulafa; Ibn Qutayba’s Uyun-ul Akhbar; Tabari’s Zakha\`ir-ul
‘Uqba, Khatib ul Baghdadi in Tarikh ul Baghdad, Abu Na’im in Hilyat ul
’Auliya’; Ibn Abil Hadid in Sharh Nahj ul Balaqah, ’Alusi in Ruh ul
Ma‘ani; and other detailed books which have been mentioned in Ihqaq ul
Haqq (vol.9) from P. 270 onwards. See also Nafahat ul Azhar fi Khulasah
‘Abaqat ul Anwar, Part 4 P. 370.

[^2]: Surah Nuh, No. 71, verse 26


