Section 7: Ministry of Lot
==========================

Surah Hud – Verse 69
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ جَآءَتْ رُسُلُنَآ إِبْرَاهِيَم بِالْبُشْرَي قَالُوا سَلاَماً
قَالَ سَلاَمٌ فَمَا لَبِثَ أَن جَآءَ بِعِجْلٍ حَنِيذٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***69. “And certainly Our messengers (the angels) came to Abraham with
glad tidings. They said ‘Peace!’ He answered ‘Peace!’ and he did not
delay to bring a roasted calf.”***

Now is time to focus on one of the highlights of the life of Abraham,
the iconoclastic champion. Of course, only that part of his story, which
deals with the story of the people of Lot and punishment of this unruly
people is being discussed here.

The Qur’an says that Allah’s messengers (angels) came to Abraham,
bearing good tidings, though they had come to deliver a message to
Abraham (as) before.

The verse says:

***“And certainly Our messengers (the angels) came to Abraham with glad
tidings...”***

There are two hypotheses incompatible with each other, as to what
message those angels were carrying:

First; the message relates to tidings regarding the birth of Ismail and
Isaac which were great good tidings for him.

Secondly, Abraham, who was tired of the unruliness and corruption of the
people of Lot, became happy on hearing of the mission of the angels to
destroy them.

When the messengers arrived they gave him the greetings of ‘Peace’ and
he answered them likewise. Before long he had brought them a roasted
calf.

The verse says:

***“…They said ‘Peace!’ He answered ‘Peace!’ and he did not delay to
bring a roasted calf.”***

The inference drawn from the sentence is that one of the rules of
hosting a guest is that a meal should be prepared for him at the
earliest possible time, after his arrival, for he can be both tired and
hungry, especially when he is a traveler.

Surah Hud – Verse 70
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا رَءَآ أَيْدِيَهُمْ لاَ تَصِلُ إِلَيْهِ نَكِرَهُمْ وَأَوْجَسَ
مِنْهُمْ خِيفَةً قَالُوا لا تَخَفْ إِنَّآ اُرْسِلْنَآ إِلَي قَوْمِ
لُوطٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***70. “But when he saw their hands extended not towards it, he
mistrusted them, and conceived a fear of them. They said: ‘Fear not; we
have been sent against the people of Lot’.”***

Abraham’s (as) fear is different from the kind of fear and weakness
found in ordinary men when facing problematic situations, for he was the
archetypical iconoclast in history who was never afraid of anything.
Nevertheless focusing one’s attention on possible dangers and on being a
possible target is another matter.

The verse says:

***“But when he saw their hands extended not towards it, he mistrusted
them, and conceived a fear of them. They said: ‘Fear not; we have been
sent against the people of Lot’.”***

At any rate, since Lot (as) and his tribe was one of the groups under
Abraham’s command, he had to be briefed before their annihilation.

Surah Hud – Verse 71
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَامْرَأَتُهُ قَآئِمَةٌ فَضَحِكَتْ فَبَشَّرْنَاهَا بإِسْحَاقَ وَمِن
وَرَآءِ إِسْحَاقَ يَعْقُوبَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***71. “And his wife was standing (by) and she laughed when We gave her
the glad tidings (of the birth) of Isaac, and after Isaac, of Jacob.”***

There are several possibilities mentioned as to the reasons for the
standing by of Abraham’s wife; when the verse says:

***“And his wife was standing (by) and she laughed when We gave her the
glad tidings (of the birth) of Isaac, and after Isaac, of Jacob.”***

a- for worshipping

b- for serving the guests

c- for witnessing the comings and goings of individuals and the
discussions.

Her laughter was either because she understood that their abstinence
from eating was not a sign of danger for Abraham, or, as has been
pointed out in some commentaries, Sarah, Abraham’s wife, was an elderly
woman who had long passed her child bearing days when she suddenly heard
this unbelievable news.

However, while in this mood, she realized that the Divine Will was that
she would have a child.

However, each group of the Divine angels were commissioned to accomplish
a particular affair. These group of angels followed two objectives. One
of which was the extermination of the corrupt people of Lot, and the
other was to give the good tidings of a child to be bestowed upon
Abraham (as) and Sarah.

Surah Hud – Verse 72
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَتْ يَا وَيْلَتَي ءَأَلِدُ وَأَنَاْ عَجُوزٌ وَهَذَا بَعْلِي
شَيْخاً إِنَّ هَذَا لَشَيْءٌ عَجِيبٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***72. “She said: ‘Voe is me! Shall I bear a child when I am an old
woman, and this my husband is an old man? Verily this is a wonderful
thing!’”***

Sarah, who had given up hope of having children, with a tone of
tremendous wonder, exclaimed implying that alas for her. Might she give
birth to a child despite her old age and despite the fact that her
husband too was old? That was a truly amazing matter.

The verse itself says:

***“She said: ‘Voe is me! Shall I bear a child when I am an old woman,
and this my husband is an old man? Verily this is a wonderful
thing!’”***

That same Allah Who had made the fire cold for Abraham (as) and had made
him win over the idol-worshippers, is definitely able to make an
infertile old woman fertile and an old man sire a child.

Surah Hud – Verse 73
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا أَتَعْجَبِينَ مِنْ أَمْرِ اللَّهِ رَحْمَةُ اللَّهِ
وَبَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَيْكُمْ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ إِنَّهُ حَمِيدٌ مَجِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***73. “They said: “Do you wonder at Allah’s decree? The grace of Allah
and His blessings on you, O people of the House! Verily He is Praise
worthy, Glorious. ”***

One day, Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) gave greetings to a group of people
which returned his greetings, saying:

“*Our greetings to you and may Allah’s favor and blessings be with you,
the Ahl-ul-Bayt, and may His forgiveness and His paradise also be upon
you as well*.”

Ali (as) said:

“*Do not add anything to what* *the angels said to Abraham (as),
therefore, the phrase ‘And may Allah’s* *favour* *and blessings be with
you’ would suffice.*”

The verse says:

***“They said: “Do you wonder at Allah’s decree? The grace of Allah and
His blessings on you, O people of the House! Verily He is Praise worthy,
Glorious. ”***

 **Question:** Considering the fact that in the above verse, the angels
addressed Abraham’s wife using the phrase Ahl-ul-Bayt, and since,
naturally, everyone’s wife is considered as part of one’s household, why
is it then that in the verse of Tathir in the Surah Al Ahzab, No. 33,
verse 33,[^1] the wives of the Prophet Muhammad (S) are not included in
his household?

**Answer:** Regarding only the literal meaning of the word, it would be
natural for the word Ahl-ul-Bayt to include reference to one’s wife.

However, we have firm grounds regarding the fact that someone can be
excluded from this denotation even when normally they would be included
in its purview, like in the verse saying: “*Verily he is not of your
household*”[^2] where Noah’s son is not counted as a member in Noah’s
household.

Sometimes it also happens that there could be a reason to include
someone who would normally not be considered as a member of the
household, as has been said of Salman:

*“Salman belongs to our household (Ahl-ul-Bayt)”*

There are numerous narrations concerning the verse of Tathir which say
that the blessed Prophet (S) had taken certain people under his cloak
calling them his Ahl-ul-Bayt, while he did not allow his wife, the pious
Umm-us-Salamah, to enter.

This Divine favor and blessings were not confined to that time and
place. It has continued in this family, too. What Divine blessing can be
superior to that bestowed upon the Prophet (S) and the Immaculate Imams
(as) who have emerged from this household?

Surah Hud – Verse 74
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا ذَهَبَ عَنْ إِبْرَاهِيمَ الرَّوْعُ وَجَآءَتْهُ الْبُشْرَي
يُجَادِلُنَا فِي قَوْمِ لُوطٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***74. “So when fear had passed from Abraham and the glad tidings
reached him, he began disputing with Us concerning the people of
Lot.”***

Perhaps Abraham’s (as) plea is the same one mentioned in Surah ‘Ankabut,
No. 29, verse 31, where, in addressing the angels, he asked how they
would overturn the land when Lot (as) still remained among them.

They answered that they were well aware of their status, so they would
save Lot and his followers. The verse says:

***“So when fear had passed from Abraham and the glad tidings reached
him, he began disputing with Us concerning the people of Lot.”***

The angels removed his anxiety and in directly addressing Sarah they
reinforced the good tidings of them being graced with progeny. Concern
and anxiety in the face of possible danger are safety-orientated issues
while having children has an emotional dimension. Safety issues relate
to society as a whole and children are related to the household.

Surah Hud – Verses 75 - 76
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لَحَلِيمٌ أَوَّاهٌ مُنِيبٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ إِبْرَاهِيمُ أَعْرِضْ عَنْ هَذَآ إِنَّهُ قَدْ جَآءَ أَمْرُ رَبّكَ
وَإِنَّهُمْ ءَاتِيِهمْ عَذَابٌ غَيْرُ مَرْدُودٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***75. “Verily Abraham was indeed for bearing, tender-hearted,
penitent.”***  
***76. “O Abraham! Forsake this! Indeed the decree of your Lord has come
to pass and surely there is coming (upon) them an irreversible
chastisement.”***

Patience is a highly praised characteristic that enables someone to
forbear any infliction in times of crisis and not try to avenge it. This
is why Abraham wished to haply remove the punishment from the people of
Lot.

This good quality is very prominent in prophets, godly benevolent
authorities, and knowledgeable people, for were it not to exist, they
would not be able to tolerate the difficulties and troubles of their
people, and therefore, they would not be able to achieve their
objectives which would include guidance.

The Qur’anic term /’awwah/ means supplication and humility before Allah,
along with crying and weeping.

The verse says:

***“Verily Abraham was indeed for bearing, tender-hearted, penitent.”***

Here, Abraham shows compassion for the people of Lot, who are rather
inextricably entangled with having to suffer this awesome penalty.

The Qur’anic term /munib/, mentioned in the first verse, denotes
repentance and returning, and at the same time concentrating on Allah,
for Abraham appealed to Him to forgive and not to condemn the people of
Lot.

However, Allah, the Blissful and Glorious, is so perfectly patient,
forgiving, indulgent and compassionate that His servants can not even
remotely conceive its extent. The crucial determining factor in all
this, however, is that it all depends upon the suitability of the
servant in point, which, when lacking in suitability sparing them is of
no avail.

Once the limits are exceeded, the mercy changes to rigor and this must
be so of necessity, for mercy from the point of view of the sharp teeth
that Allah gave to a panther is the other side of oppression from the
point of view of the sheep in its jaws.

The people of Lot had no more potential to be guided, and if they were
left to continue, their evil acts would have permeated other spheres as
well, just like a corrupt organ which, if not excised, would affect
other organs, thus spreading the infection further. Therefore, in
response, the angels said:

***“O Abraham! Forsake this! Indeed the decree of your Lord has come to
pass and surely there is coming (upon) them an irreversible
chastisement.”***

At that point Abraham realized that there was no more room for mercy, he
gave up pleading for them and the angels of death went forth to do their
work executing the Divine order and exterminating the people of Lot.

Surah Hud – Verse 77
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمَّا جَآءَتْ رُسُلُنَا لُوطاً سِيءَ بِهِمْ وَضَاقَ بِهِمْ ذَرْعاً
وَقَالَ هَذَا يَوْمٌ عَصِيبٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***77. “And when Our messengers (the angels) came to Lot, he was grieved
for them and felt straitened to protect them. He said: ‘This is a
distressful day’.”***

When the angels came, Lot was engaged in farming outside the town. He
noticed some handsome, well-dressed young men arrived. He became afraid
that his people might take to them when they entered the town.

He thought that it would be best to invite them to his house, which he
did, and his invitation was accepted. As he was taking them home, he was
worried that his people might pass by and notice them. He wanted them to
go back where they came from, saying:

“*You should know that you are going to a despicable and evil people*”.

At this point, Gabriel said:

“*That’s one*”.

The reason why Gabriel said this was that Allah had told the angels that
they should not hasten to destroy the people of Lot until Lot himself
had testified to their evil three times. As they kept on going, for the
second time Lot told them:

“*Really, you are going towards an evil people.*”

Gabriel this time said:

*“That’s the second time”.*

As Lot arrived at the gate of the town, he said for the third time:

*“You are going among an evil people from among Allah’s creatures.”*

Gabriel said:

*“That’s the third time”.*

Lot entered the town followed by his guests. One by one they entered the
house, and when Lot’s wife noticed their handsomeness she wanted to call
the people and tell them about it. She climbed up on the roof of the
house and lit a fire. When the evil people of the town came, she told
them that there were some very handsome young men in the house.

Lot was at his wits end trying to find a way to get rid of these people,
to save his guests from being the objects of their evil intentions and
to protect his honor. He was having a hard time, because he was in a
quandary as to what he should do. He murmured:

*“This is a very difficult day.”*

On the one hand, how could he protect his guests from the wretchedness
and evil of those people? On the other hand, how could he eradicate the
evil that they had caused? And finally, what should he do about the spy
on the inside, his wife, who was willing to reveal anything secret in
his house to the enemy outside?

As the Qur’an says:

***“Allah sets forth an example to the Unbelievers, the wife of Noah and
the wife of Lot. They were under two of Our righteous servants, but they
acted treacherously towards them so they availed them nothing before
Allah on their account, but were told: ‘Enter you both the Fire along
with (others) that enter!’”***[^3]

Surah Hud – Verse 78
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَآءَهُ قَوْمُهُ يُهْرَعُونَ إِلَيْهِ وَمِن قَبْلُ كَانُوا
يَعْمَلُونَ السَّيّئاتِ قَالَ يَاقَوْمِ هَؤُلآءِ بَنَاتي هُنَّ
أَطْهَرُ لَكُمْ فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَلاتُخْزُونِ فِي ضَيْفِي أَلَيْسَ
مِنكُمْ رَجُلٌ رَشِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***78. “And his people came rushing towards him, And aforetime they had
been practicing abominations. He said: ‘O my people, here are my
daughters they are purer for you. So fear Allah, and do no degrade me
with my guests! Is there not among you one upright man?’”***

The Arabic term /yuhra‘un/ derived from /’ihra’/ means intensive
driving. That is, the uninhibited passion of this rebellious people
goaded them on towards Lot’s (as) guests.

The meaning of the term /at-har/, in this verse, is not that sodomy has
something pure about it but that marriage is purer. It means that for
the sinner who is pursuing the gratification his sexual instincts, it is
preferable to get married than to commit sin.

It is worthy to note that one’s potentialities can flourish when caught
in the midst of anxieties and difficulties. If the Divine angels would
have introduced themselves to Lot (as) on their arrival, there would
have been no need for moaning, sighing, crying for help and appealing to
the emotions of the public, nor would there have been any need to offer
a marriage proposal.

The verse says:

***“And his people came rushing towards him, And aforetime they had been
practicing abominations. He said: ‘O my people, here are my daughters
they are purer for you. So fear Allah, and do no degrade me with my
guests! Is there not among you one upright man?’”***

**Question:** Why would a prophet propose his daughter for marriage to
an unbelieving idol worshipper?

**Answer:** Perhaps he might suggest that conversion be a condition for
the marriage so that the marriage could facilitate and strengthen the
belief in Allah.

Maybe the meaning of the term /banati’/ is ‘people’s daughters’ as the
prophet is considered the father of the nation and is speaking on their
behalf. Or maybe, at that time, such marriages were common for the sake
of convenience and expediency.

### Explanations

1-Sometimes the norms of human society degenerate to such an extent that
people hasten towards committing sins being seduced by their unruly
lower selves.

2- To prevent people from doing what is forbidden, we must at first open
up and show the true path to them so that they do not seek pleasure by
committing sins.

3- The meaning of the term ‘chastity’ is not isolation. On the contrary,
it means purity in normal social intercourse.

4- Marriage is the sole and only correct context for sexual
gratification, other methods are unclean and sinful.

5- Considering sin as a commonplace matter does not exempt man from his
responsibility in dissuading others from performing forbidden acts.

6- Showing hospitality is such an important matter that the noblest of
men have tolerated a tremendous degree of suffering for its sake.

7- Homosexuality has been forbidden, considered abominable, and has been
rejected in previous religions and is incompatible with one’s manliness,
development and chastity.

Surah Hud – Verses 79 - 80
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا لَقَدْ عَلِمْتَ مَالَنَا فِي بَنَاتِكَ مِنْ حَقّ‌ٍ وَإِنَّكَ
لَتَعْلَمُ مَا نُرِيدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ لَوْ أَنَّ لِي بِكُمْ قُوَّةً أَوْ ءَاوِي إِلَي رُكْنٍ شَدِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***79. “They said: ‘You know we have no right to your daughters, and
verily you know well what we desire’.”***  
***80. “He said: ‘Would that I had the power against you or I might take
refuge in a strong support’.”***

One’s deviation from the right path leads man to the point where he
considers the forbidden act of sodomy as a correct and virtuous act and
the religiously acceptable act of marriage as a vice and as wrong
conduct.

In other words, man is transformed as a consequence of sin, where the
most natural way for him may seem to be the ugliest and the most vicious
way becomes the most attractive.

The verse, concerning the people of Lot, says:

***“They said: ‘You know we have no right to your daughters, and verily
you know well what we desire’.”***

In our holy religion, homosexuality is considered as one of the capital
sins that require religious punishment. It consists of lashes, execution
or both commensurate with the act, and is to be applied upon those who
have committed the act according to the testimony of just witnesses.

Muslim leaders and those in positions of responsibility must prevent it
by all means. This is why Lot (as) says that if he had faithful
companions, he would have fought against those mean people, to defend
his guests, or at least he would have taken them to a safe place to
shelter them.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘Would that I had the power against you or I might take
refuge in a strong support’.”***

### The Sin of Sodomy in the Qur’an and Traditions

There are many accounts in the Glorious Qur’an about the vicious and
detestable act of this deviant people, all of which exhibit the
magnitude and intensity of the sin. [^4]

The Islamic literature highlights the grievous consequences for such
behavior revealing how serious a sin it is in the religion of Islam. For
example, it is said that if an adolescent commits or is the object of
the act of sodomy, Allah’s heavens start trembling and He will not speak
to those involved on the Day of Resurrection.

Imam Sadiq (as) has said that if someone can to be stoned to death
twice, that person would be he who had committed the act of sodomy. We
can also find in another Islamic from Imam Sadiq (as) quoting the
Prophet (S) who said:

*“He who performs a sexual act with an adolescent, will enter the Day of
Judgment in a state of uncleanness, Allah will be outraged, the
perpetrator will be deprived of His favor and He will prepare a place in
Hell for such a person and what an awful place it is!”*

Again he said:

*“If a male is involved in sex with another male, Allah’s heavens will
tremble.”*[^5]

Numerous narrations severely denounce transvestites, i.e. men and women
who make themselves up to look like the opposite sex which predisposes
them to the act of sodomy.

Surah Hud – Verse 81
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا يَا لُوطُ إِنَّا رُسُلُ رَبّكَ لَن يَصِلُوا إِلَيْكَ فَاَسْرِ
بِاَهْلِكَ بِقِطْعٍ مِنَ الَّيْلِ وَلا يَلْتَفِتْ مِنكُمْ أَحَدٌ
إِلاَّ امْرَأَتَكَ إِنَّهُ مُصِيبُهَا مَآ أَصَابَهُمْ إِنَّ
مَوْعِدَهُمُ الصُّبْحُ أَلَيْسَ الصُّبْحُ بِقَرِيبٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***81. “They (the guests) said: ‘O Lot! Verily we are messengers of your
Lord! Never shall they reach you! So travel with your family in a part
of the night, and let none of you look back, but your wife. Surely she
shall be smitten by that which smites them. Verily their appointed time
is the morning: Is not the morning nigh?’”***

The Arabic term /’asri/ is derived from /’isra’/ which means ‘movement
by night’.

The phrase /’illamra’ataka/ (but your wife) has been exceptioned, either
is derived from /ahlika/ which means: ‘Do move your whole family by
night except your wife,’ or it has been exceptioned from /la yaltafit/
meaning that none of them should look behind or pay attention to what
was going on behind them except his wife, who, while leaving with him
was worried about those corrupt people and would end up lingering behind
and, consequently, became a victim of the Divine punishment.

When the divine angels noticed Lot’s anxiety under the tormenting
conditions he was in, they unveiled the secret telling him that they
were messengers from Allah, that he should stop worrying and know that
those people would not be able to bother him any more.

The verse says:

***“They (the guests) said: ‘O Lot! Verily we are messengers of your
Lord! Never shall they reach you !...”***

Becoming aware as to who his guests were and what their mission was,
provided him with the utmost comfort and ease of mind, he then realized
that his time of troubles was about to be over and he would be free from
association with the depravity of this vicious and scandalous tribe, the
time for rejoicing was at hand.

The guests ordered Lot to take his family that night and leave that land
immediately, for good. However, they were told to be careful not to look
back. The only person who violated this order was Lot’s wife, who,
guilty of inclination towards the corrupt ones disregarded the order and
was dealt the same punishment as the Sodomites.

The verse says:

***“…So travel with your family in a part of the night, and let none of
you look back, but your wife. Surely she shall be smitten by that which
smites them...”***

The angels last words to him were that the time for imposing the penalty
will be in the morning. As the last hours of the night approached, they
told them to get up and depart from the town as soon as they can,
because the morning time was near.

The verse says:

***“…Verily their appointed time is the morning: Is not the morning
nigh?’”***

Surah Hud – Verses 82-83
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا جَآءَ أَمْرُنَا جَعَلْنَا عَالِيَهَا سَافِلَهَا وَأَمْطَرْنَا
عَلَيْهَا حِجَارَةً مِن سِجّيلٍ مَنْضُود
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُسَوَّمَةً عِندَ رَبّكَ وَمَا هِيَ مِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ بِبَعِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***82. “When Our command came, We turned it (their township) upside
down, and rained on it stones of baked clay, layer on layer.”***

***83. “Marked with your Lord, and it is not far off from the unjust
ones.”***

The Arabic term /sijjil/ means a piece of baked clay which is neither as
soft as clay nor as hard as stone.

The Arabic word /mandud/ means one on top of the other in succession.
The objective of stones being marked either is that every piece of stone
was meant for a particular person, or it means that those stones were
different from the ones on the earth.

This holy verse explains the end result of the people of Lot.

The people of Lot used to live during the time of Abraham (a.s), and Lot
(as), their prophet, was sent among them to propagate and disseminate
the same religion of monotheism. Accompanying Abraham (as) he went to
Palestine then to a land called ‘Mu‘tafikat’, where the people used to
worship idols and openly sodomize.

Lot (as) started struggling against this corruption and social
pathology. The more he struggled, the less he met with success until he
was threatened with expulsion if he did not stop preaching.[^6]
Thereafter the angels of Divine punishment and death came down and after
informing Abraham and Lot (as), completed their mission turning the land
of this corrupt tribe upside down.

According to verse 13 of the Surah Al-Hijr, a blast occurred and
overwhelmed the people of Lot.

Perhaps, it was this horrible blast which turned the region upside down,
stones were thrown out from within the earth and fell upon their heads
similar to volcanic eruptions and the subsequent explosions which
occur.[^7]

### Explanations

1. The punishment of those who go against human nature is the
overturning of their cities and environment.

The verse says:

***“When Our command came, We turned it (their township) upside
down...”***

2. Oppressive people cannot escape Divine punishment as Allah’s anger
can turn rain into stones and pelt them to death.

The verse says:

***“…and rained on it stones of baked clay, layer on layer.”***

Those nations who have a permissive attitude towards homosexuality such
as is found in the West, must expect Allah’s punishment and the
upturning of the region where this corruption takes place.

The verse says:

***“Marked with your Lord, and it is not far off from the unjust
ones.”***

[^1]: It says: “…Verily Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness
from you, O people of the House and to purify you a (thorough)
purifying.”

[^2]: Surah Hud No. 11, verse 46

[^3]: Surah At-Tahrim, No. 66, verse 10

[^4]: Refer to Surah Al-A‘raf, verses 79-80-83, Surah Hud verse 82,
Surah Al-’Anbiya verse 74, Surah An-Naml verse 54.

[^5]: Refer to Usul-i-Kafi, Wasa’il-ush-Shi‘ah, Bihar ul ’Anwar, Nahj ul
Balaqah

[^6]: Surah Ash-Shu‘ara, No. 26, verse 167

[^7]: Al-Mizan, the


