Section 8: The Ministry of Shu‘ayb
==================================

Surah Hud – Verse 84
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإِلَي مَدْيَنَ أَخَاهُمْ شُعَيْباً قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ
مَا لَكُم مِنْ إِلَهٍ غَيْرُهُ وَلا تَنْقُصُوا الْمِكْيَالَ
وَالْمِيزَانَ إِنّي أَرَاكُم بِخَيْرٍ وإِنّي أَخَافُ عَلَيْكُمْ
عَذَابَ يَوْمٍ مُحِيطٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***84. “And to (the people of) Madyan (We sent) their brother Shu‘ayb.
He said: ‘O my people! Worship Allah! You have no other Allah than He.
And do not give short measure and weight. Verily I see you in prosperity
and I fear for you the punishment of an all-encompassing Day’.”***

Madyan whose name today is Ma‘an, is a town to the east of the Gulf of
‘Aqaba. In the Torah its name is mentioned as Madyan. Its inhabitants
were among the descendents of Ismail (as) and they enjoyed good
commercial ties with Egypt, Lebanon and Palestine. Some people regard
the term ‘Madyan’ as the name of a tribe that used to live around Mount
Sinai.

The types of corruption that were practiced by the different nations
mentioned in the Qur’an vary, and this very fact should be of note.

The corruption of the people of Lot had been sexual deviation, and the
corruption of the people of Shu‘ayb (as) in this case was economic
corruption, i.e. use of short weights; weighing less than what they were
assumed to sell or measuring less and claiming to deliver the value of
the goods exactly as their clients had ordered.

In keeping with the ways of the other prophets (as), this compassionate
and brotherly prophet at first called them to believe in monotheism, the
Unity of Allah, the most fundamental pillar of religion, exhorting his
people to worship the one and only God.

The verse says:

***“And to (the people of) Madyan (We sent) their brother Shu‘ayb. He
said: ‘O my people! Worship Allah! You have no other Allah than
He...”***

Then he turned his attention to the economic corruption of the people
whose roots were found in the idol worship itself which was prevalent
among the people of Madyan at the time. He said that they should not
weigh out their goods less than their value by using the wrong scales in
their commercial transactions.

The verse says:

***“…And do not give short measure and weight...”***

This great prophet’s words can be interpreted as two reasons for them.
At first he seems to be saying that by accepting this advice the gates
of commerce will develop, prices will deflate, and peace and tranquility
will prevail which will attract Allah’s grace upon the community.

It is also possible to interpret this sentence to mean that Shu‘ayb sees
them having affluence and tremendous wealth; thus, there is no reason
for them to infringe upon people’s rights, by selling them less goods
and charging them the same price.

The second matter is that he also fears their insistence upon idol
worship, and abusing Allah’s blessings will lead to their punishment on
the Day of Judgment.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Verily I see you in prosperity and I fear for you the punishment of
an all-encompassing Day’.”***

Surah Hud – Verse 85
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَا قَوْمِ أَوْفُوا الْمِكْيَالَ وَالْمِيزَانَ بِالْقِسْطِ وَلا
تَبْخَسُوا النَّاسَ أَشْيَآءَهُمْ وَلا تَعْثَوْا فِي الأَرْضِ
مُفْسِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***85. “And O my people! Fill up the measure and the balance in justice,
and do not diminish the people their things: and do not mischief in the
land, working corruption.”***

The Qur’anic phrase /la tabxasu/ is derived from the article /baxasa/
signifying ‘not to reduce’; while the Arabic phrase /la ta‘au/ means
‘not to commit evil or mischief’.

Compromising people’s rights in economic matters is a prominent example
of corruption, for ailing economies always lead communities to
corruption. All economic transactions should be strictly supervised.

Shu‘ayb insisted upon the establishment of a just economic system in
this verse and along with dissuading his people from cheating others in
economic transactions, he also called upon them to consider the rights
of others, saying that they should use scales and weighing devices with
fairness.

But this verse says:

***“And O my people! Fill up the measure and the balance in
justice...”***

The establishment of justice and safeguarding everyone’s due rights are
principles that must be administered throughout all of society. Taking
this one step further, he said that they should not falsely ascribe
faults and defects to other people’s goods, thus reducing the value of
their goods, properties and belongings.

It continues saying:

***“…and do not diminish the people their things:...”***

Towards the end of the verse, going even further, he added that they
should not corrupt the earth by committing mischief.

It says:

***“…and do not mischief in the land, working corruption.”***

The above two verses strongly indicate that next to the belief in
monotheism, a healthy economy is of primary importance. It also shows
that anarchy in an economic system can be a major source of corruption
in any society.

Surah Hud – Verse 86
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَقِيَّتُ اللَّهِ خَيْرٌ لَكُمْ إِن كُنتُم مُؤْمِنِينَ وَمَآ أَنَاْ
عَلَيْكُمْ بِحَفِيظٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***86. “(The lawful wealth) which is left by Allah is better for you, if
you be believers. And I am not a guardian over you.”***

The Qur’anic term /baqiyatullah/, mentioned in this verse, refers to the
dividends which one can obtain through a godly and allowed capital, and
it is certainly a hundred percent clean.

However, according to the Islamic narrations, it refers to everything
Divinely sanctioned that is left for humanity as a whole. One example of
this are the faithful soldiers who return victoriously from a holy war,
for they have remained alive by the Divine will.

It refers also to the contemporary Imam, Imam Mahdi (May Allah hasten
his auspicious advent), who is also known as /baqiyatullah/ since that
noble person has been retained and stored for the guidance of mankind by
the Divine Will.

Some Islamic narrations denote that one of the names of this honorable
man (Hadrat Mahdi) is /baqiyatullah/[^1] whom we greet with this name
saying: /’assalamu ‘alayka ya baqiatullah fi ’ardeh/.

When he appears in Mecca, he will recite the above verse in a loud voice
and say:

*“I am that promised Godly being kept by Allah.*[^2]

Certainly the other immaculate Imams (as) have been also entitled as:
/baqiatullah/.

Surah Hud – Verse 87
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا يَا شُعَيْبُ أَصَلاتُكَ تَأْمُرُكَ أَن نَتْرُكَ مَا يَعْبُدُ
ابَآؤُنَآ أَوْ أَن نَفْعَلَ فِي أَمْوَالِنَا مَا نَشَآءُ إِنَّكَ
لاَنتَ الْحَلِيمُ الرَّشِيدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***87. “They said: ‘O Shu‘ayb! Does your prayer command you that we
should leave off that our fathers worshipped, or we (should forsake to
do) what we like with our property? Truly you are the forbearing, the
right minded’.”***

Now let us look at how this obstinate people reacted in face of this
Divinely reformist voice.

Those who idol-worshippers regarded their idols as symbols of their
ancestral tradition and an emblem of their cultural identity, and who
gained profit through fraudulent activity in their transactions, asked
Shu‘ayb if it was his religion of prayer that ordered him to encourage
them to abandon the worship of that which their fathers had worshipped,
and interfere in their transactions to make them lose their freedom in
dealing with their own property.

The verse says:

***“They said: ‘O Shu‘ayb! Does your prayer command you that we should
leave off that our fathers worshipped, or we (should forsake to do) what
we like with our property?...”***

The people of Shu‘ayb wrongly thought that no one should set the minimum
limits for proprietors, rights, regarding domination in their
properties, when in fact financial affairs should always be governed by
correct criteria. Such criteria are clearly elucidated by the Divine
prophets otherwise society would see a great degree of corruption.

They wanted to know how could such a forbearing, patient and
understanding man, have said such a thing.

They said:

***“…Truly you are the forbearing, the right minded’.”***

Perhaps they thought that the particular movements and words of prayer
would have had a negative effect on them, but if they truly meditated
they would have found that prayer enlivens man’s sense of
responsibility, virtue, abstinence, piety, and gratitude, and makes him
remember Allah and His Court of Justice.

For these reasons, man would be kept away from idol worship, blind
obedience, short selling goods, and all types of fraud under the light
of prayer.

Surah Hud – Verse 88
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِن كُنتُ عَلَي بَيّنَةٍ مِن رَبّي
وَرَزَقَنِي مِنْهُ رِزْقاً حَسَناً وَمَآ اُرِيدُ أَنْ اُخَالِفَكُمْ
إِلَي مَآ أَنْهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ إِنْ اُرِيدُ إِلاَّ الإِصْلاَحَ مَا
اسْتَطَعْتُ وَمَا تَوْفِيقِي إِلاَّ بِاللَّهِ عَلَيْهِ تَوَكَّلْتُ
وَإِلَيْهِ اُنِيبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***88. “He said: ‘O My people! Bethink you’ If I be upon a clear proof
from my Lord, and He has provided me with fair sustenance from Him? And
I desire not, in opposition to you, to do that which I forbid you from
it. I desire naught save reform so far as I am able. My success is only
with Allah. On Him do I rely and unto Him I turn (repentant)’.”***

In the previous verse, the idol worshippers protested as to why they
could not be free to dispose of their own property for good or, in this
case, for evil. Shu‘ayb (as) answered that if he had kept them from
doing this, it would have been for the good of their own lives and their
community, and it was not because of such things as hostility, envy,
short sightedness or other things.

Individual interests must not be detrimental to the public interest.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘O My people! Bethink you’ If I be upon a clear proof from
my Lord, and He has provided me with fair sustenance from Him? And I
desire not, in opposition to you, to do that which I forbid you from it.
I desire naught save reform so far as I am able...”***

They had to stop thinking that a comfortable life could only be gained
through crooked dealings and sinful activity, and Allah’s prophets are
an example that one could live a decent life without being polluted by
these sins.

We must keep in mind that he who commands others to what is good and
dissuades others from what is bad must be a man of practice himself. The
prophets themselves were not only planners and leaders; they themselves
were the best examples of men of practice.

Shu‘ayb continues saying:

***“…My success is only with Allah. On Him do I rely and unto Him I turn
(repentant)’.”***

Surah Hud – Verse 89
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَا قَوْمِ لاَ يَجْرِمَنَّكُمْ شِقَاقِي أَن يُصِيبَكُم مِثْلُ مَآ
أَصَابَ قَوْمَ نُوحٍ أَوْ قَوْمَ هُودٍ أَوْ قَوْمَ صَالِحٍ وَمَا
قَوْمُ لُوطٍ مِنكُم بِبَعِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***89. “And O My people! Let not (your) breach with me cause you to sin,
lest befalls you the like of what befell the people of Noah, or the
people of Hud or the people of Salih; and the people of Lot are not far
off from you.”***

Shu‘ayb advises his opponents that they should not burn their bridges
behind themselves, i.e., because of their hostility to one person they
should not destroy the destiny and happiness of themselves and their
society.

They should stop thinking that the tragic stories of their ancestors
were simplistic and parochial in nature. The histories of many people
are similar and correspond with each other.

We must note that Allah’s hands are always capable of meting out
punishment. He can annihilate any nation anywhere regardless of what
form they might take any time He wants.

Just as He drowned the people of Noah (as), swept away the people of Hud
by storm, blasted the people of Salih (as) to extermination, and
annihilated the tribe of Lot (as) by assailing them with stones and
overturning the land with them.

The verse says:

***“And O My people! Let not (your) breach with me cause you to sin,
lest befalls you the like of what befell the people of Noah, or the
people of Hud or the people of Salih; and the people of Lot are not far
off from you.”***

Surah Hud – Verse 90
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاسْتَغْفِرُوا رَبَّكُمْ ثُمَّ تُوبُوا إِلَيْهِ إِنَّ رَبّي رَحِيمٌ
وَدُودٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***90. “(Then come) and ask forgiveness of your Lord, and turn unto Him
(in repentance): Verily my Lord is Merciful, Loving.”***

The dissidents and unbelievers must not only be warned and informed of
the punishment to come, but they must also be shown the method by which
they can reform themselves and the course of action that may attract
Divine mercy.

They must be notified that in order to receive Allah’s favor and
friendship[^3], they must follow the path of the prophets and the
leadership of the Sinless Ones. If they repent and reconstruct their
lives, they will receive positive answers from Allah.

The verse says:

***“(Then come) and ask forgiveness of your Lord, and turn unto Him (in
repentance):...”***

Allah’s (s.w.t.) favor is not a passing affair, rather it is a
continuous process and possesses numerous signs and characteristics, He
does not only accept repentance, but He also loves those who repent.

It says:

***“…Verily my Lord is Merciful, Loving.”***

Surah Hud – Verse 91
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا يَا شُعَيْبُ مَا نَفْقَهُ كَثِيراً مِمَّا تَقُولُ وَإِنَّا
لَنَرَاكَ فِينَا ضَعِيفاً وَلَوْلاَ رَهْطُكَ لَرَجَمْنَاكَ وَمَآ أَنتَ
عَلَيْنَا بِعَزِيزٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***91. “They said: ‘O Shu‘ayb! We do not understand much of what you
say; and most surely we see you weak among us. Were it not for your
family, we would certainly stone you; and you are not mighty against
us’.”***

The prophets and the divine preachers have had to bear the utmost
contempt and humiliation in the course of their mission in leading
mankind on to the Right Path. Shu‘ayb (as) is one of those examples, for
they did both to him.

They ridiculed and belittled his words and saw him as someone weak and
insignificant. They denigrated his family, threatened him with death,
and did not give due regard to his honor.

The verse says:

***“They said: ‘O Shu‘ayb! We do not understand much of what you say;
and most surely we see you weak among us. Were it not for your family,
we would certainly stone you; and you are not mighty against us’.”***

The idol worshippers told Shu‘ayb (as) that they did not grasp the
meaning of his words. But what was his speech about which they claimed
they did not understand? Was it not but the following?

1- I am empowered to perform miracles and to offer you valid proofs.

***“If I be upon a clear proof...”***

2- I have no financial difficulties and I am not in need of your
assistance.

3- I practice what I preach.

4- I intend to reform the society.

***“I desire naught save reform...”***

5- I struggle with all my might.

***“…so far as I am able…”***

6- I put all my hopes and trust in Allah.

***“…On Him do I rely...”***

7- I warn you of the consequences at the end of time and the actions of
past generations.

***“…The like of what befell the people of Noah...”***

Surah Hud – Verse 92
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ أَرَهْطِي أَعَزُّ عَلَيْكُم مِنَ اللَّهِ
وَاتَّخَذْتُمُوهُ وَرَآءَكُمْ ظِهْرِيّاً إِنَّ رَبّي بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ
مُحِيطٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***92. “He said: ‘O my people! Is then my family more esteemed with you
than Allah? And you cast Him behind your back, with neglect. Verily my
Lord encompasses what you do’.”***

We should not give priority to the rights of the people, or of groups,
parties, or even of international law over Divine rights. We must stop
excluding Allah’s role in the political and social domains and not let
it be dominated by any other matter.

According to the verse, these people refrained from doing harm to
Shu‘ayb because of the fear of retaliation from his tribe.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘O my people! Is then my family more esteemed with you than
Allah?...”***

Shu‘ayb’s response was why could they not accept his words simply for
Allah’s sake? Given that Allah was infinitely more powerful than his
tribe, they did not give any importance to Him at all ignoring Him and
violating His commandments.

It continues:

***“…And you cast Him behind your back, with neglect...”***

In fact they should stop thinking that Allah was not seeing what they
did and did not hear what they said, for one can be sure, that the Lord
is aware of all of our deeds.

The verse concludes:

***“…Verily my Lord encompasses what you do’.”***

Surah Hud – Verse 93
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَا قَوْمِ اعْمَلُوا عَلَي مَكَانَتِكُمْ إِنّي عَامِلٌ سَوْفَ
تَعْلَمُونَ مَن يَأْتِيهِ عَذَابٌ يُخْزِيهِ وَمَنْ هُوَ كَاذِبٌ
وَارْتَقِبُوا إِنّي مَعَكُمْ رَقِيبٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***93. “And O my people! Act according to your ability. I will do (my
part). Soon you will know on whom comes the Penalty disgracing him, and
who it is a liar. And watch you; Verily I (too) am watching with
you.”***

As the disbelievers of the people of Shu‘ayb threatened to stone him to
death while giving him their last words, Shu‘ayb, declaring his stand in
the face of these threats did not flinch from the threat and issued a
challenge to them, instead he said that they would do whatever they
could, and might not spare anything. He should do what is in his power
as well.

The verse says:

***“And O my people! Act according to your ability. I will do (my
part)...”***

However, you will soon realize who will be the one suffering a
humiliating punishment, and who is a liar. So, wait and see and I will
do the same.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Soon you will know on whom comes the Penalty disgracing him, and
who it is a liar...”***

You try to win me over with your power, numbers, wealth, and your
influence and I shall also wait and see how the Divine punishment will
soon entangle you and your misguided population, exterminating you from
the face of the earth.

The verse says:

***“…And watch you; Verily I (too) am watching with you.”***

Surah Hud – Verses 94 - 95
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمَّا جَآءَ أَمْرُنَا نَجَّيْنَا شُعَيْباً وَالَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا
مَعَهُ بِرَحْمَةٍ مِنَّا وَأَخَذَتِ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا الصَّيْحَةُ
فَاَصْبَحُوا فِي دِيَارِهِمْ جَاثِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَاَن لَمْ يَغْنَوْا فِيهَآ أَلاَ بُعْداً لِمَدْيَنَ كَمَا بَعِدَتْ
ثَمُودُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***94. “And when Our Command came, We saved Shu‘ayb and those who
believed with him by a mercy from Us, and the (heavenly) Blast overtook
those who were unjust, so they become motionless corpses in their
abodes.”***  
***95. “As if they had never dwelt there. Behold! Away with (people of)
Madyan, even as were cast away (the people of) Thamud.”***

Ultimately, the final stage did come. The Qur’an implies that when
Allah’s Command for the punishment of this misguided, oppressing and
obstinate people was issued, after Shu‘ayb and those who believed with
him were saved by Divine favor and blessings, the terrible sound from
the skies and the great death-dealing blast came over the people of
Madyan and took them all by the throat.

The verse says:

***“And when Our Command came, We saved Shu‘ayb and those who believed
with him by a mercy from Us, and the (heavenly) Blast overtook those who
were unjust...”***

In the aftermath of the blast, the Qur’an indicates that the people of
Shu‘ayb lay face down on the earth, they had died in their houses as a
result of this great blast, and their corpses were left there to provide
others with didactic lessons. Their lives were terminated in such a way
that it was as if they had never existed there before.

The verse continues saying:

***“…so they become motionless corpses in their abodes.”***

The Divine outrage is far superior in destruction than any other form of
devastation, in the case of bombardment, for example, some people may
have the chance to escape more or less unharmed, and some would remain
alive after the event.

However, when the time for Allah’s anger and punishment comes, it wipes
the evildoers away in such a way that it is as if no one had ever lived
there.

The verse says:

***“As if they had never dwelt there...”***

Eventually, as was explained at the end of the stories of the peoples of
‘Ad and Thamud, Allah’s favor and blessings were removed from the people
of Madyan as they had been removed from the people of Thamud.

It says:

***“…Behold! Away with (people of) Madyan, even as were cast away (the
people of) Thamud.”***

[^1]: Bihar ul ’Anwar, vol. 46, p. 259

[^2]: Tafsir-us-Safi, vol. 2, p. 468

[^3]: The term /wadud/ refers to that kind of friendship which is
everlasting.


