Surah Yusuf, Chapter 12
=======================

**Surah** **Yusuf** **(Joseph),**

**No. 12 (Revealed in Mecca)**

**111 verses in 12 Sections**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***

The Magnitude and Glory of the Qur’an
-------------------------------------

The Qur’an, which is a reflection of the magnificence and glory of Allah
and is an eternal and everlasting miracle in itself, presents clear
evidence and accurately foretells events. As a witness to these events,
it presents true historical facts backed by strong logic and penetrating
insight.

It is the repository of a superior kind of grace and is a boundless
ocean of merits. It offers strategies, it encourages while at the same
time gives warnings, and it gives accounts of man’s past while also
predicting the future.

It is unique in that it is as accessible to the common people as well as
to the elite among the scholars. It contains material from the invisible
world as well as from the physical world. It illustrates the causes for
the enhancement one’s honour and the factors which bring about one’s
wretchedness.

It enlightens one’s thinking, reasoning, and way of meditation and logic
while we are alive and at the same time it provides companionship during
our solitary confinement in the grave and on the Day of Resurrection.

The Qur’an is a repository of all knowledge and every science, and is
the only celestial Book which has not been distorted. The more science
develops the more its secrets unveil.

Its parables, metaphors and its similes are never wearisome and its
repetitions often convey a wide variety of meanings. The Qur’an can be
used as a criterion for verifying the words of the men of Allah.

We have been told that whenever we hear words attributed to those holy
men we should compare them to the Qur’an and if they do not conform to
it, then we should reject them.

The Qur’an is considered as the “*Greater Weighty Thing*” and the
Ahl-ul-Bayt (as) are considered by the believers as “*The Lesser Weighty
Thing*”. In this regard, the Prophet (S) reiterated several times:

 *“I have left two great gifts amongst you (Muslims) which will never be
separated until the Day of Resurrection when they will join me at the
Pool of Kauthar.”*

Even now the Ahl-ul-Bayt, in the person of Hadrat Mahdi, (may Allah
hasten his advent) is still coupled with the Book of Allah, and any
commentary written on the Qur’an which ignores well documented
narrations that originate from them are invalid and misguiding, for the
holy Prophet (S) said:

 *“If you take recourse to these two; the Book and my Ahl-ul-Bayt, you
will never lose your way.”*

*Certainly, taking recourse to the one* *and* *neglecting the other will
lead to misguidance.*

The Content of the Surah
------------------------

Before beginning our discussion of the verses of this Surah, it is
necessary to point out a number of points:

1 - All of the verses of this Surah, except a few, concern the
beautiful, instructive biography of Hadrat Yusuf (as) and this is the
reason why this Surah is called “Yusuf”.

And, it is also for this reason that out of the 27 times that the name
of Yusuf has been mentioned in the Qur’an, 25 of them are found in this
Surah. The other two suras in which his name has been mentioned are in
verse 34 of Surah Al-Ghafir, and in verse 84 of Surah Al-’An‘am.

The content of this Surah is well integrated in one reading and it
presents different highlights of a single story expressed in ten
sections through an extraordinarily fluent, concise, interesting, and
attractive manner.

Ignorant story tellers or those who have questionable objectives in
mind, have sought to present this story as an exciting love story for
the whimsical, they try to change everything around sexuality and
present it as if it was a Hollywood romance, providing a distorted
picture of the true Yusuf and his real biography.

The Qur’an, whose everything is paradigm, narrates the story revealing
sublime lessons in chastity, abstemiousness, virtue, faith, and
domination over individual selfishness. This has been so carefully
arranged that if someone was to read it several times, he would still be
involuntarily drawn by its powerful attraction.

It is for this reason that the Qur’an has called it the Best of Stories
/ahsanul qasas/ and the Surah has presented instructive lessons for
contemplation.

2 – Focusing our attention on the verses of this Surah reveals the fact
that the holy Qur’an is a miracle in all its dimensions, and the
champions it presents in its stories are real, not imaginary and unique
in their class.

There is Abraham, the iconoclastic champion who, with his sublime and
unconquerable spirit stood alone opposing powerful despots.

There is Moses, the hero who taught an obstinate people to go against a
recalcitrant oppressor.

And then there is Yusuf (Joseph) (as), the champion who embodied
righteousness, purity and virtue versus a passionate, beautiful and
conniving woman.

On reading this Surah we cannot help but be struck with wonderment at
the revelation of the Qur’an and its ability to relate a story of such
subtlety and profundity.

Among the many subjects covered by this Surah, the story of Yusuf also
deals with the sensitive issue of love, the Qur’an does not overlook or
bypass these issues, indeed, it speaks of them in great detail but in
such a way that no undesirable or negative effect would be left on the
reader.

It delves deeply into every issue and proposition but one would find
that powerful rays of virtue may dominate the discussion at all times.

3 – **The story of Yusuf before and after Islam:** Undoubtedly, the
story of Yusuf had been known before Islam. This story has been
extensively mentioned in 14 chapters (37 to 50) in the Book of Genesis.
A careful reading of these 14 chapters shows that what is found in the
Torah is quite different from what is in the Qur’an.

A comparison of the two accounts reveals the extent to which the
Qur’anic version is void of all the superstitions found in the Torah.

And the fact that the Qur’an says to the Prophet: “***Before this, thou
too was among those who knew it not***”, is a reference made to the
Prophet’s lack of prior awareness of the story and the sheer truth of
this instructive biography. Indeed, whatever the prophets possess is
God-given.

After the dawn of Islam, historians also wrote accounts and
interpretations of the story. In Persian poetry and literature, the
first story told about Yusuf and Zulaykha is ascribed to Ferdowsi.

Then the poems composed by Shahabuddin ‘Am‘aq and Mas‘udi Ghomi, and
later, we find the famous poetry entitled ‘Yusuf and Zulaykha’ composed
by ‘Abdurahman Jami, the famous poet of the 9th century A.H.

4- Why is the story of Yusuf, unlike that of the other prophets,
expounded in one place? One of the characteristics of this story is
that, unlike the story of the other prophets, it is discussed as a whole
in one format.

This is different from that of the stories of the other prophet which
have been recounted in separate sections in various suras of the Qur’an.
The reason for this is that separation of the climaxes of this story
destroys its integrity and in order to arrive at the proper and
necessary conclusions, it must be offered as an integrated whole.

Another specification of this holy Surah is that whereas the stories of
the other prophets recounted in the Qur’an, usually deal with the issue
of their struggles and campaigns against unruly and rebellious peoples,
but the story of Yusuf makes no mention of such matters.

On the contrary, it revolves around the life of Yusuf himself and his
passage through difficult stages of life which eventually culminates
with him becoming a powerful man in the Egyptian government.

**5- The virtues of Surah Yusuf:** The Islamic narrations cite numerous
virtues for reciting this Surah, among which one can find a tradition by
Imam Sadiq (as) saying:

 *“Whoever recites this Surah every day or every night, Allah will
enable him to be resurrected on the Day of Resurrection having a beauty
equal to that of the beauty of Yusuf, he will have no difficulties on
that Day and he will be among the righteous subjects of Allah.”*

We have already pointed out repeatedly that the narrations that have
come down to us concerning the virtues of reading the suras of the
Qur’an do not mean a superficial reading of the text without meditating
and acting upon them. On the contrary, it means a careful reading that
would encourage one to think and in turn lead to a practical application
of the text.


