Section 2: Yusuf Suffers the Treatment of His Brothers
======================================================

Surah Yusuf - Verse 7
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ كَانَ فِي يُوسُفَ وَإِخْوَتِهِ ءَايَاتٌ لِلسَّآئِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***7. “Certainly there are signs (of Allah’s sovereignty) in (the story
of) Yusuf and his brothers for the inquirers.”***

There are numerous signs of Allah’s omnipotence at work in the life
history of Hadrat Yusuf, each of which is an advice and a didactic
lesson for the seeker of Truth. Among these Signs we can cite:

1. Hadrat Yusuf’s very sophisticated dream.

2. The science of the interpretation of dreams.

3. Ya‘qub’s awareness of the future of his son.

4. Yusuf’s remaining safe at the bottom of the well.

5. Becoming blind and then regaining sight.

6. From being abandoned at the bottom of a well and becoming high,
exalted.

7. Being put in prison and finally to acceding power and government.

8. Being cleared off all accusations and hearing accusations of
corruption.

9. Parting and reunion.

10. Servitude and accession to power.

11. Choosing prison over being polluted with sin.

12. Having the upper hand yet impelled to forgive wrong done to oneself.

Along with the above signs, there are certain questions which can be
raised, the answers to which illustrate the way to a decent life:

How does man’s envy lead him to fratricide?

How can ten individuals engage in a conspiracy for treason?

How does Yusuf spare punishing his criminal brothers while having the
upper hand?

How man can prefer prison to pollution by sin and the pleasures of
committing sin, when thinking of Allah?

This Surah was revealed when the sublime Prophet (S) was economically
and socially besieged and this story provided great comfort for him.

It meant that if some of his relatives did not believe and support him,
he should not have worried for the brothers of Yusuf had thrown him down
a well. The most important verses of this Surah are those which deal
with the domination of the Divine power over man-made conspiracies.

They threw Yusuf into the well in order to become dearer to their father
but they became hated. Doors were closed in order to pollute him with
sin, but his chastity and innocence were well demonstrated in this
trying circumstance.

Neither did the well, servitude, prison, palace life, or any of these
conspiracies exert the slightest influence on Allah’s Will.

At any rate, it is from here that the entanglement of the brothers with
Yusuf first starts, and didactic lessons can be gleaned from the story.

It says:

***“Certainly there are signs (of Allah’s sovereignty) in (the story of)
Yusuf and his brothers for the inquirers.”***

What lesson might be more instructive than this? One finds a group of
powerful individuals with well calculated strategies, through envy
trying their utmost to kill a seemingly weak person.

In the end all their plans turn against them making it possible for him
to be elevated to a position of influence, governing a vast territory
with everyone bowing before him instead! This shows that when Allah’s
will is at work, His plans may be implemented by even the opponents of
those plans.

This denotes that a truly faithful believer is never left alone and even
if the whole world were to unite for his extermination, he would not
even suffer the slightest injury if the will of Allah does not desire
such.

Surah Yusuf - Verse 8
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ قَالُوا لَيُوسُفُ وَأَخُوهُ أَحَبُّ إِلَي اَبِينَا مِنَّا
وَنَحْنُ عُصْبَةٌ إِنَّ أَبَانَا لَفي ضَلالٍ مُّبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***8. “When they said: ‘Verily, Yusuf and his brother (Benjamin) are
dearer to our father than we, while we are a (strong) group. Verily, our
father is in manifest error’.”***

Hadrat Ya‘qub had 12 sons, two of whom (Yusuf and Benjamin) were of the
same mother and the rest from another mother. Ya‘qub’s interest in Yusuf
(because of his young age or because of his virtues) made his brothers
envy him.

They not only envied him but also by saying: /wa nahnu ‘usbatun/
“***while we are a (strong) group***” made it clear that they were
arrogant in spirit and, because of this, they accused their father of
being mistaken and deviated in his focus of affection.

The verse says:

***“When they said: ‘Verily, Yusuf and his brother (Benjamin) are dearer
to our father than we, while we are a (strong) group. ...”***

Many of those who are at comparatively lower rungs of position and rank
in society try to degrade those who rank higher in society in order to
compensate for their own shortcomings.

There are differences between the words, discrimination and
differentiation, the former implies attaching importance to someone over
others for no justified reason and the latter refers to distinguishing
on the basis of ones abilities and conditions.

For example, a physician’s prescriptions or a teacher’s marks differ
since they must vary in accordance with the rules which are not of an
oppressive nature. However, Yusuf’s brothers considered Ya‘qub’s love as
one that had no good reason.

### Explanations

1. If the children feel that they are discriminated against, their envy
will be aroused.

2. Discrimination among one’s children will decrease their love towards
their parents

3. The exercise of power does not engender love.

4. Envy crossed the frontiers of fatherhood and prophecy hence the
brothers attributed deviation and injustice to their father who was, at
the same time, their prophet.

The above verse says:

***“…Verily, our father is in manifest error’.”***

5. To be loved is an inherent need of man. Lack of love and affection of
others is one of the greatest sufferings of man.

Surah Yusuf - Verse 9
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اقْتُلُوا يُوسُفَ أَوِ اطْرَحُوهُ أَرْضاً يَخْلُ لَكُمْ وَجْهُ
أَبِيكُمْ وَتَكُونُوا مِن بَعْدِهِ قَوْماً صَالِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***9. “Slay you Yusuf, or cast him out to some (far) land, (so that)
your father’s attention may be given on you (exclusively), and you may
be after that (by repentance) a righteous people.”***

With respect to Divine favors, man has four options: to be jealous, to
be stingy, to be self – sacrificing, and to be envious of others.

If he enjoys a blessing and is happy that others do not enjoy it as
well, this is a case of stingy, this is also the case if he does not
enjoy a blessing and is glad that others do not enjoy it as well which
is jealousy.

If he lets others benefit from a blessing he enjoys and is not concerned
whether he would be deprived of it in the process, this is a case of
self–sacrifice. If he thinks that others enjoy a blessing and he doesn’t
and he wishes that he enjoys that blessing too, this is envy.

Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“I sometimes express my affection towards some of my children, seating
them on my lap even though they do not merit all that love, so that they
do not become envious of my other children, and the adventures of Yusuf
be repeated once more.”*[^1]

The feeling of envy, however, eventually led the brothers to conspire
with each other. They proposed two schemes, either to kill Yusuf or to
send him off to a far distant land so that the love and attention of
their father would be evenly distributed among them.

The verse says:

***“Slay you Yusuf, or cast him out to some (far) land, (so that) your
father’s attention may be given on you (exclusively)...”***

It is true that they might have trouble with their consciences having
condescended to committing such a crime against their brother. However,
they thought that it might be possible to compensate for this sin and
repent afterwards.

The holy verse continues saying:

***“…and you may be after that (by repentance) a righteous people.”***

This sentence reveals the fact that they had feelings of guilt for
having committed such a barbarous act and were afraid of Allah at the
bottom of their hearts.

However, the important problem in question lies in the fact that
discussing repentance before the commission of a sin is in actual fact a
satanic strategy to cheat one’s own conscience and keep a channel open
with Allah, hence, the person in question is not really repenting and by
no means it is a reason for his regret.

### Explanations

1. Dangerous thoughts lead man to perform dangerous acts and jealousy
leads man to such great sin that he will even be prepared to commit
fratricide.

2. Man seeks popularity and affection, the lack of which leads to the
most dangerous kinds of behaviors and deviations.

3. Although the holy Qur’an makes the acquisition of popularity and
affection upon having faith and righteous conduct, Satan makes it the
reward for killing one’s brothers.

4. The jealous person thinks that if others are killed or removed, all
the blessings will be given to him.

5. Satan, by holding out the probable possibility of future repentance,
opens up the gate for man to commit sin in the present.

6. Being knowledgeable and being aware does not always imply that one
has distanced him from deviation.

Despite the fact that Yusuf’s brothers knew and believed that killing
their brother was an evil act it did not stop them from committing it.

Surah Yusuf - Verse 10
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ قَآئِلٌ مِنْهُمْ لاَ تَقْتُلُوا يُوسُفَ وَأَلْقُوهُ فِي
غَيَابَتِ الْجُبّ يَلْتَقِطْهُ بَعْضُ السَّيَّارَةِ إِن كُنتُمْ
فَاعِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***10. “Said a speaker among them: ‘Do not slay Yusuf, and if you must
do it, throw him into the bottom of the well (so that) some caravan (of
travelers) may pick him up’.”***

The Arabic term /jubb/ means a kind of well in which stones have not
been used in its construction. The word /qayabat/ also refers to a
platform on the wall of a well near the water which cannot be seen from
above the wall.

Among his brothers, there was one who was more intelligent and had a
conscience that was superior to that of the others. He opposed the
conspiracy to murder Yusuf and the plan to send him into exile to a far
distant land, as there was the fear that he might die in the process.

He offered another contingency plan suggesting that they should not kill
Yusuf, but put him down a well in such a way as to leave him in safety,
which would enable travelers, passing by in their caravans to pick him
up and take him with them, thus putting a distance between him and
themselves and from the eyes of their father.

The verse says:

***“Said a speaker among them: ‘Do not slay Yusuf, and if you must do
it, throw him into the bottom of the well (so that) some caravan (of
travelers) may pick him up’.”***

Another important lesson drawn from this story is how a man’s jealousy
can provide him with ways of entangling himself in very serious
problems, and how, if this outrageous feeling is not controlled, it
would involve not only oneself but others as well.

It is for this very reason that in Islamic traditions various ways and
techniques have been suggested to fight this abhorrent evil. Here are
some examples:

The Prophet (S) has been quoted who said:

*“Allah dissuaded Musa Ibn Imran from being jealous, saying to him: ‘The
jealous person is furious about the blessings I have bestowed upon My
servants and hinders the distribution of those shares which I have
allocated for My servants. He who does so does not belong to Me nor do I
belong to him’.”*

And a tradition quoted from Imam Sadiq (as) says:

*“The faithful may be envious but are never jealous. However, a
hypocrite exhibits his jealousy but does not envy.”*

This part of the story teaches us that parents should be extraordinarily
vigilant as to how they express affection towards their children, for it
sometimes happens that a simple expression of love towards one child can
create such an inferiority complex in another that it would incite him
to engage in all kinds of ill conduct.

The other child could feel so intensively rejected that he would be
ready to assassinate his brother’s character, not recognizing any kind
of boundary.

Even if he is not in a position to show the appropriate reaction, he
would keep all his troubles to himself, blaming himself inwardly, which
can contribute to the occurrence of mental problems.

### Some Traditions Concerning Jealousy

1) The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“Do not be jealous, do not perform acts of hostility, do not back-bite
or gossip, stay as Allah’s sheep, and act in a brotherly manner towards
each other.”* [^2]

2) Also, he (S) said:

*“The only thing which I am most afraid of about my Ummah is the
multiplication of wealth, for people will become jealous and
consequently kill each other.”* [^3]

3) The holy Prophet (S) told his companions one day:

*“Beware that the disease of the former nations has afflicted you. That
disease is jealousy which does not wipe out the hair, but it can make
one lose his religion.”*[^4]

4) Ali (as) said:

*“A jealous person is always in discomfort and pain, even though his
body may be healthy.”*[^5]

5) Ali (as) also said:

*“Remove jealousy from your heart for jealousy is an exhausting and
exasperating disease.”*[^6]

6) Amir ul Mu’minin Ali (as) said:

*“Jealousy is the worst of diseases.”*[^7]

7) Ali (as) said:

*“Stop being jealous and stop bearing grudges for they disrupt one’s
religion and bring man to destruction”.*

8) Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Be in awe of Allah and do not feel jealous of one another.”*[^8]

9) Ali (as) said:

*“Jealousy makes one’s life bitter and dark.”*[^9]

10) Amir ul Mu’minin Ali (as) in a Tradition said:

*“Jealousy is a cureless disease which will not disappear except with
the annihilation of the jealous person or when the one of whom others
are jealous has passed away.”*[^10]

11) Ali (as) said:

*“The misfortunes of this world and the next is a consequence of one’s
jealousy.”*[^11]

12) Amir ul M’uminin Ali (as) said:

*“The faithful will neither do flatter nor is jealous, save when they
are seeking knowledge.”*[^12]

13) Imam Sadiq (as) quoting his father, said:

*“A man who has stinginess, jealousy and fear within him is not a
faithful believer.”*[^13]

14) Imam Sadiq (as) has been quoted as saying:

*“Jealousy wears away one’s faith the same way as fire consumes
wood.”*[^14]

Surah Yusuf - Verses 11 - 12
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا يَآ أَبَانَا مَالَكَ لاَ تَأْمَنَّا عَلَي يُوسُفَ وَإِنَّا
لَهُ لَنَاصِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَرْسِلْهُ مَعَنَا غَدَاً يَرْتَعْ وَيَلْعَبْ وَإِنَّا لَهُ
لَحَافِظُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***11. “They said: ‘O our father! What cause is with you that you do not
trust us with Yusuf, and verily we are his sincere well-wishers?’”***  
***12. “Send him with us tomorrow to enjoy himself and play, and verily
we shall take every care of him.”***

Jealousy makes one commit such sins as lying and playing dirty tricks
even upon the most favorite of one’s kin. After they had agreed on the
final plot to throw him into the well, the brothers fell to thinking
about how to separate Yusuf from his father.

They came up with another idea. They came to their father, disguising
their true intentions on their faces, and with an innocent tone of
voice, they told him why he did not temporarily separate himself from
Yusuf, and let him be with them instead. They inquired why Jacob did not
trust them with Yusuf to look after their little brother.

The verse says:

***“They said: ‘O our father! What cause is with you that you do not
trust us with Yusuf, and verily we are his sincere well-wishers?’”***

Yusuf’s brothers urged the father to send the young boy with them to
take him outside the town to play and to take benefit of the fresh air
and fruits there. They also mentioned that they would take care of him.

The verse says:

***“Send him with us tomorrow to enjoy himself and play, and verily we
shall take every care of him.”***

The father was put in an awkward position; if he refused their
suggestion, it would make his secret distrust of the brothers public. On
the other hand, Yusuf was attracted by the idea of going out for the
recreation and excitement outside the town.

### Points to Note

Man needs recreation and exercise, and, as one notices in this verse,
the strongest argument which persuaded Ya‘qub to submit to the wishes of
his children, was that Yusuf needed recreation.

It is mentioned in the Islamic narrations that the believer must
allocate a certain period for recreation so that he would be able to
succeed in his other affairs.[^15] Therefore, recreation and healthy
sports are not only allowable in Islam, but they are also highly
recommended.

However, the enemies of Allah in the past, present and in the future,
seek to deviate recreation and sports from their healthy role and
separate the youth from their true objectives. Thus, the youth take
sports too seriously regarding something recreational as a serious
competitive matter, consuming energies that could be put to better and
more creative use.

Worldly oppressors and plot makers not only misuse sports, but also
under any other agreeable and acceptable subject, they always pursue
their evil aims. With the name of diplomat, they send the most dangerous
spies to different countries.

Under the title of military consolers, they plot and obtain the military
secrets. By the name of human’s rights, they support their hired
patrons. With the excuse of medicine, they send arms for their
supporters, and so on.

Surah Yusuf – Verses 13 - 14
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ إِنّي لَيَحْزُنُنِي أَن تَذْهَبُوا بِهِ وَأَخَافُ أَن يَأْكُلَهُ
الذّئْبُ وَأَنتُمْ عَنْهُ غَافِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا لَئِنْ أَكَلَهُ الذّئْبُ وَنَحْنُ عُصْبَةٌ إِنَّآ إِذاً
لَخَاسِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***13. “He said: ‘Verily it saddens me that you should take him away,
and I fear lest the wolf devour him while you are heedless of
him’.”***  
***14. “They said: ‘If the wolf were to devour him while we are a
(strong) group, then we should be losers’.”***

The father was aware of his children’s jealousy and this was why he told
Yusuf that he should not recount his dream to his brothers. However
Jacob (as) did not make any mention of their jealousy, on the contrary,
he raised the issue of the wolf and their probable neglect of Yusuf as a
pretext.

Therefore, in response to their suggestions and without accusing them of
any possible wrong doing, he said that he would be saddened if they took
him with them, because in the surrounding area there might be fierce
wolves, which might probably attack and eat his son while they might be
busy having fun, and neglect him.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘Verily it saddens me that you should take him away, and I
fear lest the wolf devour him while you are heedless of him’.”***

Certainly, the brothers had no clear answer for the first reason which
their father had given, for Yusuf’s departure was such a sorrowful event
to the father that they could not compensate by any means.

It is quite possible that this statement might have enflamed their
jealousy even more.

On the other hand, the father’s answer, from a different perspective,
indicated that eventually a child had to be separated from his father
for the sake of his own development.

They could not and did not give an answer to the first reason, instead.
They focused their attention on the second reason which was more
important to their plans.

They said that they were a powerful group, and it would be they who
would be at a disadvantage if a wolf had attacked him, because the wolf
would have to eat them first, therefore, this could never happen.

In other words, they were never going to allow wolves to eat any of
their brothers and sit by and watch such a thing happen. At any rate,
they made their father submit to their demand through playing all kinds
of tricks and getting Yusuf excited about going by emphasizing the fun
he would have.

The verse says:

***“They said: ‘If the wolf were to devour him while we are a (strong)
group, then we should be losers’.”***

It is interesting to note that just as Yusuf’s brothers utilized his
inherent interest in recreation in order to achieve their objectives,
the enemies of truth and justice also try to employ sports and
recreation to poison the thinking of the new generation.

We must guard ourselves against those evil plots which the wolf–like
superpowers employ under the guise of recreational activities for the
youth.

### Outstanding Points

Give your children independence.

1- The paternal affection unto the child and defending him against
probable dangers are two principles, but the child’s independence is
also another principle.

2- A lie must be avoided to be suggested because people may misuse it.

The Prophet (S) said:

*“Do not suggest a lie and do not open the way of pretext for lying.”*

In Majma‘-ul-Bayan, it says that Ya‘qub feared that the brothers might
kill him though he did not say this directly. He referred to them
metaphorically as wolves, for he had dreamed that wolves had attacked
Yusuf.

When Ya‘qub had mentioned the word “wolves” it occurred to them to use
this as an excuse for their crime. The lesson here is that one should be
careful not to make it easy for others to misuse our words and actions.

The Arabic word /‘usbah/ refers to a strong united group, and they
protect each other on this basis.

Sometimes grown people become disconcerted in the face of danger, but
the youth are proud of their strength and do not take danger seriously:
/wa nahnu ‘usbatun/. While the father was anxious, the children were
proud of their strength.

Surah Yusuf - Verse 15
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا ذَهَبُوا بِهِ وَأَجْمَعُوا أَن يَجْعَلُوهُ فِي غَيَابَتِ
الْجُبّ وَأَوْحَيْنَآ إِلَيْهِ لَتُنَبّئَنَّهُم بِأَمْرِهِمْ هَذَا
وَهُمْ لاَ يَشْعُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***15. “So when they did take him with them, and they agreed to put him
in the bottom of the well, and We revealed unto him: ‘You will certainly
inform them of this deed of theirs while they know (you) not’.”***

At the sensitive times, Allah’s help comes unto the saints of Allah. The
best means of calmness for Yusuf, when he was at the bottom of well, was
Allah’s inspiration due to his bright future and his deliverance.

The brothers had gone to sleep that night, confident that their plot
would go according to their plan the following day. Their only anxiety
was that their father might rue, and reverse his saying.

The next morning they went to their father and he entrusted Yusuf to
their care giving them advice on how they should take care of their
little brother. They expressed their appreciation for the advice and,
taking him up gently and respectfully in front of their father, set off
with Yusuf.

It is said that the father escorted them to the gates of the town and
held Yusuf for the last time, embracing him while drops of tears rolled
down his cheeks. Then he deposited him in their care and departed with a
sorrowful heart.

As long as they were in sight of Jacob, they would fondle and caress
Yusuf, pretending that they really cared for him. But when they were out
of sight of their father, they began beating and kicking him, showing
their true colors and jealousy of the little innocent boy. He implored
the protection of one brother from the other, but all were of one cruel
mind.[^16]

In one narration it is said that when Yusuf was crying during their
mistreatment of him or when they were about to throw him into the well,
he suddenly started laughing to his brothers’ astonishment.

Then he manifested the secret of this laughter and taught then a great
lesson when he said:

*“I shall never forget that once I used to be happy to look at you, my
powerful brothers with strong arms and extraordinary bodily strength. I
used to say to myself that I had no reason to worry about anything when
I had so many powerful companions to rely on.*

*I was then sure of your protection and confident in your support. Now,
I am at your mercy, while I am being maltreated by you I am seeking the
protection of each you from the other and none of you may give me any
support.*

*Allah has taught me the lesson that I must not rely upon anyone except
Him alone.”*

At any rate, the Qur’an says that they unanimously agreed to throw him
into the well and before this they inflicted as much tyranny and cruelty
on him as was possible. It says:

***“So when they did take him with them, and they agreed to put him in
the bottom of the well...”***

To console him, it was revealed to Yusuf that he should not grieve for a
day would come when he would make them all aware of their evil designs
while they did not recognize him.

That was not a Divine revelation revealed as a prophet’s revelation, but
it was an aspiration to the heart of Yusuf. It was for Yusuf to know
that he was not alone and that he had guardians who took care of him.
This revelation shone the light of peace and hope on his heart,
expelling the darkness of frustration and despair from his soul.

The verse says:

***“…and We revealed unto him: ‘You will certainly inform them of this
deed of theirs while they know (you) not’.”***

Surah Yusuf - Verse 16
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَآءُوا أَبَاهُمْ عِشَآءً يَبْكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***16. “And they came to their father at nightfall, weeping.”***

Crying is not always sincere nor a sign of honesty. Do not trust every
type of crying and weeping.

Conspirators do not neglect to take into consideration the role of
feelings and timing.

Yusuf’s brothers had executed their plot flawlessly as they had planned
and desired against him. Now, they had to think about their return,
their father’s questions and how to make him believe their lies.

The lie they cooked up, which we will see later on in the commentary on
the next verse, was the very same fear which their father had expressed
and predicted, proclaiming that Yusuf was eaten by wolves.

The Qur’an says that the brothers went to their father at night, crying.
This kind of crying is deceiving and pretentious which shows us that
someone might cry without a valid and honest reason and therefore we
cannot conclude that someone is in trouble simply by looking at the
tears in his eyes.

The verse says:

***“And they came to their father at nightfall, weeping.”***

There are four types of weeping in the Qur’an:

1- The tears shed out of joy: Some Christians, when listening to the
chanting of the Qur’an used to shed tears.

The Qur’an says:

***“And when they hear what has been sent down to the Messenger, you see
their eyes overflowing with tears because of what they recognize of the
Truth...”***[^17]

2- The tears shed out of sorrow: For example, when some Muslims heard
that it was not possible for them to join the advance forces of the army
of the Sublime Prophet (S), they shed tears.

The Qur’an says:

***“…and their eyes overflowed with tears of sorrow, for they did not
find that which they should spend.”*** [^18]

3- The tears shed out of fear: For example, whenever certain verses of
the Qur’an were read to the men of Allah, they would fall in prostration
and cry.

***“…When the revelations of the Beneficent (Allah) were recited unto
them, they fell down prostrating and weeping.”***[^19]

In another occurrence the Qur’an says:

***“And they fall down on their faces weeping, and it adds to their
humility.”***[^20]

4- Tears shed to deceive and mislead: An example of this is reflected in
Yusuf’s brothers coming to Ya‘qub, in tears, to try to falsely prove and
convince him that a wolf had torn apart the body of their brother.

***“…Weeping.”***

Surah Yusuf - Verse 17
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا يَآ أَبَانَآ إِنَّا ذَهَبْنَا نَسْتَبِقُ وَتَرَكْنَا يُوسُفَ
عِندَ مَتَاعِنَا فَاَكَلَهُ الذّئْبُ وَمَآ أَنتَ بِمُؤْمِنٍ لَنَا
وَلَوْ كُنَّا صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. “They said: ‘O’ our father! Verily we went off racing and left
Yusuf with our things; then the wolf devoured him. But thou will never
believe us even though we be truthful’.”***

The brothers told three consecutive lies to justify their fault. They
said they had gone tracing; they left Yusuf with their things and a wolf
devoured him.

Waiting impatiently to receive his beloved son, the father was struck
with fear and concern on seeing them return without Yusuf, he was afraid
that his worst fears had been realized. Naturally, Ya‘qub asked them why
Yusuf had not returned with them.

They said that they had gone racing (horse–riding and the like) and
since Yusuf was too young and could not participate, they left him with
their belongings. They were so occupied with racing that they forgot
about everything else, even their younger brother whom they had left
looking after their things. It was at that time that the vicious wolf
came and tore him apart.

The verse says:

***“They said: ‘O’ our father! Verily we went off racing and left Yusuf
with our things; then the wolf devoured him...”***

This was the truth of the matter they said, but, they told their father
that he would never believe them, because Jacob had already predicted
such a thing would happen, and thus he might regard their claims as a
pretext.

The verse says:

***“…But thou will never believe us even though we be truthful’.”***

To explain Yusuf’s absence, as it was referred at the beginning, the
brothers told three consecutive lies: They left Yusuf with their
belongings, they went off to race with each other, and the wolf came and
ate him.

### Traditions upon Lie

There are numerous Islamic traditions about lying, a few of which are
listed below:

1) Imam Rida (as) said:

*“Keep away from major sins, which consist of: Killing someone the
shedding of whose blood is forbidden, fornication, theft, lying,
arrogance and extravagance.”*[^21]

2) It is narrated from Allah’s Prophet (S) who said:

*“Abstain from lying for it seduces (man) to commit sins which in turn
lead him to Hellfire.”*[^22]

3) Imam Hasan ‘Askari (as) has been quoted to have said:

*“All corruptions are assembled in one house, the key of which is
lying”*[^23]*.*

That is, man’s lying leads him to commit other sins.

4) The sublime Prophet told Abuthar Ghaffari:

*“O’ Abuthar! Woe be unto him who tells lies in order to make others
laugh! Woe be unto him! Woe be unto him! Woe be unto him! Woe be unto
him!”*[^24]

5) Imam Sadiq (as) has been narrated who said:

*“Allah’s Prophet (S) said: ‘The worst type of quotation is quoting a
lie’.”*[^25]

6) Ali (as) has said:

*“The end of telling a lie is self–blame and feeling sorry for
oneself.”*[^26]

7) The sublime Prophet (S) said to Ali (as):

*“O Ali! Abstain from lying, for it brings shame. Then one would be
reported as a liar to Allah.”*[^27]

8) The holy Prophet (S) remarked:

*“He who bears false witness against a Muslim or the person sheltered by
Islam, or an individual in the society, would be hanged by his tongue on
the Day of Resurrection, and would be cast along with the hypocrites
into the lowest level of Hell.”* [^28]

9) Ali (as) said:

*“The consequence of lying is meanness in this world and torment in the
Hereafter.”*[^29]

10) The sublime Prophet (S) said:

*“Lying is one of the gateways to hypocrisy.”*[^30]

Surah Yusuf - Verse 18
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَآءُوا عَلَي قَميِصِهِ بِدَمٍ كَذِبٍ قَالَ بَلْ سَوَّلَتْ لَكُمْ
أَنْفُسُكُمْ أَمْراً فَصَبْرٌ جَمِيلٌ وَاللَّهُ الْمُسْتَعَانُ عَلَي
مَاتَصِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***18. “And they brought his shirt with false blood on it. He said: ‘No,
your (guilty) selves have made a matter light for you. (For me) patience
is good; and Allah is He Whose help is to be sought against what you
describe’.”***

Patience for Allah’s determinations is good. But how is it good that one
has to keep his patience in a situation where cruelty has been inflicted
upon an innocent child, when Jacob says:

***“for me patience is good”?***

### An Answer to the Question

First, Ya‘qub knew that Yusuf was still alive, because he knew this fact
through revelation.

Secondly, if he behaved differently, he might have made them more
suspicious and they might then rush back to the hiding place, the well,
and kill the little boy.

The third point is that one should not act in such a way as to obstruct
another’s way to repentance, even if that person is as cruel as those
brothers were.

They brought Yusuf’s shirt to him, stained with false blood to prove
that he was killed.

However, as liars have poor memories, they had been neglectful to tear
the shirt apart in several places at least as would have been the case
if he had been really attacked by a wolf. They had simply taken it off
and brought it to him.

Ya‘qub was quite a perceptive and experienced man; he took one look at
the shirt and understood that the whole story had been made up. He
bluntly told them that they were lying, that their selfish and egoistic
passions had put them up to doing such a satanic and dreadful deed.

The verse says:

***“And they brought his shirt with false blood on it. He said: ‘No,
your (guilty) selves have made a matter light for you...”***

In some narrations we read that he took the shirt and turned it inside
out and asked:

*“Why is it that I do not see any traces of the wolf’s teeth and claws
on it?”*

According to another narration, he took the shirt and covered his face
with it and while he was weeping, he said:

*“What kind of wolf was it that had eaten up my son but did not do any
damage to his shirt?”*

Then he lost consciousness and fell to the ground like a dry piece of
wood. Until late at night when the cold breeze of midnight caused him to
recover his senses.

Although he felt the burning anguish of the loss of his son at the
bottom of his heart, he never uttered a single word of ingratitude
towards Allah. Instead he said he would wait patiently, with the kind of
patience that was beautiful and rely upon Allah.

The verse continues saying:

***“…(For me) patience is good;...”***

The hearts of the men of Allah are centers of compassion and it is not
surprising that when he separated from his son Ya‘qub shed abundant
tears for him which is natural. Nevertheless, despite his emotional
distress, he did not lose his self control, and did not say anything
against the consent of Allah.

Then Jacob remarked that he would ask Allah to help him for what they
said and he would seek Him to give him more ability so that he could
stand firm in front of that terrible storm and not to lose his
self-control and not to pollute his tongue with any improper word. The
verse in this regard says:

***“…and Allah is He Whose help is to be sought against what you
describe’.”***

### Explanations

1- The best type of patience is that in which, despite one’s profound
sorrow and ardent yearning, one does not forget Allah and relies upon
Divine assistance.

2- Satan, as well as the despotic soul, may present sin as something
attractive to man and provide a justification for him to commit that
sin.

3- Do not be duped by the deceptive pretensions of people. Ya‘qub did
not let himself be fooled by Yusuf’s blood–stained shirt and his
brothers’ tears, rather he said:

***“No, your (guilty) selves have made a matter light for you.”***

4- Imam Sadiq (as) has been quoted as saying that when Yusuf was thrown
down the well, Gabriel came to him and said:

*“What are you doing here?”*

He answered:

*“My brothers have thrown me down this well.”*

Gabriel asked:

*“Do you want to be saved from the well?”*

He answered:

*“It is Allah Who will take me out if He wishes.”*

He said:

*“Your Lord has commanded that you recite this prayer, and you get
out.”*

He asked:

*“What prayer?”*

He answered:

*“Say: O’ Allah: I ask You Whose is all praise, and there is no god but
You; You are the* *bestower* *of blessings (upon Your servants), the
Creator of the heavens and the earth and the Owner of Glory and
Benevolence. I ask You to send Your blessings upon Muhammad and his
descendents and appoint the wherewithal for me to be saved from the
plight I am in.”*

However, as soon as a caravan of camels arrived, Yusuf was rescued from
the well.

Surah Yusuf - Verse 19
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَآءَتْ سَيَّارَةٌ فَاَرْسَلُوا وَارِدَهُمْ فَاَدْلَي دَلْوَهُ قَالَ
يَا بُشْرَي هَذَا غُلامٌ وَاَسَرُّوهُ بِضَاعَةً وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ
بِمَا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***19. “Then there came a caravan (of travelers). They sent their
water-drawer (for water) and he let down his bucket. He said: ‘O’ good
news! This is a youth.’ So they hid him as a merchandise; while Allah is
aware of what they do.”***

Allah never leaves his sincere servants alone and saves them whenever
they are entangled in hardships. He guided Noah to safety on the surface
of water, he rescued Yunus from underneath the water, and He rescued
Yusuf from the bottom of the well, the same way He saved ’Ibrahim from
within the fire.

He guided Moses to safety through the middle of the sea, He protected
Muhammad (S) in the cave, and Ali (as) during the night fixed for the
execution of the conspiracy (Laylat-ul-Mabit), when he slept in place of
the Prophet (S).

Whenever Allah wills, He acts and it is without the consent of man.

For instance, Hadrat Musa (as) went to fetch a fire, and returned with
prophetic revelations. The caravan also went to draw water to replenish
their supply, in the process they saved Yusuf and returned with him.

Due to Allah’s will, the ropes became a means for Yusuf to climb up from
the bottom of the well and ascend the throne. From this one should heed
the things that can happen through the rope of Allah.

When those near to one do not provide the support needed, Allah provides
that support using others. His brothers abandoned him, but a caravan of
strangers arrived and gave him help.

Yusuf had a hard time down there at the bottom of the well in that
terrible darkness, but his faith in Allah and the peace and comfort,
which that faith provided, gave him a ray of hope that made him tolerate
that awful loneliness and thus remain unshaken throughout the ordeal.

Allah knows how many days passed after this event, however, a caravan
arrived and stopped there to draw water, a primary need for the caravan
in that arid climate.

They sent the man responsible for maintaining their water supplies to
get the water and he let his bucket down the well with a rope. From the
bottom of the well Yusuf saw the bucket with the rope coming down
rapidly towards him, he seized this Divine opportunity and clung to the
rope.

The verse says:

***“Then there came a caravan (of travelers). They sent their
water-drawer (for water) and he let down his bucket...”***

The water–carrier felt his bucket over weighted and quickly hauled it
up. As soon as he brought it up, his eyes fell upon a handsome little
boy. He exclaimed: “***Good tidings***,” instead of water, it was a
beautiful boy.

Some members of the caravan also took note but hid the news from the
others in order to sell the boy as a slave in Egypt. They said that that
beautiful boy was given by the owner of the well in order that they
could sell him as a merchandise in Egypt. But Allah was well aware of
what they were doing.

The verse continues saying:

***“…He said: ‘O’ good news! This is a youth.’ So they hid him as a
merchandise; while Allah is aware of what they do.”***

Surah Yusuf - Verse 20
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَشَرَوْهُ بِثَمَنٍ بَخْسٍ دَرَاهِمَ مَعْدُودَةٍ وَكَانُوا فِيهِ مِنَ
الزَّاهِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***20. “And they sold him for a small price, of a few dirhams counted
out, and in him they had no interest.”***

They sold Yusuf cheap, for a few dirhams. This is not so surprising, for
a common rule among thieves, or those who underhandedly acquire a
valuable property, is to promptly sell their easily gotten merchandise
usually quickly, for the fear that others may become aware and apprehend
them.

The verse says:

***“And they sold him for a small price, of a few dirhams counted
out...”***

Naturally, when someone intends to sell something in a hurry, he cannot
obtain a fair price for his goods.

At the end of the verse Allah says:

***“…and in him they had no interest.”***

[^1]: Bihar ul ’Anwar, vol. 14, p. 78.

[^2]: Majmu‘ah Warram, p. 81.

[^3]: Mahjjat ul Bayda’, vol. 5, p. 326.

[^4]: Bihar ul-’Anwar, vol. 70, p. 253.

[^5]: Mustadrak ul Wasa’il vol. 2 p. 328.

[^6]: Ibid

[^7]: Ghurar ul Hikam, vol. 1, P. 15

[^8]: Safinat ul Bihar, vol. 1, p. 251.

[^9]: Mastadrak-ul-Wasa’il, vol.2, p.328

[^10]: Ghurar ul Hikam, vol. 1, p. 79.

[^11]: Mastadrak-ul-Wasa’il, vol.2, p.328

[^12]: Tuhaf ul ‘Uqul, p. 928.

[^13]: Safinat-ul-Bihar, vol. 1, p. 251

[^14]: Ibid

[^15]: Hikmat 390, Nahjul Balaqah.

[^16]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan

[^17]: Surah Al-Ma\`idah, No. 5, verse 83.

[^18]: Surah Al-Taubah, No. 9, verse 92.

[^19]: Surah Maryam, No. 19, verse 58.

[^20]: Surah Al-Isra’, No. 17, verse 109

[^21]: Uyun ’Akhbar ul-Riza, vol. 2, p.137.

[^22]: Mustdrak-ul-wasael , vol.2 , p.100.

[^23]: Bihar ul ’Anwar , vol. 72 , p.263.

[^24]: Makarim al Akhlaq, p.47.

[^25]: Bihar ul Anwar, vol.72 , p.259.

[^26]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, vol.4 , p.363.

[^27]: Bihar al Anwar , vol.77, p.67.

[^28]: Wasa\`il al Shia , vol.18, p.237, hadith 6.

[^29]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, vol. 3, p. 332

[^30]: Majmu‘at ul-Warram , vol.1 , p.113.


