Section 3: Yusuf’s Firmness in Piety Against the Great Temptation
=================================================================

Surah Yusuf - Verse 21
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الَّذِي اشْتَرَاهُ مِن مِصْرَ لإِمْرَأَتِهِ أَكْرِمِي
مَثْوَاهُ عَسَي أَن يَنفَعَنَآ أَوْ نَتَّخِذَهُ وَلَداً وَكَذَلِكَ
مَكَّنَّا لِيُوسُفَ فِي الأَرْضِ وَلِنُعَلّمَهُ مِن تَأْوِيلِ
الاَحَادِيثِ وَاللَّهُ غَالِبٌ عَلَي أَمْرِهِ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ
النَّاسِ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***21. “And he of Egypt who bought him said to his wife: ‘Receive him
honorably, maybe he will profit us, or we shall adopt him as a son.’
Thus did We establish Yusuf in the land, and that We might teach him the
interpretation of tales (dreams). And Allah is predominant over His
affair; but most people do not know.”***

The adventurous story of Yusuf and his brothers, which culminated in
them throwing him down the bottom of the well, came to an end and a new
chapter in the life of this small boy began in Egypt.

Yusuf was eventually taken to Egypt and, according to the usual
procedure, he was put up for sale. Evidently he was seen as a valuable
piece of property and was sold to the ‘Aziz (the Great One) of Egypt who
enjoyed a high rank in the Pharaoh’s court, very much like the position
of Prime Minister today.

The holy Qur’an implies that the ‘Aziz of Egypt, who had bought him,
told his wife to receive Yusuf honorably and not treat him as a slave
for he might be useful to them or else they could adopt him as their
son.

It says:

***“And he of Egypt who bought him said to his wife: ‘Receive him
honorably, maybe he will profit us, or we shall adopt him as a
son.’...”***

One can conclude from this sentence that the ‘Aziz had no children and
aspired to have one. As soon as his eyes fell upon the beautiful and
dignified boy, he was immediately attracted to him and thought that he
could fill the role of a son for him.

Then the Qur’an in this holy verse continues saying:

***“…Thus did We establish Yusuf in the land...”***

After that, the verse also adds that this opportunity was made available
in order to teach him the interpretation of tales. It says:

***“…and that We might teach him the interpretation of tales
(dreams)...”***

The “***interpretation of tales***” here signifies the art of
interpreting dreams through which Yusuf could have access to any
important secret of the future.

At the end of the verse, the Qur’an says:

***“…And Allah is predominant over His affair; but most people do not
know.”***

Surah Yusuf - Verse 22
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمَّا بَلَغَ أَشُدَّهُ ءَاتَيْنَاهُ حُكْماً وَعِلْماً وَكَذَلِكَ
نَجْزِي الْمُـحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***22. “And when he reached his prime (maturity), We gave him wisdom and
knowledge. And thus do We reward the doers of good.”***

The Arabic term /ašudda/ is derived from /šadd/ meaning a firm knot
which, in this verse, denotes bodily and spiritual development. This
word is also sometimes used in the Qur’an to mean maturity, as in verse
34 of the Surah Al ’Isra’, No. 17 which says:

***“Do not approach the orphan’s property until he attains his
maturity...”.***

Sometimes, the term is used to mean attaining the age of forty as in
verse 15 of the Surah Al Ahqaf No. 46 where it says:

***“…until when he attains his maturity and reaches forty years…”***

Sometimes it refers to the peak of one’s development and strength before
old age as in verse 67 in Surah Ghafir No. 40 The Qur’an says:

***“…then He brings you forth as a child, then that you may attain your
maturity, then that you may be old...”***

Gradually Yusuf became acquainted with the problems besetting this new
environment which was in fact an important political center of Egypt.

On the one hand, he would notice the fabulous palaces of the Egyptian
aristocracy with their unlimited wealth, and on the other, the misery of
the slave market and the suffering imposed upon the common people.

At the same time he was engaged in self–actualization and purification
of his soul. The Qur’an implies that Allah gave Yusuf wisdom and
knowledge.

The verse says:

***“And when he reached his prime (maturity), We gave him wisdom and
knowledge...”***

The purpose of employing the words /hukman wa ‘ilma/ (wisdom and
knowledge), in the above verse, is that Allah had bestowed the rank of
prophecy upon Yusuf as soon as he had developed physically and
spiritually.

His physical maturity was crowned by the gift of /hukm/wisdom,
understanding, and the power of correct discrimination which is free of
egoistic influences and mistakes. The term ‘knowledge’ is employed here
to mean the awareness which is associated with wisdom.

The gifts of “hukm” and “‘ilm” were two valuable Divine favors which
were bestowed upon Yusuf for his virtue, patience, righteousness, and
trust, since those sincere believers who can control their restive
desires in the field of struggle of soul are divinely given some merits
out of knowledge and sciences which are far beyond any material
criteria.

The verse continues saying:

***“…And thus do We reward the doers of good.”***

Surah Yusuf - Verse 23
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَاوَدَتْهُ الَّتِي هُوَ فِي بَيْتِهَا عَن نَفْسِهِ وَغَلَّقَتِ
الاَبَوْابَ وَقَالَتْ هَيْتَ لَكَ قَالَ مَعَاذَ اللَّهِ إِنَّهُ رَبّي
أَحْسَنَ مَثْوَايَ إِنَّهُ لاَ يُفْلِحُ الظَّالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***23. “And the woman, in whose house he was, sought to seduce him from
his self and she closed the doors and said: ‘Come here’. He said ‘I seek
refuge in Allah! Verily He is my Lord. He made good my abode. Verily the
unjust do not prosper’.”***

Two possibilities have been advanced for the interpretation of the
Qur’anic phrase: /’innahu rabbi ’ahsana mawaya/ (verily He is my Lord.
He made good my abode).

A- It is the Almighty, my Lord, Who has honored my position and I seek
refuge in Him.

B- The ‘Aziz is my lord who has honored me as his guest and he told you
about me to give me a good abode, and I will not betray him.

Both possibilities have their own advocates which they support with
their own documentations.

We are of the opinion that the first theory is more acceptable, for
Yusuf did not commit sin because of his Divinely bestowed virtue, and
not simply because he was staying in the palace of ‘Aziz and that being
indebted to him, he could not violate the wife of ‘Aziz.

Such a scenario requires much less virtue that that required for the
fear of Allah. Certainly, we see allusions made several times to the
word /rabbika/ in this Surah which refers to the ‘Aziz. However, the use
of the term /rabbi/, which is used in this sentence refers to Allah.

Moreover, it is not in consonance with Yusuf’s position and character to
lower himself to such an extent to call the ‘Aziz /rabbi/ “my lord”.

Not only had Yusuf attracted the ‘Aziz to himself with his Divine beauty
and conduct, but he had also completely conquered the heart of his wife,
Zulaykha, as well. With the passage of time, her love for him grew to
great heights but Yusuf, who was righteous and self–abstaining, thought
of no one but Allah, and his heart was always filled with the love of
Allah.

Other factors also helped to inflame Zulaykha’s burning desire for him.

On the one hand, she was childless and lived a luxurious and
aristocratic life, and on the other hand, she had no domestic conflicts
or problems in her life which left her with ample time to engage in
fantasy and plan schemes.

Her weak faith and lack of ethical virtues left her in the grip of her
satanic lust and passions which eventually led her to decide to take
action in order to realize the pleasure she was seeking.

So, to obtain her wish and reaching her aim, she applied all means and
methods she could. By asking and requesting him, she tried to gain his
heart and make him agree, as the Qur’an says:

***“And the woman in whose house he was, sought, to seduce him from his
self...”***

Finally, it came to her one day to entrap him in a secluded place in the
house. She used every possible means to tempt and excite him, putting on
the most attractive clothing, make up and the best scented perfumes. She
set the scene so that to bring Yusuf to his knees.

The Qur’an says that she locked all the doors securely, telling him to
come and take her. The verse says:

***“…and she closed the doors and said: ‘Come here.’...”***

Here was this very attractive woman, alone with him in a locked room,
with no one else aware of what was going on. Or so she thought that, by
this circumstance, she might make him understand that no one was able to
penetrate into inside and he would not be worry.

Yusuf saw the whole thing was wrong and sinful from the beginning, he
was trapped, it seemed that he had no other option open to him. To her
insistent demands, when all seemed lost, he simply replied,

***“I seek refuge in Allah.”***

By saying this he both confessed to the oneness of Allah, and to the
practical aspect of this belief. All things being equal, how could he
possibly have submitted to such a request, while he was still living in
the house of the ‘Aziz and eating from his generous pocket, and who
provided him with many favors regarding him in great esteem?

The verse says:

***“…Verily He is my Lord. He made good my abode...”***

Yusuf continues saying whether that was not a manifest injustice and a
treachery and certainly the unjust will not be prosperous.

The verse says:

***“…Verily the unjust do not prosper.”***

### Messages

1. Do not leave young men alone in the houses where there are forbidden
women who are not virtuous, since the situation may result in a
passionate involvement with each other.

2. Capital sins first begin gradually with lax rules of social
intercourse and free association. Therefore, shun association between
forbidden men and women in secluded places as it paves the way for
sinful behavior.

3. The sin of adultery has been established as a sin throughout history,
and it was for this reason that Zulaykha securely fastened all the doors
to the room.

4. The best kind of Islamic virtue is to keep oneself from committing
sin for the sake of the favor, affection and right of Allah, and not
because of the fear of scandal in this world or out of the fear of Hell
Fire in the Hereafter.

5. Every door might often be closed but the door for those seeking
shelter with Allah always remains open.

6. Keeping Allah in mind is a factor that hinders us from committing sin
and error.

7. Adultery, fornication and conspiring against innocent youth are
considered as tyranny against oneself, one’s own spouse and the members
of society.

8. One must not obey any authority of any rank if it orders us to commit
sins, because the immaculate Imam (as) said:

*“Do not obey a created (man) in disobeying the Creator.”*[^1]

9. One moment’s sin puts a great distance between man and salvation.

Surah Yusuf - Verse 24
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ هَمَّتْ بِهِ وَهَمَّ بِهَا لَوْلآ أَن رَءَا بُرْهَانَ رَبّهِ
كَذَلِكَ لِنَصْرِفَ عَنْهُ السُّوءَ وَالْفَحْشَآءَ إِنَّهُ مِنْ
عِبَادِنَا الْمُـخْلَصِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***24. “And indeed she desired him, and he would have desired her if he
had not seen the evidence of his Lord. Thus (it was) that We turned away
from him evil and indecency. Verily he was (one) of Our chosen servants,
(sincere and purified).”***

Imam Sadiq (as) has said that /burhanu rabbi/ (a Sign from my Lord), is
identical with the light of knowledge, certainty and wisdom which Allah
has said in a phrase of the previous verses:

***“We gave him wisdom and knowledge”*** and whatever has been mentioned
in some narrations which claim that the “***Sign from his Lord***” means
his witnessing the face of his father or that of Gabriel does not have a
firm chain of transmission.

At any rate, if Divine assistance is absent, everyone is liable to
commit mistakes. However, Allah protects His sincere subjects.

The incident with the wife of the ‘Aziz is a very sensitive issue. The
holy Qur’an indicates her powerful sensuality and attractiveness when it
says that she was about to seduce him and had it not been for Allah’s
evidence which Yusuf had noticed, he would have fallen into her arms.

The verse says:

***“And indeed she desired him, and he would have desired her if he had
not seen the evidence of his Lord...”***

Yusuf was a young man and not yet married, and he was confronting an
extremely exciting sexual situation for the first time, with all these
frailties he would have succumbed and given in, had it not been for the
sake of Allah’s evidence.

That is, had it not been for Allah’s evidence, which means the essence
of faith, piety, training, and, finally, the rank of inerrancy, it seems
that he would have succumbed to the temptation despite his core of
faith, virtue and chastity.

This interpretation has been concisely expressed in a noble narration
from Imam Rida (as) where Ma’mun, the Abbasid caliph, asked the Imam:

*“Aren’t you one who believes that the prophets are immaculate?”*

He answered:

*“Yes”.*

Then Ma’mun asked:

*“Then what is the interpretation of this Qur’anic verse, which says:*

***“And indeed she desired him, and he would have desired her if he had
not seen the evidence of his Lord...”***

The Imam (as) answered:

*“The wife of the ‘Aziz decided to gratify her desire with Yusuf and
were it not for the evidence of Allah which Yusuf witnessed, he would
also have decided the same way she had decided.*

*However, he was an immaculate person and such a person never intends to
commit sin and never seeks to engage in sinful acts.*[^2]

Ma’mun said:

*“Well done O ’Abul Hassan!”*

Let us turn to the commentary of the rest of the verse. The Glorious
Qur’an implies that Allah (s.w.t.) showed Yusuf His evidence in order to
divert him from evil and indecency, for he was one of His sincere and
purified servants.

The verse says:

***“…Thus (it was) that We turned away from him evil and
indecency...”***

The reason for this was, as Allah says, that:

***“…Verily he was (one) of Our chosen servants, (sincere and
purified).”***

In this verse, allusion is made to the fact that He had sent invisible
Divine assistance to rescue him from falling into evil and sin. This
kind of Divine assistance, which comes during moments of trouble and
crisis, is not confined to the prophets, such as Yusuf. They can also
cover those sincere servants of Allah among ordinary people as well, who
also deserve such favors.

### Solemnity in Statement

One of the amazing things about the Qur’an, which is also one of its
miracles, is its solemnity and its use of respectable language. That is,
it never uses indecent words or concepts.

It’s speech is never in keeping with the ordinary and illiterate
individuals, in the environment of ignorance, but at the same time, it
is accessible to all, using a language that the ordinary men and the
intellectual can understand.

Among all the biographies mentioned in the Qur’an, there is only one
real love story which is the story of Yusuf and Zulaykha.

This story explains the ardent love of a beautiful sensual woman unto a
handsome youth, but pure.

However, the Qur’an has beautifully combined precision in expression
with solemnity and chastity, and despite the fact that it talks about
affairs of the heart, it has utilized the principles of piety, morals
and respect without being paralysed in the process.

Surah Yusuf - Verse 25
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاسْتَبَقَا الْبَابَ وَقَدَّتْ قَمِيصَهُ مِن دُبُرٍ وَأَلْفَيَا
سَيّدَهَا لَدَي الْبَابِ قَالَتْ مَا جَزَآءُ مَنْ أَرَادَ بِاَهْلِكَ
سُوءاً إِلآَّ أَن يُسْجَنَ أَوْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***25. “And they both raced to the door and she tore his shirt form the
back. They both found her husband by the door. She said: ‘What is the
punishment for him who intends evil to your wife save he be imprisoned
or a painful chastisement?’”***

The Arabic word /’istibaq/ means one or several persons racing with each
other; and the term /qadda/ signifies to be torn apart lengthwise. The
word /lafa’/ refers to the sudden finding of something.

Yusuf’s firm resistance almost made Zulaykha lose hope. But Yusuf, who
had won against the restive low desires in the course of confrontation
with that beautiful woman who burned with desire for him, felt he would
not be out of danger if he remained in that situation, so he bolted for
the door.

Zulaykha, not to be outmaneuvered, took off after him, as the verse
indicates, they both raced towards the door, and not being able to catch
up to him, she reached out for his shirt to pull him back and tore it
from the back. Yusuf did eventually make it to the door, and, on opening
it, they came face to face with the ‘Aziz.

The verse says:

***“And they both raced to the door and she tore his shirt form the
back. They both found her husband by the door...”***

The need to protect herself from scandal and the desire to punish Yusuf
for rejecting her advances flooded her thoughts. Putting on a specious
face, she looked at her husband with a straight face and accused Yusuf
of having evil designs against her, and sought his punishment by prison
or a grievous chastisement.

The verse says:

***“…She said: ‘What is the punishment for him who intends evil to your
wife save he be imprisoned or a painful chastisement?’”***

Surah Yusuf - Verse 26
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ هِيَ رَاوَدَتْنِي عَن نَفْسِي وَشَهِدَ شَاهِدٌ مِنْ أَهْلِهَآ
إِن كَانَ قَمِيصُهُ قُدَّ مِن قُبُلٍ فَصَدَقَتْ وَهُوَ مِنَ
الْكَاذِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***26. “He said: ‘She (it was who) sought to seduce me from my (pure)
self,’ and a witness from her own family bore witness, ‘If it be that
his shirt is torn from the front, then she speaks the truth and he is of
the liars’.”***

Some narrations say that the witness was a child who, like Jesus (as),
spoke from inside the cradle, but since this report is not well
documented it cannot be disregarded.

It might be better to think of the witness as one of the counselors of
the ‘Aziz who was a relative of his wife and who was fairly intelligent
that, like ‘Aziz, saw the situation.

This “witness” however, did not actually witness the main event, because
if he did himself, he would not have used the conditional sentence and
circumstantial evidence to make a judgment, therefore the word “witness”
is used to describe him as a referee.

At first, Yusuf said nothing, and perhaps if the wife of the ‘Aziz did
not speak out accusing him with a flagrant lie, her reputation would not
have been damaged by the saying:

***“She it was (who) sought to seduce me…”***

However, once she had made her accusations, Yusuf did not see any wisdom
in continuing to hold his tongue, he had to defend himself which meant
disclosing the truth where she was concerned, so he said that it was she
who was the one who was doing the seducing.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘She (it was who) sought to seduce me from my (pure) self,’
and a witness from her own family bore witness...”***

Obviously, it is hard to believe at first that the unmarried male slave
in the prime of his young manhood would be the one who was innocent and
the older married woman who was apparently noble, would be the one with
the sinful character. Thus, there would have been a greater tendency to
accuse Yusuf in this connection than the wife of the ‘Aziz.

As Allah is always an advocate of those who are upright and good, He
would not allow this pious abstemious man to be the object of false
accusations.

Thus, as the Qur’an says a witness from among her very own household
suggested that the true culprit would be determined by looking at the
way the shirt was torn, that if it were torn from the front, it would
indicate that she was right and he would be the liar.

The verse says:

***“…‘If it be that his shirt is torn from the front, then she speaks
the truth and he is of the liars’.”***

Surah Yusuf - Verse 27
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن كَانَ قَمِيصُهُ قُدَّ مِن دُبُرٍ فَكَذَبَتْ وَهُوَ مِنَ
الصَّادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***27. “And if his shirt is torn from the back, then she tells a lie,
and he is of the truthful (ones).”***

In the story of Yusuf, his shirt plays a decisive role. In one part of
the story, his shirt, being torn from behind, provides good evidence to
prove his innocence and leads to the establishment of Zulaykha’s guilt.

This incident is a good example of the application of criminological
investigation in establishing guilt. In another part of the story the
shirt also plays a pivotal role, the fact that it was not torn apart by
a wolf indicated to the father that the brothers had played foul with
Yusuf and had fabricated a lie to cover it up.

At the end of the story, the shirt once more plays a major part,
becoming the means whereby the father regains his eyesight.

However, generally the application of the proper methods of recognition
of crime is necessary for finding the crime and the criminal.

That was why the witness said:

***“And if his shirt is torn from the back, then she tells a lie, and he
is of the truthful (ones).”***

The witness was one of the relatives of the wife of the ‘Aziz, as
indicated by the phrase /min ahliha/. He was a wise, knowledgeable and
intelligent man, and it is said that he had been one of the counselors
and consultants of the ‘Aziz, who was accompanying ‘Aziz at that moment.

Surah Yusuf - Verse 28
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا رَءَا قَمِيصَهُ قُدَّ مِن دُبُرٍ قَالَ إِنَّهُ مِن
كَيْدِكُنَّ إِنَّ كَيْدَكُنَّ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***28. “So when he (the ‘Aziz) saw his shirt was torn from behind, he
said: ‘Verily it is of the guile of you women! Truly, your guile is
great’.”***

The Qur’anic terms /kayda kunna/ (your guile) here means: ‘to accuse
some guiltless people while hiding one’s own guilt and swiftly
dissociating it from oneself without having the slightest anxiety’.

The Qur’an regards the Satan’s tricks as weak, but the guile of women
have been mentioned as great in this verse. According to the
‘Tafsir-us-Safi’, it is because the satanic guile is momentary,
invisible and acted in a subtle way, whereas the guile of women is acted
along with delicacy, and affection, which are both focused and
continuous.

Allah sometimes accomplishes major tasks by means of some small things.

For example: ’Abraha was defeated by the birds of ’Ababil; the life of
the Prophet of Islam (S) was saved because of a spider’s web; a crow was
used to instruct a human being (Cain) on how to bury a human being
(Abel); the chastity of Mary was made manifest through the infant’s
talk, Yusuf’s innocence was proved by the tear in his shirt; the faith
of a country’s people was known through the messages of a bird (Hoopoe);
and finally, the People of the Cave were recognized through the kind of
their money.

All of these incidents are examples of great occurrences divinely
fulfilled through objects and incidents that are otherwise seen as
commonplace or insignificant.

The ‘Aziz accepted the method proposed by the “witness” and gazed at
Yusuf’s shirt. He noticed that the shirt had been torn from the back,
and he remembered that he had never heard Yusuf tell a lie, even once,
he turned to his wife and said that this act was part of the guile of
women, that their guile is indeed, very powerful.

The verse says:

***“So when he (the ‘Aziz) saw his shirt was torn from behind, he said:
‘Verily is of the guile of you women!*** ***Truly, your guile is
great’.”***

Surah Yusuf - Verse 29
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُوسُفُ اَعْرِضْ عَنْ هَذَا وَاسْتَغْفِرِي لِذَنبِكِ إِنَّكِ كُنْتِ
مِنَ الْخَاطِئِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***29. “O Yusuf! Overlook this matter; and you, (O my wife), ask
forgiveness for your sin, for surely you are of the wrong-doers.”***

At this moment, owing to his fear that the embarrassing event might come
to light and damage his prestige, the ‘Aziz saw it convenient to put an
end to the whole affair by keeping it quiet. Turning to Yusuf, he told
him to forget about it, and turning to his wife, he told her to repent
and ask forgiveness for her sin, for she had definitely been the one who
did wrong.

The verse says:

***“O Yusuf! Overlook this matter; and you, (O my wife), ask forgiveness
for your sin, for surely you are of the wrong-doers.”***

Another great lesson that this part of the story of Yusuf teaches us is
that very support of Allah, Who assists man in the most difficult
states. According to His statement which says:

***“…whoever is in awe of Allah, He will make for him an outlet,” “And
give him sustenance from whence he thinks not;…”***[^3]***,***

Allah caused Yusuf to be proved innocent by means of existence of the
tear in his shirt as an evidence.

Yusuf’s shirt was also the same thing that one day manifested the lie of
Yusuf’s brothers before their father because of lack of tear in it, and
again his shirt was put over the face of Jacob when he regained his eye
sight, and it was brought from Egypt to Kan‘an and gave the glad tidings
to Jacob.

However, Allah has some secret favours of which no one is aware. When
the breeze of this favour blows the affairs may change in a way that it
is not predictable for any one, even for the most intelligent members.

### Some Explanations

1. The ‘Aziz of Egypt wanted to cover up the incident, but the people of
the world in all centuries came to know about it in order for Yusuf’s
innocence to be maintained.

2. The ‘Aziz, typical for those among the affluent classes, had a
lenient attitude towards matters regarding chastity, and refrained from
seriously chastising his wife.

3. Non-godly leaders are usually not able to take a decisive stand
towards their own impure wives.

A woman’s sexual relationship with any man other than her husband is
illegitimate and indecent.

[^1]: Bihar ul-’Anwar, vol.10 p.227

[^2]: Tafsir Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol.2, p.421

[^3]: Surah At-Talaq, No. 65, verses 62 and 63


