Section 4: Yusuf Prefers Prison Against the Temptation
======================================================

Surah Yusuf - Verse 30
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ نِسْوَةٌ فِي الْمَدِينَةِ امْرَأَتُ الْعَزِيزِ تُرَاوِدُ
فَتَاهَا عَن نَّفْسِهِ ۖ قَدْ شَغَفَهَا حُبًّا ۖ إِنَّا لَنَرَاهَا فِي
ضَلَالٍ مُّبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***30. “And some women in the city said: ‘The wife of the ‘Aziz has
sought to seduce her slave from his (pure) self; he has affected her
with love. Verily we see her in manifest error’.”***

The term /šaqaf/ refers to the complications of the upper part of the
heart, or of the pericardium. It is said that the Qur’anic phrase
/šaqafaha hubban/ means that someone’s love has intermingled with the
heart of the beloved which, in turn, increases the intensity of the
love.

The incident between the wife of the ‘Aziz and Yusuf was a private
affair, which the ‘Aziz had sought to cover up, but such affairs do not
remain undisclosed for long, especially when they occur in the palaces
of kinds and dwellings of wealthy aristocrats where rumor and hearsay
abound.

So finally the secret leaked out of the palace. Some of the women of the
city spread the rumor that the wife of ‘Aziz had tried to seduce her
slave, and that her love for him had overcome her to the extent that it
had conquered her entire heart.

The verse says:

***“And some women in the city said: ‘The wife of the ‘Aziz has sought
to seduce her slave from his (pure) self; he has affected her with
love...”***

So they laid the blame squarely at her door, saying:

***“…Verily we see her in manifest error’.”***

Those women, who said this statement and blamed Zulaykha therewith, were
a group of Egyptian aristocratical women that, from the point of
sensuality, were not so far from her.

Since they had not have Yusuf, idiomatically, they were hypocritically
prudish and, because of that love, considered the wife of ‘Aziz in
manifest error.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 31
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا سَمِعَتْ بِمَكْرِهِنَّ أَرْسَلَتْ إِلَيْهِنَّ وَأَعْتَدَتْ
لَهُنَّ مُتَّكَأً وَءَاتَتْ كُلَّ وَاحِدَةٍ مِنْهُنَّ سِكّيناً
وَقَالَتِ اخْرُجْ عَلَيْهِنَّ فَلَمَّا رَأَيْنَهُ أَكْبَرْنَهُ
وَقَطَّعْنَ أَيْدِيَهُنَّ وَقُلْنَ حَاشَ لِلَّهِ مَا هَذَا بَشَراً
إِنْ هَذَآ إِلاَّ مَلَكٌ كَرِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***31. “So when she heard about their malicious talk, she sent for them
and prepared a repast for them. Then she gave each one of them a knife,
and said to him (Yusuf): ‘Come forth to them.’ When they saw him, they
extolled him, and (in their amazement) cut their hands and said
(exclaimed): ‘Allah Blameless! This is not a human being. This is not
other than a noble angel!’”***

When the wife of ‘Aziz became aware of the intrigue of the Egyptian
women, she became very angry. Then she came up with an idea. She invited
them to an elaborate party which she had organized for them and gave
each person a sharp knife to peel the fruit served.

The verse says:

***“So when she heard about their malicious talk, she sent for them and
prepared a repast for them. Then she gave each one of them a
knife...”***

From the sequence of events, one can readily infer that she did not care
much for her husband and was not afraid of him, so she had not learnt
anything from the previous scandal.

She then ordered Yusuf to come into the hall so that they could see his
beauty for themselves and stop blaming her for what she did.

The verse says:

***“…and said to him (Yusuf): ‘Come forth to them.’...”***

According to several narrations, when the eyes of the Egyptian women
fell upon him they were captivated by his unearthly beautiful stature
and shining face.

The verse says:

***“…When they saw him, they extolled him, and (in their amazement) cut
their hands...”***

They were so overwhelmed that they fell head over heels in love with
him, which profoundly embarrassed him.

As soon as they saw how abstinent and chaste he was, and his attractive
eyes in his innocent face which had blushed from modesty and shame
clearly illustrated these facts, they all exclaimed that that young man
had never done anything wrong in his life, he was not an ordinary man,
but was a sublime heavenly angel.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and said (exclaimed): ‘Allah Blameless! This is not a human being.
This is not other than a noble angel!’”***

### Explanations

1. The Arabic term /haša/ means: ‘excepting, with the exception’. It was
a custom in that time that when they wanted to know a person exempted
from an indecency, at first they exempted Allah and then that person.

2. The wife of ‘Aziz was quite politically astute, through the banquet
she had arranged she caught the women unawares and was able to expose
the vulnerabilities of the rivals in that locality.

3. Talking about other people’s problems is not always a show of
compassion. It can be the result of jealousy, or part of a plot against
them.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 32
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَتْ فَذَلِكُنَّ الَّذِي لُمْتُنَّنِي فِيهِ وَلَقَدْ رَاوَدتُّهُ
عَن نَّفْسِهِ فَاسْتَعْصَمَ وَلَئِن لَّمْ يَفْعَلَ مَآ ءَامُرُهُ
لَيُسْجَنَنَّ وَلَيَكُوناً مِنَ الصَّاغِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***32. “She said: ‘This is before you he about whom you did blame me!
And indeed I sought to seduce him from his (pure) self, but he proved
continent. And (now), if he does not do what I command him, he shall
certainly be imprisoned, and will certainly be of the humiliated!’”***

At this moment, the wife of the ‘Aziz turned to those women who used to
criticize her for her intense love for Yusuf and said that although they
had not seen him before, only getting a first glimpse of him caused them
to lose their hearts.

How could they possibly have blamed her, when she was exposed to looking
at that beautiful face frequently day and night? She also admitted that
he was innocent indicating that she was the one who did the seducing.

The verse says:

***“She said: ‘This is before you he about whom you did blame me! And
indeed I sought to seduce him from his (pure) self...”***

Thus while she was justifying her behavior, she explicitly confessed her
culpability saying that she was the one who invited him to engage in an
illicit act which he had refused to do.

The verse continues saying:

***“…but he proved continent...”***

However, without expressing her remorse, she threatened him with
imprisonment and humiliation if he did not acquiesce to her demands.

She said:

***“…And (now), if he does not do what I command him, he shall certainly
be imprisoned, and will certainly be of the humiliated!””***

### Highlights

1- Psychological and social conditions influence individual morality.
When ‘Aziz’ wife was afraid of exposing her evil actions, she closed the
doors to the room. However, when she found the Egyptian women on her
side, she openly stated that:

***“And indeed I sought to seduce him from his self”***

The same case applies to society. When people are no longer sensitive to
evildoing, it becomes easier to commit sin.

It may be for this very reason that we invocate in the supplication of
Kumayl: “*O Allah! Forgive me for all the sins which prevent me from
being chaste and break my abstinence*”, for at first, committing sins is
difficult for man, but as soon as the barriers are broken, it becomes
easy.

2- The liar is always exposed and scandalized. The one who claimed that
Yusuf wanted to seduce her yesterday, and had had evil intentions
towards him, today openly confesses that she herself had had the
intention of gratifying her sexual desires towards him.

3- It is true, that at times the enemy also testifies to the honesty of
the person he opposes.

4- Residing in palaces paves the way for the loss of one’s chastity.

(Although the ‘Aziz realized that his wife had betrayed him and he asked
her to repent of her guilt, they did not become alienated from each
other and he did not distance between his wife and Yusuf.)

Surah Yusuf – Verse 33
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبِّ السِّجْنُ أَحَبُّ إِلَيَّ مِمَّا يَدْعُونَنِي إِلَيْهِ
وَإِلاَّ تَصْرِفْ عَنّي كَيْدَهُنَّ أَصْبُ إِلَيْهِنَ وَأَكُن مِنَ
الْجَاهِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***33. “He said: ‘My Lord! The prison is dearer to me than that to which
they invite me; and if You turn not their guile from me, I may incline
towards them and become of the ignorant ones’.”***

Interestingly, some commentators have narrated an astonishing subject
and have said that some of the Egyptian women in the gathering supported
the wife of the ‘Aziz and, giving right to her, defended her behavior.

They surrounded Yusuf and every one of them tried in her own way to
persuade him to submit to the desires of the wife of ‘Aziz or to her
own, in other words, they all had the same intentions as Zulaykha had.

It is in the face of this overwhelming temptation that Yusuf cries out
to his Lord that he would welcome a life prison than the corruption to
which those women were inviting him.

In a tradition attributed to Abu Hamzah al Thumali, it is narrated that
Imam Ali-ibn-il-Hussein (as) said that as soon as those women had parted
company with Zulaykha, each one of them sent someone in private to Yusuf
and requested an audience with him.

Yusuf had been surrounded by a series of difficulties from all sides.
However, being already prepared for any mishap that might befall, he
turned to Allah immediately without entering into any relationship with
these passionate, promiscuous women and sought His help.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘My Lord! The prison is dearer to me than that to which
they invite me;...”***

He was in the prime of his youth, and naturally, the lower aspect of his
soul could have inclined towards them and he would have found himself
among the ignorant.

But, since he knew that in all cases, especially at the time of crises,
there is no way to safety except relying on Allah, he trusted in Allah
and asked Him help by saying:

***“…and if You turn not their guile from me, I may incline towards them
and become of the ignorant ones’.”***

### Points to Remember

1. Men of Allah prefer all the difficulties that come with a life of
honor to a sinful life of luxury.

2. By seeking assistance from the Almighty, man can distance himself
from any kind of sin and temptation under any kind of circumstance.

3. Hardship and suffering cannot provide man with the justification to
commit sin.

4. Man’s character depends on his soul and not on his body. If man’s
soul is free and he is in prison, it can be like a paradise for him. And
if his soul is under pressure, even a palace may become a prison for
him.

5. To please people at the expense of displeasing Allah is manifest
ignorance.

6. As was said, the wife of ‘Aziz and the other women employed various
means to achieve their objectives. They showed intense love and desire,
total submission and later profuse promises of great rewards, finally,
when all of that failed, they started threatening Yusuf with
imprisonment.

This is the usual methodology that all dictators and despots resort to
throughout the ages. It has even been experimented many times that they
usually at first show excessive moderation and leniency towards men of
Allah to make them acquiesce to their designs, putting on a smiling face
on one occasion, and, on the other, when they fail to achieve their
objectives in this way, they resort to the cruelest of threats sometimes
at the end of the same sitting that they had with together.

It never occurs to them that they show contradictions and double
standards in their behavior, illustrating an abhorring lack of integrity
which deserves the utmost humiliation and kinds of censure.

The reason for this is obvious. They are only after their own
objectives, and the means are not important for them, because for them,
the ends justify the means. The weak and foolish, in this course, may
submit themselves sooner or later to these attempts and thus get caught
in their trap forever.

But the men of Allah, who are enlightened by the light of faith, easily
pass through all these trials showing their steadfastness and
irreconcilability with evil. They go as far as courting their death, for
victory is the ultimate aim.

Victory here does not only mean their own victory but it also denotes
the victory of their school of thought based on principle rather than
caprice.

7. There are always some people like the whimsical and promiscuous women
of Egypt who regard themselves as innocent and clean when they are not
principal players on the scene always pretending to be more virtuous and
innocent than some others.

They would think the wife of the ‘Aziz to be vulgar and seductive. But,
as soon as the tables are turned, they immediately lose their hearts and
prove that whatever virtues they had claimed had been utterly
meaningless.

Whereas Zulaykha had fallen in love with Yusuf after frequent meetings
with him and after some years of life, these women fell into the very
same situation, in the same meeting and after one glance at him, cutting
their own hands with knives instead of the fruit they were supposed to
cut.

8. When we are facing the attacks of powerful evil forces, and we find
ourselves teetering on the edge of the abyss of destruction, we must
turn to Allah for protection. We must seek His support, for if His
assistance is not there, nothing can be done for us.

This is the lesson which the great Yusuf, the infallible one, has taught
us. It is he who says to Allah if their evil plots are not averted from
him, he would tend to incline towards them, and he would be left alone
in his plight and will be no more. It is holy Allah Who is the
Protector, not one’s abilities, powers, or mere virtues.

This state of absolute dependence on Allah (s.w.t.) does not only
provide man with a power and perseverance which is unlimited, but it
also makes it possible for him to enjoy the hidden Divine favors as
well, favors which are impossible to explain and can be only witnessed
and accepted. Such people are they who are sheltered by Allah both in
this world and the Hereafter.

In one tradition, the Prophet of Islam (S) says that there are seven
groups that will be sheltered by Allah on the Day when there will be no
shade except His:

1. A just pioneer and leader.

2. A young man who has been trained in servitude unto Allah from the
beginning of his life.

3. He whose heart is attached to mosques and places where Allah is
worshipped and whenever he leaves those places, he ceaselessly thinks of
the time when he can return thereto.

4. Those who work together in obeying Allah, and when they depart from
one another, the spiritual bond of their unity remains firm.

5. Those who when they hear Allah’s name mentioned, have tears in their
eyes because of their sense of responsibility before Allah or for fear
of their sins.

6. The man who says that he is in awe of Allah when he is invited to
consort with a beautiful woman and he refuses to commit sin.

7. A man who assists those who are in need and provides charity for them
in such a way that his left hand does not know what his right hand has
done.

### Some Narrations Regarding Fear of Allah

1. The Prophet of Allah (S) said:

*"He who stops committing sins for the fear of Allah, He, the High,
provides him with satisfaction on the Day of Judgment.”* [^1]

2. Once Zayd ibn Suhan asked Amir-ul-Mu’minin (as):

*“Which man is superior with Allah, the Almighty, the Glorious?” He
answered: “He who is more in awe of Allah, more aware of piety and
morality, and is less inclined to worldliness.”*[^2]

3. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“The highest ranking man before Allah is he who is the most in awe of
Allah.”* [^3]

4. Amir-ul-Mu’minin (as) said:

*“How fortunate is he who finds it necessary to be Allah fearing and
obeys Allah both in private and in public.”*[^4]

5. The Prophet of Allah (S) said:

*"How fortunate are those whose fear of Allah prevents them from fearing
others.”*[^5]

### Some Narrations Regarding Treason

1. The Prophet of Allah (S) said:

*“The believer accepts all inherent traits and characteristics, except
treason and lying.”*[^6]*.*

2. Amir-ul-Mu’minin (as) said:

*“Abstain from betraying others which is the most heinous of sins, and
truly, a traitor will be caught in the torment and torture of the Fire
because of his own treachery.”*[^7]

3. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“There are four characteristics, when each of which appears in a house
it causes for the destruction of that house, and blessings do not make
headway in that house because of those circumstances. They are; treason,
theft, drinking alcoholic beverages, and fornication (or
adultery).”*[^8]

4. Amir-ul-Mu’minin (as) said:

*“The ultimate in betrayal is betraying a friend and breaking vows and
promises.”*[^9]

5. Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“It is certain that a true believer never betrays (anyone).”* [^10]

Surah Yusuf – Verse 34
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاسْتَجَابَ لَهُ رَبُّهُ فَصَرَفَ عَنْهُ كَيْدَهُنَّ إِنَّهُ هُوَ
السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***34. “So his Lord answered him and He turned away from him their
guile; verily He is the All Hearing, the All Knowing.”***

According to the Divine promise, Allah always accepts the supplications
of the pious. Those sincere fighters for a holy cause (whether it be
against one’s self, or an outward enemy) and those who assist others in
goodness will always get a Divine response to their requests.

Yusuf was not left alone in such a dangerous situation. Allah answered
his prayer. Indeed, as the Qur’an says, Allah is the Hearer, the Knower.

The verse says:

***“So his Lord answered him and He turned away from him their guile;
verily He is the All Hearing, the All Knowing.”***

He hears the prayers and supplications of His subjects. He is completely
aware of their inmost secrets, and He knows the solution to all their
problems.

Some commentators reject that while Yusuf knew that Allah would protect
him and return away their snare, why did he pray? The answer is that the
prayer of Yusuf to Allah was that he could overcome their hearts so that
they would dispense with their guile, and Allah answered him either.

As a result of his supplication, the women lost all hope in achieving
their objectives and all the tricks that were within their means proved
to be of no benefit to them, so, in despair, they stopped chasing him.
It was then that Yusuf felt tranquility.

Zulaykha, after seeing the hopelessness of her attempts, was ready to
send him to prison.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 35
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ بَدَا لَهُمْ مِن بَعْدِ مَا رَأَوُاْ الاَيَاتِ لَيَسْجُنُنَّهُ
حَتَّي حِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***35. “Then it seemed to them, after they had seen the signs (of his
innocence), to imprison him till a time.”***

### From Palace to Prison

 The strange meeting between the Egyptian women and Yusuf in the palace
of the ‘Aziz, with its particular tumult, ended. The fear of the
increasing damage the sex scandal was causing to the prestige of his
family.

In the view of people, it was becoming more and more every day. The
‘Aziz and his advisors thought that the only way to rescue the situation
was to remove Yusuf from the scene entirely, and the best way to do that
was to send him to prison.

This would not only help the people forget about the situation, but
would also make it seem that real culprit had been Yusuf himself.

The Qur’an in this holy verse says:

***“Then it seemed to them, after they had seen the signs (of his
innocence), to imprison him till a time.”***

In such morally decrepit environments, apparently freedom only belongs
to those who are corrupt and so does everything else, whereas the pure
and God-fearing individuals, like Yusuf, must be isolated and
imprisoned. However, such a situation never lasts forever.

### Explanations

1. Only a person with a distracted mind would engage in a fruitless act
causing trouble for everyone, like throwing an important needle into the
bottom of a well which could not be found and taken out by a hundred
wise men.

2. Love is such a distraction. A woman fell in love and although many
men and high-ranking officials of a country joined together to solve the
problems caused by that woman, they were unable to find a solution.

3. Trials and courts are held in default of a person aften as ceremonial
gestures in palaces where despots and dictators live, assure the
condemnation of the innocent.

4. Those people who dwell in luxurious palaces are usually reckless and
brash. Despite all the reasons in his favour, Yusuf was still convicted
and sent to prison.

[^1]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, vol. 67 p. 498

[^2]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, vol. 74, p. 378

[^3]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, vol. 74, p. 180

[^4]: Ghurar ul Hikam, vol. 4, p. 239

[^5]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, vol. 74, p. 126

[^6]: Kanz ul-‘Ummal, vol. 3, p. 468

[^7]: Ghurar ul-Hikam vol. 1, p. 150

[^8]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, vol. 76, p. 125, The Amali of Tusi

[^9]: Ghurar ul-Hikam, vol. 2, p. 505

[^10]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, vol. 100, p. 175


