Section 5: Yusuf Preaches Unity of Allah in the Prison
======================================================

Surah Yusuf – Verse 36
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَدَخَلَ مَعَهُ السّجْنَ فَتَيَانِ قَالَ أَحَدُهُمَآ إِنّي أَرَانِي
أَعْصِرُ خَمْراً وَقَالَ الاَخَرُ إِنّي أَرَانِي أَحْمِلُ فَوْقَ
رَأْسِي خُبْزاً تَأْكُلُ الطَّيْرُ مِنْهُ نَبّئْنَا بِتَأْوِيلِهِ
إِنَّا نَرَاكَ مِنَ الْمُـحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***36. “And with him there entered into the prison two youths. One of
them said (unto Yusuf): ‘I saw (in dream) myself pressing wine’ The
other said: ‘I saw (in my dream) myself carrying on my head bread from
which the birds were eating.’ Tell us its interpretations, verily we see
you of the righteous ones’.”***

Among those who entered into prison with Yusuf, there were two young
men, as the verse says:

***“And with him there entered into the prison two youths...”***

Man’s other senses usually become more active in obtaining information
when his direct channels of communication and direct access to
information are obstructed. In such cases his dreams can provide him
with an alternative means.

It is for this reason that it is said that the two men, one of whom was
the man responsible for the ruler’s buffet, and the other, for his
catering services. They approached Yusuf in the prison to describe the
wonderful dreams they had seen the previous night.

It is important to note that they were imprisoned because of the false
accusations of their enemies who claimed that they were about to poison
the king.

Each one of the two prisoners recalled his dream to Yusuf for his
interpretation in a manner as the verse says:

***“…One of them said (unto Yusuf): ‘I saw (in dream) myself pressing
wine’ The other said: ‘I saw (in my dream) myself carrying on my head
bread from which the birds were eating.’...”***

Then, they added to their statement unto Yusuf:

***“…Tell us its interpretations, verily we see you of the righteous
ones’.”***

### Some Issues to Remember

1. An Islamic tradition denotes that the reason why they called Yusuf a
truly righteous person was because he used to always take care of the
sick and the needy in the prison and find accommodation for others.[^1]

2. We must take dreams seriously, for there are secrets hidden in some
of them.

3. Once the people have confidence in someone, they tend to share all
their secrets with him.

4. Enlightened people also leave their impact and influence upon others
even when they are confined in prison.

5. Even guilty people tend to have a high esteem for those who are truly
righteous.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 37
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ لاَ يَأْتِيكُمَا طَعَامٌ تُرْزَقَانِهِ إِلاَّ نَبَّأْتُكُمَا
بِتَأْوِيلِهِ قَبْلَ أَن يَأْتِيَكُمَا ذَلِكُمَا مِمَّا عَلَّمَنِي
رَبّي إِنّي تَرَكْتُ مِلَّةَ قَوْمٍ لايُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَهُم
بِالأَخِرَةِ هُمْ كَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***37. “He said: ‘There shall not come to you the food with which you
are fed but I will inform you both of its interpretation before it comes
to you. This is of what my Lord has taught me. Verily, I have abandoned
the religion of a people who do not believe in Allah and they are
disbelievers in the Hereafter’.”***

In the first part of the verse, it is probable that the Qur’an is
hinting that Yusuf said he also knew from the side of Allah what kind of
food that would be served to them, and that he could also interpret
their dreams just as easily.

In this case, the implication would be that in addition to interpreting
dreams, Yusuf also knew about other things as well, which he used to
foretell. This ability is similar to that of Hadrat Isa (as) who used to
read the minds of those around him regarding what they used to eat or
what they had stored in their houses.

**Question:** Why did Hadrat Yusuf (as) not interpret their dreams then
and there but postpone their interpretation for later?

Fakhr Razi provides the answer to this question as follows:

1. He wanted to make them wait so that he could advise, admonish, and
convert them, perhaps that person might believe before his execution.

2. He wanted to build up their confidence by foretelling the kind of
food before the food had been served.

3. He wanted to tantalize them so that they would lend their ears more
carefully to what he had to say.

4. As the interpretation of one of the dreams was that that person was
going to be executed, Yusuf was postponing the issue so that that person
might not lose heart too suddenly.

At any rate, Yusuf, who would not miss any opportunity to provide
guidance and counseling, made the most of the two prisoners’ requests
for the interpretation of their dreams, and used them as a means for
introducing and explaining important facts which were helpful not only
for their lives, but also for all human beings.

At first, in order to build their confidence, he told them that he would
tell them the meanings of their dreams before their food had arrived.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘There shall not come to you the food with which you are
fed but I will inform you both of its interpretation before it comes to
you...”***

Then, the faithful and theistic Yusuf, whose whole entity was filled
with Monotheism, made it quite clear that this knowledge of interpreting
dreams was among those things taught him by Allah and that nothing could
take place without His Will.

The verse continues saying:

***“…This is of what my Lord has taught me...”***

To counter any misconception that the Almighty would give anything to
anyone without conditions, he added that he had abandoned the way of
those who did not believe in Allah and the Day of Resurrection, alluding
to the idol worshipping people of Egypt and Kan‘an, and that it was this
enlightening faith and virtue which made him deserve such a blessing.

The verse says:

***“…Verily, I have abandoned the religion of a people who do not
believe in Allah and they are disbelievers in the Hereafter’.”***

The Messages Conveyed in this Verse:

1. In order to impress others more deeply, it is sometimes necessary to
show one’s scientific ability and knowledge and one’s perfections and
virtues.

2. He who escapes the dark shadows of polytheism, arrives at the
enlightenment of knowledge and Truth.

3. Belief in monotheism and resurrection along with other doctrines is a
requirement in all religions.

4. The basis of faith rests upon distancing oneself from polytheism and
unbelief /tabarri/ and reliance upon the saints of Allah, as is
mentioned in the verse quoted above and the next verse, saying:

***“…Verily, I have abandoned the religion of a people who do not
believe in Allah...” “And I have followed the religion of my fathers,
’Ibrahim...”***

Surah Yusuf – Verse 38
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّبَعْتُ مِلَّةَ ءَابآءِي إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ مَا
كَانَ لَنَآ أَن نُّشْرِكَ بِاللَّهِ مِن شَيْءٍ ذَلِكَ مِن فَضْلِ
اللَّهِ عَلَيْنَا وَعَلَي النَّاسِ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لا
يَشْكُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***38. “And I have followed the religion of my fathers, ’Ibrahim, Ishaq
and Ya‘qub. And it beseems us not to associate aught with Allah.***
***That is of Allah’s favor upon us and upon mankind, but most people do
not give thanks.”***

Since hereditary nobility plays an important role in the formation of
the character of an individual, it also has a very important role when
people are to accept a person.

Therefore, Hadrat Yusuf introduces himself by presenting his illustrious
lineage of forefathers, all of whom were Divine prophets, confirming, at
the same time, his sanctified message. This is exactly the same method
which the Prophet (S) used to employ in introducing himself.

He used to say, that he was the same oft mentioned Prophet whose name
had been mentioned in both the Torah and the Gospels.

Hadrat Sayyid-ush-Shuhada, Hussein ibn Ali (as) and Imam Sajjad (as)
also introduced themselves to the people in Karbala and Syria as the
children of Fatimat-az-Zahra (as), saying:

 *‘I am the son of Fatimat-az-Zahra’.*

The Arabic term /millat/ has been applied in the Qur’an with the sense
of religion. And in verse 78 of Surah Hajj, the profile of the religion
of ’Ibrahim /millata ’Ibrahim/ has been depicted as:

***“And strive hard in (the way of), such a striving as is due to Him;
He has chosen you, and has not laid upon you any hardship in religion –
the faith of your father ’Ibrahim. It is He Who has named you Muslims,
both before and in this (revelation)…..So establish the regular prayer,
do give regular Charity, and hold fast to Allah!”***

Turning ones back to the ways of divine prophets and adhering to
polytheism is ingratitude due to the blessings of Allah. Therefore, we
must dissociate ourselves from such ideas, as they go against the
inherent good which is found in human nature. Abraham said:

***“And I have followed the religion of my fathers, ’Ibrahim, Ishaq and
Ya‘qub...”***

Hadrat Yusuf is not only a descendent by blood lineage, he is also an
inheritor of a spiritual lineage as well, thus it does not behoove him
to associate anyone with Allah, and this monotheistic pedigree goes back
to the iconoclastic ’Ibrahim. This is one of the Divine blessings sent
upon the family of ’Ibrahim and upon all people, for that matter.

The verse says:

***“…And it beseems us not to associate aught with Allah. That is of
Allah’s favor upon us and upon mankind...”***

Unfortunately, most people do not thank Allah for all these blessings
and deviate from the Right Path. The verse says:

***“…but most people do not give thanks.”***

Incidentally, it is worthy to note that these verses show that despite
the fact that Yusuf (as) used to live among those idol – worshippers,
Allah, the Magnificent, has nowhere mentioned that this respectable and
worthy person ever called on the people to be monotheistic and worship
the One God, except in this verse where he has extended the invitation
to the two prisoners who were with him in prison.

It seems that he was not at all optimistic about the people of Egypt
lending their ears to him, let alone accepting his message.

However, when he noticed that these two individuals took him as a
righteous and decent man of good conduct, and they turned to him, a
glimmer of hope and success appeared in his heart that they might
probably listen to him and accept him.

As a result, he proceeded to call them to the worship of Allah and thus
be converted to the faith of monotheism.

In the narrations it is said that these prisoners told Yusuf that as
soon as they saw him, they had become interested in him and began to
love him greatly.

Yusuf answered that they would better not love him or express any
affection for him, for, according to him, the catastrophes that had been
inflicted upon him was because of friendship, and whoever had loved him
somehow caused him some sort of disaster.

His aunt had loved him and she accused him to theft. His father had
loved him, and because of this, he was thrown down to the bottom of the
well. The wife of the ‘Aziz had loved him and because of that he was put
in prison.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 39
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا صَاحِبَيِ السّجْنِ ءَأَرْبَابٌ مُّتَفَرّقُونَ خَيْرٌ أَمِ اللَّهُ
الْوَاحِدُ الْقَهَّارُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***39. “O my (two) mates of the prison! Are (many) diverse lords better,
or Allah, the One, the All-Dominant?”***

Men are of three different types: One group is flexible like the air
which has no form or shape and is so volatile that it can naturally fill
any container regardless of its size, shape, or structure.

The second group is inflexible and resistant in all its aspects, like
iron and steel which can withstand all kinds of pressure from the
outside. The third group is composed of leaders and pioneers who seek to
convert everything into what Allah has ordained. Yusuf is an example of
the third group, seeking to convert polytheists into monotheism even in
the prison.

In different occurrences of the Sublime Qur’an, we find that it has
employed the method of comparing ideas supporting true monotheism and
unbelief, some examples of which, concerning Allah, we present below.

***1) “It there any of your partners (whom you ascribe unto Allah that)
can originate creation, then bring it back again?”*** [^2]

***2) “It there any of your partners (whom you ascribe unto Allah) one
(that) leads towards the Truth?”***[^3]

***3) “Shall I seek a lord other than Allah while He is the Lord of
everything?”***[^4]

 ***4) “Is Allah better, or what they associate (with Him)?”***[^5]

### Explanations

1. Call people to the true faith with love and affection.

2. Use opportune places and times for the propagation of religion.

(As soon as Yusuf realizes that they require him to interpret their
dreams, he takes the opportunity to propagate the faith.)

3. Queries and comparisons are often channels of both communication and
guidance.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 40
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِهِ إِلآَّ أَسْمآءً سَمَّيْتُمُوهَآ أَنتُمْ
وءَابَآؤُكُم مَّآ أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ بِهَا مِن سُلْطَانٍ إِنِ الْحُكْمُ
إِلاَّ لِلَّهِ أَمَرَ أَلاَّ تَعْبُدُوا إِلآَّ إِيَّاهُ ذَلِكَ الدّينُ
الْقَيّمُ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***40. “You do not worship besides Him but (mere) names which you have
named, you and your fathers, for which Allah has not sent down any
authority. Judgment belongs only to Allah. He has commanded that you
worship none but Him. That is the right religion, but most people do not
know.”***

Those who are worshipped other than Him are not the substantial and real
objects of worship. On the contrary, they are the products of man’s own
imagination or that of his ancestors.

One’s ideas must be either based upon rational demonstration or they
must have the traditions as their firm foundation. Therefore, one must
not bow to any command other than those issued from Divine sources, for
issuing commands and decrees are the sole prerogatives of Allah.

All laws are legally unstable, except Divine laws.

Ignorance and the lack of knowledge pave the way for idol worship. Most
people who are ignorant suffer from conscious ignorance and are aware of
their own lack of knowledge, or they suffer from unconscious ignorance
thinking they know while in actual fact they do not know.

The honor and respect that we bestow upon powerful individuals and
organizations, protocols, pomp meetings, supports, condemnations, and
circumstance are nothing but fictitious titles and modern icons which we
ourselves have created and have tried to relate to them instead of the
Divinity as if they were realities.

In reality, however, this fact must be believed that “***It is only He
who is worthy of governing***” so one must never surrender to icons and
despots and bow to them. One must believe in monotheism in all its
dimensions: in worship, in government, in culture, and in all things.

The verse says:

***“You do not worship besides Him but (mere) names which you have
named, you and your fathers, for which Allah has not sent down any
authority. Judgment belongs only to Allah. He has commanded that you
worship none but Him...”***

This is the direct and sustaining Divine way of life. However, most
people are not aware of this and owing to this lack of awareness, they
deviate from the right path, going astray in idol worship and
surrendering to non – Divine governments.

Consequently, they suffer tortures, deprivations, and disasters as a
result of their choice of the wrong path of life. The verse says:

***“…That is the right religion, but most people do not know.”***

Surah Yusuf – Verse 41
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَاصَاحِبَيِ السّجْنِ أَمَّآ أَحَدُكُمَا فَيَسْقِي رَبَّهُ خَمْراً
وَأَمَّا الأَخَرُ فَيُصْلَبُ فَتَأْكُلُ الطَّيْرُ مِن رَّأْسِهِ قُضِيَ
الأَمْرُ الَّذِي فِيهِ تَسْتَفْتِيَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***41. “O’ my (two) mates of the prison! as for one of you, he shall
pour out wine for his lord to drink; whereas the other will be crucified
and the birds shall eat on his head. The matter is decreed about which
you do enquire.”***

The Arabic term /rabb/ is also applied for governor, as well as lord in
the Arabic phrase: /rabbud dar/ which means: the lord of the house or
the owner. Therefore, the phrase /fayasqi rabbahu xamra/ means: ‘he
gives wine to his lord.’

From here on, he begins interpreting the dreams of those two prisoners,
but before this Yusuf had preached them Monotheism and then he expressed
his miracle for them. He began with the interpretation of the butler.

It has been narrated that the first prisoner had also seen three bunches
of grapes in his dream. Hadrat Yusuf said that they meant that that
prisoner would remain in prison for three more days and he would return
to his original profession on the fourth day.

The other prisoner on the other hand, who had been the King’s cook, had
seen three bags instead. Yusuf said that they also meant that he would
stay in prison for three more days, but his end was much more gloomy.
The king would take him out of the prison after that and had him hanged
where the birds could eat on his head.

The verse from the tongue of Yusuf says:

***“O’ my (two) mates of the prison! as for one of you, he shall pour
out wine for his lord to drink; whereas the other will be crucified and
the birds shall eat on his head. The matter is decreed about which you
do enquire.”***

It is said that the latter, on hearing the interpretation, said that he
had not dreamed at all and he had been only joking. Yusuf (as) then told
him that his fate had been decreed and what was said had to be
fulfilled.

From these accounts it is evident that Yusuf (as) had received the news
from the invisible world revealed to him; not as the dreams other people
usually interpret.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 42
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ لِلَّذِي ظَنَّ أَنَّهُ نَاجٍ مّنْهُمَا اذكُرْنِي عِندَ رَبّكَ
فَاَنسَاهُ الشَّيْطَانُ ذِكْرَ رَبّهِ فَلَبِثَ فِي السّجْنِ بِضْعَ
سِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***42. “And he said to him whom he knew would be saved of the two:
‘Mention me to your lord.’ However, Satan caused him to forget to
mention him to his lord, so he (Yusuf) remained in prison a few
years.”***

The Arabic word /zann/ is employed with several different meanings. In
certain circumstances it is used to mean ‘belief’ and ‘knowledge’,
because Yusuf had explicitly and decisively foretold the forthcoming
release of one prisoner, and the execution of the other. Therefore, the
word /zann/ does not mean ‘suspicion’ in this verse, which is the usual
meaning of the term.

The Arabic term /bid‘/ refers to any number less than 10, which has led
most commentators to believe that the number of years of Yusuf
imprisonment had amounted to 7 years.

In some commentaries, the Qur’anic sentence /fa’ansah-uš-šaytanu/ has
been interpreted to mean that Satan took Allah out of the mind of Yusuf
when he took recourse to the king’s cup bearer for assistance instead of
turning to Allah and therefore, he had forgotten Allah, which was a
‘leaving the better’ for Yusuf and he had to stay in prison for several
more years for that.

The verse says:

***“And he said to him whom he knew would be saved of the two: ‘Mention
me to your lord.’ However, Satan caused him to forget to mention him to
his lord, so he (Yusuf) remained in prison a few years.”***

The writer of Al Mizan, however, writes that such narrations are in
contradiction to the Qur’an for the Qur’an considers Yusuf as one of the
‘sincere’ and true believers whom Satan has no influence over.

Moreover, in the next two verses, we see that the person who had
forgotten about Yusuf was finally reminded, thus it becomes clear that
the question of forgetfulness concerned the cup-bearer and not Yusuf.

Imam Sadiq (as) has been quoted to have said that Gabriel at the moment
came up to Yusuf and said:

*Who is it that made* ***you*** *the most beautiful of all people?*

Yusuf answered:

*My Lord.*

Gabriel asked:

*Who is it that made you the most favored among all your brothers with
your father?*

Yusuf answered:

*My Lord.*

Gabriel asked:

*Who is it that sent the caravan of camels to rescue you from the bottom
of the well?*

Yusuf answered:

*My Lord.*

Gabriel:

*Who is it that kept away the stone thrown at you?*

Yusuf:

*My Lord.*

Gabriel:

*Who is it that took you out from the well?*

Yusuf:

*My Lord.*

Gabriel:

*Who kept the lusts of those women which were targeted at you from
reaching you?*

Yusuf:

*My Lord.*

Gabriel:

*Your Lord puts this question to you: ‘Then what caused you to take your
problem to a creature and not to Me, the Creator? In order for the
retribution of the word you said and for what you have done, you must
remain in the prison for several more years.’*[^6]

It is important, however, to note that in different kinds of
circumstances, in order to repel the harms and avoiding some
difficulties, it is permitted to take recourse to some mortals and it is
not a vile.

On many occasions, this cannot be avoided, and sometimes it is even
absolutely necessary, or it becomes compulsory.

Our Prophet (S) used to ask for assistance of the emigrants, and
companions, as well as others in matters where he needed their help. If
seeking assistance from other than Allah were not permissible and were a
vile, he (S) would not have done it.

Thus if these narrations are correct, one must say that Yusuf’s
blameworthiness and the punishment imposed on him were due to the
possibility that he might have abandoned that admirable habit he had
which made him wait patiently for Allah’s decree to manifest, and made
him trust only in Allah, the Glorified, in all catastrophes and
hardships.

This story teaches us to seek Allah’s support and assistance when
hardships and calamities befall us. We must seek to find shelter in Him
alone, while at the same time it is permissible to seek the support of
others in these circumstances knowing that it is because of His will
others are there to help us.

Imam Sadiq (as) has been quoted to have said that Gabriel taught Yusuf
the following supplication to recite after he finished each set of
prayers for his freedom from prison:

*“O Allah, provide me with the means of relief and deliverance and
provide me with my sustenance from where I know and where I do not
know.”*

And Shu‘ayb Aqarquti, quoting Imam Sadiq (as), says that when the period
of Yusuf’s imprisonment came to an end and the day of his freedom had
arrived, he placed his cheeks on the ground (in humility) and said:

*“O Allah! if my sins have besmeared my* *honour* *when I face You, so I
call upon You by the combined* *honour* *of my meritorious ancestors,
’Ibrahim, Isma‘il, Is-haq, and Ya‘qub.”*

After this prayer, Allah provided him with the means for his freedom.
Shu‘ayb, the narrator of the tradition, asked the Imam if they could say
the same prayer. The Imam replied:

*You can also say something similar in this way; “O Allah, my sins have
besmeared my* *honour* *when I face You, so I come to You and I call
upon You by the combined* *honour* *of Your Prophet (S), Ali, Fatimah,
Hassan, Hussayn, and the Imams (as)*[^7]*.”*

[^1]: Tafsir Nur-uth- Thaqalayn. Mizan ul Hikmah

[^2]: Surah Yunus, No. 10, verse 34

[^3]: Ibid, 35

[^4]: Surah Al-’An‘am, No. 6, verse 164

[^5]: Surah An-Naml, No. 27, verse 59

[^6]: Tafsir Abu Hamid Muhammad al Ghazali; Tafsir Majma‘-ul-Bayan,
Tafsir Burhan, Tafsir Safi.

[^7]: Tafsirs: Majma‘ ul Bayan, vol. 5, p. 235 and Safi, vol. 3, p. 23
and Ia


