Section 7: Yusuf Cleared of the False Charge
============================================

Surah Yusuf – Verse 50
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الْمَلِكُ ائْتُونِي بِهِ فَلَمَّا جَآءَهُ الرَّسُولُ قَالَ
ارْجِعْ إِلَي رَبّكَ فَسْأَلْهُ مَا بَالُ النّسْوَةِ اللاَّتِي
قَطَّعْنَ أَيْدِيَهُنَّ إِنَّ رَبّي بِكَيْدِهِنَّ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***50. “So the king said: ‘Bring him to me.’ Then, when the messenger
came to him, he (Yusuf) said: ‘Go back unto your lord and ask him: What
was the case of the women who cut their own hands? Verily my Lord is
aware of their guile’.”***

By interpreting the king’s dream and proposing a precise program of
dealing with the future impending famine without attaching any
preconditions, Yusuf not only showed in prison that he was an
extraordinary person, but he also indicated that he was a knowledgeable
and wise man. The verse says:

***“So the king said: ‘Bring him to me.’...”***

When the messenger came to him, Yusuf did not jump to seize his freedom,
instead he requested a reevaluation of his past record, he would not
leave the prison just by the king’s permission and forgiveness; yet, he
told him that he should go back to the king and ask him about the women
who had been at the palace of the ‘Aziz and had cut their hands.

He did not want his freedom to be the result of a royal amnesty. Yusuf
wanted his innocence and chastity to be vindicated and get the king to
understand that his entire regime was more corrupt and injustice more
widespread that he could have imagined. Probably, because he held the
‘Aziz in great respect, he did not mention his wife, and only mentioned
the women as a group.

It is mentioned in an Islamic tradition that the blessed Prophet (S)
said:

“*I am astonished at the patience of Yusuf, whenever the king needed his
dream interpreted, Yusuf did not say that he would not do such unless he
was freed from prison, but when they wanted to free him, he did not come
out until all the charges and accusations against him were refuted.”*

Therefore, when the messenger of the king came to Yusuf, instead of
being happy that after years of imprisonment he was going to be free, he
gave him a negative answer. The verse says:

***Then, when the messenger came to him, he (Yusuf) said: ‘Go back unto
your lord and ask him: What was the case of the women who cut their own
hands?...”***

Yusuf did not want to accept the disgrace of the king’s forgiveness, and
after freeing from prison to live as a criminal, or at least as an
accused one who had been included the royal amnesty. He wanted to
perfectly prove his innocence and chastity and then get free honourably.

Then he added implying that if common people of Egypt, and even the
people of the royal court, might not know how and by who the plan of his
imprisonment was designed, but the Lord was aware of the guile of those
women.

The holy verse continues saying:

***“…Verily my Lord is aware of their guile’.”***

### Explanations

1. Freedom at any price is often of no value. To prove one’s innocence
is more important than one’s freedom.

2. Yusuf (as) first removed all misconceptions from the people’s minds
regarding his role in the scandal, then later accepted his release.

3. It is a religious obligation for everyone to guard and defend his
reputation.

4. Yusuf made it known to the king that after his release from the
prison, he would not regard him as his Allah, or lord and would not
consider himself as his slave. On the contrary, he would regard the
Almighty as his Lord.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 51
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ مَا خَطْبُكُنَّ إِذْ رَاوَدتُّنَّ يُوسُفَ عَن نَّفْسِهِ قُلْنَ
حَاشَ لِلَّهِ مَا عَلِمْنَا عَلَيْهِ مِن سُوءٍ قَالَتِ امْرَأَتُ
الْعَزيِزِ الأَنَ حَصْحَصَ الْحَقُّ أَنَاْ رَاوَدتُّهُ عَن نَّفْسِهِ
وَإِنَّهُ لَمِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***51. “He (the king) said (to the women): ‘What was the matter with you
women when you sought to seduce Yusuf from his (pure) self?’ They
answered: ‘Allah Blameless! We know no evil of him.’ The wife of the
‘Aziz said: ‘Now the truth has become manifest, I (it was who) sought to
seduce him from his (pure) self, and verily he is of the truthful
ones’.”***

The Arabic term /xatb/ means being called or invited for an important
matter. The term /xatib/ refers to a person who calls the people or
invites them for such a matter.

The Qur’anic term /has-hasa/, which means ‘to come to light’, is derived
from the word /hissah/ with the sense of: share, part, and sorting out
the ‘true’ from the ‘untrue’.

When the special envoy returned to the king and frankly communicated
Yusuf’s proposal to him, he was even more astonished by his greatness of
character and lofty aims. Therefore, he lost no time in contacting the
women who had taken part in the affair. He had them brought before him
and asked them about what happened when they had made their passes at
Yusuf.

The verse says:

***“He (the king) said (to the women): ‘What was the matter with you
women when you sought to seduce Yusuf from his (pure) self?’...”***

Their dormant consciences were aroused and all of a sudden, because of
the provocative question, they unanimously declared that Yusuf had not
been guilty and testified to his chastity and flawless personality. The
verse says:

***“…They answered: ‘Allah Blameless! We know no evil of him.’...”***

The wife of the ‘Aziz, who was attending there, felt the time ripe for
her to confess her wrongdoing and reconcile her guilty conscience after
several years.

She then bore testimony to Yusuf’s chastity and confessed her guilt
especially when she became aware of his greatness and magnitude which,
as a result of his message to the king was becoming well known and he
had mentioned nothing about her in his message except something secretly
pointing to those women of Egypt.

Suddenly, as if a burst occurred in her inside, she exclaimed such the
Qur’an says:

***“…The wife of the ‘Aziz said: ‘Now the truth has become manifest, I
(it was who) sought to seduce him from his (pure) self, and verily he is
of the truthful ones’.”***

### Explanations

1. Whenever there is a knotty and complicated problem, the person in
charge should study the evidence himself and proceed to set up the
mechanism to see that justice is done.

2. Accused persons should be invited to defend themselves. In the story
even Zulaykha was present when the investigation was taking place.

3. Truth would not always remain hidden, guilty consciences will be
aroused one day and they will of necessity, confess. Social pressure and
the environmental influences can drive even the stiff-necked to confess.
As soon as the wife of the ‘Aziz was convinced that all the women had
testified to Yusuf’s innocence, she also accepted to confess.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 52
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ لِيَعْلَمَ اَنِيّ لَمْ أَخُنْهُ بِالْغَيْبِ وَاَنَّ اللَّهَ لاَ
يَهْدِي كَيْدَ الْخَآئِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***52. “(Yusuf said): “That, so that he (the ‘Aziz) may know that I have
not betrayed him in secret, and that Allah does not guide the device of
the treacherous.””***

There are two views concerning this holy verse. Some commentators claim
that it is a continuation of the speech of Zulaykha, the wife of ‘Aziz.
Others attribute these words to Yusuf (as).

However, when we explore the verse in depth, the latter view seems more
likely to be correct, for what treason can be greater than sending an
innocent man to prison for several years?

If these were the words of Zulaykha, it implies that her confession was
made to remind Yusuf that she had not betrayed him in his absence and
had not accused him for whatever had transpired. However, she did betray
him and leveled untrue accusations against him in his presence.

If, on the other hand, these are the words of Yusuf, that he sent back
the messenger of the king asking him to investigate the status of these
Egyptian women, it was due to the fact that he wanted the king or the
‘Aziz to know that he had never betrayed the latter in his absence
concerning his wife; for Allah does not guide traitors when they engage
in their double dealing.

The verse says:

***“(Yusuf said): “That, so that he (the ‘Aziz) may know that I have not
betrayed him in secret, and that Allah does not guide the device of the
treacherous.””***

### Explanations

1. A sublime person does not seek vengeance rather he searches for the
truth and seeks to protect honor and respect.

2. The sign of true belief is abstaining from betraying others secretly.

3. Having evil intentions towards other people’s spouses is considered
as being treacherous to their husbands themselves.

4. A traitor does not achieve his objectives and his end is not easy. Of
course, once we are pure and truthful Allah does not allow the wicked to
damage our reputation.

5. Yusuf (as) endeavored to draw the king’s attention to the fact that
Allah’s Will and Divine Providence always play a decisive role in
occurrences and events.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 53
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَآ اُبَرّئُ نَفْسِي إِنَّ النَّفْسَ لأَمَّارَةٌ بِالسُّوءِ إِلاَّ
مَا رَحِمَ رَبّي إِنَّ رَبّي غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***53. “And I do not absolve myself, verily the (human) soul enjoins to
evil, save that whereon my Lord has mercy; verily my Lord is the
Forgiving, the Merciful.”***

There are several descriptions throughout the Qur’an of the self or
soul; some of them are pointed out here:

1) The despotic soul which leads one to commit evil and vicious acts. If
it is not controlled by faith and reason, it results in man’s sudden
fall.

2) The reproaching soul. This self or ego is active when a guilty person
blames and scolds himself. In this case, he tends to seek repentance and
is apologetic for the sin or crime which he has committed.

3) The peaceful soul which is found in only the prophets, and those
truly trained by them. Once they find themselves surrounded by unbridled
passion and ignorance, they seek the help of Allah to be extricated from
it. They owe everything to Allah who loves them very much.

Yusuf (as) sees Allah’s grace and favor as the reason for his unscathed
honor and the absence of treachery from his heart, since man with a
human nature replete with frailties cannot excuse himself of the evil
tendencies that are present in his soul.

The verse from the tongue of Yusuf says:

***“And I do not absolve myself, verily the (human) soul enjoins to
evil, save that whereon my Lord has mercy; verily my Lord is the
Forgiving, the Merciful.”***

Many Islamic narrations have pointed out the dangerous qualities present
in the soul, regarding giving excuses for its evil tendencies, self
satisfaction and self gratification as the results of corrupt reasoning
which are counted among the greatest of the traps laid by the Satan.

### Explanations

1. One should never admire himself immaculate and free of blame,
excusing oneself of faults.

2. Only Allah’s grace is the source of salvation. Once man is left to
himself, he will collapse.

3. The dangers that are engendered by the self are very grave, do not
regard them as simple.

4. Despite all the dangers which may be surrounding you, do not despair
of Allah’s grace.

5. One of the conditions of perfection is that one should not consider
himself perfect although everyone else might regard him as such.

In Hadrat Yusuf’s (as) case, everybody bore witness to his perfection,
they included his brothers, the wife of the ‘Aziz, the king’s witness,
Satan, as well as all the prisoners, nevertheless, Yusuf himself asserts
that he was not perfect by saying:

***“I do not absolve myself. ...”***

Surah Yusuf – Verse 54
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الْمَلِكُ ائْتُونِي بِهِ أَسْتَخْلِصْهُ لِنَفْسِي فَلَمَّا
كَلَّمَهُ قَالَ إِنَّكَ اليَوْمَ لَدَيْنَا مَكِينٌ أَمِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***54. “And the king said: ‘Bring him to me. I will attach him to my
person.’ Then when he had spoken with him, he said: ‘Verily today you
are of high standing in our presence, a trusted one’.”***

In Lisan-ul-Arab, an Arabic dictionary, it is said that once a person
confides in another person and involves him in his affairs, he applies
the phrase: /’istaxlis-hu/ i.e.

‘***I will attach him to my person, or take him into my confidence***’.

When Yusuf was in prison, the prison had been depicted as: ‘the grave of
the living, the house of grief and sorrow, the place of trial for the
friends, and the blow upon the faces of the foes.’[^1]

As the king realized that Yusuf was reliable and sincere and found no
treachery ascribable to him, he took him into his confidence.

The verse says:

***“And the king said: ‘Bring him to me. I will attach him to my
person.’...”***

Were Allah not to find any betrayal on the part of the servants, what
would He do? Certainly, He would also bring him closer to Himself. That
is why that the Qur’an contains such an interpretation and such
references for the prophets such as:

***“And I myself have chosen you...”***[^2]

or

***“…Verily I have chosen you above the people by My messages and by My
speaking…”*** [^3]

By using the word /ladayna/ the king declared that Yusuf had a high
position in the hierarchy of his administration requiring all other
authorities to obey him. Therefore, if Allah wants to appoint
yesterday’s prisoner as today’s commander He can do so.

The verse says:

***“…Then when he had spoken with him, he said: ‘Verily today you are of
high standing in our presence, a trusted one’.”***

### Explanations

1. Private consultants in the hierarchy of the administration of every
country must be men of virtue, good thinkers, able planners and reliable
people. (All of which characterized Yusuf).

2. One’s defects and vices, as well his virtues, remain secret until he
opens his mouth.

3. It is often useful to conduct a personal interview in the selection
for every type of job.

4. Give authorization to only those in whom you have confidence.

5. The unbelievers and polytheists are also equally bent on achieving
kinds of spiritual perfection. Seeking perfection is an inherent value
embedded in human nature.

Being authorized without the necessary qualifications is not possible,
because the two are interdependent.

This is because, if one is reliable but is not given any authorization,
he would be unable to do anything, while, on the other hand, if one has
authorization but lacks honesty and reliability, the interests of the
entire public will be jeopardized.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 55
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ اجْعَلْنِي عَلَي خَزَآئِنِ الأَرْضِ إِنّي حَفِيظٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***55. “He (Yusuf) said: ‘Set me over the storehouses of the land.
Verily I am a knowing guardian’.”***

The ‘Aziz offered Yusuf (as) the choice of assuming any position in the
government he should take the reins of the important affairs to improve
them. Yusuf (as) proposed his appointment as the minister responsible
for treasures of the country, because he was a trustworthy custodian
since he knew that economic injustice was one of the major causes of
social disruption.

The verse says:

***“He (Yusuf) said: ‘Set me over the storehouses of the land. Verily I
am a knowing guardian’.”***

With political power in his hands to affect economic programming, Yusuf
would be more able to manage the impending food shortage and could also
help the oppressed by reducing their suffering as much as he could, he
could reclaim their rights and put an end to the economic mismanagement
and anarchy which prevailed in the country.

The Qur’anic sentence: ‘***Verily I am a knowing guardian’***, shows
that administration and administrative ability should be accompanied
with faithfulness, and also shows that mere purity and faithfulness are
not enough for accepting a sensitive social post, but besides them
knowledge, expertness and administrative ability are necessary, too.’

Here are some examples of questions and answers worth noting:

**Question:** Why did Yusuf (as) make a proposal for a governmental
post?

**Answer:** He discovered that the dream of the king foretold that an
imminent danger and hardship was facing the people and he knew that he
would be able to prevent it, as well as the undesirable economic events,
so he asked for the relevant governmental portfolio in order to carry
out this task.

**Question:** Why did Yusuf (as) utter words of praise for himself? Does
not the Qur’an say that one should not praise himself?

The Qur’an says:

***“Do not praise yourself.”***[^4]

**Answer:** Yusuf did not praise himself, he was simply mentioning his
suitability for the immense task ahead, which was regulating the
dreadful effects of famine and drought. It was not because of ambition
or the vain desire to abuse public office.

**Question:** Why did Yusuf (as) cooperate with an infidel government?
Is it not the case that this is forbidden in the Qur’an ?

**Answer:** Yusuf did not accept this responsibility for that end. On
the contrary, he did it to relieve the people from the pressures
associated with the period of the famine. He never praised or flattered
the regime.

According to the Tafsir f i Zilal il Qur’an, in such hard times,
politicians usually abandon their people and flee at the time of danger,
but Yusuf stayed to protect the people. If one is unable to overthrow an
oppressive regime, or reform it, one must stop degradation and
oppression as far as he can, which might include being active in public
affairs.

Observing the law of priority in both reason and religion is a basic
principle. It might not be admissible to participate in the
administrative hierarchy of a government of unbelievers; nevertheless,
it is far more desirable if it is a means saving a nation from famine.

According to Tafsir Tibyan, Yusuf (as) did not accept this political
position in order to assist an oppressor; neither did he accept a
military post, which might make him shed blood illegitimately. He only
accepted an economic post in order to rescue the nation from famine.

Imam Rida (as) said that when it was necessary for Yusuf to become the
custodian of the treasure in Egypt, he proposed his readiness for the
position himself. [^5]

Ali ibn Yaqteen also became a minister in the court of the Abbasid
Caliphate on the advice of Imam Kazim (as). The mere presence of such
men of Allah can be a great haven for the oppressed. Imam Sadiq (as)
said:

*“The atonement for a governmental deed is to fulfil the needs of
(religious) brothers”.*[^6]

Imam Rida (as) was asked why he accepted to be a successor to the
caliphate of Ma\`mun. He replied that Yusuf (as), who was a prophet,
joined a pagan administration, but the Imam himself, who was the
successor to the Prophet (S), had joined the system of someone who
claimed to be a Muslim.

His acceptance had been done under duress, while Yusuf’s (as) was
voluntary because of the importance of the matter.[^7]

As soon as Yusuf (as) took office, he did not seek to see his parents,
for visiting parents was an emotional matter while rescuing people from
famine was a social responsibility.

Imam Sadiq (as) addressing a group of seemingly pious people called them
to lead a life of abstemiousness, he said:

*“Inform me as to what you think about Yusuf the prophet, who told the
king of Egypt: “Set me over the storehouses of the land.” His
responsibility extended far and wide including as far as the Yemen… At
the same time, we do not know of any one who found fault with this
engagement of his.”*[^8]

It has been narrated from Imam Rida (as) that Yusuf gathered and stored
the wheat during the first seven years.

During the second seven years, when the famine happened, he gradually
and carefully distributed them among people for their daily consumption
saving the entire country of Egypt from a potential catastrophe in this
way.

Throughout those seven years of famine, Yusuf never ate to his fill,
lest he might forget those who were nearly starving.[^9]

Both the Tafsirs, Majma‘ ul Bayan, and Al Mizan say that during the
first year of the famine, Hadrat Yusuf (as) exchanged wheat for gold and
silver. In the second year, he exchanged wheat for gems and jewels.

During its third year, he would exchange wheat for four footed animals,
in the fourth year he would exchange wheat for slaves, in the fifth year
he exchanged wheat for houses; in the sixth year he exchanged wheat for
farms and fields and finally, in the seventh year he exchanged wheat for
labor.

When the seventh year came to an end, he addressed the king of Egypt,
saying:

*“All the people’s properties are at my disposal. However, I call Allah
to testify and you to bear witness that I liberated all the people and I
shall return all their properties to them, I shall also give you back
your palace, the throne and your seal. Holding this administrative
position was a means for me to save the people and nothing more. You
must deal with them with justice.”*

On hearing these words, the king was so profoundly humbled in the face
of such spiritual magnitude that he suddenly uttered the following
words:

*“I bear witness that there is no Allah but Allah and that you are His
messenger. Verily, you are of high standing in our presence, a trusted
one.”*

We must remember that the Qur’anic criteria in selecting individuals do
not only include the attributes of guardianship and knowledge, but that
we must also take into consideration such attributes as: **Faith,** when
the Qur’an says:

***“Is he then, who is a believer like him who is a transgressor? They
are not equal.”***[^10]

**Background:** about which the Qur’an says:

***“And the foremost are the foremost.” “These are they who are drown
nigh (to Allah).”***[^11]

**Migration:** The Qur’an says:

***“…and those who believed but they did not migrate, you have not any
friendship towards them until they migrate.…”***

**Mental and bodily ability:**

***“And He has increased him abundantly in knowledge and
stature”***[^12]

**Nobility in lineage:**

***“…your father was not a bad man,”***[^13]

**Holy struggle:** the Qur’an states:

***“Allah has raised the strivers with their wealth and lives in rank
above those sitting back.”*** [^14]

### Explanations

1. One must volunteer for sensitive positions whenever it is necessary.

2. Eligibility and potential are not incompatible with trust in Allah,
piety, and honesty.

3. Out of the attributes which the king used to describe Yusuf (as)
saying: high standing, and ‘a trusted one’, and those two attributes
which Yusuf uses to describe himself as ‘***knowing***’
‘***guardian***’, one can deduce that these qualities are the main
attributes of the eligible administrators.

They are: ability, reliability, guardianship, and specialization.

4. The position of prophecy practically is not separate from government
and politics, because religion is not to be separated from politics.

5. Citizenship is not to be regarded as the principal criterion for
governmental administration. Yusuf was not an Egyptian, however he was
given the post of an administrator of Egypt, (nationalism of any kind is
not acceptable).

6. We must plan ahead for consumption, and in supervision we must always
economize and preserve the share belonging to future generations.

Surah Yusuf – Verses 56 - 57
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذلِكَ مَكَّنَّا لِيُوسُفَ فِي الأَرْضِ يَتَبَوَّاُ مِنْهَا حَيْثُ
يَشَآءُ نُصِيبُ بِرَحْمَتِنَا مَن نَّشَآءُ وَلاَ نُضِيعُ أَجْرَ
الْمُـحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلأَجْرُ الأَخِرَةِ خَيْرٌ لِلَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا وَكَانُوا يَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***56. “And thus did We give power to Yusuf in the land, to make his
dwelling there wherever he wished. We reach with Our mercy on whomsoever
We please, and We do not waste the reward of the righteous.”***  
***57. “And certainly the reward of the Hereafter is (much) better for
those who believe and are constant in keeping from evil.”***

In the above two verses, Yusuf (as) has been described as a righteous,
pious and true believer.

Throughout this Surah the Divine Will is constantly juxtaposed against
the will of man, the latter which, when it goes contrary to the Divine
will, always fails in achieving its objective, for example, Yusuf’s
brothers had decided to humiliate him by throwing him into the well and
getting him enslaved, however, the ‘Aziz recommended that he be held in
high esteem.

The wife of the ‘Aziz intended to seduce him and make him commit sins,
but Allah, on the contrary, kept him pure and unblemished. The
aristocracy sought to break and destroy him, but Allah granted him a
high position in the government of Egypt.

It is for this reason that the Qur’an says:

***“And thus did We give power to Yusuf in the land, to make his
dwelling there wherever he wished. We reach with Our mercy on whomsoever
We please, and We do not waste the reward of the righteous.”***

Even if it might seem a long time, Allah will ultimately reward the
righteous for He does not disregard any decent act nor allow it to slip
into oblivion.

However, besides the reward of this world, the righteous will enjoy some
better rewards in Hereafter.

The verse says:

***“And certainly the reward of the Hereafter is (much) better for those
who believe and are constant in keeping from evil.”***

[^1]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan, the

[^2]: Surah TaHa, No. 20, verse 13

[^3]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 144

[^4]: Surah An-Najm, No. 53, verse 32.

[^5]: Tafsir Nur-ul-Thaqalayn

[^6]: Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 12, p. 139

[^7]: Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 12, p. 146

[^8]: Tafsir Nur-uth-Thaqalayn

[^9]: Tafsirs: Majma‘ ul Bayan.

[^10]: Surah As-Sajdah, No. 32, verse 18.

[^11]: Surah Al-Waqi‘ah, No. 56, verses 10-11

[^12]: Surah Baqarah, No. 2, verse 247.

[^13]: Surah Maryam, No. 19, verse 28.

[^14]: Surah Nisa, No. 4, verse 95.


