Section 8: Yusuf Measures Out Corn to His Brothers
==================================================

Surah Yusuf – Verse 58
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَآءَ إِخْوَةُ يُوسُفَ فَدَخَلُوا عَلَيْهِ فَعَرَفَهُمْ وَهُمْ لَهُ
مُنْكِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***58. “And the brothers of Yusuf came and entered unto him, then he
knew them but they did not recognize him.”***

Eventually, as had been predicted, during the first seven consecutive
years, agriculture in Egypt thrived due to the abundance of rainfall and
water in the Nile River.

After the harvests, Yusuf had ordered the people to reserve the required
amount for their needs for themselves and sell the rest to the
government, thus the grain stocks were high and the storehouses were
filled with food supplies.

Those seven years of affluence and blessings went by, and then famine
and drought reared their ugly heads.

The little rain that fell from the sky was not enough to quench the
thirst of the palm trees, and the suffering of the people began grew
greater and greater as their stockpiles began to run out.

At this point, Yusuf sold them grain on the basis of the schedule which
he had preplanned for this emergency and in this way he adequately met
all their food requirements.

This drought did not affect Egypt alone; it had affected the countries
neighboring Egypt as well, devastating large areas. Thus the people of
Palestine and the land of Kan‘an northeast of Egypt, where the House of
Ya‘qub was established, were also affected by the drought.

It was for this reason that Ya‘qub decided to send all his children to
Egypt to purchase food supplies except Benjamin who stayed with his
father. They joined a camel caravan going to Egypt and according to some
sources, arrived there after 18 days of travel.

According to historians, foreigners who entered Egypt had to report to
the authorities on their arrival, who would inform Yusuf about them.
When they reported the arrival of a camel caravan from Palestine, Yusuf
quickly recognized his brothers’ names among the arrivals and ordered
them summoned to his court without letting anyone know who they were.

The verse says:

***“And the brothers of Yusuf came and entered unto him, then he knew
them but they did not recognize him.”***

Thirty to forty years had passed since the time they had thrown him into
well. The possibility of him remaining alive was remote, and the last
time they had come to Egypt had also been forty yeas before. It is not
surprising, therefore, that they would not have recognized their brother
when they saw him. Moreover, they did not have the slightest idea that
he had become a great ‘Aziz of Egypt.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 59
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمَّا جَهَّزَهُم بِجَهَازِهِمْ قَالَ ائْتُونِي بِاَخٍ لَّكُم مِنْ
أَبِيكُمْ أَلا تَرَوْنَ أَنّي اُوفِي الْكَيْلَ وَأَنَاْ خَيْرُ
الْمُنْزِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***59. “And when he provided them with their provisions, he said: ‘Bring
unto me a brother of years from your father. Do you not see that I give
full measure, and (that) I am the best of hosts?’”***

Yusuf was very compassionate and kind towards his brothers. When he was
speaking with them, they told him that they were ten brothers from a
single father named Ya‘qub, the grandson of ’Ibrahim al Khalil, the
great prophet of Allah.

They told him that had he known their father, he would have had more
respect for them, but their aged and venerable father was greatly
saddened and depressed.

On asking them why their father had been so grief stricken, they replied
that he had had a son whom he loved very much and who was the youngest
of all his sons. This son had gone hunting and playing with them in the
fields and when they had neglected him a wolf came upon him and killed
him. Since then, their father had been weeping and grieving for him.

Some commentators have narrated that Yusuf was in the habit of not
selling more than one camel load of grain per person, and as the
brothers were ten, he sold them ten loads of grain.

On receiving the grain, they said that their father, because of
intensive grief, could not travel, as well as a younger brother who had
stayed with him to serve him and keep his company, so they asked for a
share for those two as well.

Yusuf ordered his men to add to their share, then turning towards them
he told them to bring along the younger brother with them as a sign the
next time they came back.

The holy Qur’anic says:

***“And when he provided them with their provisions, he said: ‘Bring
unto me a brother of years from your father...”***

Then Yusuf added:

***“…Do you not see that I give full measure, and (that) I am the best
of hosts?’”***

Surah Yusuf – Verse 60
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإِن لَمْ تَأْتُونِي بِهِ فَلا كَيْلَ لَكُمْ عِنْدِي وَلاَ تَقْرَبُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***60. “But if you do not bring him to me you shall have no measure (of
corn) from me nor shall you (even) come near me.”***

After words of encouragement and showing his affection and hospitality,
he warns them of the consequences; if they did not bring their brother
with them the next time, they would get no wheat from him and they would
not even be able to get close to him, for bringing their brother would
be a proof of good faith in their dealings.

The verse says:

***“But if you do not bring him to me you shall have no measure (of
corn) from me nor shall you (even) come near me.”***

This was the perfect pretext to get the brothers to bring Benjamin to
him. Incidentally, these interpretations make it clear that the buying
and selling of grain in Egypt was not commonly done by weight but by
volume; and also this shows that Yusuf was, in all respects, a
hospitable person.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 61
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا سَنُرَاوِدُ عَنْهُ أَبَاهُ وإِنَّا لَفَاعِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***61. “They said: ‘We will seek to get him from his father; and verily
we certainly will do (it)’.”***

In answer to him, the brothers of Yusuf replied him as follows:

***“They said: ‘We will seek to get him from his father; and verily we
certainly will do (it)’.”***

They were assured that they could penetrate in father from this point of
view and attract his agreement; and it should be so. While they were
able to get Yusuf out of the hands of their father by persuasion and
insistence, how would they not be able to separate Benjamin from him?

In this regard, they called on their father frequently, begging him and
sought to deceive him.

However, the Arabic term /murawidah/ means: frequent referring to
someone, accompanying with surge and plot.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 62
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ لِفِتْيَانِهِ اجْعَلُوا بِضَاعَتَهُمْ فِي رِحَالِهِمْ
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَعْرِفُونَهَا إِذَا انْقَلَبُوا إِلَي أَهْلِهِمْ
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَرْجِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***62. “And he told his servants to put their merchandise (with which
they had bartered) into their saddle-bags, so that they may recognize it
when they return to their family in order that they might come back
(again).”***

Hadrat Yusuf (as) whose name is synonymous with words such as honesty,
generosity and sincerity, would definitely not have given money from the
treasury to his father or his brothers. It is highly probable that he
had given them back the money for the grain from of his own share and
out of his own pocket.

He returned the money to them so that lack of money would not hinder
them from coming back. In addition, returning the money was a sign of
sincerity, of having no evil intentions with regard to bringing the
brother to him, and placing the money among the goods might have been to
protect them from theft or robbery and that action can be a sign of
non-indebtedness.

Why did not Yusuf introduce himself to his brothers? What prevented him
from introducing himself so that his brothers could recognize him more
quickly and make it possible for him to return to his father sooner and
relieve him of the grief and misery that he had suffered all those
years?

Some commentators say that Allah did not allow Yusuf to do this because
this separation was a trial for Ya‘qub and he was compelled to
successfully undergo this period as was ordained by Allah. Before the
end of this test, Yusuf was not allowed to introduce himself.

Moreover, if he had immediately introduced himself to his brothers,
undesirable reactions might have resulted, among them was that they
might have become so fearful that they would not have come back at all
presuming that he would take revenge upon them for the past.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 63
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا رَجَعُوا إِلَي أَبِيهِمْ قَالُوا يَآ أَبَانَا مُنِعَ مِنَّا
الْكَيْلُ فَاَرْسِلْ مَعَنَآ أَخَانَا نَكْتَلْ وَإِنَّا لَهُ
لَحَافِظُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***63. “So, when they returned to their father, they said: ‘O our
father! The measure was denied to us, therefore send our brother with us
that we may get our measure; and verily we will certainly guard
him’.”***

Yusuf’s brothers then returned to Kan‘an rejoicing and well supplied
although they were worried that if their father did not give his consent
to send Benjamin back with them, the new ‘Aziz (Yusuf), would not
receive them and no share would be allocated to them.

Thus, on their return to Kan‘an, they told their father that the
condition for receiving future supplies of grain would be for him to
send Benjamin with them to Egypt.

The above holy verse says:

***“So, when they returned to their father, they said: ‘O our father!
The measure was denied to us, therefore send our brother with us that we
may get our measure; and verily we will certainly guard him’.”***

Surah Yusuf – Verse 64
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ هَلْ ءَأَمَنُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ إِلاَّ كَمَآ أَمِنْتُكُمْ عَلَي
أَخِيهِ مِن قَبْلُ فَاللَّهُ خَيْرٌ حَافِظاً وَهُوَ أَرْحَمُ
الرَّاحِمينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***64. “He said: ‘Shall I trust you with him save as I trusted you with
his brother before? But Allah is the best guardian, and He is the Most
Merciful of the merciful ones’.”***

The father, who had never forgotten the memory of Yusuf (as), was
overwhelmingly upset when he heard these words. Turning to them, he
wanted to know whether he could have trusted them as he had trusted them
before with Yusuf.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘Shall I trust you with him save as I trusted you with his
brother before? But Allah is the best guardian, and He is the Most
Merciful of the merciful ones’.”***

**Question:** In view of the bad record which Ya‘qub’s sons had, why did
he agree to send Benjamin along with them?

**Answer:** Fakhr Razi has dealt with a number of different
possibilities, each of which can eventually provide some kind of
justification for Ya‘qub’s consent.

Firstly, the brothers had not achieved their primary objective which
consisted of winning their father’s favor.

Secondly, they were less jealous of Benjamin than of Yusuf.

Thirdly, perhaps drought and consequently famine had forced them to make
another journey.

Fourthly, decades had passed since the affair with Yusuf and hence it
was regarded as something forgotten.

Fifthly, Allah, the Almighty, had inspired Ya‘qub with certainty
regarding the safety and protection of his son.

And finally, trusting in Allah, Ya‘qub once again entrusted Benjamin to
his brothers.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 65
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمَّا فَتَحُوا مَتَاعَهُمْ وَجَدُوا بِضَاعَتَهُمْ رُدَّتْ
إِلَيْهِمْ قَالُوا يَآ أَبَانَا مَا نَبْغِي هَذِهِ بِضَاعَتُنَا
رُدَّتْ إِلَيْنَا وَنَميرُ أَهْلَنَا وَنَحْفَظُ أَخَانَا وَنَزْدَادُ
كَيْلَ بَعِيرٍ ذَلِكَ كَيْلٌ يَسِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***65. “And when they opened their baggage, they found their merchandise
had been returned to them. They said: ‘O our father! What (more) can we
desire? This is our merchandise (that) has been returned to us. We shall
get provision for our family, and guard our brother. And we shall obtain
an extra camel’s load. That is an easy measure’.”***

The Arabic term /namiru/ is derived from the term /mir/ which means food
supplies and the phrase /namiru ahlana/ means: ‘we provide our family
with food’.

One can infer from the sentence “***We shall obtain an extra camel’s
load***” that the share of each person had been limited to a camel load
which would have been allocated to the person (Benjamin) only if he
himself had been present.

Once the brothers unloaded their goods, they found that their capital
had been returned to them, i.e., all of what they had paid the ‘Aziz,
was found among their goods.

The verse says:

***“And when they opened their baggage, they found their merchandise had
been returned to them...”***

Feeling that this discovery was decisive evidence to support their
proposal, they used it to convince their father to send Benjamin with
them, what else could they want? Their capital had been returned to them
and the prospect of adding an extra camel load to their goods was an
easy matter for the generous ‘Aziz.

The verse continues saying:

***“…They said: ‘O our father! What (more) can we desire? This is our
merchandise (that) has been returned to us. We shall get provision for
our family, and guard our brother. And we shall obtain an extra camel’s
load. That is an easy measure’.”***

Surah Yusuf – Verse 66
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ لَنْ اُرْسِلَهُ مَعَكُمْ حَتَّي تُؤْتُونِ مَوْثِقاً مِنَ اللَّهِ
لَتَأْتُنَّنِي بِهِ إِلآَّ أَن يُحَاطَ بِكُمْ فَلَمَّآ ءَاتَوْهُ
مَوْثِقَهُمْ قَالَ اللَّهُ عَلَي مَا نَقُولُ وَكِيلٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***66. “He said: ‘Never will I send him with you until you pledge a
solemn covenant to me, in Allah’s name, that you will surely bring him
back to me, unless you are surrounded in (an evil accident).’ And when
they had sworn their solemn pledge, he said: ‘Allah is Guardian over
what we say’.”***

The Arabic term /muiq/ here means that which generates reliability and
wins the confidence of the opposite side, it might take the form of a
commitment, making an oath or making a sacrifice.

Ya‘qub, despite all these incentives was not willing to send his son
Benjamin along with them. But their insistence, which was coupled with
sound logic, persuaded him to submit to their proposal.

So he finally gave his conditional approval to Benjamin going with them.
But they had to swear in Allah’s name to return Benjamin to him unless
they were rendered powerless in fulfilling their commitment due to death
or other unforeseen events.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘Never will I send him with you until you pledge a solemn
covenant to me, in Allah’s name, that you will surely bring him back to
me, unless you are surrounded in (an evil accident).’...”***

The purpose of this oath (a divine pledge) has been the very covenant
and oath which invoked the Divine Name. Only then was he prepared to
release Benjamin to them, for it now meant that Allah (s.w.t.) was
Guardian and Witness to what they pledged.

The verse says:

***“…And when they had sworn their solemn pledge, he said: ‘Allah is
Guardian over what we say’.”***

Surah Yusuf – Verse 67
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ يَا بَنِيَّ لاَ تَدْخُلُوا مِن بَابٍ وَاحدٍ وَادْخُلُوا مِنْ
أَبْوَابٍ مُّتَفَرّقَةٍ وَمَآ اُغْنِي عَنكُم مِنَ اللَّهِ مِن شَيْءٍ
إِنِ الْحُكْمُ إِلاَّ لِلَّهِ عَلَيْهِ تَوَكَّلْتُ وَعَلَيهِ
فَلْيَتَوَكَّلِ الْمُتَوَكّلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***67. “He also said: ‘O’ my sons! Do not enter by one gate, but enter
by separate gates. Yet I cannot avail you anything against Allah.
Judgment belongs no one but Allah. In Him do I put my trust, and in Him
let all that trust put their trust’.”***

After winning the approval of their father, the brothers got ready to go
to Egypt for the second time taking their younger brother along with
them.

Ya‘qub advised them that they should not all enter by one gate to avoid
drawing the attention of the jealous minded and those who did not wish
them well, instead, they should enter Egypt through different gates, and
thus be safer from the evil intentions of people.

The verse says:

***“He also said: ‘O’ my sons! Do not enter by one gate, but enter by
separate gates...”***

Nevertheless, he was quick to point out that in the final analysis, it
was Allah that was the final Guarantor and Judge, and in Him and only
Him should we put our trust, and from Him we must seek help, even when
we take precautions.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Yet I cannot avail you anything against Allah. Judgment belongs no
one but Allah. In Him do I put my trust, and in Him let all that trust
put their trust’.”***

Surah Yusuf – Verse 68
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمَّا دَخَلُوا مِنْ حَيْثُ أَمَرَهُمْ أَبُوهُم مَّا كَانَ يُغْنِي
عَنْهُم مِنَ اللَّهِ مِن شَيْءٍ إِلاَّ حَاجَةً فِي نَفْسِ يَعْقُوبَ
قَضَاهَا وَإِنَّهُ لَذُو عِلْمٍ لِمَا عَلَّمْنَاهُ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ
النَّاسِ لاَ يَعْلَمُون
  </p>
</blockquote>

***68. “And when they entered in the manner their father had enjoined
them, it availed them nothing against Allah; but (it was) a need in
Jacob’s soul which he so satisfied; and verily he was possessed of a
knowledge for that We had taught him, but most people do not know.”***

The brothers set off from Kan‘an and, after covering a long distance,
they arrived in Egypt. On their arrival, they acted according to the
instructions of their old father and entered through different gates.

The verse says:

***“And when they entered in the manner their father had enjoined
them...”***

This behavior, however, did not have any influence on the Divine will.
The only effect mentioned here was that Ya‘qub’s wishes had been
fulfilled.

The verse continues saying:

***“…it availed them nothing against Allah; but (it was) a need in
Jacob’s soul which he so satisfied;...”***

Allusion is made to the fact that its sole effect was that it provided
comfort for father for he was far away and isolated from all of his
sons. He was also concerned about those who would be jealous of them and
those who harbored ill will towards them, and being confident that they
would put his recommendations into practice, he felt more at ease.

The verse says:

***“…and verily he was possessed of a knowledge for that We had taught
him, but most people do not know.”***

### Explanations

1. Bitter experiences educate man, and as a result, he is more inclined
to take the words of great men seriously.

2. Even correct calculations and planning are only effective if they are
in accordance with the Divine will, once they run contrary to the will
of Allah they cannot come into effect.

3. Ya‘qub was aware of some secrets and subjects which he did not deem
fit to disclose.

4. The prayers of the men of Allah are always accepted and their needs
fulfilled.

5. The knowledge of the prophets has its origin in the Divine knowledge.

6. Most people are only aware of the means and the causes of events and
are ignorant of Allah’s authority and the need for putting all their
hopes and trust in Him.


