Section 10: Yusuf Discloses His Identity
========================================

Surah Yusuf – Verse 80
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا اسْتَيْأَسُوا مِنْهُ خَلَصُوا نَجِيّاً قَالَ كَبِيرُهُم
أَلَمْ تَعْلَمُوا اَنَّ أَبَاكُمْ قَدْ أَخَذَ عَلَيْكُم مَوْثِقاً مِنَ
اللَّهِ وَمِن قَبْلُ مَا فَرَّطْتُمْ فِي يُوسُفَ فَلَنْ أَبْرَحَ
الأَرْضَ حَتَّي يَأْذَنَ لِي أَبِي أَوْ يَحْكُمَ اللَّهُ لِي وَهُوَ
خَيْرُ الْحَاكِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***80. “So when they despaired of (moving) him, they conferred in
private. The eldest of them said: ‘Don’t you know that your father has
taken a solemn covenant from you in Allah’s name, and before that you
failed to perform your duty with Yusuf? Therefore, I will never leave
this land until my father permits me, or Allah decides for me; and He is
the best of judges’.”***

The brothers were faced with the prospect of returning to their father
in shame. They did their utmost to save Benjamin, however they found all
roads leading to a solution blocked.

Therefore, they despaired from the ‘Aziz, or from deliverance of the
brother, and decided to return to kan‘an and tell their father about the
matter when they went off by themselves into a corner and conferred as
to what next to do.

The verse says:

***“So when they despaired of (moving) him, they conferred in
private...”***

However, in that private conference the elder brother told them whether
they did not know that their father had taken an oath of Allah from them
that they had to return Benjamin in any possible price, and that they
were the same persons who formerly failed to fulfil their duty
concerning Yusuf, and had a bad background with the Father.

The verse says:

***“…The eldest of them said: ‘Don’t you know that your father has taken
a solemn covenant from you in Allah’s name, and before that you failed
to perform your duty with Yusuf?...”***

The older brother, who embarrassed and frustrated at their unreliability
with their father, decided to stay in Egypt until his father permitted
or until Allah (s.w.t.) decided.

The holy verse continues saying:

***“…Therefore, I will never leave this land until my father permits me,
or Allah decides for me; and He is the best of judges’.”***

The decision of Allah means either until death overtook him or that
Allah (s.w.t.) would make manifest a solution to this problem; or a
plausible excuse which could decisively accepted by father.

### Explanations

1. The Arabic term /xalasu/ means separating themselves away from
others. The Qur’anic word /najiyyan/ means to enter into a whispered
conversation with someone. Therefore, the phrase /xalasu najiyyan/ means
that they gathered together apart from others, for a confidential
meeting to decide on what to do.

2. Pleas and requests should not hinder one from executing Divine
commands and implementing decisive plans in that respect.

3. In cases where one is a culprit in major disasters and unpleasant
matters, the elders are more responsible and the more shameful they
seem.

4. Treachery and crime hurt the conscience of good people throughout
their lives.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 81
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ارْجِعُوا إِلَي أَبِيكُمْ فَقُولُوا يَآ أَبَانَا إِنَّ ابْنَكَ سَرَقَ
وَمَا شَهِدْنَآ إِلاَّ بِمَا عَلِمْنَا وَمَا كُنَّا لِلْغَيْبِ
حَافِظِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***81. “Go back to your father and say: ‘O’ father! Verily your son has
committed theft, and we did not bear witness except to what we knew, and
we were not guardians of the Unseen’.”***

Then the elder brother told other brothers that they would return to the
Father and say that his son (Benjamin) committed theft and that the
testimony they would present to their father could only be based on the
amount of the truth that they were aware of.

They saw the king’s cup discovered and taken out from their brother’s
load which proved that he had committed theft. Nevertheless, they
started to become aware that the hidden truth of the matter rested with
Allah.

The verse says:

***“Go back to your father and say: ‘O’ father! Verily your son has
committed theft, and we did not bear witness except to what we knew, and
we were not guardians of the Unseen’.”***

Surah Yusuf – Verse 82
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاسْأَلِ الْقَرْيَةَ الَّتِي كُنَّا فِيهَا وَالْعِيرَ الَّتِي
أَقْبَلْنَا فِيهَا وإِنَّا لَصَادِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***82. “And ask at the town in which we were and the caravan with which
we travelled hither, and verily we are indeed truthful.”***

The Arabic term /qaryah/ does not only mean ‘village ’, but it also
means ‘a meeting place’ and ‘a residential area’ as well, whether be it
a town or a village.

Yusuf’s brothers did not have any evidence to prove that he was killed
by a wolf when they described the event for their father, but they
provided two proofs to support their story in this situation. Firstly
they had witnesses in the town, and secondly, they had witnesses in the
caravan among which they were.

Besides that, in the former description they said: ***“…even though we
be truthful”***[^1] where the Arabic word /lau/ is a sign of doubt,
weakness, and anxiety, while here, in this verse, they say: ***“…verily
we are indeed truthful”*** that, with the application of ‘***verily***’
and ‘***indeed***’, they claimed that they were really truthful.

Then, in order to make clear their father from any suspicion and to make
him sure that the fact had been exactly that very thing they explained,
they said:

***“And ask at the town in which we were and the caravan with which we
travelled hither...”***

This statement means that there were naturally some people from Kan‘an
among them whom Jacob knew and he could ask the true affair from them so
that, however, he would become certain that they were telling nothing
but the truth.

It says:

***“…and verily we are indeed truthful.”***

They were very confident in their position, they were sure that if the
father were to investigate he would find that they were indeed telling
the truth.

From the verse, we can also deduce that the news that Benjamin had
stolen the king’s cup spread around the town and among the caravan.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 83
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ بَلْ سَوَّلَتْ لَكُمْ أَنفُسُكُمْ أَمْراً فَصَبْرٌ جَميلٌ عَسَي
اللَّهُ أَن يَأْتِيَنِي بِهِم جَميعاً إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْعَلِيمُ
الْحَكِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***83. “He (Ya‘qub) said: ‘No, but your (guilty) selves have made a
matter fair for you, so patience is good. Maybe Allah will bring them to
me all together; verily He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise’.”***

The brothers departed from Egypt, leaving the youngest and the oldest
behind, they returned to Kan‘an in frustration and shame. On this
occasion, contrary to other times, their father found them deeply
disturbed and depressed and that Benjamin and the oldest brother were
not with them, thus he realized that something unpleasant had taken
place.

In order to remove their father’s suspicions and increase his confidence
in them, this time they told the truth of the matter as it had appeared
to them, calling him to inquire from the people of Egypt and the caravan
to verify their story.

Ya‘qub was not impressed, he became angry, and staring at them, he told
them that it was their souls that had made something appealing to them
that had led to this disaster.

The verse says:

***“He (Ya‘qub) said: ‘No, but your (guilty) selves have made a matter
fair for you...”***

On his part Ya‘qub had no other choice than to take recourse in sweet
patience and trust in Allah to return all his sons to him, if He willed,
because He is aware of them inside of all as well as whatever happened
and will happen. Moreover, He is Wise and never does anything undue.

The holy verse continues saying:

***“…so patience is good. Maybe Allah will bring them to me all
together; verily He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise’.”***

### Explanations

1- When the brothers, feigning sadness, brought Yusuf’s bloody shirt to
their father, they said that Yusuf had been eaten by a wolf. Hadrat
Ya‘qub (as) said that their souls had made up something which they had
found attractive.

Now, with his next two sons taken away from him, he repeats the same
sentence. Perhaps, this question may be raised that: in Yusuf’s affair
the brothers committed treason and planned conspiracies, while in the
Benjamin’s affair, such was not the case.

Then, why does Ya‘qub say the same thing in both cases? Tafsir Al Mizan,
provides the answer. ‘Allamah Tabataba’i says that Ya‘qub meant that the
facts surrounding these two other brothers remaining in Egypt is an
extension of their previous conduct with regard to Yusuf (as).

That is, all these occurrences, even though they were not directly
responsible for the last one, were the consequences of their previous
unethical behaviour.

It may be said that the purpose of Ya‘qub was that even then they
thought themselves as innocent and that they had acted well, however,
they had still behaved unethically in the crisis.

Firstly why were they quick to assume that their brother was guilty once
they saw the cup among his load? Couldn’t it be possible that someone
else had hidden it there?

Secondly, why did they return so quickly without any research? And
thirdly, why did they choose servitude as a penalty of the thief?

2- One’s selfish ego seeks to present evil acts as beautiful to itself
in order to justify guilt.

3- Maintaining patience is a practice prevalent among the men of Allah
and a good patience in a believer is the kind that one surrenders
oneself to Allah without complaining about His Will.

4- One must never despair of Allah’s omnipotence.

***“Maybe Allah will bring them to me,”***

5- Solving old and new problems are both alike once the issue in
question is Allah’s will. Allah is able to bring together in one place
yesterday’s Yusuf and today’s brother after many years.

6- A devout believer regards bitter events as having their origin in
Allah’s Providence as well.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 84
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَوَلَّي عَنْهُمْ وَقَالَ يَآ أَسَفَي عَلَي يُوسُفَ وَابْيَضَّتْ
عَينَاهُ مِنَ الْحُزْنِ فَهُوَ كَظِيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***84. “And he turned away from them and said: ‘Alas for Yusuf!’ And his
eyes became white with the grief of that he repressed.”***

The Arabic word /’asaf/ philologically means grief and sorrow
accompanied with wrath. Ya‘qub constantly had some tear in his eyes, the
word ‘what a pity!’ on his tongue, and grief in his heart.

Imam Baqir (as) has been narrated who said in a tradition that his
father Ali-ibn-il-Husayn, even twenty years after the event of Karbala,
used to weep upon any ground. Once he was asked why he wept such a great
deal.

He answered:

*“Ya‘qub had eleven sons one of whom disappeared, although he was alive
Ya‘qub lost his eye-sight for him, while I saw by my own eyes that my
father, my brothers and seventeen men from the house-hold of the Prophet
(S) were slain as martyr before my eyes. How may I not weep?”*

However, a deep sorrow and grief occupied throughout the entity of
Ya‘qub, and the absence of Benjamin, the same son who was a cause of
solace for him, reminded him of his dear Yusuf.

The remembrance of the time this fair, intelligent, faithful, fair young
son was close in his bosom and a moment of the smelling of whose smelt
refreshed the father as new life for him.

But now, not only there was no sign of him, but also his substitute,
Benjamin, had an important painful fate like him. It was at this moment
that he showed reaction as follows:

***“And he turned away from them and said: ‘Alas for Yusuf!’...”***

This double grief caused Ya‘qub (as) to shed flood of tears
involuntarily as much as that his eyes lost its sight.

The verse continues saying:

***“…And his eyes became white with the grief of that he repressed.”***

He was very sad, yet he tried to control his grief and anger patiently,
so that he would say nothing contrast to the Will of Allah.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 85
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا تَاللَّهِ تَفْتَؤَأُ تَذْكُرُ يُوسُفَ حَتَّي تَكُونَ حَرَضاً
أَوْ تَكُونَ مِنَ الْهَالِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***85. “They said: ‘By Allah! You will never cease to remember Yusuf
until you are ill or (until) you are of the perished ones’.”***

The Arabic term /harad/ refers to a person who grieves to death out of
love or sorrow.

The brothers, who were over whelmed by sorrow as a result of this
sequence of events, had a troubled conscience because of Yusuf’s affair
and now they were finding themselves being tried anew with regard to
Benjamin while they were profoundly hurt at the ever increasing sadness
of their father.

With inconvenience they addressed the Father, and as the verse says:

***“They said: ‘By Allah! You will never cease to remember Yusuf until
you are ill or (until) you are of the perished ones’.”***

### Explanations

1. The ideal love is spiritual and the heavenly sighs of grief which are
of valuable import. The thinking of the men of Allah is identical with
the thinking of Allah Himself.

2. The issue of paternal love is different from ordinary kinds of love.

3. Spiritual and psychic problems leave their impact on the body, among
which one can name the separation from a loved one which might cause a
nervous break-down or even death.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 86
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ إِنَّمَآ أَشْكُوا بَثّي وَحُزْنِي إِلَي اللَّهِ وَأَعْلَمُ مِنَ
اللَّهِ مَا لا تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***86. “He said: ‘I only complain of my anguish and my grief to Allah,
and I know from Allah that which you do not know’.”***

Ya‘qub declared that he used to relate his grief, his need, his life
problems and his difficulties to Allah in the dark of night and in
private times; and some commentators have said that /ba/ means an
expression of grief while the word /huzn/ signifies hiding and covering
one’s grief.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘I only complain of my anguish and my grief to Allah, and I
know from Allah that which you do not know’.”***

The Prophet of Allah (S) has been narrated to have said that Gabriel
came to visit Ya‘qub and said:

*“Allah sends His greetings to you and says that you should be of good
cheer that He swears upon His Glory and Magnanimity that if those two
sons were dead He would return their lives to them. Now you should
prepare some food for the poor, those who are Allah’s most favorite
servants.”*

From then on, whenever Ya‘qub wanted to have a meal, he would order
someone to call any poor man outside his home that was hungry could come
inside and share his meal with him.

And when he was fasting, he would order someone to proclaim outside his
house that whoever was fasting could come in and join him in breaking
his fast with him. This narration has been quoted by Hakim Abu ‘Abdullah
Hafiz in his Sahih.

The sentence “***and I know from Allah that which you do not know***”,
means that Ya‘qub well knew that Yusuf’s dream would come true, that he
was alive and according to the dream he saw they would soon prostrate
before him.

In the book entitled ‘An-Nubuwwah’ (The Prophethood) documented from
Sadir Siyrafi, Imam Baqir (as) is narrated to have said that Ya‘qub
prayed for Allah to send the Angel of Death to him, and when the latter
came to Ya‘qub, the angel asked him what he could do for him. Ya‘qub
asked him if he had seen the spirit of Yusuf among those that he had
taken.

He answered he had not, so Ya‘qub realized that Yusuf was still alive.

### Messages to Note

1. A monotheist shares his secrets and his hidden troubles only with
Allah.

2. There are two vicious and heinous attributes regarding human beings:
The silence which rules and reigns over one’s heart and nerves, exerting
pressure on them and jeopardizing one’s health. The other one is crying
and moaning in front of people which diminishes ones honor, and lowers
the chances of success.

The best action in this regard is to take one’s complaint to Allah.

3. There lies in a dialogue or a discussion with Allah such a great
pleasure which cannot be understood by ordinary people.

4. Superficial people usually pass by events easily. However thoughtful
people follow events until their outcome in the Hereafter.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 87
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بَنِيَّ اذْهَبُوا فَتَحَسَّسُوا مِن يُوسُفَ وَأَخِيهِ وَلا
تَيْأَسُوا مِن رَّوْحِ اللَّهِ إِنَّهُ لا يَيْأَسُ مِن رَوْحِ اللَّهِ
إِلاَّ الْقَوْمُ الْكَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***87. “O’ my sons! Go and enquire about Yusuf and his brother, and
never despair of Allah’s Mercy. Verily none despairs of Allah’s Mercy
except the unbelieving people.”***

The Arabic term /tahassus/ means searching for something good by using
one’s senses, while the Arabic term /tajassus/ means to search for bad
things.

According to Raqib, both the terms /rauh/ and /ruh/ mean spirit, but the
word /rauh/ is used when there is a relief and favor in question. It
seems, by the removal of difficulties a new and fresh spirit emerges in
man.

In Tafsir-i-Tibyan it is said that the word /ruh/ (spirit) is derived
from /rih/ (wind). As man feels comfortable when the wind blows, he
feels happy once he has the Divine Grace.

The famine, however, continued to strike hard in Egypt and in the
surrounding areas, including Kan‘an. Once again Ya‘qub ordered his sons
to go to Egypt and procure the food supplies necessary; but this time,
the search for Yusuf and his brother Benjamin were placed at the top of
the list of priorities.

Jacob said:

***“O’ my sons! Go and enquire about Yusuf and his brother...”***

The brothers were sure that Yusuf was no longer alive, so the advice of
their old father astonished them greatly. He reminded them that they
should never despair of Divine grace for that was a sign of unbelief.
Allah’s mercy can remove all difficulties.

Ya‘qub continued saying:

***“…and never despair of Allah’s Mercy. Verily none despairs of Allah’s
Mercy except the unbelieving people.”***

Surah Yusuf – Verse 88
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا دَخَلُوا عَلَيْهِ قَالُوا يآ أَيُّهَا الْعَزِيزُ مَسَّنَا
وَأَهْلَنَا الضُّرُّ وَجِئْنَا بِبِضَاعَةٍ مُّزْجَاةٍ فَاَوْفِ لَنَا
الْكَيْلَ وَتَصَدَّقْ عَلَيْنَآ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَجْزِي الْمُتَصَدّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***88. “Then, when they entered unto him (Yusuf), they said: ‘O’ ‘Aziz!
Affliction has visited us and our family, and we have brought scanty
merchandise. So pay us full measure and bestow you charity on us; verily
Allah will reward the charitable ones’.”***

So once again the sons of Ya‘qub loaded up their goods and, for the
third time, they headed for Egypt, a land that had been full of
adventures for them.

The verse says:

***“Then, when they entered unto him (Yusuf), they said: ‘O’ ‘Aziz!
Affliction has visited us and our family, and we have brought scanty
merchandise. So pay us full measure and bestow you charity on us; verily
Allah will reward the charitable ones’.”***

This time, however, they entered Egypt feeling embarrassed and ashamed,
because, contrary to their other trips, their past record had been badly
damaged with the ‘Aziz and it is probable that some people now
considered them as the thieves of Kan‘an.

The only thing which was their source of comfort among the host of
difficulties and their exasperating troubles was the advice their father
gave them; that they should not despair of Allah’s mercy, for solving
any difficulty was an easy matter for Him.

The Arabic term /bida‘at/ refers to a property in the form of a price.
The Qur’anic term /muzjat/ is derived from /’izja’/ with the sense of
‘casting out’. When salesmen return the money to the customer when it is
less than the required amount, they call it: /bida‘tun muzjat/.

Some commentators have claimed that the meaning of “***bestow you
charity on us***” is a request for Benjamin’s return, but most of the
other commentators believe that it is a request for wheat itself.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 89
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ هَلْ عَلِمْتُم مَّا فَعَلْتُم بِيُوسُفَ وَأَخِيهِ إِذْ أَنتُمْ
جَاهِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***89. “He (Yusuf) said: ‘did you know what you did with Yusuf and his
brother when you were ignorant?””***

A question can be the product of many objectives which can be positive
and constructive or negative and disturbing. Perhaps Yusuf’s objective
in asking this question was to let them know that he knew the whole
story. Another possible objective could be that he wanted them to know
that they did wrong and that they had to repent.

In any rate, at that moment when the period of trial had ended, and
Yusuf also seemed terribly anxious and restless, in order to introduce
himself, turned to the brothers and began as follows:

***“He (Yusuf) said: ‘did you know what you did with Yusuf and his
brother when you were ignorant?””***

Yusuf, the ‘Aziz, finished his speaking while he was smiling. His smile
showed his beautiful teeth to his brothers quite manifestly. Once they
noticed them, realized that they were amazingly similar to the teeth of
their brother Yusuf.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 90
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا أَءِنَّكَ لأَنتَ يُوسُفُ قَالَ أَنَاْ يُوسُفُ وَهَذآ أَخِي
قَدْ مَنَّ اللَّهُ عَلَيْنَآ إِنَّهُ مَن يَتَّقِ وَيَصْبِرْ فَإِنَّ
اللَّهَ لاَ يُضِيعُ أَجْرَ الْمُـحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***90. “They said: ‘Are you indeed Yusuf?’ He said: ‘(Yes), I am Yusuf
and this is my brother. Allah has been indeed gracious to us. Verily
whoever keeps from evil and is patient (is always rewarded) for verily
Allah does not waste the reward of the righteous’.”***

The more the time passed the more the brothers were astonished at why
the ‘Aziz wept upon their father’s letter and how he knew the story of
Yusuf. They thought his feature was very alike to that of Yusuf; perhaps
he was the same Yusuf.

They decided to ask this question from him. If he was not Yusuf they
would not be considered as mad; but if he was Yusuf what they could do
with shame. Excitement had encompassed them thoroughly. At last, they
broke their silence by asking whether he was Yusuf.

The verse says:

***“They said: ‘Are you indeed Yusuf?’...”***

What happened here in this scene? Which painter can draw in a painting
the feature of shame, happiness, weeping, and embracing? Only Allah
knows it and none else.

The conditions should be in a state that people ask, and the stimuli
increase in them for development and guidance. The stimulus for research
and questions ceaselessly increase in Yusuf’s brothers. They said to
themselves why he persisted on bringing Benjamin with them.

Why was the king’s cup found in the loads? Why did he return their money
first time they bought wheat? Where from did he know the story of Yusuf?
Would he not give them wheat again? When this excitement went to its
climax, they asked him whether he was Yusuf and he answered: ‘Yes’.

Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“There is indeed a course of Yusuf in Hadrat Gha’im (as)… People will
not recognize him (as) until when Allah will allow him to introduce
himself.”*[^2]

### Explanations

1. The length of time in history containing bitter and sweet events can
change the relations and comprehensions and cognitions.

2. It is true that the people’s obligation is bitter, but the obligation
of Allah is sweet.

3. The men of Allah believe that all bounties belong to Him.

4. Patience and virtue pave the ground for one's honor.

5. Allah’s grace is wisely distributed and is allocated according to the
well established criteria.

6. That person is eligible for an administrative position and who must
have passed the tests of crises, jealousies, titles, lusts,
humiliations, imprisonments, and slander.

7. One must make use of sensitive periods to inform and propagate. Once
the brothers’ sense of shame was aroused because of their wrong deeds,
they were most ready to accept Yusuf’s remarks.

8. One of the Divine ways of treatment is the bestowal of power in
government upon the righteous people.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 91
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا تَاللَّهِ لَقَدْ ءَاثَرَكَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْنَا وَإِن كُنَّا
لَخَاطِئِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***91. “They said: ‘By Allah! Allah has indeed preferred you above us,
and we certainly have been guilty’.”***

The Arabic term /’iar/ means: ‘accepting other people’s superiority over
oneself’. Because of their wrong way of thinking, such as saying “***We
are a (strong) group***”[^3], they did wrong things like throwing Yusuf
down the well.

Allah made them so exasperated that they had to beg in order to fill
their stomachs and only after this were they ready to confess that their
plans were in ruins and they could see the reality of their wrong
thinking.

The verse says:

***“They said: ‘By Allah! Allah has indeed preferred you above us, and
we certainly have been guilty’.”***

The brothers had sworn on several occasions employing the holy phrase
/tallah/. When the cup was discovered they swore to Allah that they had
not come to that land to commit theft or any other kind of
corruption.[^4]

Swearing to Allah, they told their father that he was always repeating
the name of Yusuf,[^5] and by doing so he showed his extreme love
towards him being in his ancient error.[^6] Now they swore Yusuf was
superior to them.[^7]

Of course the brothers could not look Yusuf in the eyes because of their
shame, and they were probably worried whether or not their crimes would
be forgiven.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 92
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ لاَ تَثْرِيبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الْيَوْمَ يَغْفِرُ اللَّهُ لَكُمْ
وَهُوَ أَرْحَمُ الرَّاحِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***92. “He said: ‘There is no reproach against you this day. Allah may
forgive you; and He is the most Merciful of the merciful (ones)’.”***

The Arabic term /tarib/, mentioned in this verse, means ‘to scorn, to
count something sin, and as much blameworthy.’

At the time of the conquest of Mecca, the pagans had sought refuge in
the Ka‘bah. ‘Umar on that occasion said:

“*We shall take revenge today!*”

However the Prophet (S) replied:

“*Today is the day of blessings*”.

Then he asked the pagans what they thought. They said that they believed
that all would be good, that the Prophet was their sublime brother. The
Prophet (S) said that his words that day were the same as those of
Yusuf.

Here is the word of Yusuf:

***“He said: ‘There is no reproach against you this day...”***

‘Umar then replied that he was ashamed of himself for what he said.[^8]

Ali (as) said:

*“When you gain power over your adversary pardon him by way of thanks
for being able to overcome him.”*[^9]

The traditions say that the heart of a youth is more lenient than that
of an old person, and the immaculate Imam, narrating this verse has said
that since Yusuf was young, he soon forgave his brothers.

Yusuf did not expect the shameful state of his brothers to continue at
the time of his success in particular, and to reassure them, he
immediately said that they would not be threatened or blamed on that
day, and they would not feel grief or sorrow due to the past.

Not only did he declare that he had forgiven them but he also informed
them that the right of Allah was forgivable, as well, by means of that
regret and remorse.

He added:

***“…Allah may forgive you; and He is the most Merciful of the merciful
(ones)’.”***

This incident illustrates Yusuf’s greatness for not only did he spare
his own right, but as far as the Divine right was concerned, he
reassured them that Allah was Compassionate and Merciful.

### Explanations

1. Tolerance is an important instrument of administration.

2. One must learn from Yusuf’s humanity and generosity for he not only
overlooked his own right but he also went out of his way to secure
Allah’s pardon for his brothers.

3. Men of Allah are in the habit of pardoning once they are at the
climax of their power and glory.

4. Allah’s pardon can also extend to include those who had for years
been giving trouble to two of His prophets, Yusuf and Ya‘qub.

5. Once the servant of Allah forgives what can one expect Allah to do?
He is the Most Forgiving of all!

6. To forgive those who are ashamed is the very habit of the Divine
Being.

7. To attribute Allah as the Most Forgiving and as the Most Merciful of
the merciful ones is the ritual for the process of prayer and
repentance.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 93
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذْهَبُوا بِقَمِيصِي هَذَا فَاَلْقُوهُ عَلَي وَجْهِ أَبِي يَأْتِ
بَصِيراً وَأْتُونِي بِاَهْلِكُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***93. “Go with this shirt of mine and lay it on my father’s face, he
will (again) be able to see; and bring me your family all together.”***

This shirt has been mentioned in several occurrences of the story of
Hadrat Yusuf.

A – At first the brothers had stained the shirt of Yusuf with fake blood
and took it to his father, claiming that the wolf had eaten him.[^10]

B – A shirt was torn from the back and was instrumental in identifying
the offender.[^11]

C – A shirt caused Ya‘qub to regain his eyesight.

The verse says:

***“Go with this shirt of mine and lay it on my father’s face, he will
(again) be able to see; and bring me your family all together.”***

We see that Yusuf’s shirt on the face of a blind man can make him regain
his sight, therefore, one can hope to be cured by whatever is in contact
with the men of Allah, such as their mausoleums, courtyards, houses,
doors, the earth, the walls, clothing, and anything else.

We have already been covering the stages in which Yusuf was recognized,
their apologies to him, the pardon he granted and his request for Divine
forgiveness; but the father’s blindness, which had been a clue to the
brothers’ crime, was still outstanding. We have the solution to this
problem in this verse.

Incidentally, the traditions say that Yusuf said:

*“The person who takes my shirt to my father must be the same one who
had taken my blood stained shirt to him, so that he may rejoice after
having been saddened by it.”*

The traditions say that Yusuf seated all his brothers next to him every
day and night for their meals and they always felt ashamed. So they sent
him a message saying that they wanted to have their meals separately
since looking at his face made them feel ashamed.

Yusuf answered:

*“I take pride in sitting next to you and having my meals with you.”*

One could only say: ‘Allah is the greatest’ for such a magnitude of
spirit.

### Explanations

1. Taking recourse to objects, which are somehow associated with men of
Allah, is permitted. Yusuf’s shirt, for example, makes a blind man
regain his eyesight.

2. He who fights against his carnal desires and passions, even his
clothing becomes sacrosanct and sanctified.

3. There is no age limit for performing miracles and wonder workings by
a saint.

4. Yusuf was knowledgeable about the invisible world, otherwise, how
could he know that the shirt could cure his father’s blindness?

5. Affluent children ought to provide for their less well to do
relatives especially their elderly parents.

6. Social conditions leave their impact on the performance of one’s
duties.

7. One must take care of one’s family, in Yusuf’s case, he had to look
after his family in order for them to come to Egypt. Attending to one’s
relatives is a necessity once one fully observes the rights of others.

8. Migration and changing one’s residence have many effects, one of
which is that it removes sad and bitter memories.

[^1]: The current Surah, verse 17

[^2]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, vol. 12, p. 283

[^3]: The current Surah, verses 8 and 14

[^4]: Ibid, verse 73

[^5]: Ibid, verse 85

[^6]: Ibid, verse 95

[^7]: Ibid, the verse under discussion

[^8]: Tafsir-i-Qurtubi

[^9]: Nahjul-Balaqah, saying No. 11

[^10]: The current Surah; verse 18

[^11]: Ibid, verse 27


