Section 11: Jacob Goes to Yusuf
===============================

Surah Yusuf – Verse 94
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمَّا فَصَلَتِ الْعِيرُ قَالَ أَبُوهُمْ إِنّي لأَجِدُ رِيحَ يُوسُفَ
لَوْلآ أَن تُفَنّدُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***94. “And when the caravan set out (from Egypt to Kan‘an), their
father said: ‘Verily I perceive Yusuf’s scent, unless you think me
doting’.”***

Finally, Allah’s grace became manifest. Beside them with joy, Ya‘qub’s
sons took the shirt and headed for Kan‘an. When the caravan departed
from Egypt, their father said that he perceived Yusuf’s scent while
people around him would not believe him.

The verse says:

***“And when the caravan set out (from Egypt to Kan‘an), their father
said: ‘Verily I perceive Yusuf’s scent, unless you think me doting’.”***

### Explanations

The Qur’anic term /fasalat/ means ‘distance’ and /fasalati l‘iru/ here
means that the caravan distanced itself from Egypt. The term
/tufannidun/ is derived from /fanida/ meaning the lack of ability to
think and absence of wisdom.

Ya‘qub was worry about the people around him who might attribute him
silly, so he said: Perhaps the ‘scent of Yusuf ’ implies some fresh news
from Yusuf. This issue is being discussed in scientific circles today as
‘telepathy’ which means the transfer of thought to others in far distant
places.

That is, those who are closely related with each other, or who have
extrasensory perception, can receive direct messages from someone else
from a very long distance away.

Someone said to Imam Baqir (as):

 *“Sometimes, I feel terribly sorry for no reason in such a way that
those around me perceive it.”*

The Imam responded:

*“Muslims are all created out of the same core and nature, and when a
serious accident occurs to one, someone else feels sorry in another land
and place.”*

Surah Yusuf – Verse 95
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا تَاللَّهِ إِنَّكَ لَفِي ضَلاَلِكَ الْقَدِيِمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***95. “They said: ‘By Allah! you are in your ancient error’.”***

Those with Ya‘qub, who normally were the spouses of his children, his
grand sons and grand daughters, and other members of his extended
family, had long since given up Yusuf for dead and thought this new
assertion by Ya‘qub was nothing but his refusal to face reality.

In fact they probably thought he was having delusions when he said that
he perceived the scent of Yusuf. That was why, addressing him, they
seriously and rudely said he was in his old error.

The verse says:

***“They said: ‘By Allah! you are in your ancient error’.”***

It becomes evident that ‘persisting in his old error’ does not mean
error in belief. On the contrary, it means being in error in refusing to
recognize what they perceived as the reality about Yusuf.

However these meanings show that they behaved unto that old great
prophet very rudely and boldly. Once they remarked their father had been
in a manifest aberration, and here they told him:

***“…you are in your ancient error’.”***

They were unaware of the intimacy and sincerity of the old man of
Kan‘an, and regarded him as not being as enlightened and illuminated as
them. They did not think that future events might be as clear to him as
a reflection in a mirror.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 96
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّآ أَن جَآءَ الْبَشِيرُ أَلْقَاهُ عَلَي وَجْهِهِ فَارْتَدَّ
بَصِيراً قَالَ أَلَمْ أَقُل لَّكُمْ اِنّي أَعْلَمُ مِنَ اللَّهِ مَا
لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***96. “Then, when the bearer of the good news came, he cast it (the
shirt) on his (Jacob’s) face and (forthwith) he regained his sight. He
said: ‘Did I not tell you I know from Allah what you do not know?’”***

After a number of difficult nights and days, one day Ya‘qub heard a loud
voice proclaiming that the caravan of Kan‘an had just arrived from
Egypt. Unlike the previous occasion, the brothers arrived in joyous
spirits and went straight to their father’s house.

Before anybody else, Bashir, ‘the bearer of good news’, came up to the
old grieving man and placed the shirt over his face. Ya‘qub was unable
to see the shirt, but just before it was placed on his face, he sensed
the familiar scent of his Yusuf.

A wonderful excitement overwhelmed the old man, the scent intensified
when the shirt fell on his face, and suddenly he felt his eyes were
opened and he was able to see. The world, with all its beauties, was
once again before his eyes; as the Qur’an says:

***“Then, when the bearer of the good news came, he cast it (the shirt)
on his (Jacob’s) face and (forthwith) he regained his sight...”***

The brothers and their entourage burst into tears of joy and he, with a
decisive tone, told them:

***“…‘Did I not tell you I know from Allah what you do not know?’”***

If the purpose of the Qur’an that says ‘his eyes turned white’ is a
decrease and diminishing of the eyesight, then the term /basiran/ means
illumination, and it indicates that sadness and joy both leave an impact
on one’s sense of vision.

However, if the intent of the verse is a complete blindness, which can
be inferred from the literal view of the verse, then the Qur’anic phrase
which says ‘and (forthwith) he regained his sight’ would imply that the
return of his eyesight was a miracle that the Qur’an proves it.

### Explanations

1. The knowledge of the prophets has its origin in the Divine knowledge.

2. The prophets trust the promises of the Almighty as the Divine Will
rules over all natural laws.

3. The clothing and the belongings of men of Allah can have an impact
over some other beings.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 97
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا يَآ أَبَانَا اسْتَغْفِرْ لَنَا ذُنُوبَنَآ إِنَّا كُنَّا
خَاطِئِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***97. “They said: ‘O’ our father! Ask forgiveness of our sins for us,
verily we were guilty’.”***

This amazing miracle made the brothers think deeply about their dark
past. In so doing they regretted their past misdeeds and asked their
father to seek forgiveness for their sins.

The verse says:

***“They said: ‘O’ our father! Ask forgiveness of our sins for us,
verily we were guilty’.”***

This is a good lesson for us; that we must always think of reforming
ourselves and compensate for our past mistakes. We are all sinners and
offenders.

We should also take note that it is permissible to appeal to the men of
Allah to ask forgiveness of one’s sins.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 98
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ سَوْفَ أَسْتَغْفِرُ لَكُمْ رَبّي إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْغَفُورُ
الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***98. “He said: ‘Soon I will ask forgiveness for you from my Lord; He
is the Forgiving, the Merciful’.”***

The great old man, who possessed a magnanimous spirit and with immense
generosity, refrained from blaming them; instead he promised them that
he would soon ask forgiveness for them from Allah. The verse says:

***“He said: ‘Soon I will ask forgiveness for you from my Lord;...”***

It has been mentioned in some Islamic traditions that Ya‘qub’s (as) aim
was to postpone acting upon their request until dawn the next Friday
when would have been a more appropriate time for the acceptance of
prayers and repentance. Ya‘qub hoped that Allah would accept their
repentance and overlook their sins, for Allah is Compassionate and Kind
as the verse states:

***“…He is the Forgiving, the Merciful’.”***

This verse and the verse before it show that asking a third party to ask
forgiveness from Allah for oneself not only is not incompatible with
monotheism, but also provides a way to merit Allah’s approbation.
Otherwise, how would it be possible that prophet Ya‘qub (as) could
accept his sons’ request to seek forgiveness for them from Allah? There
is a light at the end of the tunnel.

These verses teach us that no matter how hard and painful one’s
difficulties might be, and how limited and insufficient the apparent
means and the possibilities might seem, one must not feel removed from
hope in Allah’s grace and favor.

In this story, Allah made a blind man regain his eyesight with a shirt
and made the smell of that shirt travel a long distance, He enabled
someone lost to return home after long years of separation, and healed
the wounds of broken hearts can also remove the grave pains and
difficulties.

Yes, in this story and historical event, there lies the great lesson of
Unity and theology proving that nothing is difficult and complicated for
the Will of Allah.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 99
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا دَخَلُوا عَلَي يُوسُفَ ءَاوَي إِلَيْهِ أَبَوَيْـهِ وَقَالَ
ادْخُلُوا مِصْرَ إِن شَآءَ اللَّهُ ءَامِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***99. “Then when they entered unto Yusuf, he lodged his parents with
him and said: ‘Enter Egypt, Allah willing, (all) in security’.”***

### The End of Yusuf and His Brothers

The family, in response to Yusuf’s invitation, and after much
preparation, traveled to Egypt. Ya‘qub was riding to the destination
while his lips were busy calling Allah and thanking Him.

This journey, unlike the previous ones, was free from all kinds of
troubles, and those troubles could not even be compared to the
remarkable gains which awaited them at the end of the journey.

The very thought of joining Yusuf made the trip easy for them so much so
that a painful thorny path would seem as if it had been paved with
velvet. Soon when the oases of Egypt came into view, they were finally
there.

Typical of the style of the Qur’an, it skips over the details which we
fill in by means of the traditional narrations and by our own
imagination, and simply says that they entered into the presence of
Yusuf.

The verse says:

***“Then when they entered unto Yusuf, he lodged his parents with
him...”***

When they arrived at his palace, and Yusuf embraced his parents, this
was the sweetest moment in Ya‘qub’s life. It was a meeting that had come
about after many years of separation.

Every moment of this meeting and embracing Ya‘qub and Yusuf was so
exciting that only Allah knows what happened and none else. In these
sweet moments of reunion, then, only Allah knows the intensity of the
bliss shared between the father and his beloved son.

Yusuf told every one to enter the land of Egypt and assured them that
they would be safe and secure there.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and said: ‘Enter Egypt, Allah willing, (all) in security’.”***

One can conclude from this statement that Yusuf had come out of the
gates of the town to welcome his parents. Perhaps the sentence ‘they
entered unto Yusuf’ means that he had ordered tents to be erected there
to receive and entertain preliminarily his parents before they entered
the town.

### Explanations

1. It is difficult, of course, to describe this part of the story. Yusuf
had arranged some tents outside the city and waiting for his parents to
come and that he would bring them respectfully into Egypt.

It was natural that in Kan‘an, when Yusuf’s parents and brothers were
preparing themselves for the journey, people there had a very happy
time.

They saw that by receiving the good news of Yusuf’s safety, and in the
case that Ya‘qub had regained his eyesight, how joyful were the family
setting off to meet Yusuf.

These people were also happy that Yusuf had become a treasurer and
governor in Egypt and especially that, by sending wheat for them in the
course of famine, he had supported them.

2. One can conclude from the Arabic term /abawayh/ (his parents), that
Yusuf’s mother had also been alive at the time.

Some narrations say that Ya‘qub insisted and swore that Yusuf would
recount his own story for him. As Yusuf began telling his story of how
his brothers had taken him near the edge of the well and took off his
shirt while threatening him, Ya‘qub fainted.

When he recovered, he again asked him to continue, but Yusuf swore by
Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac (as) and begged his father to spare him from
telling it, and Ya‘qub accepted.[^1]

By the way, it is worthy to note that social posts and ranks should not
cause us to be heedless of respecting our parents in any condition.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 100
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَفَعَ أَبَوَيْهِ عَلَي الْعَرْشِ وَخَرُّوا لَهُ سُجَّداً وَقَالَ
يَآ أَبَتِ هَذَا تَأْوِيلُ رُؤْيايَ مِن قَبْلُ قَدْ جَعَلَهَا رَبّي
حَقّاً وَقَدْ أَحْسَنَ بِي إِذْ أَخْرَجَني مِنَ السّجْنِ وَجَآءَ بِكُم
مّنَ الْبَدْوِ مِن بَعْدِ أَن نَّزَغَ الشَّيْطَانُ بَينِي وَبَيْنَ
إِخْوَتِي إِنَّ رَبّي لَطِيفٌ لِمَا يَشَآءُ إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْعَلِيمُ
الْحَكِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***100. “And he raised both his parents upon the throne, and they fell
down prostrating before him, and he said: ‘O’ my father! This is the
interpretation of my dream of aforetime! My Lord has made it come true;
and He was indeed kind to me when He brought me out of the prison, and
He brought you out of the desert (of Kan‘an into Egypt) after Satan had
made strife between me and my brothers. Verily my Lord is Benignant unto
what He wills. Verily He is indeed the All-Knowing, the All-Wise’.”***

When he seated his parents on the throne, the magnitude of the Divine
Grace and the profundity of such favors and blessings left such an
impact upon his parents and brothers that they went into a state of
prostration before him.

The verse says:

***“And he raised both his parents upon the throne, and they fell down
prostrating before him...”***

Certainly prostration, implying worship, belongs only to Allah alone.
Some Islamic traditions state that this prostration had been done as
obedience and worship unto Allah as well as an act of respect towards
Yusuf.

At this point he told his father that the meaning of his dream had now
become clear, the dream of the sun, the moon and the eleven stars all
prostrating before him were now represented by his parents and his
eleven brothers prostrating before him.

The verse says:

***“…and he said: ‘O’ my father! This is the interpretation of my dream
of aforetime! My Lord has made it come true;...”***

But even in the midst of triumph and glory, Yusuf never forgot Allah’s
mercy upon him; he recounted all of his troubles and how Allah had
always helped him overcome them.

The verse says:

***“…and He was indeed kind to me when He brought me out of the prison,
and He brought you out of the desert (of Kan‘an into Egypt) after Satan
had made strife between me and my brothers...”***

Interestingly enough, he did not mention his sojourn in the well;
perhaps it was because he did not want to embarrass his brothers. All
these favors and graces have their origin in Allah, for Allah is the
source of Grace and He bestows his favors whenever and upon whosoever He
wants.

He administers all the affairs of His subjects and helps them to solve
their problems. He knows those who are in need and who merits his favor,
for He is knowledgeable and wise.

The verse says:

***“…Verily my Lord is Benignant unto what He wills. Verily He is indeed
the All-knowing, the All-Wise’.”***

### Explanations

1. The Arabic term /‘arš/ lexically means the throne on which a sultan
or ruler is seated. The term /xarru/ means throwing oneself upon the
earth, while the term /badw/ means ‘oasis, desert’ and /nazaqa/ means
‘initiating a task with intention of corruption’.

2. The Qur’anic term ‘Latif’ is one of Allah’s names which implies that
His power permeates into all complicated matters and its relevance to
this verse is the fact that there were complications in Yusuf’s life
which could only have been solved by Allah’s Power alone.

3. Yusuf became like the Ka‘ba for them, and his parents and his
brothers prostrated before him for the sake of Allah. Were this
prostration for other than Allah (s.w.t.), it would have been an act of
polytheism, however, Ya‘qub (as) and Yusuf (as), who were two of Allah’s
prophets, would not support such a forbidden act.

### Messages to Remember

1. No matter in what position you are in, you should regard your parents
as superior to yourselves.

2. Men of Allah regard entering and leaving prison as a monotheistic
circle and a theological gesture.

3. All bitter and sweet events take place in accordance with Divine
Knowledge and Wisdom.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 101
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ قَدْ آتَيْتَنِي مِنَ الْمُلْكِ وَعَلَّمْتَنِي مِن تَأْوِيلِ
الْأَحَادِيثِ ۚ فَاطِرَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ أَنتَ وَلِيِّي فِي
الدُّنْيَا وَالْآخِرَةِ ۖ تَوَفَّنِي مُسْلِمًا وَأَلْحِقْنِي
بِالصَّالِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***101. “O my Lord! You have given me to rule, and have taught me the
interpretation of dreams. (O!) Originator of the heavens and the earth!
You are my Protector in the world and the Hereafter. Cause me die a
Muslim (in submission (unto you) and join me with the righteous.”***

When they witness their own glory and power, the men of Allah are at
once reminded of the Almighty. They are aware that everything that
exists has its origin in Him.

Turning to the true Proprietor, the everlasting Benefactor, Yusuf gave
thanks to Almighty Allah for bestowing upon him great political power,
and the science of dream interpretation. This science had created
tremendous changes in his life and that of the majority of His subjects
and what a profound science it is!

The verse says:

***“O my Lord! You have given me to rule, and have taught me the
interpretation of dreams...”***

It is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth and it is for this
reason that everything is humble when facing Him; He is our Guardian and
our Protector in this world and in the world Hereafter.

Yusuf continues his plea to Allah saying:

***“…(O!) Originator of the heavens and the earth! You are my Protector
in the world and the Hereafter. Cause me die a Muslim (in submission
(unto you) and join me with the righteous.”***

### Explanations

1. It is a Divine prerogative to bestow sovereignty upon someone.
Therefore, one should not consider one’s sovereignty as a consequence of
one’s own initiative, thinking, power, allies, or one’s own plan; on the
contrary, the Divine will is the root and the main factor in one’s rise
to power.

2. Abu Hamzah has said that Ya‘qub (as) lived for 147 years and he was
130 years of age when he called upon Yusuf in Egypt and stayed there for
17 years. Ibn Ishaq has said that when Ya‘qub died, his body was placed
in a casket made of Ebony wood and taken to the city of Bayt ul Muqaddas
(Jerusalem).

After burying his father there, Yusuf returned to Egypt in accordance
with the will of that great man. He lived for 23 years more after his
father died. He was the first Messenger of the Children of Israel. He
stated in his will that he would be buried near the grave of his
fathers.

Some have said that he was buried in Egypt until Moses (as) brought his
remains with him and buried them near the tomb of his father.

It is said that the position of prophecy was accorded to Robil after him
and Yahuda acceded to the rank after the latter’s term.

In the Book, An-Nubuwwah, Muhammad ibn Muslim, is quoted as saying:

*“I asked Imam Baqir (as) who was /hujjah/, Allah’s Authority on the
earth at that time? Was it Ya‘qub or Yusuf? He answered that Ya‘qub (as)
was, and Yusuf was the sovereign.*

*When Ya‘qub passed away, Yusuf laid him in a casket, brought him to
Damascus, and buried him in Bayt ul Muqaddas, and then Yusuf became the
Authority of Allah after Ya‘qub. I asked if Yusuf was a prophet and a
messenger of Allah as well.*

 *He answered: “Yes, have you not heard what Allah, the Glorious and the
Magnanimous has said: meaning: ‘Yusuf came to you previously along with
evidences’?”* [^2]

Imam Sadiq (as) is narrated to have said:

*“When Yusuf went to prison, he was twelve years old. He remained in
prison for 18 years and he lived for 80 years after his release from
prison which amounts to a total of 110 years.*

*And as Allah the Almighty destined him to pass away in Egypt, he was
put into a casket made of marble and was buried in the middle of the
Nile River. The reason why he was buried in such a way was because the
people of Egypt started to vie with each other to bury him in their own
quarter of the city and hence benefit from the blessings of the presence
of such a pure body among them.*

Thus it was considered more appropriate to bury the body in the middle
of the Nile River, making it possible for the river water to flow over
it and allow all the inhabitants to benefit from it.

This tomb remained in the Nile River until the time of Moses (as) when
he took it out of the Nile and out of Egypt with himself.

A closer look at a few of the previous verses would reveal the following
points of note:

### 1- Is Prostration Allowed to Other Than Allah?

As we discussed a foretime, regarding issues relating to the prostration
of the angels to Adam; prostration can signify worship which in this
case is particular to Allah, and it is not allowed for anyone in any
religion to worship any being other than Allah. The monotheism of
worship is an important part of general monotheism about which all
prophets had a similar message and outlook.

Therefore, from this particular point of view, prostration must only be
for Allah the same Allah Who had accorded so many favors and sovereignty
to Yusuf, and who removed all of Ya‘qub’s difficulties.

However, although prostration can be for Allah’s sake, in the case of
Yusuf it could also have been a sign of glorification and respect for
Yusuf as well, because it had been performed in view of the grandeur of
the favours which Allah had bestowed upon him.

From this point of view, the Arabic pronoun /lahu/ meaning ‘before him’
in the phrase: ***“and they fell down prostrating before him”*** which
definitely refers to Yusuf is compatible with this meaning.

Another way of looking at it is that prostration in its broad meaning
indicates humility or modesty, and is not always used according to its
prevalent meaning as worship, rather it sometimes can refer to a very
profound type of respect.

### 2- Social Security is a Great Blessing from Allah

Among all the merits and bounties of Egypt, Yusuf Pointed out the bounty
of security. This shows that the bounty of security is the root of all
merits.

It is indeed true because when security disappears other material and
spiritual subjects of welfare will be in danger. When an environment is
not secured, is not possible to worship Allah, nor is life with honesty
and free mind, nor struggle and effort and endeavour for progression and
social aims.

This phrase may be; however, an illusion to this fact that Yusuf wanted
to say that the land of Egypt, where he was governing, was not any more
the former country of Pharaoh. Those despotic behaviours, crimes,
exploitations, cruelties and tortures had been disappeared. It was a
completely secured site.

### 3- The Important Position of Knowledge

At the end of the holy verse, Yusuf once again stresses the importance
of the science of dream interpretation and compares it with the
sovereignty bestowed upon him. He finally concludes that knowledge, even
such a science as dream interpretation has a great impact even on such
matters as political rule.

### 4- Man Can Undergo a Great Deal of Changes Throughout His Lifetime

However, the last years are the milestones in one’s life, because it
marks the conclusion of one’s life, and the final judgment depends on
it. Therefore, faithful and conscious people always ask Allah to
illuminate the last years of their lives and Yusuf did as such saying:

***“…Cause me die a Muslim (in submission unto You), and join me with
the righteous!”***

### 5- Did Yusuf’s Mother Come to Egypt?

One can well conclude from the above verses that Yusuf’s mother was
still alive at that time and that she came to Egypt along with her
husband and her sons. To compensate for this blessing she prostrated.

However, some commentators insist on the matter that his mother, Rail
(Rahil), had already passed away and it was his aunt who came to Egypt
and had substituted for his mother. Nevertheless, in the Torah it says
that Rail passed away after giving birth to Benjamin.[^3]

This conclusion can also be drawn from other narrations such as those
narrated by Wahab ibn Bunyah and Ka‘b ul Akhbar both of which have been
apparently taken from the Torah.

Anyway, we cannot explain away or interpret the verses of the Qur’an at
face value which say that Yusuf’s mother was alive that day and this
fact should not be overlooked without adequate justification.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 102
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ مِنْ أَنْبَآءِ الْغَيْبِ نُوحِيهِ إِلَيْكَ وَمَا كُنتَ
لَدَيْهِمْ إِذْ أَجْمَعُوا أَمْرَهُمْ وَهُمْ يَمْكُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***102. “That is of the news of the Unseen (which) We reveal to you (O’
Prophet); and you were not with them (the brothers of Joseph) when they
agreed upon their plan and they were plotting.”***

After winding up the story of Yusuf, with all its didactic lessons and
precious conclusions and without any extravagant and historical
superstition, the Qur’an, addressing the Prophet (S), says that this
information was news from the invisible world which Allah had revealed
to him, because he was not there to witness the most secret and detailed
thoughts and behaviors that they had occurred, such as the secret
plotting of the brothers against Yusuf and their attempts to deceive
their father.

The verse says:

***“That is of the news of the Unseen (which) We reveal to you (O’
Prophet); and you were not with them (the brothers of Joseph) when they
agreed upon their plan and they were plotting.”***

Therefore, it was only revelation of Allah which informed him of such
important news.

This statement makes it clear that though the story of Yusuf has been
mentioned in the Torah, and naturally the people of Arabia, more or
less, knew something about it, but they never knew the whole event
properly and in detail, even what was said in private meetings has not
been free from additional matters and superstitions.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 103
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَآ أَكْثَرُ النَّاسِ وَلَوْ حَرَصْتَ بِمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***103. “And most people will not believe, though you desire it.”***

The Arabic term (harasa) refers to an intense desire for something and
the struggle to attain it.

The prophets were zealous, sympathetic, and eager in their efforts to
guide others to the Right Path and the fact that people did not accept
the faith does not imply that the prophets had failed or that they had
any shortcomings.

This refusal is due to man’s liberty and freedom of choice itself which
he employs in his reluctance to accept the faith. Therefore, most people
have been repeatedly criticized by the Qur’an from the ideological and
religious perspective.

The verse says:

***“And most people will not believe, though you desire it.”***

However, receiving these clear signs revealed and hearing these divine
admonitions all people must believe and return to the right path, but in
spite of the desist of the Prophet, most of them do not believe.

Surah Yusuf – Verse 104
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا تَسْأَلُهُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ إِنْ هُوَ إِلاَّ ذِكْرٌ
لِلْعَالَمِين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***104. “And you do not ask them for any reward for it; it (the Qur’an)
is no other than a reminder for all mankind.”***

In this verse the Qur’an refers to the fact that mankind has excuse and
no real reason to reject the call of the Prophet because of the
obviousness of the message, he also does not require any reward for
delivering it to them, which indicates that he has no personal ulterior
motives and there is no heed for him to fabricate the text of his
message.

The verse says:

***“And you do not ask them for any reward for it;...”***

This is a universal call and a reminder to the people of the world, at
the same time, it is a table spread for princes and the paupers alike,
indeed for all human beings.

The verse says:

***“…it (the Qur’an) is no other than a reminder for all mankind.”***

Generosity is one of the signs of a sincere believer. He expects no
reward or thanks from anyone.

Certainly, the Qur’an is a reminder because:

1. It reminds one of His blessings and attributes.

2. It reminds one of his past and his future.

3. It reminds one of the fall, the collapse, as well as the glory of
human societies.

4. It reminds one of the Day of Resurrection and its stages.

5. It reminds one of the magnitudes of existence.

6. It reminds one of the lives of historical personages.

The Qur’anic sciences and its ordinances are facts which must be learned
and always kept in mind, because the Qur’anic term /ŏikr/ is called to a
knowledge which exists in mind and one does not neglect it.

[^1]: Majma‘ ul Bayan.

[^2]: Surah Ghafir, No. 40 verse 34.

[^3]: The Torah, Genesis, Chapter 35, No. 18 says: “And it came to pass,
as her soul was in departing, (for she died) that she called his name
Ben-oni: but his father called him Benjamin.


