Section 1: The Qur’an Contains Signs From the All-Wise
======================================================

Surah Yunus – Verse 1
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الر تِلْكَ ءَايَاتُ الْكِتَابِ الْحَكِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. “Alif ‘A’, Lam ‘L’, Ra ‘R’. These are the verses of the Book of
Wisdom.”***

It is noteworthy that six consecutive suras of the Qur’an begin with
abbreviated letters which are recited: Alif, Lam, Ra. These Suras are:
Yunus, Hud, Yusuf, Ar-Ra‘d (with an exception, of course), ’Ibrahim, and
Al-Hijr. Each of these letters is an indication to the Names of Allah or
to some other things which have been explained at the beginning of Surah
Al-Baqarah.

The Arabic word /tilka/ refers to the verses that are found in this
Surah.

The objective meaning of the Qur’anic phrase /al kitab il hakim/ is the
“Protected Tablet” or the Qur’an. Since it contains wisdom and teaches
by means of wisdom, it is therefore Wise.

In other words; the Qur’an has a high rank, because the Holy Book itself
is Wise. Simultaneously, while it contains both teachings of wisdom and
is wise in content, it is a judge and an arbitrator as well. It remains
intact from hostile elements and history and the passage of time can
leave no impact upon it. It is “***the Book of Wisdom***”.

Surah Yunus – Verse 2
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَكَانَ لِلنَّاسِ عَجَباً أَنْ أَوْحَيْنَآ إِلَي رَجُلٍ مِنْهُمْ أَنْ
أَنذِرِ النَّاسَ وَبَشّرِ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا أَنَّ لَهُمْ قَدَمَ
صِدْقٍ عِنْدَ رَبّهِمْ قَالَ الْكَافِرُونَ إِنَّ هَذَا لَسَاحِرٌ
مُبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***2. “Was it a wonder to the people that We revealed to a man from
among themselves that he should warn mankind and give good tidings to
those who believe that they have before their Lord the rank of Truth?
(While) the unbelievers say: ‘This is indeed an evident sorcerer!’”***

The verses of wisdom of the Qur’an are composed of the same letters and
sounds that are just like Alif, Lam, and Ra.

Their differences with other statements lie in the fact that they are
intermingled with divine wisdom, the sort of which is so encompassing
that it exposes the truth, and drags mankind to guidance, but the people
do not believe this fact that a man, selected from among themselves, can
receive revelations from Allah.

This matter is not surprising, since the aim of revelation is to warn
the people and give glad tidings to the believers notifying them of the
high esteem in which they are being held with their Creator. If they
believe firmly in Him, He guides them and rewards them accordingly[^1]!

The verse says:

***“Was it a wonder to the people that We revealed to a man from among
themselves that he should warn mankind and give good tidings to those
who believe that they have before their Lord the rank of Truth?…”***

The idolaters, however, said that “***this man***” (meaning the Prophet
(S), must have obviously been a sorcerer and a magician since he brought
something that could not be brought by others.

The verse continues saying:

***“…(While) the unbelievers say: ‘This is indeed an evident
sorcerer!’”***

The disbelievers considered prophecy as sorcery and, because of their
short sightedness, dark heartedness, and lack of understanding, they
could mostly not grasp the truth and distinguish the difference between
miracles and the work of magicians.

Surah Yunus – Verse 3
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ رَبَّكُمُ اللّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضَ فِي
سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ ثُمَّ اسْتَوَي عَلَي الْعَرْشِ يُدَبِّرُ الاَمْرَ مَا
مِن شَفِيعٍ إِلاَّ مِنْ بَعْدِ إِذْنِهِ ذَلِكُمُ اللّهُ رَبُّكُمْ
فَاعْبُدُوهُ أَفَلاَ تَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***3. “Verily, your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the Earth
in six Days. Then He established Himself on ‘Arsh (the Throne),
directing the affair. No intercessor can there be except after
(obtaining) His leave. This is Allah your Lord; Him therefore worship
you: will you not remember?”***

The objective meaning of ‘***Six Days’*** is six periods of time in the
course of creation.

The ‘***throne***’ (‘arsh) alludes to power and omnipotence. When one
says someone was enthroned or overthrown, he implies that he was
elevated in power or stripped of his power. Allah’s comprehensive
authority extends all over existence both before the creation of the
earth and the heavens and after their creation.

The Qur’an says:

***“And His ‘Arsh (throne) was over the water.”***[^2]

Even next to the end of the world and during the Resurrection, Allah’s
omnipotence over all existence will remain intact, too.

The Qur’an says:

***“…and above them eight shall bear on that Day your Lord’s ‘Arsh
(throne).”***[^3]

### Messages

1. Acquiring knowledge about Allah (s.w.t.) should precede worshipping
Him.

2. Worship must be kept exclusively for Him Who has the power to create
and administer all the affairs of creation and to no one else.

3. The creation of the world has been accomplished according to a plan
and an arranged program, (in six days). When there are pre-ordaining
plans for all beings in the system of creation, how can one think of
human beings, who are the outstanding achievements of the creative
process, to be without any planned destiny?

The verse says:

***“Verily, your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the Earth in
six Days. Then He established Himself on ‘Arsh (the Throne), directing
the affair. ...”***

4. Allah has created the entire existence and is in full command,
administering it with wisdom while leaving no one in charge of any part
without His prior approval.

5. Any effort at mediation by any being must meet with His approval.
Thus one, such as idols, cannot be unduly appointed as an intercessor.

The verse says:

***“…No intercessor can there be except after (obtaining) His
leave...”***

6. Extremists might try to introduce the Creator as Allah, nevertheless
they consider themselves as competent policy-makers and able to separate
religion from politics.

It says:

***“…This is Allah your Lord; Him therefore worship you:…”***

Man believes in his Creator. He only needs to be reminded.

The verse concludes:

***“…will you not remember?”***

7. Deity is not separate from Lordship.

Surah Yunus – Verse 4
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَيْهِ مَرْجِعُكُمْ جَمِيعاً وَعْدَ اللّهِ حَقّاً إِنَّهُ يَبْدَؤُ
الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ يُعِيدُهُ لِيَجْزِيَ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا
الصَّالِحَاتِ بِالْقِسْطِ وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَهُمْ شَرَابٌ مِنْ
حَمِيمٍ وَعَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْفُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***4. “To Him will be your return, all together. The promise of Allah is
true. Verily He originates the (process of) creation, then He causes it
to return, that He may reward with justice those who believe and do
righteous deeds; but those who disbelieve, for them shall be a drink
from the boiling fluids and a painful chastisement for what they used to
reject.”***

This verse puts forth both the principle of Resurrection ***(to Him will
be your return)*****,** and its probability,

***(…He originates the (process of) creation, then He causes it to
return…).***

This meaning is just like verse 19 of Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7 which
states:

***“…As He brought you forth in the beginning, so shall you return.”***

And it also refers to the aim of Resurrection which involves punishment
and reward.

The verse continues saying:

***“…that He may reward with justice those who believe and do righteous
deeds; but those who disbelieve, for them shall be a drink from the
boiling fluids and a painful chastisement for what they used to
reject.”***

Therefore, those who are believers and have done good deeds will be
rewarded in a just manner, leading them to Paradise. The share of the
unbelievers will be a burning liquid made of boiling water that will
torture them painfully and they will be kept in Hell forever.

Surah Yunus – Verse 5
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي جَعَلَ الشَّمْسَ ضِيَآءً وَالْقَمَرَ نُوراً وَقَدَّرَهُ
مَنَازِلَ لِتَعْلَمُوا عَدَدَ السّنِينَ وَالْحِسَابَ مَا خَلَقَ اللّهُ
ذَلِكَ إِلاَّ بِالْحَقِّ يُفَصِّلُ الاَيَاتِ لِقَوْمٍ يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. “He it is Who made the sun a radiation and the moon a light, and
determined it by stations, that you might know the number of years and
the reckoning (of time). Allah did not create that save in truth. (Thus)
does He explain the Signs in detail, for a people who know.”***

There are words used in the Qur’an for the sun, such as /siraj/ and
/diya’/, which signify a strong and intensive light. As for the moon,
the words used are /nur/ and /munir/ which signify even dim light as
well.

From among the tokens of Allah’s designs in the world of existence and
His absolute command over the universe, one can name the wise order
spread throughout the entire cosmos. Do you not behold what a heat and
what a light He has given to the sun?

They change with the changes of the sun in the morning and during the
day, and manifest themselves in the variety of the seasons of the year.
It varies at dawn and midday, not exceeding the limits at any extreme.

If the sun’s heat exceeds what it already is, all the earth would be
incinerated, and if it decreases from its present temperature, the earth
and what ever is in it will freeze, and in both cases, life will
terminate in its totality.

If the light of the sun was extinguished you would no longer be able to
see the moon for it borrows its light from the sun. It spreads its light
at nighttime over the earth, residing temporarily in its different
stages: as the full moon, as a crescent and occasionally disappearing
altogether.

Through observing the regularity of these changes mankind can keep track
of their days, months and years, organize their work and make plans with
a schedule.

That is, it is an accurate natural calendar that can benefit both the
sage and the illiterate for keeping track of the rhythm of their work in
their daily-lives. This privilege of the moon is besides the light that
it gives us.

The verse says:

***“He it is Who made the sun a radiation and the moon a light, and
determined it by stations, that you might know the number of years and
the reckoning (of time)...”***

Then the Qur’an implies that this process of creation and the revolution
and rotation of the sun and the moon are not to be dismissed as trivial
matters.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Allah did not create that save in truth...”***

The cloud and the wind, the moon and the sun move in the sky that you
may earn your bread, and you should not eat it without being aware of
your Provider.

At the end of the verse, the Qur’an emphasizes that Allah explains His
verses for those who comprehend them although those who are ill-sighted
and unaware overlook all these verses, not understanding the slightest
thing from them.

It says:

***“…(Thus) does He explain the Signs in detail, for a people who
know.”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 7
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِي اخْتِلاَفِ الَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ وَمَا خَلَقَ اللّهُ فِي
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ لاَيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***6. “Verily, in the alternation of night and day, and all that Allah
has created in the heavens and the earth, surely there are signs for a
people who keep from evil.”***

Allah has designed the universe in keeping with His Own magnificence and
wisdom, the cycle of night and day, the overarching heavens, the fixed
and moving stars, the animals, plants, inanimate objects, and all the
rest of provisions and bounties provided in the earth are proofs and
evidences upon His Oneness and Glory for those people who avoid
committing sins and disobeying Allah for the fear of His punishment.

The fact that He only mentions the pious as those who reflect upon His
Signs is an indication that it is only such people who take lessons by
observing the worldly phenomena. The rest of mankind are blinded by
their own negligence and ignorance; no phenomenon can affect on their
hearts; thus, they cannot grasp the objectives of creation.

Incidentally, the word ‘alternation’ /’ixtilaf/, mentioned in the holy
verse, signifies coming and going as well as variation. Thus the night
and the day are different in some respects:

A. They alternatively substitute for each other. Allah says:

***“… The sign of the night have We made to pass away and have We the
sign of the day manifest...”***[^4]

B. Night is pre-ordained for tranquility and the day for the hustle and
bustle of struggle.

Allah says:

***“And We made the night as a covering,”***

***“And We made the day for (seeking) livelihood.”***[^5]

C. The decrease and increase in the number of daylight hours in the
different seasons of the year.

D. The change in the hours of the day and the night in various regions
of the world.

The verse says:

***“Verily, in the alternation of night and day, and all that Allah has
created in the heavens and the earth, surely there are signs for a
people who keep from evil.”***

**Question:** Why is it that some scientists are atheists?

**Answer:** In itself, science is not sufficient. The approach to truth
must stem from intentional and purposeful people and the motive must
originate from those who honestly seek the truth and reality. Thus sins
and pollutions from sin leave a negative impact upon one’s analysis and
cognition.

Surah Yunus – Verses 7 - 8
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ لاَ يَرْجُونَ لِقَآءَنَا وَرَضُوا بِالْحَيَاةِ
الدُّنْيَا وَاطْمَاَنُّوا بِهَا وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ عَنْ ءَايَاتِنَا
غَافِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اُوْلَئِكَ مَأْوَاهُمُ النَّارُ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***7. “Verily those who do not expect the meeting with Us, but are
pleased with the life of this world and are satisfied with it, and those
who are neglectful of Our Signs,”***  
***8. “These! Their abode is the Fire for what they used to earn.”***

From this verse on, there is also a description concerning the
Resurrection and the destiny of people in the Hereafter.

At first, the verse says:

***“Verily those who do not expect on the meeting with Us, but are
pleased with the life of this world and are satisfied with it...”***

Then it refers to those who are neglectful of the revelations of Allah
and do not meditate upon them so as to be thoroughly awakened and feel
responsibility. The verse continues saying:

***“…and those who are neglectful of Our Signs,”***

Both of these two groups will have their abode in the Fire for the evil
actions they have committed. The verse says:

***“Their abode is the Fire for what they used to earn.”***

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“He who loves meeting Allah, Allah also loves meeting him.”* [^6]

In fact, the direct result of the lack of belief in the Resurrection is
this very love unto this limited life, of worldly position and a
confidence and reliance upon it.

Also, negligence from the revelations of Allah, is the origin of
separation from Allah which in turn is the origin of the lack of
sympathy and, consequently, falling into pollution, mischief, and sin
whose ultimate result cannot be aught but Fire.

Surah Yunus – Verse 9
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ يَهْدِيهِمْ
رَبُّهُم بِإِيمَانِهِمْ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهِمُ الاَنْهَارُ فِي
جَنَّاتِ النَّعِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***9. “Verily those who believe and do righteous deeds, their Lord will
guide them by their Faith: beneath them rivers flow in gardens of
bliss.”***

Then the Qur’an refers to the state of another group who behave opposite
of the two groups mentioned before.

The holy verse says:

***“Verily those who believe and do righteous deeds, their Lord will
guide them by their Faith:...”***

This beam of light of Divine guidance which has its origins in their
faith enlightens every aspect within the entire horizons of their lives.
They are so enlightened by that light that they will never submit
themselves to the falsity of the materialist schools, satanic fancies or
the false glamour associated with sin, wealth and power, and they never
pave the path of astray.

As for the Hereafter, the Creator (s.w.t.) establishes them in palaces
and Gardens underneath which Rivers flow.

The verse continues saying:

***“…beneath them rivers flow in gardens of bliss.”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 10
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دَعْوَاهُمْ فِيهَا سُبْحَانَكَ اللَّهُمَّ وَتَحِيَّتُهُمْ فِيهَا
سَلاَمٌ وءَاخِرُ دَعْوَاهُمْ أَنِ الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***10. “Their cry therein (will be): ‘Glory be to You, O Allah!’ and
‘Peace’ will be their greeting therein. And the close of their cry (will
be): ‘(All) praise is (only) Allah’s, the Lord of the Worlds’.”***

The faithful will lead their lives in an environment full of peace,
kindness, love unto the Lord, and blessings of various kinds. Whenever
they contemplate these things and reflect upon His Essence and
qualities, in their speech and prayers in Paradise they will invoke
their Lord, and as the verse says:

***“Their cry therein (will be): ‘Glory be to You, O Allah!’…”***

And whenever they encounter each other, their talk will be of peace and
friendliness. Their greetings are exclusively /salam/.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and ‘Peace’ will be their greeting therein...”***

And finally, whenever they enjoy the various blessings of Allah in
Paradise, they will start thanking Him, and end their words with
gratitude.

The verse says:

***“…And the close of their cry (will be): ‘(All) praise is (only)
Allah’s, the Lord of the Worlds’.”***

### Explanations

“***Peace***” is the word uttered by the people in Paradise and the
atmosphere of Paradise is filled with /salam/ (peace). It comes from
different sources, such as from Allah:

***“Peace: a word from a Merciful Lord”***[^7]***,***

and which comes from the angels saying:

***“Peace be upon you, you shall be happy;”***[^8]***.***

It also is uttered by all those who reside in Paradise.

***“Only the saying: ‘Peace, Peace’.”***[^9]

The holy phrase ***“(All) praise is (only) Allah’s”*** is the saying of
the prophets and saints. Hadrat Noah (as), after being released from the
unjust people uttered these words, and ’Ibrahim (as) also, saying them,
thanked Allah in his old age for He had bestowed him Ishmael and Ishaq.

Some Islamic tradition indicate that the People of Paradise, by uttering
/subhaanaka ’allahumma/ will call up the hosts of Paradise, who in turn
show up immediately and fulfill their wishes. [^10]

[^1]: In Islamic quotations, whether those of the Sunnis or those of the
Shia‘h, the Prophet of Islam (S) has been known as the Propagator of
Truth. (See the of Qurtubi and Al-Borhan).

[^2]: Surah Hud, No. 11, verse 7

[^3]: Surah Al-Haqqah, No. 69, verse 17

[^4]: Surah Al-’Isra’, No. 17, verse 12

[^5]: Surah Naba’, No. 78, verses 10, 11

[^6]: Tafsir-ul-Furqan

[^7]: Surah Yaseen, No. 36, verse 58

[^8]: Surah Az-Zumae, No. 39, verse 73

[^9]: Surah Al-Waqi‘ah, No. 56, verse 26

[^10]: The Manhaj-us-Sadiqin


