Section 2: Ingratitude of Men
=============================

Surah Yunus – Verse 11
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ يُعَجِّلُ اللّهُ لِلنَّاسِ الشَّرَّ اسْتِعْجَالَهُم بِالْخَيْرِ
لَقُضِيَ إِلَيْهِمْ أَجَلُهُمْ فَنَذَرُ الَّذِينَ لايَرْجُونَ
لِقَآءَنَا فِي طُغْيَانِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***11. “And if Allah were to hasten on for men the ill (they have
earned) as they would hasten on the good, surely their term would
already be decreed unto them. But We leave those who do not expect the
meeting with Us, in their contumacy, wandering blindly.”***

This verse also deals with the subject of punishment and reward meted
out to the evildoers. First, the Qur’an implies if Allah punished the
evil-doers swiftly in this world and hastened on their punishment at the
same speed in which they are after the good things of this world and
their own interests, that would be the end of the world and no traces of
them would remain.

The verse says:

***“And if Allah were to hasten on for men the ill (they have earned) as
they would hasten on the good, Surely their term would already be
decreed unto them...”***

However, as Allah’s grace encompasses all His servants, even the
evildoers, idol worshippers, and non-believers, He does not hasten on
their punishment lest they wake-up and repent and be lead straight.

At the end of the verse, He says that punishment is for those who do not
believe in the Resurrection and the Meeting with Him; they are left
alone so that they may stray and remain in confusion, not knowing the
truth from “untruth” and the right path from the wrong.

The verse says:

***“…But We leave those who do not expect the meeting with Us, in their
contumacy, wandering blindly.”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 12
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا مَسَّ الإِنْسَانَ الضُّرُّ دَعَانَا لِجَنْبِهِ أَوْ قَاعِداً
أَوْ قَآئِماً فَلَمَّا كَشَفْنَا عَنْهُ ضُرَّهُ مَرَّ كَأَن لَمْ
يَدْعُنَآ إِلَي ضُرّ‌ٍ مَسَّهُ كَذَلِكَ زُيِّنَ لِلْمُسْرِفِينَ مَا
كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***12. “And when an affliction touches a man, he calls Us (while
reclining) on his side, or sitting, or standing. But when We remove from
him his affliction, he passes on, as if he never called Us to an
affliction that touched him. Thus is made fair seeming to the
extravagant that which they have been doing.”***

Then the Qur’an refers to the existence of the light of monotheism in
man, which emanates from the depth of his soul. It indicates that when
man suffers from the loss of something, and he is helpless on all sides,
he seeks Allah’s help by stretching his hands towards Him, calling Him
in whatever state he is whether lying on his side, sitting or standing.

The verse says:

***“And when an affliction touches a man, he calls Us (while reclining)
on his side, or sitting, or standing...”***

Yes, the positive aspect of the difficulties and painful incidents is
that they unveil the true character of human beings and, though it may
last merely for a while, the light of monotheism eventually shines
forth.

Then the Qur’an implies that these people, however, are so in capacious
and unwise that as soon as their troubles are removed they once more
become so immersed in oblivion that it is as if they had made no
supplications at all, and He had not given them any assistance.  
 The verse says:

***“…But when We remove from him his affliction, he passes on, as if he
never called Us to an affliction that touched him. Thus is made fair
seeming to the extravagant that which they have been doing.”***

It is this very ingratitude and negligence that has made the indecent
acts of the mischief makers seemingly beautiful for them.

Surah Yunus – Verse 13
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَهْلَكْنَا الْقُرُونَ مِن قَبْلِكُمْ لَمَّا ظَلَمُوا
وَجَآءَتْهُمْ رُسُلُهُم بِالبَيِّنَاتِ وَمَا كَانُوا لِيُؤْمِنُوا
كَذَلِكَ نَجْزِي الْقَوْمَ الْمُـجْرِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***13. “And certainly We destroyed the generations before you when they
were unjust, and their messengers came to them with clear arguments and
they would not believe. Thus do We recompense the guilty people. ”***

In this holy verse, Allah informs us of the calamities which were
inflicted upon previous nations and warns the present nations against
the descent of those calamities which may fall upon them.

The Qur’an announces that Allah exterminated former nations by means of
kinds of punishment when they inflicted injustice upon themselves by
revolting, becoming disobedient, and after sending prophets to them with
obvious miracles and clear proofs.

The verse says:

***“And certainly We destroyed the generations before you when they were
unjust, and their messengers came to them with clear arguments and they
would not believe...”***

This verse carries this message that the secret of their eradication was
that if they had been to remain existent, they definitely would not have
believed in their prophets and the Books. Which were sent to them.

In the future, too, Allah will inflict calamities upon those unbelieving
people who do not reform themselves in spite of offering them proofs for
completing arguments, and with the full understanding that they are
well-informed as to the consequences and that they will not believe.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Thus do We recompense the guilty people. ”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 14
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ جَعَلْنَاكُمْ خَلآئِفَ فِي الأَرْضِ مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ لِنَنْظُرَ
كَيْفَ تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***14. “Then We made you successors in the earth after them to see how
you behave.”***

Allah expresses more explicitly the matter in this verse, implying that,
after destroying them, He substituted you on the earth in their place so
that He may observe the way you behave.

The verse says:

***“Then We made you successors in the earth after them to see how you
behave.”***

From the sentence ***“and they would not believe:”*****,** mentioned in
the previous verse, it is understood that Allah exterminates only those
whose situation leaves no hope that they will even be probable believers
in the future, for those who may become believers in the future are not
involved in this category for such punishments.

Surah Yunus – Verse 15
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإِذَا تُتْلَي عَلَيْهِمْ ءَايَاتُنَا بَيِّنَاتٍ قَالَ الَّذِينَ لاَ
يَرْجُونَ لِقَآءَنَا ائْتِ بِقُرْءَانٍ غَيْرِ هَذَآ أَوْ بَدِّ لْهُ
قُلْ مَايَكُونُ لِي أَنْ اُبَدِّ لَهُ مِن تِلْقَآئِ نَفْسِي إِنْ
أَتَّبِعُ إِلاَّ مَا يُوحَي إِلَيَّ إِنّي أَخَافُ إِنْ عَصَيْتُ رَبّي
عَذَابَ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***15. “And when Our Clear Signs are recited unto them, those who do not
expect the meeting with Us, say: ‘Bring us a Qur’an other than this, or
alter it.’ Say: ‘It is not for me to alter it of my own*** ***accord, I
follow naught but what is revealed unto me; verily, I fear, if I were to
disobey my Lord the Penalty of a Great Day (to come).’”***

### The Occasion of the Revelation

This holy verse and the next two verses had been revealed concerning
several idol-worshippers when they came to the Prophet (S) and said:

*“Whatever this Qur’an says about abandoning the worship of our great
idols namely Lat, Uzza, Manat, Hubal and its disrespect of them is not
acceptable and bearable to us. If you want us to follow you, get us
another Qur’an which is free of this criticism, or, at least change such
ideas in this present Qur’an.”*

These holy verses, following the previous verses, are all concerned with
‘Origin and End’.

First, The Qur’an alludes to one of the great mistakes of the
idol-worshippers.

It says:

***“And when Our Clear Signs are recited unto them, those who do not
expect the meeting with Us, say: ‘Bring us a Qur’an other than this, or
alter it.’...”***

These ignorant people did not want the Prophet (S) to guide them as a
leader; they rather invited him to follow in the footsteps of their own
superstitious conjectures.

The Qur’an explicitly enlightens them regarding their grave mistake,
ordering the Prophet (S) to tell them that it is impossible for him to
alter the Divine revelation by himself.

The verse says:

***“…Say: ‘It is not for me to alter it of my own accord...”***

Then, to articulate further, he should add that he would only follow
what was revealed to him, and that not only he could not make any
alterations in that heavenly Revelation, but, also he feared the
punishment of that Great Day (Resurrection) if he would disobey the
Command of the Lord.

The holy verse says:

***“…I follow naught but what is revealed unto me; verily, I fear, if I
were to disobey my Lord the Penalty of a Great Day (to come).’”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 16
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لَوْ شَآءَ اللَّهُ مَا تَلَوْتُهُ عَلَيْكُمْ وَلآ أَدْرَاكُمْ بِهِ
فَقَدْ لَبِثْتُ فِيكُمْ عُمُراً مِن قَبْلِهِ أَفَلاَ تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***16. “Say: ‘Had Allah so willed, I would not have recited it to you,
nor would He have taught it to you. Indeed I have lived amongst you a
lifetime before it. Have you then no sense?’”***

In this verse the Qur’an brings a reason for the Divine order by
commanding the Prophet to say that his ideas do not have the slightest
role in this Holy Book, and had Allah wanted, he would not have read the
Qur’an to them and they would not have been made aware of it.

The verse says:

***“Say: ‘Had Allah so willed, I would not have recited it to you, nor
would He have taught it to you...”***

I have lived among you a long time before this. It provides reason for
what I claim, for you have never heard me saying such things before.

If the verses had come from me, you should have heard me saying them
during the past forty years as they would have been at the tip of my
tongue, or at least parts of it might have been heard by someone in the
past. How can you not notice such an obvious matter?

The verse continues saying:

***“…Indeed I have lived amongst you a lifetime before it. Have you then
no sense?’”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 17
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنِ افْتَرَي عَلَي اللَّهِ كَذِباً أَوْ كَذَّبَ
بِايَاتِهِ إِنَّهُ لا يُفْلِحُ الْمُـجْرِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. “Who is then more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah,
or belies His Signs? Verily the guilty ones will never prosper.”***

In order to emphasize the point, the Prophet (S) adds that, being well
aware that the worst kind of evil is that someone falsely attributes a
lie to Allah, how could he then commit such a sin on the earth?

The verse says:

***“Who is then more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah, or
belies His Signs?...”***

And he who denies the Divine verses, his action is also the most cruel
and unjust of all actions. If the unbelievers are unaware of the scope
and volume of the severity and greatness of the sin of forging a lie to
the Divine verses, the Prophet, on the contrary, is not so unaware. At
any event, this action of theirs is a grave offence and those who
perpetrate it will never be saved.

The verse says:

***“…Verily the guilty ones will never prosper.”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 18
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ مَا لا يَضُرُّهُمْ وَلا يَنفَعُهُمْ
وَيَقُولُونَ هَؤُلآءِ شُفَعَآؤُنَا عِندَ اللَّهِ قُلْ اَتُنَبِّؤُنَ
اللَّهَ بِمَا لا يَعلَمُ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَلا فِي الأَرْضِ
سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَي عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***18. “And they worship, besides Allah, what can neither hurt them nor
profit them, and they say: ‘These are our intercessors with Allah.’ Say:
‘Will you inform Allah of what He knows not either in the heavens or in
the earth?’ Glory be to Him! High be He exalted above what they
associate (with Him).”***

The issue of monotheism is also continued in this verse by negating the
claim that these idols are associated with divinity, and it has been
proved as groundless by offering clear reasons. They used to worship
icons and idols which neither did any harm to them nor any good.

They were neither feared by the idol worshippers nor did the idols
provide them with any profit so that they were worshipped for gaining
benefit thereof.

The verse says:

***“And they worship, besides Allah, what can neither hurt them nor
profit them...”***

The Qur’an deals with the groundless and unfounded claims of the idol
worshippers when it implies that they claim that these idols serve as
mediators between them and Allah which was one of the motives for
worshipping them.

The verse says:

***“…and they say: ‘These are our intercessors with Allah.’…”***

The Qur’an, in response to such a way of thinking, tells the Prophet (S)
to ask them a question, as follows:

***“…Say: ‘Will you inform Allah of what He knows not either in the
heavens or in the earth?’...”***

***Allusion is here made to the fact that if the Almighty had such
mediators who would protect them, and wherever on the earth or in the
skies they might have existed, He would have been well aware of their
existence.***

At the end of the verse it stresses emphatically on the fact that Allah
is pure and superior to those partners whom they envisage for Him.

The verse says:

***“…Glory be to Him! High be He exalted above what they associate (with
Him).”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 19
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ النَّاسُ إِلآَّ اُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً فَاخْتَلَفُوا وَلَوْلاَ
كَلِمَةٌ سَبَقَتْ مِن رَّبّكَ لَقُضِيَ بَيْنَهُمْ فِيمَا فِيهِ
يَخْتَلِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***19. “And mankind were only one community, then they differed, and had
not a Word already gone forth from your Lord, their differences would
have been judged between them.”***

This verse refers to the monotheistic nature of all human beings,
alluding in part to the previous verse in connection with negating
unbelief and idol worshipping. It implies that in the beginning, all
human beings were of a single nation, and, with no exception, all were
monotheists.

The verse says:

***“And mankind were only one community...”***

This monotheistic nature, that was untouched at the beginning, because
of shortsightedness and some satanic attitudes, underwent changes. With
the passage of time, some went astray from the monotheistic path and
became the adherents of polytheism. Thus the human society spitted into
two groups: Monotheists and Polytheists.

The verse continues saying:

***“…then they differed...”***

Therefore, polytheism is in fact a deviation from what is innate in
human nature, and its roots lie in some baseless ideas and conjectures.

One might raise the issue at this point as to why the Almighty does not
hasten to eradicate the origin of such differences by the speedy
punishment of the polytheists?

The Qur’an immediately gives an answer to this question implying that if
Allah’s command in regard to the absence of their speedy punishment had
not been already issued, arbitration would have been administered and
their differences would have been judged, then all of them would meet
their painful fate.

The verse says:

***“…and had not a Word already gone forth from your Lord, their
differences would have been judged between them.”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 20
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَقُولُونَ لَوْلآ اُنزِلَ عَلَيْهِ ءَايَةٌ مِن رَبِّهِ فَقُلْ
إِنَّمَا الْغَيْبُ لِلَّهِ فَانتَظِرُوا إِنّي مَعَكُم مِنَ
الْمُنْتَظِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***20. “And they say: ‘Why is not a Sign sent down to him from his
Lord?’ Say then: ‘ Verily the Unseen is only for Allah (to*** ***know).
Wait you then, verily I, also with you, will be of those who wait’.”***

Once again, the Qur’an deals with the pretexts of the polytheists for
evading belief and faith in Islam. It indicates that the disbelievers
complain about a miracle not being sent down from Allah to the Prophet
(S).

The verse in this regard says:

***“And they say: ‘Why is not a Sign sent down to him from his
Lord?’...”***

They meant, of course, that any time they demanded a miracle they
desired, the Prophet (S) should have acted immediately and accordingly
[^1] to fulfill their demands. It was forthwith revealed to the Prophet
(S) that the invisible world and supernatural affairs, (miracles
relating to the invisible and metaphysical world), belong to Allah
alone.

The verse says:

***“…Say then: ‘ Verily the Unseen is only for Allah (to know)...”***

Therefore the Prophet (S) should tell them he could not perform miracles
according to their wishes, which they would later deny and which would
not convince them to become believers. In the final analysis, they
refrained from believing regardless of the pretext.

At the end of the verse, from his tongue, the Qur’an, in a threatening
tone implies that if they did not stop being obstinate, they should
expect divine punishment whilst, on the other hand, the Prophet (S)
should expect victory.

The verse says:

***“…Wait you then, verily I, also with you, will be of those who
wait’.”***

[^1]: Some commentators state that Allah is aware of the world of Unseen
and whatever stands in the way of divine miracles to be sent down is
itself invisible, none is aware but Allah.


