Section 3: The Divine Mercy
===========================

Surah Yunus – Verse 21
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإِذَآ أَذَقْنَا النَّاسَ رَحْمَةً مِن بَعْدِ ضَرَّآءَ مَسَّتْهُمْ
إِذَا لَهُم مَكْرٌ فِي ءَايَاتِنَا قُلِ اللَّهُ أَسْرَعُ مَكْراً إِنَّ
رُسُلَنَا يَكْتُبُونَ مَاتَمْكُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***21. “And when We make mankind taste of (Our) mercy after adversity
hath touched them, behold! they have a device concerning Our Signs! Say:
‘Allah is quicker at devising. Verily, Our messengers record what you
devise’.””***

The previous verse alluded to the pretexts of those who used to ask why
no new signs were revealed. Here Allah refers to their obstinacy and to
the fact that they played dirty tricks after a new verse was revealed
instead of appreciating it.

The verse says:

***“And when We make mankind taste of (Our) mercy after adversity hath
touched them, behold! they have a device concerning Our Signs!...”***

As for the occasion of revelation of this verse, it has been said that
there occurred a drought and famine in Mecca. The Almighty (s.w.t.) made
it rain for the blessing of His Prophet (S). The polytheists claimed,
however, that the reason for the rain was because of the idols. [^1]

One of the measures and tricky devices employed by his enemies was
character assassination of the Prophet (S), ridiculing the divine
verses, and degrading the blessings of Allah.

At any rate, man misuses God-given blessings and makes mischief instead
of giving thanks and we must know that he who plays dirty tricks, will
ultimately be involved with the device and the punishment of Allah.

The verse says:

***“…Say: ‘Allah is quicker at devising...”***

Then, He warns them not to think that such conspiracies and plans will
be forgotten. His messengers, (that is, His angels responsible for
recording human actions) will take note of all those plans which
disbelievers arrange for extinguishing the light of the truth. And they
must prepare themselves for the Judgment and the punishment in the world
here-after.

The verse says:

***“…Verily, Our messengers record what you devise’.”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 22
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي يُسَيّرُكُمْ فِي الْبَرِّ وَالْبَحْرِ حَتَّي إِذَا
كُنتُمْ فِي الْفُلْكِ وَجَرَيْنَ بِهِم بِرِيحٍ طَيّبَةٍ وَفَرِحُوا
بِهَا جَآءَتْهَا رِيحٌ عَاصِفٌ وَجَآءَهُمُ الْمَوْجُ مِن كُلِّ مَكَانٍ
وَظَنُّوا أَنَّهُمْ اُحِيطَ بِهِمْ دَعَوُا اللَّهَ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ
الدّينَ لَئِنْ أَنجَيْتَنَا مِنْ هَذِهِ لَنَكُونَنّ َمِنَ
الشَّاكِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***22. “He it is Who enables you to traverse through land and sea; so
that you are in the ships, and they sail with them with a favourable
wind, and they rejoice thereat. Then there comes upon them a stormy wind
and the waves come on them from all sides, and they think that they are
encompassed therewith, they call upon Allah, making their faith pure for
Him, (saying): ‘If You deliver us from this, we shall surely be of the
grateful ones’.”***

In this verse the Qur’an appeals to the depths of human nature,
explaining to them the monotheism which is embedded in their very being,
describing to them how man once in great difficulty and danger, tends to
forget everything but Allah.

First, He says that He is the One Who enables you to traverse through
the land and the sea. And, when you go on board a ship, He makes you
eventually get, you and your ship, to your destination with the help of
the appropriate winds that gladden every heart.

Then when a horrible thunderstorm blows and waves buffet them from all
sides, it makes them realize that death is near, and they lose their
hopes of survival.

The verse says:

***“He it is Who enables you to traverse through land and sea; so that
you are in the ships, and they sail with them with a favourable wind,
and they rejoice thereat. Then there comes upon them a stormy wind and
the waves come on them from all sides, and they think that they are
encompassed therewith...”***

At just about that time, they are reminded of Allah and call upon Him
sincerely, their thoughts stripped of all sorts of polytheism and idol
worship.

The verse continues saying:

***“…they call upon Allah, making their faith pure for Him…”***

They start praying at this time, saying that if Allah save them from
this plight, they will thank Him while they shall neither oppress others
nor turn to others for help save Him.

The verse says:

***“…(saying): ‘If You deliver us from this, we shall surely be of the
grateful ones’.”***

Although this temporary awakening will often have no remarkable
educational effect upon extraordinarily wicked people, yet He completes
the process of reasoning to the end to them, and it will serve as their
eventual condemnation.

In such incidents, those individuals, who are only slightly polluted,
are usually awakened and tend to reform themselves.

Surah Yunus – Verse 23
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّآ أَنجَاهُمْ إِذَا هُمْ يَبْغُونَ فِي الاَرْضِ بِغَيْرِ الْحَقّ
يَآ أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّمَا بَغْيُكُمْ عَلَي أَنفُسِكُم مَتَاعَ
الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا ثُمَّ إِلَيْنَا مَرجِعُكُمْ فَنُنَبّئُكُم بِمَا
كُنتُم تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***23. “But when He delivers them, behold! They rebel in the earth
unjustly. O mankind! Your rebellion is against your own selves, an
enjoyment of the life of this world. Then to Us is your return, and We
shall inform you of what you used to do.”***

But such neglectful people usually start bothering others and oppressing
them on the earth, as soon as Allah saves them and leads them to safe
shores.

The verse says:

***“But when He delivers them, behold! They rebel in the earth unjustly.
...”***

Yet, the Qur’an advises people to know that whatever oppression they
commit and whatever sort of deviation they have made from the right
path, they themselves will pay its price.

The verse says:

***“…O mankind! Your rebellion is against your own selves…”***

The only thing that they may be able to do is to enjoy the life in this
world for merely a few days, and finally their eventual return will be
towards Allah. It is at that time that they shall be informed of
whatever they did in the world.

The verse says:

***“…an enjoyment of the life of this world. Then to Us is your return,
and We shall inform you of what you used to do.”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 24
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا مَثَلُ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا كَمَآءٍ أَنزَلْنَاهُ مِنَ
السَّمَآءِ فَاخْتَلَطَ بِهِ نَبَاتُ الاَرْضِ مِمَّا يَأْكُلُ النَّاسُ
وَالاَنْعَامُ حَتَّي إِذَآ أَخَذَتِ الأَرْضُ زُخْرُفَهَا وَازَّيَّنَتْ
وَظَنَّ أَهْلُهَآ أَنَّهُمْ قَادِرُونَ عَلَيْهَآ أَتَاهَآ أَمْرُنَا
لَيْلاً أَوْ نَهَاراً فَجَعَلْنَاهَا حَصِيداً كَاَن لَمْ تَغْنَ
بِالاَمْسِ كَذَلِكَ نُفَصِّلُ الاَيَاتِ لِقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***24. “The likeness of the life of this world is just as the water
which We send down from the sky, and the plants of the earth mingle with
it whereof men and cattle eat, till when the earth takes its ornament
and is embellished, and its people imagine that they have power over it,
(but suddenly) Our command reaches it by night or by day, and We make it
stubble, as if it had not flourished the day before! Thus do We explain
the Signs in detail for a people who reflect.***

In the foregoing verses allusion had been made to the lack of permanence
in this worldly life. In this holy verse this grave reality is depicted
with an interesting example so that He may remove the curtain of
arrogance and negligence from the eyes of those who are neglectful and
unjust.

The verse says:

***“The likeness of the life of this world is just as the water which We
send down from the sky...”***

These life-providing drops fall on cultivable soil, making it possible
for various plants to grow, some of which are useful for man, and others
that are useful for birds and beasts.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and the plants of the earth mingle with it whereof men and cattle
eat...”***

These plants, besides the nutritional qualities that they contain for
living creatures, cover the earth’s surface and decorate it so that the
earth finds its utmost beauty in it.

It is at this time that the blossoms decorate the branches and the
flowers bloom. Nutritious grains and fruits show up gradually,
dramatically depicting the full meaning of the scene of life, thus
rendering people’s hearts hopeful and their eyes full of joy.

This is done to the extent that people on the earth become certain that
they can benefit from the blessings of the plants and fruits as well as
from their life-inducing grains.

The verse says:

***“…till when the earth takes its ornament and is embellished, and its
people imagine that they have power over it...”***

All of a sudden, Allah’s command reaches them, ordering excessive cold,
unexpected heavy rains or strong thunderstorms to overwhelm and
eradicate them all as if they never existed.

The verse continues saying:

***“…(but suddenly) Our command reaches it by night or by day, and We
make it stubble, as if it had not flourished the day before!...”***

Towards the end of the verse, in order to emphasize further, Allah
declares:

***“…Thus do We explain the Signs in detail for a people who reflect.***

Surah Yunus – Verse 25
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ يَدْعُواْ إِلَي دَارِ السَّلاَمِ وَيَهْدِي مَن يَشَآءُ إِلَي
صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***25. “And Allah doth call mankind to the Abode of Peace and He guides
whomever He Pleases unto the Straight path.”***

The Arabic appellation /dar-us-Salam/ is one of the names of Paradise
within which nobody bears any grudge against another and where no
quarrel, war, and exploitation takes place.

The verse says:

***“And Allah doth call mankind to the Abode of Peace and He guides
whomever He Pleases unto the Straight path.”***

The holy word “***Peace***” is Allah’s name, and “***the Abode of
Peace***” signifies the proximity of the divine blessings. It is the
place where everyone’s words and greetings consist of “peace”, and unto
whom Allah also sends peace.

The Qur’an says:

***“Peace: a word from a Merciful Lord.” (Surah Yasin, verse 58)***

Some Islamic traditions indicate that the way leads to the mastership
(wilayat) of Amir-ul-Mu’mineen (as) and the Immaculate Imams, has been
stated as the best example for the ‘***Straight Path***’.[^2]

We must note that the divine call is the symbol of His special favour
towards His servants. It embodies the safe passage of man in this world
and the Hereafter, the first stage of which is transient while the
second stage is permanent.

Incidentally, the Straight Path is one which creates ‘peace’ for man not
only in the Hereafter, but also creates peace for him in this world.

Surah Yunus – Verse 26
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلَّذِينَ أَحْسَنُوا الْحُسْنَي وَزِيَادَةٌ وَلاَ يَرْهَقُ
وُجُوهَهُمْ قَتَرٌ وَلاَ ذِلَّةٌ اُوْلَئِكَ أَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ هُمْ
فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***26. “For those who do good, is a goodly (reward), and more (than
this). Neither dust nor abasement shall over spread their faces. They
are Companions of the Garden; they will abide therein forever.”***

The Arabic term /rahiqa/ signifies covering by force and the word
/qatar/ means ‘dust’, ‘smoke’ and ‘ashes’.

Bestowing incremental and extra rewards on the believers has repeatedly
been mentioned in the Qur’an by the words /ziyadah/, /zi‘f/ and
/’az‘af/.

Among them are the following verses:

***“Whoever brings a good (deed), he shall have ten times its
like...”***[^3]

***“…He will pay them their rewards fully and with bestow upon them more
out of His Grace.”***[^4]

In addition to the complete reward, Allah also bestows upon them more
for partaking of his own virtue, there is a seven hundred-fold reward
for giving charity for Allah’s sake.

***“The likeness of those who spend their property in the way of Allah
is as the likeness of a grain (of corn) that grows seven ears, (with) a
hundred grains in every ear. And Allah multiplies (in abundance) for
whom He wills; and Allah is All-Embracing, All-Knowing.”***[^5]

Imam Sadiq (as) declares:

*“Every thing has its own system of measurement except tears, a drop of
which extinguishes fires”.*

Then he (as) said:

*“He who sheds tears for the sake of Allah, his face will never confront
darkness and humiliation,”*

and he recited:

*“Neither dust nor abasement shall overspread their face.”*[^6]

Fadil-bin-Yasar, has narrated from Imam Baqir (as) who said that the
Messenger of Allah (S) declared;

*“There are no eyes which are soaked with tears for the fear of Allah
except that Allah forbids that body to be in the Fire of Hell. Were he
to shed tears, his face would not be covered by the dust and
abasement”.*[^7]

At any rate, those who turn to other than Allah, have no excuses to make
as Allah (s.w.t.) simultaneously extends His invitation to man and, at
the same time, leads him; He not only rewards but also rewards more and
more.

The verse says:

***“For those who do good, is a goodly (reward), and more (than this).
Neither dust nor abasement shall over spread their faces. They are
Companions of the Garden; they will abide therein forever.”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 27
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ كَسَبُوا السَّيِّئَاتِ جَزَآءُ سَيِّئَةٍ بِمِثْلِهَا
وَتَرْهَقُهُمْ ذِلَّةٌ مَا لَهُم مِنَ اللَّهِ مِنْ عَاصِمٍ كَأَنَّمَآ
اُغْشِيَتْ وُجُوهُهُمْ قِطَعاً مِنَ الَّيْلِ مَظْلِماً اُوْلَئِكَ
أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ‌ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***27. “And those who have earned evil will have a reward of like evil;
and the dust of ignominy will cover them. No defender will they have
from (the wrath of) Allah: as if their faces had been covered with
pieces from the darkness of night. They are Companions of the Fire: they
will abide therein forever!”***

And those who have committed evil acts and sins will be punished
accordingly in proportion to their acts. They will be punished to the
extent they deserve, not more, for punishment beyond that which a person
deserves is something inequitable (which is far from the Divine
Providence).

On the other hand, the reward for good deeds exceeds what one deserves
and it is good to emanate from Allah. Therefore, the objective meaning
of the word “***like***”, in this verse, is nothing more and nothing
less than one’s due.

The verse says:

***“And those who have earned evil will have a reward of like
evil;...”***

The Qur’anic phrase /wa tar haqahum ŏillah/ signifies that such sinners
will be humiliated and become debased, for punishment is coupled with
degradation.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and the dust of ignominy will cover them...”***

Then the verse implies that there are no guards and obstacles to hinder
the punishment of Allah from them.

It says:

***“…No defender will they have from (the wrath of) Allah:…”***

The obscurity reflected on their faces would be to such an extent that
one would imagine that parts of the darkness of the night had cast their
shadow, one after another, over them.

The verse says:

***“…as if their faces had been covered with pieces from the darkness of
night...”***

They shall be coupled with the Hell Fire and will eternally remain
within its flames.

The verse concludes saying:

***“…They are Companions of the Fire: they will abide therein
forever!”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 28
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُهُمْ جَمِيعاً ثُمَّ نَقُولُ لِلَّذِينَ أَشْرَكُوا
مَكَانَكُمْ أَنتُمْ وَشُرَكَآؤُكُمْ فَزَيَّلْنَا بَيْنَهُمْ وَقَالَ
شُرَكَآؤُهُم مَّا كُنتُمْ إِيَّانَا تَعْبُدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***28. “And the Day We shall muster them all, then We shall say to those
who associated others (with Us): ‘Get you to your place! You and your
associates’, then We shall set a space between them, and their
associates shall say: ‘It was not us (indeed) that you used to
worship!’”***

This verse also follows the previous discussions on the issue of the
origin of existence and the Resurrection and the situation of the
polytheists.

At first, the Qur’an warns all to remember the Day when Allah will
assemble all His subjects and make them rise from the dead.

The verse says:

***“And the Day We shall muster them all...”***

Then He will declare unto the polytheists to stay in their place
together with their idols so that He may examine their account.

It continues saying:

***“…then We shall say to those who associated others*** ***(with
Us):...”***

The Qur’an informs that Allah will separate these two groups from each
other; i.e. the worshippers and the worshipped ones, and He will
question each individual separately, as it is usual with all courts that
they investigate each person separately.

The verse says:

***“…‘Get you to your place! You and your associates’, then We shall set
a space between them...”***

Allah may ask the idol-worshippers why they worshipped idols along with
Allah (s.w.t.), and He will also ask the idols why they permitted such
an act to occur, that they allowed the polytheists to worship them.

It is at this time that those things that were worshipped as idols will
speak, saying to them that they never worshipped idols. In actual fact,
they worshipped the creation of their own imaginations, whims and
passions.

The verse says:

***“…and their associates shall say: ‘It was not us (indeed) that you
used to worship!’”***

Surah Yunus – Verse 29
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَفَي بِاللَّهِ شَهِيداً بَيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَكُمْ إِن كُنَّا عَنْ
عِبَادَتِكُمْ لَغَافِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***29. “Allah is a sufficient witness between us and you: we certainly
were Unaware of your worship (of us).”***

In the previous verse, those things worshipped were saying that the
polytheists did not worship them. Here, they declare that they were
unaware of their worship.

The verse says:

***“Allah is a sufficient witness between us and you: we certainly were
Unaware of your worship (of us).”***

Consequently, whatever act of worship is performed without the knowledge
of the worshipped is null and void.

Incidentally, there are numerous allusions made to the hatred and
disavowal of those objects worshipped from the polytheists and their
deeds in the Qur’an, i.e., Surah Al-Furqan, No. 25, verse 17, and Surah
Al-Qasas, No. 28, verse 63.

Surah Yunus – Verse 30
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُنَالِكَ تَبْلُوا كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَآ أَسْلَفَتْ وَرُدُّوا إِلَي اللَّهِ
مَوْلاَهُمُ الْحَقّ وَضَلَّ عَنْهُم مَا كَانُوا يَفْتَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***30. “There will every soul realize (the reward of) the deeds it sent
aforetime, and they will be brought back to Allah, their true Lord, and
that which they used to fabricate (the false deities) will vanish (away)
from them.”***

The Day of Resurrection is the day on which the worldly test results are
received.

The verse says:

***“There will every soul realize (the reward of) the deeds it sent
aforetime...”***

The true Lord is Allah and any other than Him, whatever it may be, is
absurd.

The verse says:

***“…and they will be brought back to Allah, their true Lord...”***

The Resurrection pertains to all men. And the false effects of the
worshipped will be wiped out.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and that which they used to fabricate (the false deities) will
vanish (away) from them.”***

All existence has its origin in Him, and the final destination will be
towards Him, too.

[^1]: The commentary of As-Safi, Fi-Zalal-il-Qur’an and Fakhr-i-Razi

[^2]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan

[^3]: Surah Al-’An‘am, No. 6, verse 160

[^4]: Surah An-Nisa’, No. 4, verse 173

[^5]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 261

[^6]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, the

[^7]: Majma‘ ul-Bayan


