Introduction
============

"(We take) Allah's colour, and who is better than Allah at colouring,
and we are His worshippers." Holy Qur'an (2:138)

Islam came to light man's path and provide him with a system of life
that regulates his relationship with his Creator and his fellowman. It
brought about a radical change in man's concepts, ideas, beliefs, and
life. It built a grand 'ummah' and a remarkable culture and started a
scientific revival that changed the course of history.

Islamic culture grew, developed an independent character, and found a
definite identity; in a systematic and distinguished way.

Basing their efforts on monotheism, Muslim philosophers, 'fuqaha',
intellectuals and researchers shared in the build-up of the 'ummah's'
cultural character.

In the past, Islamic culture faced a series of military and ideological
wars that dragged on for many centuries, but, in spite of all the
tribulations and hardships, it emerged victorious. And today, Islamic
culture, Islamic doctrine and the Muslim 'Ummah' are the target of a
hostile, vicious and ignorant war launched by both the East and the
West.

Our forefathers did their job, now it is the task of the Muslim
intellectuals, researchers, and preachers (ulama) to face up to the
present-day ignorant, cultural invasion, spearheaded by capitalism and
helped by existentialism and the variety of modern, materialistic
schools and philosophies.

Spilt construction Muslim 'ulama' and intellectuals challenged the
ignorant cultures at the time of the first stage of cultural and
ideological interaction, following the embracing of Islam by other
nations, including the Persians, Indians and Chinese. Such non-Islamic
beliefs also seeped into the Muslim world through the translation of
Greek and Roman thought, and through the adherents of the distorted
divine religions; Judaism, Christianity and the like.

Our 'ummah' is undoubtedly going through a bitter, culture struggle.
Our war with our foes is cultural in the first place and it is the most
dangerous of all wars staged against our Muslim 'ummah' even more
dangerous than the ideological one.

The superpowers have lift no stone unturned to swerve the 'ummah's'
political march. In the twentieth century, they have made efforts, laid.
plans, built educational institutions, organized political parties, and
innovated theories and schools of thought, such as Qadiyaniyah and
Baha'ism, for this purpose.

They have mobilized the mass media; radio stations, television
networks, cinema and theater, as well as the print media, in order to
present a "cultural substitute" to the Muslim generations, in a bid to
make them drop their Islamic beliefs and repudiate their great Islamic
values. But Allah wills to keep His Word high and that of the idolaters
low:

"... Then as for the scum, it passes away as a worthless thing; and as
for that which does good to people, it tarries on the earth. Thus does
Allah set forth parables."
Holy Qur'an (13:17)

Those Muslims who are working hard to revive Islam, and those who call
for it to guide humanity must, once again, join hands, unify their
ranks, and put aside their slight religious, racial and sectarian
differences; clinging to the call of guidance and hoisting the flag of
enlightenment to mankind.

As it presents this booklet to its readers, Al-Balagh Foundation prays,
to Allah; the Exalted and All-Powerful, to make it useful to them. It is
hoped that this modest effort will help in correcting wrong concepts by
purifying our thoughts, and exhorting Muslims to hold on to Islam. Allah
certainly hears our prayers.


Al-Balagh Foundation


**Culture and Civilization**

Concepts are the main pillar of the edifice of culture and knowledge.
Thanks to these, a certain 'ummah's' cultural and ideological character,
with its particular qualities, from others.

Our Islamic knowledge, in the fields of thought, literature,
jurisprudence, law, politics, ethics, art, philosophy ... etc, has its
own concepts and expressions. If our concepts, such as those of freedom,
obedience, responsibility, 'ummah', homeland, politics, worship,
asceticism, art, counsel 'shoora', culture, civilization, innate nature
(fitrah), reason, realization, spirit, soul, hypocrisy, apostasy,
ignorance (pre-Islamic era),

equality, justice, oppression ... are well defined, well-coined, and
well-used in the light of Islam, expressing exactly their ideological,
doctrinal and cultural meanings, then we can shape our separate,
distinguished cultural character, and at the same time have a tenacious,
cultural build-up. Should we do this we would no longer lack the ability
to discern and sift out the concepts. Foreign ideas and concepts could
hardly have a harmful on our message and beliefs.

Every expression has its won special, definite meaning, a certain
ideological sense; and a well-defined cultural import, It is not right
to use the word "freedom" the way capitalists and pornographers do, or
understand it in the sphere of personal conduct, economics and polities
the way they do. Nor, it is right to understand "homeland" and "nation"
the way man-made theories and laws do. We should understand it as it is
in Islam; our nation is the Muslim 'ummah'.

The concept of 'ummah', as we know it, is 'a human group bound to each
other by the bonds of doctrine and principle; 'The Muslim 'ummah' is
one; always open to new converts, but of a definite type and character.'
So, the Muslim 'ummah' is never restricted to a certain community,
people, land or language and it is capable of increasing in number. Any
individual, or nation that embraces Islam joins this 'ummah' and becomes
part of it.

'Culture' and 'civilization' are two words that are vaguely and wrongly
understood by many people; some people even mix them up. As a result, a
call to abolish the cultural character of the Muslim 'ummah' has
emerged. Some called for subservience, first, to the Western
materialistic culture, and then, to the Communist, Marxist one.

They also called for dissolving the 'ummah's' character, and
obliterating its peculiarities by means of borrowing foreign concepts,
and modifying certain expressions and slogans, without touching a
borrowed thought; which is alien to Islam. Great effort was made,
actually , by the 'ideological agents' and the collaborators of the
'cultural imperialism' to achieve this end.

It is a matter of great importance to properly define the meanings of
'culture' and 'civilization', and show the correct use of each of these
two words. In order to explain the difference between them, let us
define these expressions, and give some examples.

Culture is 'a set of ideas and concepts about the universe, existence,
life and man'. Under this category fall beliefs, laws, regulations,
morals, philosophy, art, and literature. Briefly, culture can be defined
as 'a set of principles and values on which human character and social
life are based, and by which their relationship is defined'. The scope
of culture is then, 'the human side of life'.

And, it is due to this that the concept of culture, and the way of
developing it, varies from one culture to another; and, so, we have
Islamic culture, Greek culture, Roman culture, Capitalist culture,
Communist culture ... etc. Each one of these cultures has its own style
and way of shaping human character, and building life.

The way Islam understands life and moulds man, with all his ideas,
concepts, sentiments, behaviour, social organisation and human ties,
differs for example, from the way capitalist or communist cultures do.
This cultural style of shaping man's character leaves its impact on his
life. It marks, with its colour, his behaviour and existence, his
artistic, literary, cultural and behavioural activities, making his
character and society distinctly particular among the individual
characters and societies made by other culture.

The Holy Qur'an refers to this cultural colour, and the distinguishing
marks of the Muslim individual and groups:

"So, if they believe as you believe, they are indeed on the right
course; and if they turn back, then they are only in opposition. But
Allah will suffice you against them; and He is All-Hearing, All-
All-Knowing. (We take) Allah's colour, and who is better than Allah at
colouring, and we are His worshippers."
Holy Qur'an (137-138)

So, the doctrine of monotheism and the values of the faith form the
core of Islamic culture. They are a tenacious, close-knit body.
Substituting cultural ideals and concepts such as laws, morals,
philosophy, and theories of sociology and psychology ... etc, for other
ideals leads to ruin; in fact, to the ideological and behavioural
collapse of the 'ummah'.

Civilization, on the other hand, differs greatly in its meaning from
culture. It is 'the modus vivendi to the way man's energies and the
resources of nature are employed; which is done through science, natural
experiments, discoveries and inventions, that enables man to harness
natural resources, making use of them in his industries, construction
materials, agriculture, and the type of wars he fights. He can produce
whatever tools or equipment he needs; however inexpensive, primitive, or
complicated and advanced they may be:

This is the scientific side of life. Man, in this case, discovers the
laws of nature and life and employs them in industry ... etc.

The difference between culture and civilization, then, is that the
former is related to the human side of man's life, while the latter is
related to the materialistic side.

Culture shows man how 'he should behave in life' and draws for him 'his
relationship with the Creator of the world and his fellowman', while
civilization is defined as 'man's ability to discover laws of nature and
life, and how he should employ them for his benefit'.

Civilization, then, is shared by men regardless of their social
theories, beliefs and philosophies. It differs only slightly one culture
to another, and the scope of difference depends on the cultural concepts
and social values that govern the different cultures.

We should pay particular attention to an important point concerning
'culture' and 'civilization', because they are two expressions that have
new meaning which is different from the original, literal one. In
Arabic, 'hadharah' refers to the process of living in a village or the
countryside and means a permanent, settled life; which is opposite to
the wandering life of the bedouins.

As for 'madaniyyah' (civilization), it is taken from the verb
'madana' - (to settle in a certain place), therefore, both words are
literally similar, denoting settlements, permanent life, and residence.
The two words give this meaning idiomaticness, but each one of them
covers a specific area which makes it impossible to use them
interchangeably.


**Relationship between Culture and Civilization**

In spite of the fact that the area of 'culture' and its sphere of
influence is the human side of man's life; including beliefs, behaviour,
ideals, laws, arts, literatureetc, and the area of 'civilization' is the
material means of life; such as transportation, machinery,
petroleum-drilling the process of producing medicine, and curing the
sick ..,etc, they are linked firmly together, and affected by each
other.

What matters, here, is Islam's view of the relationship between culture
and civilization, which gives culture precedence over civilization.

In the light of cultural values, centred around the doctrine of
monotheism, man makes use of the achievements of civilization for his
own benefit, Whatever culture allows him, he is free to produce and then
use.

But whatever culture forbids, as being 'haram', he has no right to use,
or, for that matter to make as a tool; which would ruin
self-fulfillment, and human life, dor example, civilization presents us
with medicine; manufactures planes, cars; produces cotton and woollen
textiles; produces different materials from petroleum; develops
agricultural production and improves breeds of animals; provides housing
with furniture, as well as heating and cooling systems ... etc. thus, it
provides resources for man; putting at his disposal whatever helps him
lead a comfortable life.

Here, culture enters the scene, giving explanation for the way of using
and benefitting from all these remarkable human achievements. However,
when man manufactures tools and equipment of destruction, annihilation,
and torture, and employs his talents to produce tools for entertainment,
debauchery, and pornography; such as drugs, liquor, and tools of
aberrant sex ... etc, culture, with its values and standards, blocks the
way of deviation and the unwise use of man's energy, with that of
resources of nature.

The Holy Qur'an mentions this relationship between culture and
civilization and the grave danger of deviating from the straight
cultural path. It talks about nations that misused their material
achievements due to their misunderstanding of the role of their
achievements, stemming from their lack of values and ideals. The Qur'an
says:

"And Allah sets forth a parable; a town safe and secure, to which its
means of subsistence came in abundance from every quarter , but it
disbelieved in Allah's favours, so Allah made it taste a pall of hunger
and fear because of what they wrought." Holy Qur'an (16:112)

"Do you build on every height a monument? You (only) sport. And you
make fortresses that you may abide. And when you seize, you seize as
tyrants. So, be in awe of Allah and obey me. And be in awe of Him Who
aids you with that which you know- He aids you with cattle and children.
And gardens and fountains. Surely I fear for you the chastisement of a
grievous Day." Holy Qur'an (26:128-135)

And, it also emphasizes the leading role of culture in this verse:

"So, be in awe of Allah and obey me, and be in awe of Him Who aids you
with that which you know." Holy Qur'an (131-132)

Prophet Hud (a.s.), as the aforementioned verses show, exhorted his
people to be obedient and pious; to adhere to the religious beliefs he
brought to them, which outlined the way they should use their material
achievements in the best, proper way. He warned them that their
civilization might turn into a catastrophe that would devastate them;
changing their life into total misery and suffering; a life of
starvation, fear, repression ... etc.

How perfect the Qur'anic analysis of that situation is! How easily it
can apply to our time! Anyone who would like to examine the similarity
between pre-Islamic era (jahiliyyah) civilization would find no
testimonies better than the concepts of our modern, ignorant,
materialistic achievements and his civilized progress, into tools of
oppression, exploitation, deviation, enslavement, and blood letting.
Never has history witnessed such a large-scale, horrifying predicament
that man has brought upon himself as is in the case of the
present-day.

Since the hour of their birth, the contemporary, ignorant civilizations
of Capitalism and Communism, among others, have been treading the same
path as the old 'jahiliyyah' civilizations. Both ancient and modem
civilizations, as expressed in the Qur'an exploit man's scientific
advancement devastatingly, bringing down upon humanity deviation,
misery, oppression and ruin.


