Islam's Attitude Towards Civilization and Different Cultures
============================================================

After studying the difference between culture and civilization we
should now determine the attitude of Islam towards civilization and the
various existing cultures on this planet. Islam displays a confident
posture in that it refuses to subscribe to any culture forein to it
which includes any concept, doctrine, legislation, moral value, life
philosophy ... etc, that is not based on its beliefs, or has no common
ground with it.

So, the imitation of the capitalist, communist, socialist, Roman, Greek
... etc. civilization; the free adoption of any of their doctrines, or
the dissolution into their entities, is something firmly rejected by
Islam. There is no way to reconcile these cultures with Islamic
principles, objectives or system; whether on the level of beliefs and
philosophy, or legislation, ethics, arts, literature, education ...
etc.

Civilization, on the other hand, has no special affiliation (with..) or
distinguished identity. Discoveries, inventions, and industries are all
at the disposal of humanity. They are a means to serve man and provide
him with comfort, with the exception, of course, of that which is
detrimental to man's life or goes against his morals. Within the limits
of his culture, the Muslim can react positively to the scientific
movement, and cooperate with executives and groups worldwide; anytime
and any where He can make use of scientific products and achievement,
regardless of their origin.

Within the context of his cultural motives, he should do his utmost to
be in the fore front, He has to be a cultural leader, for he is the one
who can direct man's ability and natural resources in the right
direction, so that they can be employed for the benefit of all
humanity.

**Collapse of Cultures**

A community, exactly like the human body, is subject to feebleness,
disease and decay. The first social fabric that may contract disease is
often that of thought and belief, next, is the social conduct and
morals, then, the social, political and economic apparatus and
institutions; such as the family, slate, school, press, ... etc.

The moment the thought of a given group of people, which is, in fact,
the soul of their culture, debilitates and frays, the fabric of the
group disintegrates and decays. The more extensive the social deviation
the worse the ruin. Thereafter, disease creeps slowly into the social
units; the very social bodies and institutions that have been built by
all individuals to symbolize the collective spirit of the group and
represent its cultural progression. When the disease permeates all the
cells of these institutions, they began to function reversely.

This time the disease travels from the institutions to the individuals.
As a result, such morbid phenomena change into a social and behavioural
tide that engulfs everyone. Sometimes human communities may contract
cultural malaise while they are at the summit of their scientific
progress.

The human community, though scientifically and industrially advanced,
is suffering from the most fatal social plagues, namely the dangerous
deviations which are threatening to annihilate, on this planet, all the
scientific achievements and marvelous production of man's intellect.

Man's diseased, materialistic culture is tumbling down the slope of
history. It is not only simply unhealthy, but also has entered the final
phase of its morbid downfall.

The 'pre-Islamic era' 'formula' of life, adopted by man, inevitably
ends in total destruction and annihilation. This is a fact recorded by
history and stressed in the Qur'an.

It is a lesson drawn from the fate of numerous extinct cultures.

"How many a town We destroyed while it was iniquitous, so it is fallen
down upon its roofs; and (how many) a deserted well and palace raised
high! Have they not travelled in the land so that they should have
hearts with which to understand, or ears with which to hear? For surely
it is not the eyes that are blind, but blind are the hearts which are in
the breasts." Holy Qur'an (22:45-46)

"Have they not travelled in the land and seen what was the end of those
before them? Allah destroyed them. And for the infidels is the like
thereof." Holy Qur'an (47:10)

"And how many a town which rebelled against the commandment of its Lord
and His messengers, so We called it to severe account and We chastised
it with a stern chastisement! So it tasted the evil consequences of its
conduct, and the end of its affair was perdition." Holy Qur'an
(65:8-9)

"We have certainly been promised this - we and our fathers before;
these are nothing but stories of the ancients! Say: Travel in the land,
then see what was the end of the guilty!." Holy Qur'an (27:68-69)

"And Allah sets forth a parable: A town safe and secure, to which its
means of subsistence came in abundance from every quarter; but it
disbelieved in Allah's favours, so Allah made it taste a pall of hunger
and fear because of what they wrought." Holy Qur'an (16:112)

In these Qur'anic texts, the Noble Qur'an draws man's attention to the
progression of history, the growth and development of cultures; then, it
describes their downfall shrinkage, and decay, explaining the reasons
for their extinction. It calls on us to look for their traces, and
examine their histories; to put our fingers on the points of weakness
and the areas where diseases have struck, It is in our own interests to
avoid the wrongs of past nations, and fully grasp the lessons of
history.

When the Qur'an relates the story of a nation's rise and fall, it aims
at developing our sense of awareness with regard to man's past
experience, and enables us to make the best use of the lessons of
history drawn from the stories of numerous nations and various cultures.
The Qur'an focuses on the key reasons behind cultural downfall and
summarizes the plagues of the human community by the following:

1. Spiritual Imbalance: The disruption of man's relationship with Allah
which is represented by his repudiation of the Creator of the universe
and life, as well as his abandonment of Allah's Shari'ah.

"Have they not travelled in the land and seen what was the end of those
before them ? Allah destroyed them. And for the infidels is the like
thereof." Holy Qur'an (47:10)

Disbelief, in the logic of the Qur'an, means denial of the right, and
the split between man and the natural laws set for him. As a result
disbelief leads eventually to ruin for it is actually the process of
abolishing the laws governing man's existence, and falsifying the course
of history. In other words, the disbeliever moves against the goals of
life. These two phenomena surface as a direct outcome of the deeper
cause of disbelief. When man abandons the natural laws which govern him,
human civilization weakens and decays, and fades away.

In this case cultural collapse is inescapable, because life moves in
the wrong direction. Man, left alone, can never define his own goals in
this life, the goals that lead him to his Great Creator.

2. The second cause behind cultural downfall is "man's mischief", or
"misuse of life and man's existence", or "unwise use of things", or "the
use of man's existence for goals other than the ones set for him".
Should such a thing arise, if man misuses Allah's favours and the
resources of nature in the wrong way, for bad purposes, in the wrong
place and time; not as Allah has ordered, man's own deviation, in this
respect, serves as the green light that signals the start of the
collapse of a certain culture:

"Then We made Our promise good to them; so We delivered them and whom
We pleased, and We destroyed the extravagant." Holy Qur'an (21:9)

"Do you build on every height a monument? You (only) sport. And you
make fortresses that you may abide. And when you seize, you seize as
tyrants. So, be in awe of Allah and obey me. And be in awe of Him Who
aids you with that which you know- He aids you with cattle and children.
And gardens and fountains. Surely I fear for you the chastisement of a
grievous Day. Thye said: It is the same to us whether you admonish, or
are not one of the admonishers: This is nothing but stories of the
ancients. And we will not be chastised." Holy Qur'an (26:128-139)

The Qur'an, as seen in these verses, describes the irresponsible,
mischievous use of life as a devastating pickaxe, demolishing the
edifice of culture, tearing it down unit after unit, until, finally, it
collapses into ruin. The destroyed edifice expresses the story of man's
mutiny against natural laws. The Qur'an depicts this important law in
these verses:

"And Allah sets forth a par able: A town safe and secure, to which its
means of subsistence came in abundance from every quarter; but it
disbelieved in Allah's favours, so Allah made it taste a pall of hunger
and fear because of what they wrought." Holy Qur'an (16:112)

"And you dwell in the abodes of those who wronged themselves, and it is
clear to you how We dealt with them and We made (them) examples for
you." Holy Qur'an (14:45)

With such clarity the Qur'an discloses the grave cause of man's down
fall. It shows the role of the use of riches and the resources of
nature, and the employment of science, as contributing to either man's
peaceful, smooth life, or his downfall.

From one culture to another, and from one man to another, the manner in
which things are used differ. And, so, wise use of the means of
civilization and the potentials of life depends entirely on man's
cultural awareness.

That is why the use of resources and endowments by ancient,
materialistic cultures, as mentioned by the Qur'an, was marked by
mischief and aimlessness.

" ... but it disbelieved in Allah's favours, so Allah made it taste a
pall of hunger and fear because of what they wrought." Holy Qur'an
(16:112)

We conclude from the Qur'anic analysis that the nature of this
mischievous use of things leads man to starvation and fear, which
reflects man's cultural misery, and pushes to the surface the factors of
death and collapse, that are deeply embedded in an unstabile society.
Misery and terror are the result of human oppression and economic and
political illegal practices,

which end in Struggle and in destruction of resources. Being not
entitled to receive Allah's blessings, man loses them and his social
fabric and culture eventually fade away. All social phenomena, as we can
see clearly in this vicious cycle, are, in fact, the product of man's
misunderstanding, and his erratic, obscured perception of the goal and
value of life.

3. Confusion in man's standards and the lack of clear goals: When human
culture enters the stage of cloudiness and opaqueness, mixing the values
of evil and good, man moves ground, aimlessly, with no direction; values
vanish, and man's spirituality shrinks. At this point, man transgresses
the limits of Sacredness and finds himself in the vortex of debauchery
and rot.

When a set of ideological and behavioural phenomena comes to the
forefront reflecting man's confusion with regard to human standards and
his lack of noble and defined objectives, it means that man's culture
has become old and frail; living out its last days. Truthful are Allah's
words:

"How many populations have We destroyed, which were given to
wrong-doing? They trumbled down on their roofs. And how many wells are
lying idle and neglected, and castles lofty and well-built?

Do they not travel through the land, so that their hearts (and minds)
may thus learn wisdom and their ears may thus learn to hear? Truly it is
not the eyes that are blind, but the hearts which are in their breasts."
Holy Qur'an (22:45-46)

"It is true we were promised this,- we and our fathers before (us):
these are nothing but tales of the ancients. Say: Go you through the
land and see what has been the end of those guilty (of sin)" Holy Qur'an
(27:68-69)

"Curses were pronounced on those among the Children of Israel who
rejected faith, by the tongue of David. And of Jesus the son of Mary:
Because they disobeyed and persisted in Excesses. Nor did they forbid
one another. The iniquities which they committed: evil indeed were the
deeds which they did." Holy Qur'an (7:78-79)

When human values and standards decline in a particular, morbid
society, social disorders and maladies spread; what the Holy Qur'an
reveals. Oppression, crime, aggression, evil-doing, ignorance and lack
of sound judgement are all the results of unprincipled, straying man,
who has abandoned all ethical standards and even his own reason, and
formed animal groups roaming the land, governed by a disintegrated,
materialistic civilization.

"... They are as cattle; no, they are more astray. These are the
heedless ones." Holy Qur'an (7:179)

These are the main morbid phenomena which herald the downfall of human
culture; as seen by the Holy Qur'an, which is expounded on, elaborately,
in many of its verses. Whenever we see such phenomena creeping into
man's life, we know, positively, that both culture and society are
moving toward destruction and ruin, and that man's culture is helpless
and unable to accommodate his movement; unable to base his history on
the serene logic of existence and the ultimate goal of life, especially
when the Noble Qur'an has painted culture as a tenacious tissue made
from man's awareness and understanding of the universe and life.

This cultural formula and cultural tissue may by shredded into pieces
when the factors of man's downfall work on it. It appears, in the
Qur'an, as a house erected by man to protect himself, but it collapses
over his head when man toys with its foundation. The house buries man
and terminates his existence. It remains a scene of ruin and debris;

which is testimony to man's ignorance and tragedy. If one examines
history, from the perspective of the Qur'an, especially the ancient
past, one will find civilizations that grew and prospered, then shrunk
and breathed their last. Modern culture made by modem, ignorant man, is
only a confluence of the ignorant cultures of past generations, referred
to in the Qur'an, and a stagnant pool on whose floor all microbes of
annihilation and destruction exist.

At this point, the observer of the drift of modern materialistic
culture, which carries deep in it the seeds of its own destruction,
cannot help lamenting over this ignorant culture, while he witnesses its
tragic end as it propels headlong at full speed to meet its inevitable
fate.

"And warn people of a day when the chastisement will come to them, then
the wrongdoers will say: Our lord, respite us to a near term, we will
respond to Your call and follow the messengers. Did you not wear before
that there will be no passing away for you? And you dwell in the abodes
of those who wronged themselves, and it is clear to you how We dealt
with them and We made (them) examples for you.

And they have indeed planned their plan, and their plan with Allah,
though their plan is such that the mountains should be moved thereby. So
think not that Allah will fail in His promise to His messengers. Surely
Allah is Mighty, the Lord of retribution." Holy Qur'an (14:14-47)


