5. Regression and Lack of Self-confidence
=========================================

Weak hearts get bored. Shaky wills collapse and break down. A
disintegrated 'ummah' crumbles and falls before catastrophes and
misfortunes. But alive, aware 'ummah', whose members feel strong and
powerful, and whose wills are solid and firm, can turn defeat into
victory, and downfall into uprising. It draws lessons from events, and
makes the best use of the tragedies it under goes. Out of hard and
unfavourable conditions it emerges rich in experience which lightens its
path and shows it the right course of action.

The Qur'an addresses the Muslim 'ummah', saying:

"And be not weak-hearted, nor grieve, and you will have the upper hand
if you are believers." Holy Qur'an (3:138)

The Qur'an tries to make the Muslim, who may yield in a moment of
weakness and uncertainty, overcome the internal defeatism he suffers
from. It instills in him a spirit of steadfastness and spiritual
strength, and spreads out before him limitless horizons of victory.

Our 'ummah', the Muslim 'ummah', which prides itself on its glorious
history, has unfortunately succumbed to extreme stagnation and
deterioration; under the pressure of many centuries of backwardness,
ignorance and decay. It has forgotten all about its glorious past, and
lost its cultural and material capabilities which would have helped it
continue its cultural march, that would have put it at the fore front of
all nations.

It has awoken from its deep slumber at the shouts of the invading
enemies; helpless, broken, unable to move having lost its fortitude and
strength, abandoned its mission and principles, and buried under layers
of ignorance its precious scientific and cultural legacy. Short of
weapons to defend its existence and culture, it faced its foes.

With not enough knowledge and awareness, not ready, it was only natural
that our 'ummah' would be defeated; dazzled by the trappings of the
western invading civilization. It became submissive; receptive to the
invading thought and culture. Having lost its leadership position, it
soon yielded to the invading conquerors.

Its enemies, on the other had, doubled their subversive efforts to
ingrain the feeling of backwardness, ineptitude, and the inability to
catch up with the world in the fields of knowledge, civilization and
technology. They placed all kinds of obstacles and hindrances before the
'ummah' and planted the spirit of defeatism in it. The 'ummah'
surrendered and accepted the fait accompli, thus, the most important
pillar of the character of the 'ummah' was pulled down.

Nothing but the Qur'an can cure our 'ummah' of this malaise. There is a
great need to build a Qur'anic generation, that believes in the goals of
the Qur'an, carries the spirit of the Qur'an, so that it can march
forward without weakness or hesitation.

This vanguard should take the utmost advantage of the lessons of
history, examine closely the experiences of past and present nations,
and monitor the direction of events, so as to check the aimless movement
Of mankind, to realize that nothing is impossible in the world of the
possible and that its position is in the forefront. It should lead
humanity along the read of progress and peace.

"You (Muslims) are the best nation raised up for people: you enjoin
good and forbid evil ..." Holy Qur'an (3:109)

"And thus We have made you an exalted nation that may be the bearers of
witness to the people and (that) are the Messenger may be a bearer of
witness to you ..." Holy Qur'an (2:143)

When this vanguard again exists in the world of Islam, this multitude
of committed, strong-willed, Qur'anic- educated men, who know no
despair, regression or inferiority; the whole 'ummah' of the Qur'an will
be reborn. It means that life, once again will enter the torpid body of
the 'ummah", the spirit of revival will creep into its awareness in much
the same way that spring creeps into the trees. It will be the good news
of the 'ummah's' departure from ineptitude and lethargy. Then the
'ummah' can reject the rotting focade to which it had been forced to
cling for so long and can use its limbs again after their long
paralyis.


**6. Despair of Change and Reform**

Despair is a morbid, dangerous condition that marks frail characters
and hopeless souls, when images of failure are heaped before them, or
when they are reminded of their ineptitude and failure to achieve all
the goals they dreamt of This phenomenon grows more dangerous especially
when it he comes a collective one, transcending the boundaries of the
individuals in the group. Then, this disease begins to eat away at the
wills and kill the spirit of bravery, and blocks man's movement. Even
those who are lucky to be free from it find their way full of
obstacles.

This morbid condition has sneaked into the Muslim individual and
groups. Muslims despair of reforms and feel helpless in the face of
waves of corruption. They are so burdened with the heavy years of
oppression and evil Colonialism that they cannot deal with their pitiful
backwardness in the fields of science, politics, economicsetc.

The majority of Muslims choose resignation to reality, keeping silent
vis-a-vis corruption and decadence. Neglecting the divine order to
enjoin good and forbid evil, they have left the arena to the enemies of
Islam, and the preachers of ignorance and corruption.

An analytical look at the social fabric of Muslims and their psychology
sums up the causes of despair and resignation to the current way of
life, on the following points:

1. Some people feel despair due to an objective feeling that can be
traced to the individual's psychological disorder. Some people are
melancholy by nature. The root cause of this condition is private
concerning the individual himself; but, then, it engulfs the whole
society colouring its altitudes and positions.

2. People's ignorance of the course of history. This ignorance of, or
misunderstanding of, human history which is subject to ebb and flow,
advancement and regression, naturally yields a human attitude that is
far from being real. Such people can think only within the boundaries of
the present conditions and circumstances enveloping their communities.
How can they know that what they are witnessing is only a fleeting,
passing phenomenon, and a transitional case of history, that repeals
itself now and then, like the bubbles that are born on the lake bottom,
then rise to the surface and burst?

"Let not control in the land, of those who reject faith, deceive you. A
brief enjoyment! Then their abode is hell. And evil is the
resting-place." Holy Qur'an (3:195-196)

What we see today as an awe-inspiring, magnificent edifice will become,
in years, decades or centuries to come, a dilapidated entity, a trace,
or a story kept in the depths of history records or museums. If these
people only know this fact, if they know that history is always in
constant motion, that it repeats itself, their view of life will
certainly change.

Truthful are Allah's words:

"Indeed there have been examples before you; so travel in the land and
see what was the end of the deniers. This is a clear statement for
people, and a guidance and an admonition to the pious. And be not
weak-hearted, nor grieve, and you will have the upper hand if you are
faithful. If a wound has afflicted you, a wound like it has also
afflicted the (disbelieving) people. And We bring these days to people
by turns, that Allah may know those who believe and take witnesses from
among you. And Allah loves not the wrongdoers. And that He may purge
those who believe and deprive the infidels of blessings. Do you think
that you will enter the Garden while Allah has not yet known those from
among you who strive hard (not) known the steadfast." Holy Qur'an
(3:136-140)

The Qur'an speaks, in a bid to stir up our sense of history, about
Allah's laws, and the laws that govern the drift of human history which
state that no political, or social ... situation remains as it is, that
defeat is not insurmountable, and victory is not everlasting. All these
historical phenomena are transitory. They have no fixed value or
constant existence, except when they are grounded in right and
justice.

"... Then as for the scum, it passe away as a worthless thing; and as
for that which does good to people, it tarries on the land ..." Holy
Qur'an (13:17)

How many nations were born and then perished! How many states rose and
fell! How many groups and parties attained the pinnacle of triumph and
glory, only to be beaten and become mere stories and narrations in the
annals of history! How many a culture or a doctrine spread across this
planet then fell and faded from the stage of history!

"... and We bring these days to people by turns, ..." Holy Qur'an
(3:140)

The course of history is a school in which man learns from its events,
and benefits from its facts and lessons. That is why the Qur'an reminds
us of the past nations, instills in us the spirit of victory, exhorts us
to overcome our despair and weakness, and urges us to sacrifice and
fight for the cause of Allah.

3. The feeling of fear form the technological progress achieved by the
foes of Islam. Muslims feel they are lagging behind in technology and
this inferiority complex, which clutches at the Muslim heart, is for the
despondent at least, a hard-to-overcome obstacle. None of the preachers
of the faith or the reformers can match the advanced forces of the
enemies of Islam,

particularly in the arenas of politics and industry; this is what many
despairing Muslims think. But the Qur'an, in its address to the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), analyses this morbid phenomenon and opens
the Muslims' eyes to the facts of history.

"None dispute concerning the messages of Allah but those who
disbelieve, so let not their control in the land deceive you. Before
them the people of Noah and the parties after them rejected (prophets),
and every nation purposed against its messenger to destroy him, and
disputed by means of falsehood to render null thereby the truth, so I
seized them; how (terrible) was then My retribution!" Holy Qur'an
(40:4-5)

"Let not control in the land" of those who reject faith, deceive you. A
brief enjoyment! Then their abode is hell. And evil is the
resting-place." Holy Qur'an (3:195-196)

4. Accumulation of Corruption. Corruption has spread across the
despairing Muslims as overwhelming and hard to obliterate. But these
people lose sight of the fact that the intensity of corruption hastens
its death. When corruption and deviation rule a certain society it
rushes towards disintegration, and this, in itself, marks the birth of a
new society and the beginning of a fresh historical phase.

The prophets were the best examples of diligent preachers who dealt
with their own people most kindly, carefully and conscientiously. The
prophets and messengers of Allah (a.s.) and their faithful adherents
enriched the way to Allah with good experiences, wise attitudes and
courses of action. The Noble Qur'an presents us with an example of the
brave, unique actions of people who knew no despair or weakness, Allah
addresses His Messenger Moses (a.s.), saying:

"Go you and your brother with My messages and be not remiss in
remembering Me. Go both of you to Pharaoh, surely he is inordinate; then
speak to him a gentle word, haply he may mind or fear." Holy Qur'an
(20:42-44)

Pharaoh, as the Qur'an describes him, was well known as a haughty and
arrogant tyrant. He was an evil man bent on spreading disbelief, and
sustaining crime and corruption. But, in spite of this, Allah, the Most
Exalted, ordered His prophet Moses to go to him, say the word of right
to him, and establish the proof of Allah before him.

For the same reason, namely calling people to be true servants of
Allah, the Qur'an gives the ideal attitude taken by a number of
believers towards other despairing men, who asked the believers
protestingly:

"... Why preach you to a people whom Allah would destroy ..." Holy
Qur'an (7:164)

The Qur'an mentions the story as an example of the patience,
forbearance and strength of the men who devoted themselves
whole-heartedly to the faith. It says:

"... Why preach you to a people whom Allah would destroy or whom He
would chastise with a severe chastisement? They said: To be free from
blame before your Lord, and that haply they may guard (against evil)."
Holy Qur'an (7:164)

These committed men do not want to let despair attack themselves, lest
it stands as a high wall blocking the process of calling people to the
right path, explaining the truths about the faith and establishing the
proof of Allah for them. Having done this, the preacher and reformer can
feel at peace with himself, living with a clear conscience because he
has done what his Lord has ordered him to do.

5. The failure of many reformers and reformist movements is that they
do not bring about the change they promised people earlier, and keep to
the principles they called for before, This failure leaves a bad
impression and a negative effect on the souls of many people. The result
is the despair and pessimism that makes people the reformers. Such
people see only the negative side of the reformer's efforts, and look
only at the failure of the reformist movements. They will not even lock
at the causes of the failure and decline to work with the same spirit
and determination with which the true reformers work, after studying
their experiences, evaluating them, and setting a sound course of
action.

These people should realise that the failures of the committed
reformers have given them good, in valuable lessons which they would
never have experienced if it were not for the hardships and sufferings
of these reformers, This encounter has blazed the trail for them, and
enlightened the road therefore, they have to make use of this great
experience and go on with the march of reforms and struggle. They should
discard the factors of despair; setting out to work with fresh
determination and spirit.


**Epilogue**

There are some factors and reasons that actively help to hasten the
downfall of societies and cultures, if they are begotten in their
atmospheres or have the chance to clutch at the ingredients of culture
and civilization.

There looms on the horizon a number of morbid signs and evidences
indicating the imminent breakdown of the present human culture; on that
will totally disappear from the scene. The Qur'an makes mention of all
fatal morbid reasons, obstacles and phenomena that stand between the
Muslim and his duty of facing the elements of weakness and decadence.
Before any of these factors arises, the Qur'an points it out, and warns
people of it, lest the Muslim reformer forgets his duty of fighting
corruption, or gives up in the face of obstacles and hindrances.

This Qur'anic attitude inspires us, we Muslims of today, to ponder over
the conditions of our 'ummah', detect its points of strength and
weakness, and those of the materialistic, ignorant culture; which is
launching a war against us, and planning to tear down our culture and
bring an end to our existence.

By contemplating on these conditions we can find the means to answer
back, inspite of elements of weakness and decadence, making our way
ahead more fruitful. This is the way we can resume our cultural
triumphant and historical march; hoisting the banner of Islam, and
leading the whole world on the road of guidance, prosperity and peace.


