Preface
=======

Imam Ali bin Abi Talib may Allah’s greeting be to him – is the Imam of
eloquents and scholastic as he is the Imam of the pious; the masterpiece
of whose is Nahj Al-Balaghah that represents, on the grounds of Arabic
style, a rank coming after that of the Holy Quran. Throughout thirteen
centuries, the Arab styles have related to it, have built up on its
foundation, have quoted their firebrands from it, and that their good
styles revive within the framework of his magic eloquence.

Imam Ali was improvising his speeches, reciting them at people meetings
as summeries of a contemplations and at their circles as addresses
increasing inside the self; the tongue utters them spontaneously and
thus come precise (under the Creator’s speech and above that of the
created).

At the end of the fourth century A.H. Al-Sharif Al-Radhi chose samples
of his sermons, letters, and short sayings, and gathered them in a book
called Nahj Al-Balaghah. The name indicates that these chosen samples
represent a method in eloquence and performance that leads, if taken as
an example, to rhetoric as it is a revelation of the self and reality,
and a delivery to the receiver. This is the objective of the great
creative literature.

From the day the book was selected, scholars and literary men devoted
themselves to reading and explaining it; thus the expla-nations became
numerous and various, some of which reached several volumes that
requires, only to be acquainted with, time and effort people often do
not have within these days. Hence came the need for a book that
facilitates knowledge of the “Nahj” for the common reader by selecting
samples and explaining them.

The famous author George Gerdak attempted to carry out this task: he
works throughout years to simplify difficulties for the reader so as to
collect within a book masterpieces of Nahj Al-Balagha; he classifies
them according to its topics on them one hand, and according to time of
appearance on the other hand, and explains what is strange and difficult
out of their expressions.

Once more, throughout these masterpieces which he chooses, organizes
and explains, he introduces an excellent study on the “Allawiyan
Personality” adding it to his well-known five-study series.

This book satisfies a need for the common reader, the students of
schools and universities, and the specialized reader as well, at this
time when man does not find an opportunity for reading, amid several
businesses and the control of audiovisual mass media.

Al-Ghadear Center for studies is interested to introduce this book in
its new dress after its edition has been sold out wishing to achieve the
benefit it aims.


Al-Ghadeer Center for Islamic Studies


