Describing His Conduct and That of Mu’awiyah
============================================

**He Deceives and Commits Evils**

By Allah, Mu’awiyah is not more cunning that I but he betrays and
commits evil deeds. If I don’t hate deceit I would be the most cunning
of all men.

**The Price of Swearing Allegiance**

He did not swear allegiance till he put a condition that he would pay
him its price. The hand of this purchaser may not be successful and the
contact of the seller may face disgrace. Now you should take up arms for
war and arrange equipment for it.

**Eaters of bribe**

A letter, whose some meaning has been mentioned, sent to a group of his
companions:

You but are fighting the eaters of bribe, the salves of this world,
hereies and fabrications I have been known that the son of the whore
(Amru bin Al-Aa’s) did not swear allegiance to Mu’a-wiyah till he got
him agree that he would pay him a bribe which is the greatest of all
what is at his hands of authority. May the hand of this seller, of his
religion by his world, be empty. May the hand of this purchaser the
support of a treacherous, wicked man by people’s money, be soiled with
earth. (i.e. become poor).

**You have Ruined Your this and the next World To Amru bin Al-A’as when
he accede to Mu’awiyah**

You have surely made your religion subservient to this worldly seekings
of a man whose misguidance is apparent and whose veil had been torn
away. Nobleman is disgraced by his company and prudent is befooled by
his associaiton. You have followed in his steps seeking his surplus like
the dog that follows the lion resorting to his paws and waiting for
whatever remnants of his prey fall down to him. Thus, you have ruined
your this world as well as the next life, although if you had stuck to
the right, you would have got what you were after. If Allah grants me
power over you and Ibn Abi Sufyan (Mu’awiyah) I shall penalize you for
what you have done.

**I shall Inflict Upon you**

**A letter to Ziyad ibna Abeeh, his governor of Basrah**

I truthfully swear by Allah that if I come to know that you have
misappropriated the funds of Muslims, small or big, I shall inflict upon
you such punishment which will leave you empty handed, heavy backed and
humiliated; Wassalaam.

**Enjoying Comforts**

From A letter to Ziyad ibna Abeeh too:

Do you expect that Allah may give you the reward of humble person while
you yourself vainglorious in His view? And do you hope that He may give
you the reward of those practising charity while you enjoy comforts and
deny them to the weak people and widows? Certainly man is awarded
according to what he has done and meets what he has sent forward.


**Beware of Mu’awiyah**

From A letter to Ziyad ibn Abih when Imam knew that Mu’awiyah had
written to Ziyad to deceive him to attach him to himself in kinship.

I have learnt that Mu’awyiah has written to you to deceive your wit and
blunt your sharpness. You should be on guard against him because he is
ths Satan who approaches the believer from the front and from the back,
from the right and from the left, to break into his inadvertance and
overcome his intelligence.

**All men to us are Equal**

A letter to Sahl ibn Hunayf Al-Ansari, his Governor of Medina, about
certain persons who had accede to Mu’awyiah Now, I have come to know
that certain persons from your side are stealthily acceding to
Mu’awyiah. Do not feel sorry for their numbers and what you lose of
their help.

It is enough for them that they have gone into misguidance and for you
that you have been relieved of them. They have known justice, seen it,
heard and perceived it. They have realized here that, to us, all men are
equal in the matter of right. Therefore, they ran away to selfishness
and partiality. So, away with them and let them far away. By Allah, they
have surely not fled from an oppression nor do they proceeded to a
justice.

**O’ you semi-men**

From a sermon after Sufyan Ibn Auf of Banu Ghamid invaded Al-Anbar;
Mu’awyiah had sent him to raid over people the sides of Iraq. To
frighten its inhabitants.

The horsemen of Banu Ghamid have reached Al-Anbar and killed Hassan ibn
Hassan Al-Bakri. They have removed your horsemen from their garrison and
killed virtuous men of you I have come to know that the person of them
has been breaking into Muslim women and the other women under protection
of Islam and took away their ornaments from legs, arms, necks and ears
and no woman could resist it except by reciting the verse of Quran, “We
are for Allah, and to He we shall return.”

Then they got back laden with wealth without any wound or loss of life.
If any Muslim dies of grief after all this he is not to be blamed but
rather there is justification for him before me How strange! How
strange! By Allah my heart sinks to see unity of these people on their
wrong and your dispersion about your right. Woe and grief befall you as.
You have become a target at which arrows are shot. You are raided on but
you don’t raid, you are invaded but don’t invade. Allah is being
disobeyed and you remain agreeable to it.

When I order you to make a raid on them in summer you say it is hot
weather. Respite us till heat subsides from it. When I order you to
march in winter you say it is severely cold; give us time till cold
clears from us All this are just execuses to flee from heat and cold so
you from sword flee more quickly, by Allah, semi-men not men, your
intelligence is that of children and your wit is that of women.

I wish I have not seen you nor known you. By Allah, this acquaintance
has brought about regret and resulted in distress. May Allah fight you!
You have filled my bosom with rage and counteracted my plans by
disobeying and deserting me so much so that Quraysh started saying that
the son of Abi Talib is brave but does not know (the tactics of) war.

May Allah orphan them is there anyone more stubborne in war and older
in practicing it than I? I undertook it as I hadn’t reached twenty yet,
and here I am, exceding sixty, but one who is not obeyed has no
opinion.

**Even If I Strike Him With My Sword**

Even if I strike the nose of a believer with this, my sword for hating
me he does not hate me, and even if I pour out all the riches of this
world in the lap of a hypocrite to love me he doesn’t love me.

**Will There Be Talk Without Action
Rebuking his dissuasive companions:**

O’ people, your bodies are together but your desires are divergent.
Your talk softens hard-stoned mountains and your action tempts your
enemy into you. If one calls you the call rece-ives no heed. And he who
sufferes from you his heart has no solace. Which dewelling after your
dwelling do you protect and with which Imam after me would you go for
fighting? By Allah, really deceived is the one whom you deceive while,

by Allah, he who won you had won the most abortive lot. By Allah, I am
now in a position that I neither believe in your speech nor hope for
your support, not threaten the enemy with you. What is the matter with
you? What is your treatment? What is your cure? The other party are also
men like you. Will there be speech without action, carelessness without
piety and a baseless hope?

I Don’t Improve You By Corrupting Myself From a speech admonishing his
companions too:

How much do I deal with you smoothly such as old worn clothes are dealt
with, as they when sewed from one side get torn from the other. Do you
whenever a brigade from Al-Sham draws near you, everyone of you shuts
his door and hides himself like the lizard in its hole or a hyena in its
den. By Allah he whom you support is humilliated. By Allah, you are
numerous in courtyards but few under banners. Certainly, I know what can
improve you and straightens your crookedness. But I do not improve your
condition by corrupting myself!

**Determining Without Hurry**

Some of his companions suggested preparation to fight with him, after
he sent Jarir ibn Abdillah Al-Bajali to Mu’awyiah:

My preparion for war with the people of Al-Sham while Jarir is still
there would be a closing the door for Al-Sham and prevention of its
people from a good action if they intend doing it. My opinion is to
determine without hurry.

I have meditated and reflected upon this matter thoroughly from all its
sides but I do not find any way except war or heresy. There had been
over the people a ruler who brought about new unislamic practices and
gave people the reasons to speak so they spoke them they resented and
changed.

I Am Tired Of Rebuking You To mobilize people for fighting with the
people of Al-Sham Woe to you. I have become tired of rebuking you. When
I invite you to fight your enemy your eyes revolve as though you are in
the clutches of death, and in the senselessness of last moments. You are
like nothing but camels whose shepherd have strayed, so that whenever
they are collected from one side they disperse from the other side! You
are intrigued against but do not intrigue.

Your boundaries are decreased but you do not get enraged. Your enemy do
not sleep but you are unmindful. By Allah, spineless people are subdued.
By Allah, I think about you that when battle rages and death hovers
around you, you will cut away from the son of Abi Talib like the
severing of the head from the trunk. By Allah he who gives his enemy the
chance to remove his flesh, crush his bones and cut his skin into
pieces, then it means that his helplessness is great and what is
surrounded within the sides of his chest (i.e his heart) is weak.

You be that person if you wish, as to me before I accept it there would
be an encounter with sharp-edged swords in which the moths bones of
skulls fly; thereafter let Allah do what ever He likes!


