The Continuity of State
=======================

**Deliver at the battle of siffin**

So now, Allah, the Glorified, has, by giving me the authority, have
created the right you owe to me, and I owe you like what you owe me. As
right is the most vast in description but the most narrow in practice.
It does not accrue to any person unless it accrues against him also, and
right does not accrue against a person unless it also accrues in his
favour.

Then, he the Glorified made of his rights, rights for some people on
others. He made them so as to equate with one another and some of them
entail some other rights and some rights don’t become valid except by
some others. The greatest of these rights that Allah, the Glorified, has
made obligatory is the right of the ruler over the ruled and the right
of the ruled over the ruler. The ruled cannot prosper unless the rulers
are sound, while the rulers cannot be sound unless the ruled are
sincer.

If the ruled discharge the rights of the ruler and the ruler discharges
their rights, then justice becomes mightly among them, criterion of
justice become clear consequently time will improve, the continuance of
govern-ment will be expected, and the hopes of enemies disappointed. But
if the ruled gain sway over the ruler, or the ruler prejudiced the
ruled, then disagreement crops up in every direction sings of inequity
appear.

Then desires are acted upon, the Allah’s com-mands are counteracted,
diseases of spirits become numerous and there is no hesitation in
disregarding even great rights, nor in committing big wrongs. In such
circumstances virtuous humili-ated while vicious are honoured.

No person, however great his position in the matter of right, is above
being helped to carry on the obligations placed on him by Allah, and no
man, however small he may be regarded by others, and however humble he
may appear before the eyes, is less than rendering help or being
helped.

Here, one of Imam’s companions replied to him by a long speech where he
praised him much and mentioned his own listening to him and obeying him,
imam said this prominent saying:

In the view of virtuous people, the worst characteristic of rulers is
that it may be thought about them that they love haughtiness, and their
affairs may be taken to be based on pride.

I would really hate that you may absorb, That I love high praises or to
hear eulogies. By the grace of Allah I am not like this so do not
address me in the manner tyrrants are addressed, and do not be discreet
of me as you do the people of passion and do not associate with me with
flattery and do not think I find it heavy if a true thing is said to me,
as that who feels disgusted when a truth is said to him or justice is
placed before him he would find it more difficult to act upon them! Do
not, so, abstain from saying a truth or pointing out justice since I do
not regard myself above erring.

**Peace Is Prior**

**When Imam’s companions showed impatience on his delay in giving them
permission to fight in Siffin**

Well, as for your saying is all this (delay) is due to a hatred of
death!? Then by Allah I do not care whether I proceed towards death or
death advances towards me as for you saying that it may be due to my
suspicious about the people of Al-Sham, well, by Allah, I did not put
off war even for a day except in the hope that some group may join me,
find guidance through me and see my light with their weak eyes. This is
dearer to me than killing them in the state of their misguidance
although they draw on themselves the burden of their sins.


**The Honourable Instruction**

**Given to the army before the encoun-ter with the enemy at Siffin**

Do not fight them unless they begin the fighting, because, by the grace
of Allah, you have a plea that you are in the right and to leave them
till they begin fighting will be another plea in your side against them.
If, by the will of Allah, the enemy is defeated then do not kill a run
away, do not strike a helpless person, do not finish off a wounded
person, and do not excite women by any harm even though they may attack
your honour with filthy words and abuse your officers!

O’ my Allah! Save the Victor From Excesses

**When imam decided to fight the enemy at Siffin**

O’ my Allah! The God of this earth which Thou has made it an abode for
people and a place for the movement of insects and beasts and countless
other creatures seen and unseen and The God of strong mountains which
Thou hast made as pegs for the earth and a shelter for creatures. If
Thou givest us victory over our enemy, save us from excesses and keep us
on the straight path of truth. But if Thou givest them victory over us,
then grant us martyrdom and save us from misguiding.

O’ my Allah! Reform relaiton between us and them From a speech of his
in Siffin, Imam had heard some of his men abusing the people of Al-sham
in reply to their abusing him: I dislike you to be abusers, but if you
describe their deeds and recount their situations that would be a better
mode of speaking and a more convincing way of arguing. Instead of
abusing them you should say:

“O’Allah! Save our blood and their blood, reform the relation and
eradicate enmity, and lead them out of their misguidance so that he who
is ignorant of the truth may know it, and he who inclines towards excess
aggresion refrain from it.

**He Spoke with Their Tongues
From a sermon of his**

They have made Satan the criterion of their affairs, and he has taken
them as his traps. He has laid eggs and hatched in their bosoms. He
creeps and crawls in their laps so He sees through their eyes, and
speaks with their tongues. In this way he has led them to slippery paths
and adorned for them stupidity like the action of one whom Satan has
made partner in his domain and speaks untruth through his tongue.


**They Made Them Officers Over The Heads**

Someone asked Imam about fabri-cated traditions and contradictory
sayings spreading among people, he said: Certainly, what is at the hand
of people is right and wrong, true and false. Allah too had warned you
well about the hypocrites and described them fully to you. They have
remained after the Holy Prophet. They made advances to the leaders of
misguidance and callers towards Hell through falsehood and slandering.
So, they inducted them into high offices made them rulers over people
and amassed wealth through them. People are always with rulers and after
this world except those whom Allah safeguards.

**Two Kinds**

His speech on those who love and hate him:

Two categories, with regard to me, will be ruined, namely he who loves
me too much and the love takes him away from rightfulness, and he who
hates me too much and the hatred takes him away from rightfulness. The
best one with regard to me is he who is in the middle course. So be with
him and be with the great majority because Allah’s hand is with the
majority.

And from his speech on those:

Two categories of persons will face ruin on account of me: he who loves
me with exaggeration, and he who hates me intensely.

Sahl bin Hunayf Al-Ansari died at Kufa after his return from the battle
of Siffin and he was very much loved by Imam as he was one of the
strongest supporters of Imam in the way of right. Imam said
thereafter:

Even if a mountain loves me it would crumble down.

**Just Leaders**

Imam went to enquire about the health of his companion Al-Ala’ ibn
Ziyad Al-Harithi and when he noticed the vastness of his house said:

What do you do with this vast house in this world? Don’t you need this
house more in the next world? Yes, you can use it to attain the next:
you can entertain in it guests and be regardful of kinship and to pay
all your obligations according to their categories. In this way you can
use it to serve your next life.

Then AL-Ala’ said to him: O’ Amir Al-Mu’minin: I want to complain to
you about my brother Asim ibn Ziyad. He said: What is the matter with
him?

Al-Ala’ said: He has put on a woolen gown and cut himself away from the
world. Imam said: present him to me. When he came Imam said:

O’ enemy of yourself. Certainly, the evil (Satan) has mis-quided you.
Do you feel no pity for your wife and your children? DO you think that
Allah has granted you these benevolences and He dislikes you to take it?
You are less important to Him to treat you so.

He said: O’ Amir Al-Mu’minin, you actually put on coare dress and eat
rough food.

Imam replied: Woe unto you, I am not like you. Allah has made it
obligatory on just leaders that they should maintain themselves at the
level of weak people least the poor feel very sad for his poverty.

**If I Am Given The Domains Of The Seven Stars**

From a speech describing himself as a guard of public funds after his
brother Aqil destituted and asked him to give him some grain:

By Allah, I would rather pass a night in wakefulness lying on the
thorns of Al-Sadan (plant having sharp prickles) or be driven in chains
as a prisoner is dearer to me than meeting Allah and his Messenger on
the Day of Judgement as an oppressor of some slaves or a usurper of some
thing of the wreckage of this world.

By Allah, even if I had been given all the domains of the seven (stars)
with all that exists under the skies in order that I may disobey Allah
by ripping of one grain of barley from an ant I would not do it. For me
your world is meaner than a leaf in the mouth of a locust chewing it.
What has Ali to do with a passing away bounty and a vanishing appetite?
We do seek shelter of Allah from the sleep of mind and the ugliness of
mistakes, and from Him we seek help.

**Moved By Storms**

I has been like a mountain which neither sweeping wind could move nor
storms could shake. No one could find fault with me nor could any
speaker wink at me. The weak in my view is strong till I restore his
right and deliver it to him while the strong is in my view weak till I
take right from him.

Were it not for the dyespepsia of the Oppressor and hunger of the
Oppressed From a sermon of his called Alsheq-sheqeiah

… Till the third man of these people stood up heaving his breasts i.e
his stomuch is too full of food. With him the sons of his father also
stood up swallowing Allah’s wealth like a camel devouring the foliage of
spring till his actions finished him off and his dyespepsia stumble him
down. At that moment nothing took me by surprise, but the crowd of
people rushing to me from every direction they advanced towards me in a
rushing way that Hasan and Husayn were crushed and both the ends of my
shoul-der garment were torn.

They gathered around me like a resting herd of sheep and goats. When I
took up the reins of government one party breached of homage and another
turned disobedient while the rest began acting wrongfully as if they had
not heard the word of Allah saying: “That abode in the hereafter, we
assign it for those who intend not to exult themselves in the earth, not
(to make) mischief therein; and the end is (best) for the pious ones.
Yes, by Allah, they had heard it and understood it but the world
appeared glittering in their eyes and its embellishments seduced them.

Behold by Him who Has split grain and created spirits hadn’t the
presence of those present been and hadn’t the presence of supporters
exhusted my argument and hadn’t Allah obligated on theology scientist
not to acquiesce in the gluttony of an oppressor and the hunger of an
oppressed I would have cast the rope of it i.e Caliphate on its withers,
and would have irriga-ted its last with the cup of which I had irrigated
its first and you would have seen that in my view this world of yours is
cheaper than a sneezing of a goat.


**People of Tirck**

Surely, fulfillment of peldge is the twin of truth. I do not know a
better shield than it. One who has realized the reality of return never
betrays. We are in a time in which most of the peo-ple regard betrayal
as wisdom. Ignorant people attributed them to excellence of cunnig. What
is the matter with them? Allah may destroy them. One who has been
experience through thick and thin of life may see the way of the trick
but there is a detterrent of Allah’s piety so he gives it up after
seeing it with eyes and after being able to act upon while that who has
no religion seizes its apportunity.

You and your brother, the Human being


