Limits of Tax
=============

Written to whoever Imam has been sending to the collection of “Zakat”
and Charities. It is full of the ruler’s kindness – the father – and is
worthy to be stated in the law of the ideal state of which the
distinguished people dream:

When you reach a Quarter reside at their watering place without going
among their houses. Then proceed towards them with tranquility and
dignity till you stand among them. Then salute them and do not be remiss
in greeting them, then say to them:

“O, slaves of Allah, the “waali” of Allah and His caliph has sent mo to
you to collect from you Allah’s share in your properties. Is there
anything of His share in your properties? If so, give it to His
vicegerent.”

If someone of them says “No”, then do not repeat the demand. If someone
speaks to you in the affirmative, then go with him without frightening
him, threatening him, pressuring him, or oppressing him. Take what he
gives you, of gold or silver. If he has a cattle or camels do not enter
upon them save with his permission, because their major part is his.
Therefor, when you get there do not enter upon them like one who has
full control over them or in a violent manner.

Do not scare any animal, do not tease anyone and do not let the owner
feel grieved about anyone. Divide the property into two parts and let
the owner choose one. When he has chosen do not object to it. Then
divide the remaining into two parts and let him choose one and when he
has chosen do not raise any objection. Continue to do so till remains
only that whichis enough to satisfy Allah’s due. Then take Allah’s due
from it. If he showed dissatisfaction repeat the operatoin, then mix the
two parts and repeat what you had done before till you take Allah’s due
from his properties.

**The silly and Traders**

From a letter of Imam sent to the people of Egypt sent with Malik
Al-Ashtar when he was made Governor of that place:

By Allah, if I encounter them alone and they are numerous as to fill
the earth to the full, I don’t worry or become perplexed. I have clear
insight and certainty that I am in the right path and they are
misguided. But I grieve that silly and wicked people come to power and
control the affairs of this nation then they grib the funds of Allah as
their own property and enslave His slaves, fight against virtuous, and
ally with the sinful. If this had not been I would not have insisted on
gathering you, reprehen-ding you, mobilising you and urging you.

**The Bribed in Judgement**

O’ (people of) discordant minds and scattered hearts, whose bodies are
present but wits are absent. I lead you towards right, but you run away
from it like goat’s running away form the howling of a lion. How hard it
is for me to generate a light from you to eradicate darkness and uncover
justice, or to straighten the curve of truthfulness.

O’ my Allah! Thou knowest that what we had done was not to seek power
nor to acquire anything from the vanities of this world. We rather
wanted to restore the real signs of Thy religion and to usher prosperity
into Thy cities so that the oppressed among Thy slaves might feel
safe.

You certainly know that leadership should not be given to a miser as
his greed would aim at their wealth, nor be an ignorant as he would
estrange them from him with his rudeness, not should be he who deals
unjustly with wealth, thus he associates with some except another, nor
should he who accepts bribe while taking decisions as he would waste
rights.

**Along with the Oppressed**

I want you for Allah’s sake but you seek me for your own benefits. O’
people! Help me against yourself (desires). By Allah I will restore
theright of the oppressed from the oppressor and will lead the oppressor
from the string of his nose (like an ox) and drag him to the spring of
right even though he is reluctant.

**Money is for People**

Abdullah ibn Zama’ah who was one of his followers came to Imam to ask
for some mony, he said:

This money is not mine nor yours! The earning of their hands cannot be
for other than their mouths.

**A Trust
To Al-Ash’ath ibn Qays: Imam’s Governor of Azarbayjan**

Certainly, your assignment is not a gain for you, but it is a pledge
round your neck. It is not for you to be oppressive to a subject; you
have in your hands funds of Allah’s to whom belongs Might and Majesty,
and you are one of His treasurer till you pass it on to me. Probably I
will not be one of the bad rulers for you, wassalam.

I shall strike you with my Sword To one of his officers when he
snatched some of the public funds and fled to Al-hijaz.

As soon as it was possible for you to misappropriate the Ummah’s trust,
you hastened to turn around and attack them, and made a swift leap to
snatch away whatever you could from their property meant for their
widows and their orphans as the quick wolf snatches the wounded and
helpless goat. Then you happily loaded it off to the Hijaz without
feeling guilty for having appropriated it.

How can you enjoy food and drink when you know that you are eating and
drinking an unlawful food and drink. Fear Allah and return to these
people their properties. If you do not so and Allah grants me power over
you I shall punish you to the limit that I am not blamed before Allah
about you and strike you with my sword with which I hadn’t striken
anyone but he enters Hell.

By Allah, even if Hasan and Husayn had done what you did there would
have been no leniency with me for them and they could not have won their
way with me till I had restored from them the right and eradicated the
wrong produced by their unjust action.

**The Ruler and Bribe**

To Uthamn ibn Hunayf Al-Ansari, Imam’s Governor of Basrah, when he knew
that the people of Basrah had invited Uthman to a banquet and he had
attended:

O’ Ibn Hunayf, I have come to know that a man of Basrah invited you to
a feast and you hastened towards it. Foods of different colours were
being chosen for you and bowls were brought to you. I never thought that
you would accept the feast of a people whose poor is neglegted and their
rich is invited.

Realize that your Imam has contented himself with two shabby pieces of
cloth out of the world, and two loaves for his food. Certainly, you
cannot do so but at least support me with piety, striving, chastity and
uprightness, because, by Allah, I have not treasured any gold out of
your world nor amassed plentiful wealth nor prepared for my old clothe a
substitute, nor possessed a tiny span of its land. If I wished I could
have taken the way leading towards pure honey, fine wheat and silk
clothes but it cannot be that my desire overcomes me and my greed takes
me to choose good meals while in the Hijaz or in Yamamah there may be
that who have no hope of getting a piece of bread or who does not
remember his last satiety.

Shall I lie with a satiated belly while around me there are hungry
bellies and thirsty livers? Shall I be content with being called ‘Amir
Al-Mu’minin’ (the commander of the believers), without sharing with the
people the hardships of life? I see as if one of you would say that if
this is what the son of Abi Talib eats then weakness must have made him
weak to fight his challengers and encounter the brave. Don’t they
remember that the tree of desert is solider-trunked, while grean twigs
have soft bark, and the wild bushes are very strong for burning and slow
in dying off. By Allah if the Arabs join together to fight me I will not
surrender.

**The Ruler and Desires**

To Al-Aswad ibn Qutbah, the Gover-nor of Halwan

Now, if the governor’s desires separated they prevent him from
practicing many sorts of justice. All the people should be equal in
right before you, because there is no compensation in injustice for
justice. So avoid what you renounce its likes.

Know that nothing can make up for right at all. One of the rights on
you is that you should protect yourself and to do your best in looking
after the subjects.

**Behave Humbly**

Behave humbly with the people, meet them large-heartedly, keep yourself
lenient, accord them equal treatment in glance and gesture and in
greeting, so that the strong should not expect injustice from you in
their favour and the weak should not be despondent of your justice to
them.

**Teach the Ignorant**

TO Qutham ibn Al-Abbas, His Gover-nor of Mecca Teach the ignorant and
discuss with the learned. There should be no intermediary between you
and the people except your tongue, and a chambertain save your own face.
Do not prevent any needy person from meeting you, because if it is
chased away from your doors in its arrival then you wouldn’t be praised
for meeting it.

See what has been collected with you of the funds of Allah and spend it
over the persons with families, the distressed, the starved on your
part. Then, send the remaining to us for distribution to those who are
on our part. And ask the people of Mecca not to charge rent from
lodgers…

**The Treacherous Rulers**

To AL-Mundhir ibn Jarud Al-Abdi who had misappropriated certain things
given into his administrative charge:

If what has reached me about you is correct, then the camel of your
family and the strap of your shoe is better than yourself. A man with
qualities like yours is not fit to fortify a borderline city, nor for
performing any deed, nor for increasing his position, nor for takeing
him as a partner in any trust, nor for trusting him against
misappropriation. Therefore, com to me as soon as this letter of mine
reaches you if Allah so will.

**Noble Morals**

To Al-Harith Al-Hamdani

Avoid every such action which is performed in secret and from which
shame is felt in the open. Also avoid any action about which if the doer
is questioned he denies it or aspologized for it. Do not relate to the
people all that you hear, for that would be enough to contain lie do not
contest all that people relate to you for that would be enough to
ignorance. Forgive when you have power (to punish), show forbearance in
the state of rage, and pardon with authority.

Avoid the company of the wicked because vice adjoins vice. Keep off
anger because it is one large army of Satan’s armies.


