People of Greed and People of Poverty
=====================================

You are in a time in which good doesn’t increase but turning away and
eveil doesn’t increase but advent, and satan in destroying people but
covert-ness.

Cast your glance over people wherever you like, Do you see but a poor
man suffering from poverty, or a rich man who has changed Allah’s bounty
into infidelity where are your good people? Where are your virtuous
people? Where are your high-spirited men and generous men? Where are
those of you who avoid deceit in their business and remain pure in their
behaviour? Have they not all departed from this ignoble world? Have you
not been left among people who are just like rubbish and so mean that
the two lips cannot meet even to condemn them scornfully. Allah may
curse those who advise good but they themselves avoid it, and those who
desist others from evil but they themselves act upon it!

**The ignorant Judge**

About those who sit for judgement among people, but are not fit for it
Till when he has quenched his thirst from a polluted water and treasurd
up of cheap metals, he sits among people as a judge respons for
explaining what ever is confusing to the others. If an ambiguous problem
intercepted him he manages a shabby mean-ingless argument about it of
his own accord and passes judge-ments on its basis. In this way he is
entangled in the confusion of doubts as in the spider’s web, not knowing
whether he was right or wrong. If he is right he fears lest he erred,
and if he is wrong he hopes he is right. He is ignorant, wandering
astray in ignorance.

He scatters the traditions as the wind scatters the dry leaves.
Whatever he does not know he does not assume to be a knowledge it worth
knowing. He does not think that there is beyond his reach a view. If
anything is not clear to him he concealed it because of what he knows of
his own ignorance. Lost lives are crying for help against his unjust
verdicts, inheri-tances are grumbling against him.

I complain to Allah about a community who live ignorant and die
misguided. For them nothing is more worthless than Qura’n if it is
recited as it should be recited, nor anything more valuable than the
Qur’an if its verses are misinterpreted, nor anything more vicious than
virtue nor more virtuous than vice.

**He Judges According to His view**

When a problem is put before one of them he passes a judgement on it
from his view. When exactly the same problem is placed before another
one of them he passed on an opposite verdict. Then thses judges go to
the Imam who had appointed them and he confirms all their verdicts,
although their Allah is one, their Prophet is one, their Book (the
Qur’an) is one.

**Their learned Man is Hypoerite**

Describing the people of his time:

Know that you are living at a time when those who speak of right are
few, when tongues are blunt to utter the truth, and those who stick to
the right are humiliated. The people of this time are engaged in
disobedience. There youths are Quarralsome, their old men are sinful,
their learned men are hypocrites. Their youngs do not respect their
elders, and their rich men do don’t provide for the destitute.

**They act through doubts**

It is not that every man with a heart is intelligent, every ear does
not listen, and every eye does not see. I wonder, and why shouldn’t I
wonder, about the faults of these groups who have introduced alterations
in their religious proofs,. They act on the doubts and tread in (the way
of) their desires. For them good is whatever they consider good and evil
is whatever they consider evil., their resort for resolving distress is
to themselves. Their confidence in regard to dubious matters is in their
own opinions as if everyone of them is the leader (Imam) of himself. As
if he has decided himself he considers it to have been taken through
reliable sources and solid bonds.

**Scold the self**

O’ slaves of Allah, weigh yourselves before you are weighed, and call
it to account yourselves before you are called to account. Breath before
the suffocation of the throat. Be submissive before you are harshly
driven. Know that He who is not helped in acting as his own adviser and
scold then no one else can (effectively) be his adviser and scold.

**Beware**

Speaking to his son, Al-Hasan:

O’ my son, you should avoid making friends with a fool because he may
intend to benefit you but may harm you; you should avoid making friends
with a miser because he withdraws from you when you need him most; you
should avoid making friends with a sinful person because he sells you
for nought; and you should avoid making friends with a liar because he
is like a mirage, he shows you remote things as near and near things as
remote.

**Agreement And Disagreement**

O’ people do not feel desolated in the path of right because of the
fewress of its runners, because people have thronged round a table (of
this world) whose satiety doesn’t last, but whose hunger lasts for a
long time.

O’ people contentnees and anger is what gathers people to be treated as
one community.

O’ people he who treads the clear path reaches the spring of water, and
whoever disobeys he falls into misdirection it strays into waterless
desert.

**Hypocrisy and Injustice**

Beware from destroying your morals and changing them. Certainly the
tongue of a believer is after his heart, while the heart of a hypocrite
is after his tongue; because when a believer intends to say some thing,
he thinks it over in his mind. If it is good he discloses it, but if it
is bad he lets it remain concealed. While a hypocrite speaks whatever
comes to his tongue, without knowing what is in his favour and what goes
against him, As for the injustice That will not be left unquestioned, it
is the injustice of slaves against one another. For your unity in
respect of a right which you dislike is better than you scattering away
in respect of a wrong that you like. Blessed is the man whose own
defects keep him from the defects of others, so that he is engaged in
himself and people are in comfort of him.

**The Tribe**

O’ people! Surely no one can do without his tribe and their defence by
hands and tongues. They are the most of all people to keep him and can
ward off from him his troubles, and they are the most kind to him when
tribulations befall him. Whoever holds up his hands from his kinsmen,
they loose only one hand, but at the time of his need many hands remain
held up from helping him.

**The dispostions**

Describing man’s disposition It (the heart) has the drugs of wisdom and
things contrary to wisdom. If hope is widened to it, eagerness
humiliates it and when covetousness increases greed ruins it. If anger
rises in it a serious rage develops. If it is blessed with pleasure, it
forgets to be cautious. If it is frightened precaution busied it. If he
feels secure inadvertence leads him astray. If it earns wealth, luxury
spoils him. If trouble befalls it, impatience disgraces it. If it faces
starvation, distress overtakes it. If hunger attacks it weakness
cripples it. If he eats to the excess, dyspepsia pains it. Thus, every
shortness is harmful to it and every excess is spoiling to it.

**Time and its people**

At a time when virtue is dominant in the world and among people, if a
person entertains an evil intention about another person of whom nothing
evil has been seen, then he has done unjust. And at a time when
corruption is dominant in the world and among people, if a man
entertains a good intention about another person he has flung himself in
danger.

**Many a Fasting Person**

On fasting and prayer

Many a fasting person of whose fast gain nothing but just hunger and
thirst, and many an offerer of prayers of whose prayer gains nothing but
wakefulness and hardship. The sleep and not fasting of the tactful
(God-knowing) is far better.

**Categories of People**

From a sermon describing the bad natures of the people of his time O’
people we have been borne in such a wrongful and thankless period
wherein the virtuous is deemed vicious and the oppressor goes on
advancing in his excesses. We do not make use of what we know and do not
ask of what we do not know. We do not fear calamity till it befalls.
People are of four categories: among them is that who is not prevented
from mischief but by his low position, bluntness of his edge and paucity
of wealth.

Then there is he who has drawn his sword, openly commits mischief, and
has devoted himself to securing wealth, leading troops, rising on the
pulpit and has allowed his faith to perish. How bad is the trading that
you allow (enjoy-ment) of this world to be a price for yourself. And
among them is he who seeks this world through actions meant for the next
world, but does not seek the next world through actions of this world.
He keeps his body calm (in dignity), raises short steps, tucked up his
clothes, embellishes his body for trust – worthiness and uses the
position of Allah’s veiling as a means have held him back from seeking
authority. This keeps down his position and he has named it contentment
and he clothes himself with the robe of asceticism.

Then there remain a few men in whose case the remem-brance of their
return (to Allah on doomsday) has cast down their eyes, and the fear of
resurrection has shed their tears. Some of them are scared away and
dispersed; some are frightened and oppressed; some are quiet as if
muzzled; some are praying sincerely, some are grief-stricken and
pain-ridden whom fear has confined to namelessness and humilliation has
covered them.

They preached till they became tired, they were oppressed till they
were disgraced and they were killed till they remained few in number. So
learn from those who preceded you before those who follow you learn from
you, and refuse it realizing its uglyness as it has refused those who
has been more enchanted by it than you.

**With every wind**

Describing the people of his time:

The common riftraff who run after every caller and bend in the
direction of every wind. They haven’t been enlightened by knowledge and
haven’t sought shelter in a secure locality.

Many a small person overcomes a big one.

Avoid speaking during meetings of fear, since fear bewilders the mind
from which you acquire, and engages it with protecting the self rather
than protecting the doctrine that you like to support. Also avoid anger
from the one who compels you to it, because anger spoils the thought and
prevents from verification. Avoid the sessions which does not allow
justice in the equality between you and your apponent in matter of
attention and listening, and their holders have no morals that prevent
them from passing an unjust judgement in your favour or against you.
Avoid speaking to him who does not understand you as he makes you tired.
Avoid undervaluating the opponent since it prevents caution. Many a
small person overcomes a big one.

**His lamp at Night was the Moon**

A wonderful speech about Muhammed and christ Certainly, in the Prophet
of Allah – peace and blessing of Allah be upon him and his progency –
was sufficient example for you and a proof concerning the meanness of
the world, its defects, the multitude of its disgraces and its evils, as
its sides has been folded for him, while its flanks had been spread for
others; he was weaned from its milk and turned away from its
adornments.

If I desire I will tell you about Isa (Christ) son of Maryam (Mary). He
used a stone as his pillow, put on coarse clothes, and ate rough food.
His condiment was hunger. His lamp at night was the moon. His shade
during winter was just the expanse of earth eastward and westward. His
fruits and flowers were only what grows from the earth for the cattle.
He had no wife to allure him, nor wealth to deviate, nor greed to
humilliate him. His two feet were his mount and his two hands were his
servant.

**Like Christ’s Manner**

It is related by Nawf Al-Bikali that: I saw that one night Amir
Al-Ma’minin, peace be upon him, came out of his bed and looked at the
stars, then he said to me: O’ Nawf, are you awake or sleeping? I said:
“I am awake, O’ Amir Al-Mu’minin.” Then he said:

Blessed be those who abstain from this world and are eager for the next
world. They have taken this earth as a floor; its dust a bed-cloth; and
its water a perfume; they took the Qur’an as their undercloth and
supplicate as their blanket and then they are cut off from the world
like Isa (Chirst).

**Do not say of what you Do not know**

The qualities of the virtuous:

O’ slaves of Allah, the most beloved slave of Allah is he who has
enjoined upon himself justice. The first step of his justice is the
rejection of desires from his heart. He describes right and acts
according to it. There is no good which he has not aimed at nor any
likely place (of virtue). O’ people, do not say what you do not know,
because most of the right lies in what you deny. Accept the apologize of
one against whom you have no argument.

Their speech is to the point, their Gait is Humble.

It is related that a comparrion of Ibn Abi Talib called Hammam said: O’
Amir Al-Muminin, describe to me the pious men in such a way as though I
see them” . Imam avoided the reply, then he spoke of the pious wonderful
speech, some of which is:

Now then, Allah, the Glorified, the sublime had created the creatures
(its things) without any need for their obedience and safe from their
sinning, because the sin of anyone who sins does not harm Him nor does
the obedience of anyone who obeys benefits Him. He has distributed among
them their livelihood, and has assigned them their positions in the
world. Thus the God-fearing in it are the people of virtues.

Their speech is to the point, their dress is moderate and their gait is
humble. They keep their eyes closed to what Allah has made unlawful for
them, and they put their ears to that knowledge which is beneficial to
them. They remain in the time of trials as though they remain in
comfort. If there had not been fixed periods (of life) ordained for
each, their spirits would not have remained in their bodies even for the
twinkling of an eye.

They are not satisfied with their meagre good acts and do not regard
their major acts as great. They always blame themselves and are afraid
of their deeds. When anyone of them is spoken of highly, he says: “I
know myself better than others, and my Lord knows better than I know. O’
Allah, do not deal with me accord-ing to what they say, and make me
better than they think of me and forgive me which they do not know.”

One of the symptom of anyone of them is that you find that he has
determination along with leniency, faith with conviction, moderation in
riches devotion in worship, endurance in starva-tion, endurance in
hardship, vitality in guidance and abstain from greed. He transfuses
knowledge with forbearance, and speech with action. Good is expected
from him. Evil from him is not feared,.

He forgives him who is unjust to him. He gives to him who deprives him,
and he behaves well with him who behaves ill with him. Indecent speech
is far from him, his speech is lenient, his virtues are ever present. He
does not commit unjust to him whom he hates, and does not commit sin for
the sake of him whom he loves.

He admits truth before evidence is brought against him. He does not
call others bad names, he does not cause harm to his neighbour, he does
not feel happy at others’ misfortunes, he doesnot enter into wrong, and
does not go out of right. He suffers of himself while others feel at
rest of him, and makes people feel safe from himself. His keeping away
is not by way of vanity or feeling of greatness, nor his nearness by way
of deceit and cheating.

His keeping away from others is by way of asceticism and purification,
and his nearness to those to whom he draws near by way of lenience and
mercifulness.


