On Imam’s Borders Between Mind and Heart
========================================

He has been hard rumbling, roaring like thunder during woe nights. The
fountain is a fountain, day and night are not considered in its run.

Anyone who traces memoirs of true great men in history, apart from
being from the Orient or the Occident, or being ancient or contemporary,
he realizes an unhidden phenomenon: that they, despite the diiferences
in their intellectual fields, the varieties of their beliefs in subjucts
of mental activities, are talented literary men, varying in strength and
weakness.

They vary in being a creative producer, to being taster whose taste
draws him near to production and creation, as if literary sense in its
wide horizons, meanings, and forms, is linked to every overwhelming
talent in every kind of great activities.

A single sight at prophets, for example, is enough to decide this
phenomenon in minds. David, Sulaiman, Ishiya, Irmiya, Jacob, Jesus
christ, and Mohammed are nothing but literary men granted a literary
talent as being one of their gifted other special talents, Those are
they, Napoleon the leader, Plato the philo-sopher, Bascal the
mathematician, Pastor the biologist, Al-Khayam the arithmaticain, Nehro
the statesmen, Dighol the Politician, Ibn Khaldoon the historian, they
are literary men having in literature what raises them to the high level
of its leaders.

Each one of them has a kind of some mental activities determined by
nature and talent; then the aesthetic tendency cultivated the forms in
which it was expressed all of sudden, it is of pure literature.

This truth becomes strikingly evident in the personality of Ali bin Abi
Talib, then he is the Imam in literature, as he is the Imam in the
rights he affirmed what he taught and guided, his evidence in that is
“Nahj Al-Balagha” on the grounds of Arabic rhetoric, a rank coming after
that of Holy Quran; the Arab styles, throughout thirteen centuries, have
related to it, have built up on its construction, have quoted from it,
and that their good styles revive within the framework of his magic
eloquence.

As to eloquence Ali connected its last to its next; he joined the
masterpieces of the pure pre-islamic eloquence which is united directly
with nature sound with the purified clear islamic one which is united
with sound nature and storng logic: in a union whose elements can not be
separated from one another. He had gained the rhetoric of the
pre-Islamic era as well as the charm of prophetic eloquence – which made
some to describe his speech as (under the Crator’s speech and above that
of the created).

But it is not a surprise as Ali had been prepared by all means that fit
him to this status among people of eloquence. He grew up in an
environment where hurrey nature becomes sound and pure. He also lived
with the wisest man Mohammed bin Abdullah, being addressed from the
Prophet his message in its all ardour and strength. Add to that his
massive predispositions and great talents; and so reasons of excellence
get together firm instinct and environment likewise.

As for intelligence, exceeding intelligence, one finds, in every
expression of Nahj Ab-Balagha, a great work, it is a living
intelligence, able, broad, doesn’t miss fathomless Depths. When he works
on a topic he encompasses it in every dimension, so that no side
escapes, no much or little is passed over; he dives into its depth, and
turns around it highly, scours it heavily, and he realizes the hidden
causes and what is the farthest mystery; as he also recognizes the
truest results caused by these reasons; what is the most in closeness
and the most remote in farness.

On of the conditions of rare Allawiyan intelligence is this logical
sequence that one can see in Nahj Al-Balaghah wherever he heads for.
This cohesion between the idea and the other one is to the extrent that
every one of them is the natural result of the precedent and the cause
to the follower to its next.

In these ideas one does not find what can be dispensed with in the
topic he treats. Rather one can not find any idea which the research can
stand erect without it. He, owing to his huge extent, does not use a
word unless that word entails one to contemplate and scru-tinize, and no
phrase unless it opens, before the sights, horizons beyond horizons.

What vast roads of contemplation and sight his speech reveals to you:
“People are enemies of what they do not know”, or his saying: “The worth
of every one is in the things he does well”, or “Impiety is a weak
fortress.” What a marvellous summerized one is that: “One who keeps
light will overtake! “What grand meaning in the four phrases, and what
they contain of words classified highly, or rather say revealed
directly.

What sharpness of intelligece, a comprehension of the topic, and a
depth in recognition shows this fantastic revelation on the nature of
envier and description of his self, and the truth of his condition: “I
have not seen a wrongful person more like the wronged such as the
envier, continuous breath, worried heart, accompanying sadness. Furious
at the one who has no sin, a stingy with what he does not possesses.”

The generating of ideas continues in Nahj Al-Balagha from ideas, and so
you find an end less collection nonetheless they do not accumulate;
rather they get together and be resulted from one another. No difference
between what he writes and what he improvises. A fountain is a fountaing
night and day are not considered in his run.

His improvised sermons are miracles of ideas determined by a wise mind,
accuracy and sound logic. You get surprised before this amount of great
precision and accuracy, when you know that Ali did not prepare his
sermons even before their delivering in minutes or moments.

They are raising in his mentality, going ahead upon his tongue,
spontaneously, without hardship or effort, like flash which gleams
without taking or giving evidence before glimmering and like athunder
bolt when it roars without preparing itself for storming or roaring. And
like the wind when it blows, twists, tends, and sweeps, and orients to a
goal, then it returns to its devious ways and nothing pushes it to go
and come but the law of occurrence and logic of occasion in its existing
limits, neither before nor after.

One of the phenomena of strong accurate intelligence in Nahj
Al-Balaghah is those limits within which Ali was curbing the sentiments
of deep sadness when it agitates and storms His large emotion does not
drown him in a surrounding of sorrows and far depressions before the
power of reason appears clearly and glit-teringly, and then it is an
obeyed commander.

As to Ali’s exceeding intelligence, comprehensive in his method, he
varies the research and description and masters in every topic, does not
restrict his intellectual effort to one topic or means of research. He
speaks with the logic of the experienced wise about circumstances of
this world and people’s affairs, natures of individuals and societies.
He describes lightening, thunder, the earth and the sky. He elaborates
his speech on living nature phenomena, he describes the secrets of
creation of bats, ants, peacock, grasshopper, and likes.

He put codes for societies, and laws for morals. He excels in speaking
on the cosmos creation and masterpieces of existence. You do not find in
all Arabic literature this amount you find in Nahj Al-Balaghah of where
masterpieces of sound intellect and accurate logic in such a rare
style.

As for imagination in Nahj Al-Balaghah it is broad, long, fluttering
winged at all horizons. And owing to this strong imagination of which
many wise men and nations’ intellectuals are deprived, Ali was taking,
out of his intelligence and experie-nces, his pure objective meanings;
then he utters them glowing, moving in a frame on whose sides the kinds
are fixed in a wonderful colours. The meaning, whatsoever it is dryly
intellec-tual, it does not pass Ali’s mentality except it grows wings
crushing the feature of its stagnation and grants it with motion and
life.

Ali’s imagination is an example of genius one based on the ground of
reality; it surrounds this reality, shows and reveals it, and makes for
it extensions out of its source and nature, and shapes it with many
colours of its material and colour; hence the truth increases evidently
and that seeker falls on it or it falls on him!

Ali was distinguished with by strong far - sightedness, then by
conscious memory storing and expanding. He undergoes, during his life
stages, sentiments caused by the crudge of the ill-willed and slyness of
cheaters; and also compassionate sentiments he was surrounded with by
fedelity of good people and faithfulness of the sincere. Strong elements
were made easy for him, nourishing his inventive imagination so they
co-operate to serve this imagination and get togther in wonderful living
portaits, in its prominence and activity, concentrating on pure realism,
which extend and twigs with leaves and fruits.

Then you can, if you like, change the elements of the strong
imagination in Nahj Al-Balaghah to coloured portraits, for its intense
realism, its broad field, its wing’s extension, and its lines’
prominence. What a wonderful imagintion the Imam has when he addresses
people of Basrah; he had a pain from them after the battle of Al-Jamal,
saying: “Your city would certainly be drowned so much as though I see
its mosque like the bosom of a bird in a deep sea. Or like this magical
simile: “troubles like the parts of dark night.” Or this moving picture.
“I am but like the axis of the mill. It rotates around me while I remain
in my position.”

Or this grand portrait which he likens the extensions of the houses of
Basrah’s people to trunks of elephenats and that balconies appear to him
like vultures’ wings: “Woe to your inhabited streets and decorated
houses with wings like the wings of vultures and trunks like the trunks
of elephants”.

One of the features of broad imagination is the power of likening.
Likening in Imam’s literature is a quality filled with life. If you want
an example, see the condition of the person in power who is envied by
people and they wish to what he enjoys, but he better knows his
dangerous and tearful and warning; though he terrifies others with what
he mounted, yet he is afraid of being assassinated by him. Then see
afterwards to Ali, how he depict this meaning, saying: “the holder of
power is like the rider on a lion – he is envied for his position but he
better knows his place”.

If you want another example, listen to him likening the condition of a
man who was, as Imam sees, attempting against an enemy with what makes
hurt to himself, saying: “you are like one who pierces a spear through
himself in order to kill the person sitting behind him”. The rearman is
the man sitting at the back of the rider. Take then this outstanding
manner in likening the liar: “You should avoid making friends with a
liar because he is like a mirage, making you see far thing near, and
near things far.”

As to the artistic theory syaing that whatever is ugly in nature
becomes beautiful in art, if it is right, the indication of which lies
in the speech of Ibn Abi Talib in his description of those who deserted
this world, How terrifying is death, and how ugly its face. How
wonderful is the speech of Ibn Abi Talib and how beautiful is its
effect.

It is a saying which takes much portion of deep passion, and much more
of fertile imagination. Thus it becomes a portrait out of great art
pictures so that nothing approached to it but the portraits of art
genius in Europe when they depicted death and its fear with colour, tune
and peotry.

After Ali reminds living people of death, and establishes the relaiton
between death and them, he awakens them telling they are drawing near to
the house of solitude, uttering this in astate with loneliness full of
dark colour and sad tone: “It is as though every one of you has reached
the place of his loneliness. So what a place of loneliness it is what a
solitary place of staying, and a solitary exile.”

Then he shakes them with what they are coming across quickly, but
unconsciously using broken successive phrases as if they have the whant
gings of beating drums warning, saying “How fast are the hours in the
day, how fast are the days in the month, how fast are the months in the
year, and how fast are the years in life.

“Afterwords he gives off, in their intellects, that wonderful picture
which the mind bids and emotion lights, and that jumping imagination
incarnate its elements; then he gives these successive movements: it is
consistant of tearing eyes, bemoaning sounds, and ailing organs, saying:
“days between them and you are also bemoaning you and reciting elegies
over you”. Then he returns and gives off his imagination and emotion,
hence they create this ever-lasting protrait as one of the living
poeticul portraits.

But they have been quenched the cup of death Which has changed their
speech into dumbness, their Hearing into deafness and their movements
into stillness.

It seems as though they are fallen in slumber. They are Neighbour not
entertaining each other, or Friends who do not meet each other.

The bonds of their knowing each other have been worn out and the
connection of their friendship have been cut asunder.

Everyone of them is therefor alone although they are a group, and they
are deserted, even though friends. They don’t hope to see a morning
after a night or an evening after a day. The night or the day in which
they departed has become eternal for them.

Then he says this terrifying speech: “They do not know who comes to
them; do not pay heed to those who weep over them and do not respond to
those who call them.”

Have you ever seen this creativity in picturing the horror of death,
solitude of grave, description of its inhabitants in his saying: “They
are neighbours not entertain each other, or friends who do not meet each
other.” Then have you realized this terrifying picture of the eternity
of death which nothing can draw but Ali’s genius: “The night or the day
when they departed has become eternal for them.” And like these
masterpieces in the Nahj much more.

This sharp intelligence fertile imagination in Imam’s literature are
unified as the unity of nture to nature with the roaring emotion which
provides them with flame of life. So the idea moves, and bloods run
through its veins much hotly. Thus it addresses in you your emotion so
much as it addresses your mind because it rises from a mind which is
provided with warmth by emotion. It is difficult for man to enjoy a work
of imagination or thought in the fields of literature and other lofty
arts, if emotion does not have an active participation in producing this
work.

The human nature can not be satisfied, naturally, unless it is a
production of this overal of complex. This complete literary work can be
seen in Nahj Al-Balagha. You find yourself pushed in a sweeping current
of hot emotions when you move from place to another in Nahj
Al-Balagha.

Does it not soak your heart with sympathy and kindness when you listen
to Ali saying: “if a mountain loves me it will crumble douwn.” Or” “the
forfeiture of friends is a dreariness”.

Or “O’ my Allah! I beseech thee to take revenge on Quraysh and those
who are assisting them, for they have cut my kinship and overturned my
cup, and they said to me it is just to take your right and it is right
to be deprived of it so endure it with sadness or kill yourself in
grief” I looked around but found no one to assisst me, protect or help
me except my household.

Take this speech on the occasion of the burial of Supreme Lady Fatimah,
addressing his cousin the Holy prophet:

“O’ Propthet of Allah, Allah’s greetings are sent by me and your
daughter who has resided behind you has hastened to successed you. O’
Prophet of Allah, my patience on your pure (daughter) has been
exhausted, and my power of endurance has weakened, except that I have
ground for consolation in having endured the great hardship and heart –
rending event of your demise!” “As to my grief, it knows no bonds, and
as to my nights, they will remain sleepless till Allah chooses for me
the abode in which you are now residing.”

Then take this news:

It has been narrated by Nawf Al-Bikali that Amir Al-Muminin Ali
delivered this sermon at kufa standing on a stone which Ja’dah Ibn
Hubayrah Al-Makhzumi has placed for him. He had a woolen apparel on his
body, the belt of his sword was made of leaves, and the sandals on his
feet too were of palm leaves.

“Beware, what has been approaching of this world has fled, what has
been fleeing is approaching behind, are going ahead. The virtuous people
of Allah have made up their minds to leave and they have purchased, with
a little perishable (pleasure) of this world, for a lot of such (reward)
in the next world that will remain.

What loss did our brothers whose blood was shed in Siffeen had suffered
by not being alive today? Only that they are not suffering chocking on
swallowings and not drinking turbid water.

Surely they have met Allah and He has bestowed upon them their rewards
and he has lodged them in the safe residence after their fear, where are
my brethren who took the (right) path and trod in rightness. Where is
Ammar? Where is Ibn Al-Tayyihan? Where is Dhu’sh – Shahadatayn? And
where are their likes and their comrades who had pledged themselves to
die for the goal.

Then he wiped his hand over his honoured beard and wept for a long
time!

Zirar ibn Hamzah Al-Zabi related and said: I stand witness that I have
seen him – namely Imam – on several occasions when night had spread and
he was standing in his niche holding his beard, groaning like a man
bitten by a snake and weeping as a grieved man, saying.

O’world, O’world! Give me up. Why do you present yourself to me? Or are
eager for me? You may not get that opportunity to impress me. Deceive
some other person. I have no concern with you. I have divorced you
thrice whereafter there is no restitution. Your life is short, your
importance is little and your hope is mean Alas! The provision is
little, the way is long, the journey is far and the goal is hard to
reach.

This hot emotion, which Imam has known in his life, accompanies him
wherever he goes and tends to in Nahj Al-Balaghah. It accompanies him
when he bears upon anger and resentment as it does when it arouses
sympathy and content.

When he saw his champion’s disappointment at supporting the right,
while the others support the wrong and surround it with weapons and
spirits, he anguishes, complains, blames and scoldes, and was hard,
shattering, roaring like thundr in the woe nights! Sufficient is to read
the sermon of Al-Jihad which begins with his saying:

“O’ people, your bodies are together, but your desires are divergent.
Your talk softens hard stoned mountains etc,” to realize what a
revolting, agonized emotion that which provides this sermon with the
outburst and beating of life.

It is inadequate to mention examples of the pouring of living emotion
which diffuses warmth in Imam’s deeds. It is in his doings, his sermons
and sayings – which is an essential criterion. You are not to do
anything but to open this book so that you can know colours of Ibn Abi
Talib’s emotion, with pouring strength and deep depth.


