Style and Oratorical Genius
===========================

Such an eloquence if it speaks of rebuke it will pounce on the tongue
of storm violently! And if it threatens spoil and spoilers it will
explode into volcanoes having lights and sounds. And if it calls for
contemplation, it will associate with your source of sense and origin of
thought and so it drives you to what it wants and connects you with the
cosmos fitly.

Form incorporates with meaning as heat does with fire, light with the
sun, air with air; you are not before it but like a person before the
flood while it slopes, the sea as it surges and the wind as it
encircles.

But when he speaks to you on the splendour of existence and beauty of
creation it writes, on your heart, with an ink of the stars of the
sky.

Some expression has the gleam of flash, and the smile of the sky during
the nights of winter.

This is as to the subject. As for style, Ali bin Abi Talib is the
magician of performance literature can not be without style, and the
structure is innate to meaning, and the image is not less than the
substance. And which art with its conditions of directing is less in
concern than the conditions of the subject.

Ali bin Abi Talib’s portion of artistic taste, or the aesthetic sense,
is rare in existence. This taste was the natural controlling measure for
his literary disposition, as for his disposition, it is one of those who
have talent and originality, who see, hence feel and realize then their
tongues start ahead with what their hearts surge and the perceptions of
their sens to show in a spontaneous rush. Therefore Ali’s literature was
charactarized by faithfulness and so was his life. Faithfulness is but
the first feature of the unique art and the measure of style which does
not deceive.

The conditions of rhetoric, which is the fitness of speech for the
situation, has not come together for an Arabic literary man as they had
for Ali bin Abi Talib. His composition is an ideal for this rhetoric
after the Quran. It is succinct with clarity, strong, vigorous,
perfectly harmonized related to what is between its expressions,
meanings, aims agreement, sweet, in tone at the air, having a musical
effect. It eases and softens at positions which do not need hardship.

It becomes hard and violent in other positions especially the hour of
speaking on hypocrites, trickers, and this world seekers at the expense
of the poor and the oppressed, and holders of lost rights. Ali’s style
is frank like his heart and mind, faithful like his intention, so it is
not surprising to be a method for rhetoric.

Ali’s style reached a level in sincerity that even rhyme became above
artificiality and affectation. So it is, despite the plentifulness of
interchanging, rhymed sentences, far from artistry and nearer to be of
overflowing disposition.

Look to this rhymed speech and what it contains of soundness of
disposition: “Allah knows the uproar of beasts in the deserts, the sins
of people in seclusions, the clashes of whales in deep seas and the
popple of waters by stormy winds”. Or to this speech of one of his
sermons: “So is the sky and the air, the winds and the water, so look at
the sun and the moon, vegetation and plants, water and stone, the
succession of this night and day, the springing of these seas, the large
number of the mountains, the height of their peaks, the diversity of
these languages, and the variety of tongues…etc”.

I plea to you to keep this rhyme which flows spontanously then he
decorated them with piercing stars and ran through them a shining sun
and an effulgent moon in a revolving orbit and a moving ceiling…etc.” If
you try to change a rhymed word in all these wonders with another
unrhymed one will know how its shining fades and its beauty faints, and
taste loses its originality and accuracy which are the evidence and
measure.

Rhyme in these Allawiyan speeches is an aristic necessity which
disposition requires, that disposition which intermixed with
artificility highly as if they are of one metal which changes into
poetry, having rhythms and tunes accompanying meaning with verbal images
of their atmosphere and nature.

There are marvels in Imam’s rhyme which add melody on melody, in a nice
way and dissolves the effect in effect in refrains which nothing is more
rhythmical on hearing than them, or more loved in reverberation. An
example of that is what we have mentioned of his rhymes before. Then
here are these words, delicious to the ear and taste alike: “I am a new
day, and I am a witness upon you, hence do through me what is good and
say what is good.”

If we say that Ali’s style has frankness of meaning, eloquence of
performance, soundness of taste, we indicate to the reader to return to
this Masterpieces of Nahj Al-Balaghah to see how Ali’s words explode
from sources whose bottoms are for in their material, and in which a
wonderful artistis dress it undulates and runs. Take thses nice
expressions of his speech: “Man is hidden under his tongue” and his
saying: “longanimity is a kinsfolk”, or his saying: that whose trunk
softened his branches thickened or his saying:

“Every container beeomes narrower with what is put in it except the
container of knowledge as it becomes wider, or his saying “if a mountain
loves me, it will crumble” or in these wonderful sayings: “knowledge
guards you, while you have to guard wealth. Many a man is enchanted by
good speech of him. When this world advances to anyone (with its
favours) it attributes to him other’s merits; and when it turns away
from him it deprives him of his own merites” All people should be equal
in right before you. Do good and do not despise any part of it because
the small part of it is big and the little amount of it is much.

The warehousers of wealth have perished although they are alive no rich
person has been relished with but with which a poor has suffered of
hunger.

Then listen to this expression which reaches the peak of artistic
beauty as he wanted to deseribe his ability in disposing of kufah city
however he likes he said: “Nothing (is left to me) but kufah I grasp it
and spread it out).

You can see, in these sayings, an originality of thought and
expression; this originality which always accompanies the true literary
man and He does not miss it unless he has missed the literary charcacter
itself.

Ali’s style reaches the peak of beauty in oratorical situations, namely
the situations in which his vigorous sentiments break out, his
imagination glows hot pictures of the events of life that he had
experienced popple in it. Thus rhetoric fills his heart, and flows out
on his tongue like the outflowing of seas. His style is characterized,
in the situations like these by repetition seeking avowal and influence,
and the use of synonyms, the choosing of lucid resounding words.

Somethime the different kinds of expression atternate varying from
statement to interrogation exclamation, to condemnation. Places of stop
are strong, and healing to the psyche. This has the meaning of rhetoric
and the spirit of art. Take an example of which, the famous jihad
sermon, with which Ali addressed people when Sufyan bin Awf Al-Asadi
raided upon Al-Anbar city in Iraq and killed his governor there:

This is the brother of Ghamid whose horses have reached Alanbaar and
killed Hassan ibn Hassan Al-Bakri. They have removed your horses from
their armory garrison, and killed righteous men of you.

“I have been told that the person of them has been breaking into the
house of Muslim women and allied women taking off her anklet and her
bracelet her necklace and her earrings; then they got back laden with
wealth no one of them wounded and no blood of them was shed. If any
Muslim dies of grief after all this he is not to be blamed but rather to
me the matter is worthy of death.

How strange! how strange! By Allah it put one’s heart to death and
brings grief to see the agreement of those people on their wrong and
your dispersion from your right. Woe and grief befall you. As you have
become a target at which arrowa are shot. You are raided on and don’t
raid on, you are invaded but you don’t invade. Allah is disobeyed and
you are contented with it.

Look to Imam’s ability in these summed up words. He advances gradually
in stirring his hearers’ feeling till he reaches with them to what he
wants. He proceeded through way having eloquence of performance and
power of influence. He tells his people of Sufyan bin Awf’s invasion of
Al-Anbar, which implies dishonour that afflick them. Then he fells them
that this aggressor killed Amir Al-Muminin’s governor among others, and
he is not satisfied, rather he inserted his sword in many necks of their
men and families.

In the second paragraph of the sermon, Imam went to the position of
Zeal for the hearers, to the impulse of determination and ardour of
every Arab’s self, that is woman’s honour. Ali knows that some Arabs do
not sacrifice themselves but to protect a woman’s reputation a young
woman’s honour, yet he scolds those people for sitting without
protecting the woman whose shelter was violated by invadors and they
went safely without any wound or loss of life.

Then he shows what feels of astonishment and confusion, about a strange
matter as his enemies cling to the wrong and support it, they adopt evil
and so invade Al-Anbar to practice it, while his champions slacken in
assissting the right, they let it down and fail to defend it.

It is natural that Imam gets angry in such a situation, so his phrase
carries all the anger agitated in his self, hence it comes hotly,
severe, rhymed, tornapart, malcontant “Woe and grief befall you. You
have become the target at which arrows are shot. You are raided on you
do not raidon. You are invaded and you do not invade. Allah is being
disobeyed you are contented with it.

His passion may arouse and break, some of which crowds the other like
these successive torn up words: “I never felt weak, coward, nor did I
betray or being languid.” And this passion may be burnt with a
rebellious pain which comes from people for whom he wanted welfare.
While they didn’t want it for them-selves due to aheedlessness in their
minds, and weakness in their determination, so he addresses them with
this furious, rebellious speech, saying: “What is the matter with me! I
see you wakeful but sleeping, present but absent, hearing but deaf and
speaking but dumb…etc.”

Arab orators are many, and oratory is one of literary arts which had
been known during periods of pre-islamic and Islam, especially in the
era of the Prophet and Prudent Caliphes as they were in need of it. Yet
the great orator of the Mohammedon era is the Prophet, without dispute.
As for the prudent Caliphes and the following of Arab periods as a
whole, no one reached the extent Ali bin Abi Talib has reached in this
respect.

The esay uttering, which Ali had, was an element of his character, so
was the powerful eloquence for what is included of the elements of
disposition and artificiality a like. However Allah facilitated for him
the complete equipment which oratory requires of other constituents that
we mentioned before. Allah characterized him with sound nature, sublime
taste, and fascinating eloquence, then provisions of knowledge which Ali
was distinguished from his mates, right evidence, irrefutable power of
persuasion, and rare genius in improvisation.

Add to that his truthfulness which has no limits, which is a necessity
in every successful serman, as well as his numerous painful experiences
which revealed, to his great mind, people’s natures, morals, and
society’s features and impulses. Then there is the solid belief which is
hard to be complied with, and that deep pain mingled with deep sympathy,
and purity of heart, soundness of conscience and noblity of aim.

It is hard to find, in the personalities of history, one who gathered
all these conditions that make their holder a unique orator, except Ali
bin Abi Talib and very few people. You are not to do anything but to
review these conditions, then review famous orators in the two worlds
the eastern and the western, so as to realize that our speech is right
with no exaggeration.

Ibn Abi Talib, on pulpit, is calm, very confident in himself and in the
justice of his speech. Then he has a strong acumen, quich-witted,
discovers people’s inner selves, the desires of spirits, and the bottoms
of hearts, his heart is overflowing with feelings of liberty, humanity,
and virtues. When his magical tongue started off in what his heart
arose, he furnished people with it stirs in them sleeping virtues and
faint feelings.

As for his oratorical composition, it can not be described except that
it is the basis of Arabic rhetoric. Abu Hilal Al-Askari, author of
“Al-Sina’atayn” says: “The importance is not in mentioning the meanings
only, but it is in the goodness of expression, as well as its purity,
its fineness, its splendour, its honesty, its clarity, and plentity of
its sweets and water, in addition to rightness of formulation and
structure, and emptiness of the crookedness of versification or
formation.

Some words are grand as it pulls the tails of purple, proudly and
arrogantly. Some words have a clatter like creeping soldiers in
tinplates. Some are like a two-edged sword. Some are like a thick veil
which throws on some feeling so as to shelter sharpness and reduce their
hardship. Some have the smile of sky in the nights of winter! Some
speech works like alash, some flows like a pure spring.

All this is true of Ali’s sermons in their vocabulary and expressions.
In addition, a sermon becomes better if it is impressed by these verbal
features, on the view of “Al-Sina’atayn’s” author. How is it if they
were like Ibn Abi Talib’s sermons which comprise the splendour of these
characteristics of expression with the splendour of meaning and its
powerfulness and grandeur.

Here is something of what we have said in the third volume of our book
“Imam Ali: the voice of Humanitarian Justice” as to Imam’s eloquence,
especially in his sermons:

It is a method for rhetoric taking, from thought, imagination, and
feeling, masterpieces connected with sublime artistic taste as long as
man remains, and his imagination, feeling and thought remain,
interrelated consistent with its masterpieces, balanced, exploding with
blazing sense and distant perception, flowing with the agony of reality,
heat of truth, and the eagerness to know what is beyond this reality,
harmonious comprising of beauty of topic and that of directing to the
limit that the expression mingles with significance,

or form with meaning, as heat mingles with fire, light with the sun,
air with air; you are not before it but the way a person is before the
flood while it slopes, the sea as it surges, and the wind as it
encircles. Or like one in front of the natural event which must be
necessarily as it is exitstent of unity that one cannot separate its
ingredients except he wants wipe off its existnece and make it whithout
existence.

An eloguence when it speaks of rebuke it pounces on the tongue of storm
violently! And when it threatens spoil and spoilers it will explode into
volcanoes having lights and sounds! And when it elaborates in a logic it
will address minds and feelings, and locks every door or every proof
except what it prooves expatiatly and when it calls for contemplation it
associates the source of your senses and the origin of your thought, and
so it drives you to what it wants and connects you with the cosmos
fitly, and unifies in you the powers for discovery strongly.

And if it indulges you, you will recognize a father’s compassion, logic
of paternity, truthfulness of human fidelity, and the heat of love that
starts and does not end! As to when it speaks to you of the splendour of
existence beauties of creation and perfections of the cosmos, it writes
on your heart with an ink of the stars of sky!

It is an eloquence of the rhetoric, and a revelation of the revelation.
It is an eloquence that connected with the roots of Arabic eloquence:
what has been and will be, so that one, describing its autheor, said
that his speech is under the Creator’s speech and above that of the
created.

All Ali’s sermons exclude indications of personality as though their
meanings and expressions are preoccupations of his psyche itself, and
the events of his time which flames in his heart like fire burning in
its stove under the blowing of the north wind. Hence he improvises the
sermon with flowing sense, rich feeling, and a vigorous direction
strikingly beautiful.

So were Ali’s improvised sayings: they are at the very strong manner
that an improvised saying could be as for truthfulness, depth of
thought, and technicality of expression so that the moment his lips
utter them it went a proverb.

One of his improvised masterpieces is his saying to a man who praised
him so much although he did not admire him: “I am below what you express
and above what you feel in your heart”.

Likewise when he decided to do a great task by himself, where his
companions hesitated and failed, they came to him, referring to the
enemies, and said: “O’ Amiralmuamineen we save you them he said you
cannot save me yourselves, so how can you save me others? Before me,
people used to complain of the inequity of their rulers but now I
complain of the inequity of my people; as if I am the led and they are
the leaders”.

And when Muawiyah’s companions killed Mohammed bin Abi Bakr, and the
news of his murder reached him, he said: “Our grief over him is in so
much as their joy for it, as they have been lessened a hated and we have
been lessened abeloved.

He was asked: which of the two is better: justice or generosity? He
replied: Justice puts things in their places while generosity takes them
out of their directions; justice is a general ruler while generosity is
an accidental benefit. So, justice super-ior and better improvising, he
said describing believer.

“A believer, his cheerfulness is in his face his sorrow is in his heart
the most broad – chested (tolerant), and a very humble – hearted. He
hates high position and detest reputation renown. His grief is long, his
concern is far – reaching, his silence is much, and all time he is
occupied. He is grateful and enduring, of bright demeanour, and of soft
temperament!”

And an ignorant stubborn man asked him about a dilemma, at onece he
replied: Ask me for understanding but do not ask me for obstinacy,
because the ignorant person who tries to learn is like a learned man,
but the learned arbitrary man is like the ignorant stubborn.

In summery Ali bin Abi Talib is a great literary man, grew up on
experiencing life, on flexibility with the styles of eloquence, so he
has owned what art requires: of originality in the autheor’s
personality, And the special education in which personality grows and
originality condenses.

As for language, our beloved Arabic language which Marshlosh , in the
first volume of his book A Trip to the East, uttered this intelligent
saying: “Arabic language is the richest, the most expressive, the most,
and the most amiable in effect among other languages of the world. With
the structures of its verbs, it follows the flight of thought and
portraits it accurately; with the tunes of its sonic syllables it
imitates the cries of animals, growling of escaping water, swarming of
wind and bombing of thunder.”

As for this language, as Marshlosh mentioned its features and what he
did not mention, you could find its origins and branches, the beauty of
its colours and magic of its eloquence in Imam Ali’s literature.


It was a literature serving man and culture.

([^1]) Hasan Aon, trans; Theory of Zikrary Genve.


