The Cosmic Justice and What Ali Represents of It
================================================

**the Equivalence in Existence**

Ali felt that this great cosmos is cooperating, Vouching, one aspect of
that is when the wind rises it moves the twigs powerfully, and when it
Rises it plucks out the trees and the elements would arouse for it; and
when it falls and flew over the land lightly, the surfaces of water
would be intoxicated and things, below them, would quiet he also
realized that comprehensive power of existence cultivates straws of
plant with a law by which it cultivates grean leaves and plant which
flattened over its stem and swayed for the wind.

Ibn Abi Talib overthrew the merchants’ theory by a speech he has taken
from the soul of existence, as if he is participating by it the cosmos
in expressing what is in his conscience!

A man Casts one sight at the outer cosmos and its states: the fixed
stars in the immensity of existence, the swimming planets in the
horizons of eternity, the rising sun, the casual cloud, the hastening
wind, the mountains rising, and the seas brittled by shells or on whose
faces the night lain down – all this is enough to be confident that the
cosmos has a law, and its conditions have a code as well, both of which
lie under the senses and exist with every measure.

One sight a man casts at what surrounds him of close nature and its
states: at the summer as its heat increases and its wind falls, the
autumn whose forests dispirited and whose winds wail alternately and
whose horizons of sky frown, the winter when its atmospheres thunder and
disturbed with flashes,

and its rains burst forth with waves crowded with waves and whose
clouds mingle so that they even conceal, the signs of the earth and the
sky, the spring which steetches the world with dewy horizons, rich
rivers, cultivation, water and coloured paradises all this is enough for
a man to be confiedent that this nature has a law, its conditions have a
code as well, both of which lie under the senses and exist with evey
measure.

One testing look a man casts at this and that is enough to guide him
that these codes and laws are true, firm, and just, its stern logic
performs these characteristics. They have alone what justifier the
existence of this great cosmos.

Ibn Abi Talib cast that sight at the cosmos, and so realized directly
what these codes have of truthfulness, firmness and justice. He was
shaked at what he has seen and understood, flew in his blood, ran in his
being, and clamoured into him a sense and a thinking; then his lips
moved saying: “indeed with right the heavens and earth existed”. If you
tried to gather truthfulness, firmness and justice in one word, you
would not find a word containing all these except the word ‘the right’ –
because of what is unified of its signiticonce with the spirit of these
three words.

Ibn Abi Talib realized in his depths that comparison is true originalty
and consequently between heaven and earth, which existed with the right,
and they stretched with the three inseparable faces, truthfulness,
firmness, and justice, and between the state which must be a small
picture of this cosmos, existing on firm sound bases. So he lived in his
mind and conscience this comparison spontaneously, with no space for a
penetrating feeling or a strange thinking; then presently he says:

The greatest of these rights that Allah has made obligatory is the
right of the ruler over the ruled and the right of the ruled over the
ruler. This is an obligation which Allah has imposed on for each other.
He has made it as a dicipline of their harmony. Consequently, the ruled
cannot prosper unless the rulers are sound, and the rulers cannot be
sound without the ruled’s righteousness.

If the ruled render the rights of the ruler and the ruler renders their
rights, then justice is practiced among them, signs of justice become
clear and the rules took their course freely the continuance of
government will be hoped. But if the ruled triumph over the ruler i.e.
disobey, or the ruler does injustice to the ruled. Overthere,
disagreement appears evry-where signs of injustice appear, the ways of
the islamic “sunnah” are forsaken.

Then desires are acted on, the islamic rules dispensed with, diseases
of spirits become numerous and no annoyance is felt for disregarding a
great right, nor in committ-ing a big wrong, there virtuous people are
humiliated the vicious persons are honoured, and there Allah’s debts on
his servants become very great.

I plea to you to consider this precision of the general large
relations. Among the elements of state through Ali’s tongue. Then
between the good productive works and stability of these elements on the
bases of right; or say of truthfulness, firmness, and justice, the three
aspects of the right with which the heavens and the earth existed.

Ali felt that this great cosmos is cooperating, integrating, therefore
when the wind intensified it would move the twigs powerfully, and when
it startled it would pluck out the trees and the elements would arouse
for it; and when it softened and flew over the land lightly, the
surfaces of water would be intoxicated and things below them would
cooled down.

Ali felt that if the sun cast its light over the earth the marks of the
earth would appear to the eyes and minds, and if it clears out, it would
put on it a veil of darkness. He felt that plant grows, flourishes,
foliates, and may fruit – and it is a thing which differs, in shape and
aim, from the rays of day, the body of air, the drop of water, the dust
of land; but it does not grow nor foliate except by this ray, this body,
this drop, this dust.

He felt also that the water whose “waves were stormy and whose surges
leapt one over the other” as he says is but “loaded on dashing wind and
breaking typhoons” and that the wind which “Allah blew its motion and
spread it wide” is ordered – despite this far source – to raise up deep
waters and to intensify the waves of the oceans; pushed it fiercely into
the firmament throwing its front position on the rear and the stationary
on the flowing till its level was raised”. And one of the decoration of
the earth, and joy of hearts are these stars and planets, light of
piercing star the shining sun and luminous moon.

Ibn Abi Talib felt from an of that, that this cosmos, which is on the
right, is but one whose elements are connected with each other in a
cooperating and supporting manner, and that its powers have right
imposed for some over some others and they are equivalent in all of its
sides, inseparable by force of their existence and continuance.

He realized into his depths that reciprocation is true root and branch
between these jointed cooperating elements and human beings who have to
be cooperating and equivalent by force of their existence and
continuance. They are of this cosmos things; what happens to all of its
elements happens to them out of genius of joining forces which Ali sees
it to be imposed on them; without which they do not live nor remain.

Therefore he enfolds the world of solid nature and that of human being
in one rational flash and one tremor of sensation, so as to explore the
justice of this cosmos existing on a unity of truthfulness, firmness,
and justice, applying this code in which he shares the cosmos in
empressing, what is in its conscience saying:

“Then as a part of His rights, He imposed certain rights for certain
people on some others. He made them so as to equate with one another.
Some of these rights imply other rights. Some of which don’t fall due
except with some others.

And also from this source is his great saying, in which he decides that
the continuance of any beneficence is conditional on what is Imposed on
its holder of a natural duty toward his human brothers, and that failure
of carrying out this duty is enough to remove and exterminat them:

“If favours of Allah abound to a person people’s needs towards him also
abound. Therefore, he who fulfils for Allah all that is obliged on him
in this regard will preserve them in continuance and perpetuity, while
he who does not fulfil them will expose them to elimination and
extinction.

There is in these two sayings, which express the justice of the
univers, and people-being of its creatures what dosen’t need much
clarification.

The people’s rights, on Ali’s tongue, equal one another. They are like
the rights of water on wind, the plant on water, water on the sun, and
the sun on the law of existence. This norm, which impose on man not to
be entitled to any right unless he renders others’ rights, is not but
the just norm of existence which is founded on this justice.

The reader is to look out this matter soundly, then let him say his
view on what he sees. If he did so he would grasp, undoubtedly that this
norm, which Ibn Abi Talib has taken it to the roots of cosmic justice,
is firm, and does not change itself or be overruled by any
irregularities.

The elements of this cosmos do not take but to the amount they give,
and some of them do not gain but to the amount which other lose. If the
earth took light and warmth from the sun it would give existence the
same amount it has taken (out of its age). likewise when it takes from
the night a shadow to be covered with.

If flower took, from the many elements of the cosmos, what gives it
life, growth, and nice fragrance, light and air would take of its
colour, the same amount they have given, so that when its formation
integrated and reached the peak of its life, the amount it gives of its
age grew greater; therefore life and death pull it back and forth until
it commits its leaves and stem to death as to earth it swallows whatever
it had granted it.

And the sea does not retrieve to its abdomen but what it has given the
sky of coluds and the land of rain.

So is the human in his special life. He does not get any pleasure but
by losing another he pays, intentionally or not, to compensate for what
he has taken. He does not come to life unless it is decided that he will
die. Ali says: “He who is the holder of death is the holder of life.”

And about this wise balance of the law of life in its wideness and
orbits, its earth and sky, its solid and living creatures, Ibn Abi Talib
expresses through this word which gathers soundness of thought, violence
of observation, and genius of simplicity: “no benefaction is gotten but
by losing another”.

The lookers are to see this saying, so if they did they would be
certain that it is the reality which manifest itself through words
similar to amathematical basis that could not be deviated from.

As for general life, there is not one concern of man’s that deviation
from this basis which Ali bin Abi Talib extracts from the matter of
great cosmos. Your right on your society is that this society should
evaluate what you give, in quantity and quality, then to take from it
the same amount you gave.

But if you got less reward than you gave, your lot at that time had
gone to someone else, and that one is enjoying of a goodness you are its
owner, no doubt, and you are, as a result, compelled and prejui-diced.
But if you took more reward than you gave, the other’s lot had gone to
you, and that someone else hungers from what you ate, and you are hence
compelling and oppressing.

The existence of an oppressed and an oppressor in society is a
corruption for it and a defect in the standerds of social justice which
could not be right unless it entered in a profitable frame of cosmic
justice. Wrong cannot be a basis, rather the right is the basis. And
“the right cannot be cancelled by anything” in the law of cosmos! It is
as such Ibn Abi Talib’s faith.

Looking at the great and bright aspect of cosmic justice did not
distract Ali from looking at what is hidden and serious. His concern is
that of genius poets, where accurate things represent for them, in form
and meaning, what great things represent; they do not distinguish
between alarge or a small thing, as they are one in origin and in
significance as well.

What attracts on lookers has no more consideration in their minds and
hearts than that which is concealed in the hideout and among shadows.
Many a look flows sensations in the being of those more than that
fountains of speech can. Many a hint by which they realize clear by what
they can not see in a thousand declaration!

Many a flower under the wing of a rock may enjoy the greatness of the
existence where they do not enjoy of agreat tree Rather many a small
thing in their view is grander than a large one, and a little is more
than a plenty! I see it adequate to mention in this respect a bit of a
long saying I referred regarding the speech about the stance of the
holder of great sense and comprehensive thought towards the cosmos whose
hidden and apparent things are equal in indicating the grandeur it has,
I said:

“As if I see that this nature represents, for the poet, the beauty of
freedom to which he longs for as it sends the wind whenever and however
it likes. With no cencern whether people resent against it or were
satisfied contently! It gush the fountains from the rock when it likes,
and from the limp of dust as well, and flows it silently in the plain
and throws it from the heights of mountains.

It protrude from its chest trees, rocks, peaks and valleys in the way
it wants, with no concern that lilies may grow beside thorns or the
needles of poison may hang green wood roses with fragrant perfume. It
does not restrict itself to a knowledge which scorns dry straws and
glorifies green leaves, or ridicule from small vermins looking out from
the holes of rocks, so as to glorify the fierceness of strong beasts
that pray upon the weak.”([^1])

by this sight and feeling Ibn Abi Talib has faced the aspects of the
one existence in the two natures: the silent and the living, he felt
obviously and deeply alike that the comprehensive power of existence
cultivates straws of the plant with a law by which it cultivates the
green leaf and plant which flattened over its stem and swayed in the
wind.

It looks after the small trees of land as it does with vast great
trees. As for beast, insects, grasshoppears, and small birds, nature has
not worked, in cultivating them, a lesser portion than it has done in
cultivating huge beasts and the eagle of sky. Every creature has its
place in the wideness of existence, and everything has right in this
existence.

Thus the lofty mountain did not prevent Ibn Abi Talib from seeing stone
and the atom of dust. It did not pass him as was looking at the peacock
to pay attention to the humble ant creeping into the hideouts of the
land between its ruins and its stones, so that it is, therefore, a grand
creation and an ample thing. Ali did not see in the peacock and ant,
which the day interests them, a thing exceeding, in the meaning of
existence and its value, over what he saw in bats which the night was
made day for them and were held by the light which is extending for
everything. Yet he was seeing in them some ambiguities of wisdom so much
as he sees in the great creatures.

This creature, in Ali’s procedure, is sufficient to have breath of
life, that is, to be surviving, so that the power of inclusive existence
secures for it a basic portion that protects it from the danger of death
before its time. The cosmic justice did not establish the living of
creatures unless it sets its existence with that which keeps it
surviving. This what is meant by the genius of the standard accurate
observation of Ali’s in his saying: “For everyone having breath of life
is a foodstuff, and for every grain is an eater.”

But if there was an obstacle between the starved and his foodstuff,
between the grain and its eater, this prevention is an aggression
against the standards of cosmic justice, and a slander against the value
of life and meaning of existence. Ali says: “By Allah, even if I am
given all the domains of the seven stars in order that I may disobey
Allah to the extent of stripping an aunt of a grain of barley I would
not do it.”

As for aggression against the standards of cosmic justice, the
punishment for it is existent due to the nature of this general justice
itself which judges the doer in a manner having no laxity nor severity,
but justice and reward.

So was the grand Allawiyah look to the meaning of the one life, in its
plenty and scantiness, in its largeness and smallness. The cosmic
justice, which adjust the relaitons among creatures, cultivated them in
their different states, and fulfilled, among them, mutual works,
reciprocal rights, and equal duties, did not distinguish between an
aspect of life and another one, did not order a strong one to transgress
over a weak one as the strong one has the means of aggression, did not
agree for the many to oppress the rights of the few as the many have
been granted with features of richness.

It, therefore, does not forgive the oppression of the few under the
pretext of the interest of the many. He who aggrieves a living being, in
Ibn Abi Talib’s procedure, is as though he aggrieved all living beings.
And he who kills a self as though he has killed the whole of people. And
he who hurts a living being is as if he has hurt all of the living being
above the face of the earth. Life is life in (Ali’s) procedure and its
respect is the origin over which the branches develop.

In the theories of a lagre number of thinkers and legislators and in
the views of most of those who call themselves politi-cians, aggression
can be used over the few number of people for the sake of the many. And
in their consideration goodness is not measured except by the safety of
the many number, then in reaching what they like of prosperity.

If a thousand people were killed in an accident of aggression the
matter is grave. If two thousands were killed the matter is graver, and
so on. But if one man was killed by the same accident the case is easy
and the matter is simple. As the many of the notebooks of souls’
merch-ants then would not be dropped. But for tables of multiplication,
and processes of addition and division, it is easy to adjust them in one
mathematical process.

But Ibn Abi Talib crushes the theories of those merchants, in a saying
he takes directly from the spirit of existence in which there is no
value for numbers in the meaning of life, rather for life itself:

“By Allah, even if they had wilfully killed only one individual without
any faulthe has comitted. It would have been lawful for me to kill the
whole of that army.”

Here, it is clear the matter is not “killing the whole army”, rather
cementation the idea of respecting life in the minds of the holders of
authority, and paying their attentions to the idea that killing one
self, willy and intentionally, equals the killing of all creatures.

If we compared Ali bin Abi Talib’s view in this respect with the views
of many thinkers who saw that standards of justice do not move except by
force and muchness, it would be noticeable for us how they drop while he
elevates, how they are coarse and harsh while his horizon extends and
the values of life will be higher on his hands.

While some of those drum and repeat continually as they have discovered
views and theories that permit for the strong one to be proud of his
power only, and for the many to expand their expectations with this
richness only – in all this there is an aggression against the law of
just life – and the will of the able, developing, benevolent humn, we
see that Ibn Abi Talib shows what is more sublime of the standard of
life itself as it is a fact, and the standard of human will as it is a
blessing, and so he says with the simplicity of the great man. “Many a
small thing makes up for a lagre one! Then he clarifies in a grander,
nicer saying:

“No person, however great his position in the matter of truth is above,
to be helped to fulfil the obligations placed on him by Allah. And, no
man, however small he may be regarded by others, and however humble he
may appear before eyes, is too low to help or to be helped in this
matter.”

In these two sayings Ibn Abi Talib shows one of the aspects of cosmic
justice that appears when you examine closely, and asserts a truth often
hidden from the minds which restrict themselves in a narrow horizon.

Ali states that sparkling, pompos manifestations in terms of
existential reality are not but a scantiness out of existence, worthless
having no value nor importance; ordinary people, the foolish, the stupid
and those who applaude for whatever is glossy, worthless, and
meaningless may be dazzled by these manifestations,

but this collapse will before long vanish suddenly when the sun of
truth appears, and its great light sweeps what the ordinary assumed
light, while it is a deception for the eyes, and when the wind of just
existence storms with the storm of light straws. There are, out of
present history, numerous indications about this confusion in the
measures of the individuals and groups, and it is a confusion which
involves consequences that hurt civilization life, and man as it has a
deviation from the standards of cosmic justice.

If you lived in a period during the middle Ages in Europe, for example,
you would see occasionally caravans of people followed by caravans at
one of general square in this city or that, so as to acclaim and applaud
a creature of people whose clothes are embroidered, whose head folded
with emerald and aquamarine and stringed precious stones. And you would
see a man walking by himself on the platform, and whose step is furious,
whose sight is violent, and he did not pay attention to the concern of
those who were applauding and neither did they.

They are acclaiming the life of a “great” one, but he is not “great”.
Then the sun rose afterwards, so it dominated over the darkness, and
showed things in their actual positions. So what do you see then? You
see that those people who were applauding and acclaiming – they are, in
this position, standing as nothingness – but were applauding for a
worthless creature – called Louis the Fourteenth,

for example, or for one of the villains called Charles the Fifth, or
for an extremely small one called Charles the first, or for others who
carry names followed by numbers ... indicating scantiness. Then what
becomes clear afterwards? It becomes clear that the man of the platform
whom people did not applaud or acclaim for his life is but a true great
person called Mollier, or Milton, or Gallilo. And days elapse, and the
holders of names followed by numbers are not but worthlessness. And the
walkers on the platform, who have no numbers for their names, for whom
no one applaud, are not but all greatness.

Forgetfulness folds up the worthless, and folds up with them those
“nothingness” out of those who applaud and acclaim. And those appear on
the top of existence, and humanity places them (out of itself) at the
stances of suns before darkness. And very few people appear, who
understand them and evaluate them in their great prestige. They got
warth out of their heat like the land getting warmth of the light of
noon, and realized what Ali bin Abi Talib grasped when he said: “Often a
small thing is more beneficial than a large one.”

It is the cosmic justice which weighs every being with its great
balance and places it in its very position, no cheating nor deception,
not flattery! It is the cosmic justice in which no value diminished at
it, and no worthlessness rises high!

Ibn Abi Talib did not call this “little” as small except because it was
as such in the people’s in sights and their views at that time. He did
not call this “little” as much except for the same cause. He knows they
are wrong, and what they see as “little” may not be as such. And what
they see as large may be light in the measure of the right. As for him,
he was feeling the value of life powerfully and evidently,

felt its capabilities in all creatures, feeling that the cosmos has a
just will in estimating life wherever it was, and in respecting the
livings as they are so he utters wise phrases to which we referred. And
he uttered many others; so that when overdoers exaggerate and deny that
the simple has such a value and such capabilities for development, he
faced them saying: “Most of the right is in what you deny”.

There is another truth Ali asserts in this saying: “... no man, however
small he may be regarded by others, and however humble he may appear
before eyes, is less than offering help or being helped in this matter”
that is, every man can benefit his society and benefit as well, whatever
his talent is, and however scanty his capabilities are.

And in this insight the man whose chance of talents is scanty there is
an illustration in Ali’s mind of a deep believing in the cosmic justice
which makes of drops of water a huge sea of granules of sands deserts
and wildernesses, and it makes every little lie inside the plenty, and
every small depend on the large.

It has an illustration of the nature of benevolent life, which feels
pity for its sons, and puts each one in a frame of its blessing; it does
not aggrieve him, nor does it treat him severely.

It also has an evidence about this profound sympathy by which Ali was
immersing the living beings, so he did not see in them but people who
worth to enjoy life to the brim, benefit from its blessing, cooperate
and get help.

You can find an image of this Allawiyah insight, which is confident of
the justice of cosmos and goodness of life, and believing in man’s
capabilities – whoever he was – to become a noble thing as he was, in
Jean jack Rousseau’s literature which turns around an axis of confidence
in the justice of nature and goodness of life.

As though I saw Ibn Abi Talib specialize those who “are regarded small
by others, and appear humble before eyes” with the most portion of his
attention the hour he addressed people saying: Allah has not created you
vainly”, or the hour he cxcelled in describing his confidence of the
benevolent human nature facing people in this compassionate view: “you
are empty of evil till you has not gone astray”. That is you all are
bene-volent and useful, originally and marginally unless you deviate
from the right intentionally.

To ascertain this side of cosmic justice in Ibn Abi Talib’s faith, and
I mean the complete equalization in every right and duty between that
who has little and that who has much, and the small and the big, he
indicates that the centre of this justice but equals (with him) all
beings, with no difference between a man and another. Their human nature
is one, and their case in the balance of existence is one as well; they
are not distinguished except by what they do and what they serve. As to
that who performs and serves, then the law of existence itself will
repay him.

Yet to that who is idle arrogant, and extorter, then this law itself
will punish him with what he deserves. Ali says: “no one prevents him
from punishing another, not distract Him from another; anger does not
keep Him from mercy, and mercy does not prevent Him from punishing.”

In this respect we return with some detail to what we mentioned that
Ali bin Abi Talib showed the veil from the existential genius which
makes of the nature of things itself a higher judge that gives and
deprives, punishes and repays, so creatures bear, due to their nature of
formation, the ability to prosecute their selves by their selves,
complying with the will of just cosmos.

Ibn Abi Talib sees that existence is equally balanced not a thing of it
decreases here except that another thing of it. Increases there instead,
and both decrease and increase are equal: no increase except by the
(same) amount of decrease, and no decrease except by the (same) amount
of increase. It is worth saying that the theory speaking of this balance
in the things of existence is but one of the great outcomes which the
activity of human thought has reached in its great creeping to discover
the secrets of the cosmos, and it is also a starting-point in this
field.

It is worth saying as well that a number of previous thinkers could not
pay attention to this truth, and that a number denied it, and that a
party of those thinkers saw it, realized many of its details believed in
it, and called for it. Members of this party themselves differ too in
the power of observation and represen-tation, then in the power of
expressing at what they witnessed and trusted. Some of them watched this
balance in some of the aspects of creatures, so they declared that in a
way having some clarification of the truth.

Some others saw it in all the aspects of silent cosmos but they did not
sense for it tangible outcomes in the stream of existence, did not find
for it a corresponding line in the aspects of the living cosmos. Some
others witnessed it in the living nature, sensed for it tangible
outcomes in the stream of existence, saw of it a corresponding line in
the living creatures, and declared it in a clear statement and confident
speech.

From this party is Ali bin Abi Talib. Rather say he is at the top of
this party of the former thinkers because he has been about to prove
this theory on a sound accurate course that does not conflict, nor
contradict, and no escape for some of it from the other. Rather say he
has done that and excelled.

Perhaps Ibn Abi Talib’s position towards what he has witnessed and seen
of the aspects of balance in the existence, is more sublime than the
positions of his alike thinkers from the practical viewpoint because of
what he has insisted on ascer-taining this truth, so as to arrive at the
results follow from it in people’s life, as individuals and groups. This
reality is entirely in harmony with the centre of the Allawiyah
philosophy which is Man.

We have said that Ali sees that existence is balanced, not a thing
decreases here of it except another increases there instead, and that
this decrease and this increase are equal: no increase is except with
the amount of decrease, and no decrease except with the amount of
increase. He, in the first place, says, drawing man’s attention to this
truth using the most sticking thing to him, that is, by the existence of
himself: (He doesn’t receive a day of his age except by deserting
another of his appointed own age.

Is there any thought in man’s intellect that is able to refute this
truth which shows the counterpoise of existence in a simpler way that
one could see out of the state of existence? Then is there a
mathematical basis of the bases of geometry and algebra, more sticking
to firm truths, more indicative on the absolute reality, and more
succinct in revealing the firm and the absolute than this masterpiece by
which Ibn Abi Talib portraits the counterpoise of existence through the
living creature and his days?

If a speaker says to me that this idea is known, known to people, all
people, then about which new truth does bin Abi Talib. Reveals in your
claim? I said: the disclosure of hidden truths does not entail keeping
silent of overt truths if these were an origin for those, or those an
origin for these, or if the general method entails regulating the
details alike what is hidden of them or appears.

Ali bin Abi Talib, whose views cling to each belief, then all of his
beliefs cling in a wonderful intellectual unity, did not utter this
known saying “which is known by people, all people”, and did not utter a
more outstanding saying with the same meaning, i.e, “The breaths of one
are his steps towards his death”, but to return and establish on what he
said in a detailed structure so as to prove the theory of equivalence in
existnce.

He who said “he doesn’t receive a day of his age except by deserting
another of his own age” and “the breaths of one are his steps towards
his death”, but mentioned that so as to return to disclose a truth, more
distant from people’s minds, and more hidden from their observation, but
if flows with the two former sayings: “one doesn’t get abenevolent
except by losing another.

I think that you have known what lies in this saying: the power of
observation, the ability to reveal, the frankness of thought, and the
clarity of statement. And to regulate the sub-stance of this phrase in
pictures and forms, which differ externally but unify in meaning and
essence, Ali says: “Many a single repase prevent several repases” and
that who is wasted by near ones the far ones are offered to him.

And “Many a distant one is nearer than a near one” and “Love is an
obtained kinship”, and “He who overloaded himself beyond his ability
will fail”, and “He who does good deeds will not lose his reward” and
“Whatever you earn beyond your basic needs you are ware-housing for
others.”

In these phrases, and in many others, there is an obvious summery of
the details of the theory of existential balance as Ali bin Abi Talib
sees. It despite the difference of its close topics, move in its scope,
and its distant aim is around axes, namely the balance of the cosmos: so
that on decrease here unless an equaling increase there, and vise
versa.

Ibin Abi Talib realized this extential truth powerfully and deeply,
experienced it, declared it in each period of his life or each saying of
his, whether that was in the direct mood or the indirect one. He does
not recognize this aspect of cosmic justice but to recognize another
aspect reflecing it in a particular form or say emanates from it
outflowingly that is to what we are with respect of speech as nature
itself involves criterion, so it rewards and punishes and nothing among
the aspects of cosmic justice is more prominent than this aspect in
indicating it.

Ali saw that there is no even one thing of the thing of the cosmos has
been found for naught, rather its existence has a purpose and as aim. He
saw that each one of creatures has a function it performs, and over each
one of man’s organs there is a duty on which just cosmos protests, asks
about it, and renders an account on it. On the basis of these reality
the things of existence are equal due to their existence. As to the
small and the big are similar to this measure. Ali says: “Allah holds
you responsible for the small before the big things”.

And so he says that because the majority of people don’t pay attention
to this small thing so he draw their attention to it by bringing it
forward over the big thing in its entailing a punishment or a reward, so
us to be reassured to the occurrence of the process of equalization
between them in minds and hearts.

But if the cosmos protests against man in what it has imposed on his
limbs, asks him about them, renders him responsible of small and big
things, and reward him for what he has done: whether it was good or
evil, it is not necessary, in Ali’s observation, that the process of
protest, settling an account, and reward to be carried out outside man’s
domain himself. And that this composite process, the one although
containing a complex-ity, is carried out always, as Ali sees, within the
creature’s limits whatever it was. And as such it is accomplished with
regard to man as he is one of the creatures. Ali says: “there is a
watcher over you of yourselves; your limbs are watchmen.” The guard is
the observer. This observer does not spare any effort in seeing,
recording, punishing, and repaying.

And in unique moments of brilliance of the discovering reason and
penetrating intellect, bright colours appear to Ibn Abi Talib,s eyes of
this one of the aspects of cosmic justice; you could not react towards
them but to be surprised at this reason and this intellect. Does not Ibn
Abi Talib speak with the language of the scholars of the modern age, as
he speaks with the language of this justice itself the hour he states
this truth: “Whoever ruins his morals agonizes himself.”

Then does not he speak with these two languages alike as he says: “The
doubted person is a bout to say ‘take me’” and as he says as well: “keep
yourself away from every demerit even though you may be driven to it by
a desire, because you earn of what you have humilliated yourself.”

And there are many many masterpieces like these. Some of these
masterpieces are: “Man’s death from his sins is more than his death at
his appointed time”, and “No Chivalry is with a liar, no cmfort with
jealousy, no dignity with revenge, and no rightness with overlooking
consultation” and “If a man possesses a good disposition wait its
sisters of him.”

Thus Ali Ibn Abi Talib realized that the cosmos is one, just, firm in
its unity and justice, making in the nature of creatures themselves the
power to account, the ability to punish and reward. And thus he
expressed what he realized wonderfully.

But there are other aspects other than these aspects of cosmic justice
which Ali examined, checked their forms, and colours. So what are these
aspects .


