The Allawiyah Foreward
======================

**The Allawiyah Foreward**

§ Shall I be content with being called ‘Amir Al-Mu’minin’ (The
Commander of the Believers), although I do not share with them the
hardships of the world?

§ Forbid people to monopolize.

§ Do not appropriate to yourself a thing in which people are equal.

§ Know that I am fighting two persons: one has claimed what is not his
own and the other has ignored what is obligatory upon him.

§ No poor has starved except because of what a rich has enjoyed.

§ I have not seen any rich blessing except there is, beside it a wasted
right.

§ The ruin of the land is caused by the poverty of the cultivators,
while the cultivators become poor because of the rulers’ inclination to
collect money due to their greediness.

§ You should keep an eye on the cultivation of land more than on the
collecting of revenue.

§ No town deserves you more than another one. The best town for you is
that which bears you.

§ Poverty in one’s homeland is a strangeness.

§ If poverty were represented as a man I would kill him.

§ A human being is asked, at the Day of judgment, about his money, from
where had he earned it.

§ How can you enjoy food and drink when you know that you are eating an
unlawful food and drinking unlawfully.

§ Oppressing weak people is the worst oppression, oppres-sion calls for
sword; whoever loaded up himself with oppression will fail.

§ The day of the oppressed against the oppressor will be more difficult
than the day of the oppressor against the oppressed.

§ The doer of oppression, the helper to it, and the contented with it
are three partners.

§ Do not waste the interests of your brother depending upon your
relation with him, for he is not your brother whose right you have
wasted.

§ Whatever a defect in your secretaries which you over-look, you will
be held responsible for it.

§ The worst minister to you is he who has been a minister to
mischievous persons before you, and who has joined them their sins.

§ Thereafter, look into the affairs of your executives. Appoint them on
trial and do not appoint them according to partiality or favouritism,
because they are a collection of the branches of injustice and
treason.

§ Avoid every such action which is performed in secret and of which
shame is felt.

§ Allah has made it obligatory on just leaders that they should
maintain themselves at the level of weak people.

§ The ruled hearts are the stores of their ruler; so whatever he places
in them of justice or injustice will find it there.

§ The subjects’ love and faithfulness do not manifest ex-cept through
their feeling that the state is not a heavy burden over their
shoulders.

§ When the ruler changes, time changes too.

§ The discontent of prominent people can be forgiven with the content
of the common people.

§ If Allah becomes angry on a nation, its prices become high and its
evil men dominate it.

§ But I am worried that silly and profligate people control the affairs
of the entire community, with the result they grab the funds of Allah as
their own property and enslave his slaves.

§ The scholars are the rulers of kings; oppression is the last period
of kings’ rule.

§ Knowledge is a religion which is acted upon.

§ It is an hour – at night – no slave of Allah prays for some-thing
except granted to him unless he is a tax-collector, an intelligence man,
or a police officer.

§ Three men favour money: The sea trader, the holder of authority, and
the one accepting bribe while taking decisions.

§ If the shepherd is a wolf, then who protects the sheep?!

§ Allah may curse those who advise good but they thems-elves neglect
it, and those who detest others from evil but they themselves act upon
it.

§ Know that you are living at a time in which those who speak about
right are few, the tongue is blunt to utter truth, and those who stick
to the right are humiliated.

§ The weak is in my view strong till I restore (his) right while the
strong is in my view a weak till I take the right back from him.

§ Shortly a time will come for people no one will be taken as associate
to the rulers except informants and no one is regarded as witty but the
profligate, and no one will be regarded as weak except the fair
person.


