Foreword
========

In today’s world, the instruction and upbringing of children are among
the most basic social issues and important elements for the happiness of
humanity. Therefore, scientists have carried out deep psychological and
educational studies and research and have written an infinite number of
books on this subject.

In addition, countries have formed extensive organizations for the
proper physical and psychological upbringing of children and have put
children under theoretical and practical monitoring in every respect.

14 centuries ago, however, when people were engulfed in an age of
darkness and ignorance, the great leader of Islam paid full attention to
the value and importance of children’s upbringing and provided the
necessary teachings to his followers.

If scientists today pay attention to the instruction of children after
birth, Islam has provided step-by-step specifications for marriage,
conditions of spouses, having pure children, breastfeeding, and the
physical and psychological upbringing of children.

If scientists today include precise psychological and instructional
points in their books about children, the leaders of Islam noted the
same in their sayings and demonstrated the same in their practices long
ago.

Our purpose in writing this book is two-fold:

One: It is hoped that all the Muslims, especially educated young people,
who constitute a large part of the society, will become aware of the
comprehensive programs and orders of Islam and the practical value of
this religion while relying on their solid faith and beliefs in order
not to be deceived by the programs of others.

Two: It is also hoped that parents will become aware of their religious
and national duty in the upbringing of their children. In order to help
parents carry out this great responsibility, for doubtless a great part
of the social problems and moral pollutions experienced today are due to
ignorance and unawareness about how to perform one’s duties, we decided
to provide a practical model for those who want to bring up physically
and psychologically healthy children. The best model for Muslims is the
great leader of Islam, Prophet Muhammad and his rightful heirs, who can
be our reliable models throughout life, as they did not commit any
mistakes. It is hoped that humanity will become aware of the true models
to follow and will surrender the false satanic models in order to
achieve happiness in this world and the next.

This book consists of two parts:

1. The Prophet’s attitude towards children, consisting of five chapters,
each having its own subject heading.

2. The Prophet’s attitude towards youth, consisting of four chapters,
each chapter having several subtitles.

Finally, I would like to express thanks, especially to Hujjat al-Islam
wal-Muslimin Ilahi Khorasani, managing director of the Foundation, and
my beloved children Majid, Muhsin, Ihsan and Sa‘id, who helped me
organize the notes for the book, and to Messrs Ja‘far Shari‘atmadari the
editor, Ridha Arghiyani the compiler, Ridha Wahdati the proofreader and
Muhammad ‘Ali ‘Alaqemand, the typesetter, all of whom played a
significant role in the preparation of this book. I wish all of them
increasing success.


