Part 1: The Prophet’s Attitude towards Children
===============================================

Kindness towards children was one of the Prophet’s special
characteristics.

Chapter One: Upbringing
-----------------------

The Noble Prophet (s) said:
*“Respect your children and treat them with good manners.”*

### The Importance of Upbringing

From the time a child is born until he separates from the family to
establish a shared life with others, he passes through two phases in his
upbringing.

1. Childhood, from birth until the age of seven, is the time when the
child is not well prepared for direct instruction as he does not know
his world.

2. From the age of seven to the age of fourteen is the time when the
intellect grows gradually, in preparation for intellectual activities.
In this stage the child can learn and be instructed.

In the first period, instruction has to be indirect without commands and
psychological pressure. Rather, the child becomes familiar with good
manners and is instructed by the people surrounding him. In fact, the
moral foundation of his character is laid and good memories and proper
treatment become etched in his mind.

In the second phase, the child should not be left free to behave and do
as he pleases and his faults should not be ignored. Rather, his ill
manner should be discouraged and he should be taught order and
discipline, while emphasizing the proper use of time and he should be
encouraged to perform religious worship and do good things.[^1]

Unfortunately, most people do not know when to begin to train their
children. Some parents believe that instruction should begin after the
age of six and some say that instruction should begin at the age of
three.

Nevertheless, such beliefs are incorrect because when a child has
completed the third year of his life, 75% of good and bad
characteristics have already become formed in him.

A number of psychologists believe that the training of a child begins
from the moment of birth. However, some others are cautious and say that
the training of a child begins on the first day of the second month
after his birth. In depth practical research at the University of
Chicago has reached the conclusion that:

“Any healthy child gains 50% of his intelligence by the age of four, 30%
by the age of 8 and 20% by the age of 17. Then, any 4-year old child has
50% intelligence and the changes between the ages of 2 and 3 are far
more important than the changes between the ages of 8 and 9.”[^2]

### How to Begin the Child’s Upbringing and Instruction

For training to be effective, one has to begin much sooner than is
generally thought nowadays, i.e. from the very first weeks after birth.
First, one has to consider the physiological issues and from the first
year, the psychological issues.

One point to consider is that the value of time is not the same for a
child as for an adult. One day at the age of 1 is much longer than the
same period of time at the age of 30 and it perhaps includes six times
the physiological and psychological occurrences. Therefore, one should
not leave such a fruitful period of childhood unused, for in the first
six years of life, the outcome of the performance of the rules of life
is more definitive.[^3]

It is because of this that Imam ‘Ali said, “He who does not learn in
childhood, cannot progress in adulthood.”[^4]

Therefore, childhood is the best time for learning the right way of
living because the child is very apt to imitate, adopt and learn. At
this time, the child records in himself all the movement, speech and
behavior of the people surrounding him, with the utmost care, as if
recorded on film.

Therefore, the child’s psyche needs to be guided to the right path
simultaneously with his physical growth and development because it
becomes very difficult at the adult stage to change the character of one
who was not properly instructed in childhood.

The happiest people are those who have been reared in a correct and
healthy manner from the very beginning and who have adopted good
characteristics.

According to some psychologists, a child is like a sapling that the
gardener can easily change according to his own plans. Yet, correcting
those who are like old trees and have grown accustomed to bad ways, is
very difficult indeed. One who intends to change the attitudes of such
individuals must endure many hardships[^5].

### The Prophet as an Example for the People

God says in the Qur’an,

***“You have had a good example in God’s Messenger.”***[^6]

The Prophet of Islam has been the greatest example for humanity
throughout history because, in addition to teaching and guiding the
people with his words, he instructed them with his personal behavior.

The Prophet’s personality is not an example for a specific period,
generation, nation, religion or place. Rather, he is a lasting global
symbol for all peoples of all times.

With reference to reliable evidence and documents, the Prophet’s
attitude towards and behavior with respect to children and youth shall
now be considered.

### Respecting the Child’s Personality

In today’s world, children are considered to be very important. Full
attention is given by societies and governments to their upbringing and
respecting their personality in the family and the society. In spite of
this, people today do not pay as much attention to children’s
instruction as the Leader of the Muslims did.

Although sometimes statesmen in industrialized countries visit
orphanages and kindergartens, sometimes hugging children for photo ops
and media publicity, demonstrating their love and respect for children,
to date no individual can be compared with the Prophet of Islam. With
the utmost simplicity and kindness, he passed through the alleys and
streets, expressing his love and kindness towards children and hugging
them. The Prophet had a special love of children, whether they were his
own children or those of others. It has been written about him:
“Kindness towards children was one of the special practices of the
Prophet.”[^7]

This same practice was continued by Shi‘ite religious leaders and Imams.
They respected children’s personalities. Some examples have been
provided below.

#### 1. Asking Children’s Views

Imam ‘Ali asked his children intellectual questions in the presence of
others and in some cases, he would let his children answer the questions
of others.

Once Imam ‘Ali asked his children, Imam Hasan and Imam Husain some
questions. The latter responded wisely and briefly. Then Imam ‘Ali
turned to someone known as Harith A‘war, who was present in the
gathering and said: “Teach these wise words to your children to improve
their reasoning and thinking abilities.”[^8]

Thus Imam ‘Ali expressed his respect for his children in the best
possible way and contributed to the creation of the greatest personality
and independence in them.

#### 2. Sociability

One of the most basic factors in the development of a child’s
personality is sociability and proper treatment. Prophet Muhammad
clearly advised his followers concerning this. He told them: “Respect
your children and treat them with good manners and in an acceptable
way.”[^9]

Therefore, those who want to have children with a strong personality
must guide them with good training and avoid treating them improperly as
an improper practice cannot lead to the upbringing of worthy children
who have a strong personality.

#### 3. Fulfillment of Promises

Fulfillment of promises towards children contributes to the development
of their self-confidence and affects their personality. The true leaders
of Islam have given much advice about the fulfillment of promises to
children. Some examples are as follows:

Imam ‘Ali said: “It is not appropriate to tell lies, whether seriously
or jokingly. It is not appropriate to make a promise to one’s children
and fail to fulfill it.”[^10]

Imam ‘Ali also said: “The Prophet said, ‘If any of you makes a promise
to his child, he must fulfill it.”[^11]

Numerous sayings have been recounted in Shi‘ite sources from the Shi‘ite
Imams about the necessity of parents, fulfilling their promises.

#### 4. Familiarizing the Child with the Difficulties of Life

One of the ways to strengthen a child’s personality, especially in the
case of boys, is to familiarize them with the difficulties of life so as
to prepare them for the future; children must understand in practice
that one has to work hard to obtain anything. If a child is not familiar
with the problems and difficulties of life, when he does face
difficulties, he will become easily frustrated. This has been discussed
in the sayings of religious leaders as well.

Imam Musa ibn Ja‘far has said, “It is better for a child to become
familiarized with the unavoidable difficulties of life, which are the
toll of life, during childhood so that he can be patient during youth
and adulthood.[^12]

It must be remembered that familiarizing the child with the difficulties
of life should not bother the child, i.e. the jobs given to him to do
should not be beyond his capabilities. Therefore, the child’s abilities
must be taken into consideration as well.

The Prophet reminded us of four points in this respect:

1. What the child has been able to do should be accepted.

2. The child should not be asked to perform difficult tasks beyond his
abilities.

3. The child should not be persuaded to commit sins or be rebellious.

4. The child should not be told lies and silly things should not be done
in front of him.[^13]

It has been narrated elsewhere that, “One day, when the Messenger of God
was seven years old, he asked his nanny (Halimah Sa‘diyah): ‘Where are
my brothers?’ (The Prophet lived in Halimah’s house and he called her
sons as brothers.) She answered: “Dear child, they have gone to graze
the sheep with which God has blessed us.’ The child responded: ‘O Mum,
you did not treat me justly.’ ‘Why?’ she asked. ‘Is it right that I
should stay in the shade of the tent and drink milk while my brothers
are in the hot desert sun?’”[^14]

#### 5. Appreciating What the Child Does

The Prophet himself practiced all that he advised his followers
concerning the upbringing of children and respecting their personality.
One of the things he often did was to give a high value to actions
performed by children.

‘Amr ibn Harith has been quoted as saying: “The Prophet passed by
‘Abdullah ibn Ja‘far ibn Abu Ṭalib, while the latter was a little child.
The Prophet thus prayed for him, ‘O God, bless him in his dealings and
commerce.’”[^15]

#### 6. Rising in the Presence of Children

In order to show respect to his own children, the Prophet would either
lengthen his prostration during prayer or would end the prayer quickly
(depending on the circumstances). In all occasions he respected children
and he would teach the people in practical terms how to train the
personalities of their children.

One day, Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn arrived while the Prophet was
sitting. The Prophet rose to show respect to them and waited for them.
As they were little children and weak, this took some time. The Prophet
went towards them to welcome them. He opened his arms, took them both,
put them on his shoulders and walked, while saying, “What a good ride
you are having and what good riders you are!”[^16]

The Prophet would also stand in the presence of his daughter, Fatimah
Zahra.[^17]

#### 7. Foresight for Children

One day Imam Mujtaba called his children and his nephews and said to
them, “You are the children of the society. It is hoped that in the
future you will be great members of the society and that you will strive
to acquire knowledge. Any of you, who cannot memorize scholarly
material, should write it down, keep the written material at home and
refer to it whenever necessary.[^18]

As you see, Imam Mujtaba thought of the future of children and
familiarized parents with this reality. It was reported that:

“A man from among the Helpers died. He had a small amount of capital
which he had lost towards the end of his life in worship and in seeking
God’s pleasure. On the same day he died, his children were forced to ask
the people for help. This story was told to the Prophet. He asked, ‘What
did you do with his body?’ They replied: ‘We buried it.’ ‘If I knew this
earlier,’ said the Prophet, ‘I would not have allowed you bury him in
the Muslim cemetery, because he lost his wealth and properties and left
his children to beg among the people.’”[^19]

#### 8. Teaching Religious Edicts

If children practice praying and other acts of worship, these activities
will have a bright effect on their internal characters. Although a child
may not understand the meaning of the words and sentences in the prayer
for example, he will no doubt begin to understand the need to focus
attention on God and this will enable him to have a close relationship
with God, experience peace of mind in times of hardship and obtain His
infinite mercy and support. God says:

***“Who have believed and whose hearts have rest in the remembrance of
Allah. Verily in the remembrance of Allah do hearts find rest.”***[^20]

In order to bring up pious, God-fearing children, there needs to be
harmony between their bodies and their souls. To this end, Islam has
obligated parents to draw the attention of their children to God and to
teach them to worship Him and the knowledge of religious precepts. Islam
has ordered parents to make their children pray.

Mu‘awiah ibn Wahab asked Imam Sadiq, “At what age should we make
children pray?” “Between the ages of six to seven years, make them
pray.” Imam said.[^21]

The Prophet is quoted as saying, “Make your children pray at the age of
seven.”[^22]

In another narration about parental duties with respect to children’s
faith, Imam Baqir is quoted as saying, “At the age of three, teach the
child the words of monotheism, i.e. *La ilaha ill-Allah*. At the age of
four, teach the child to say *Muhammad* *rasul Allah* (Muhammad is God’s
Prophet). At the age of five, make him face the *kiblah* and order him
to prostrate before God. At the age of six, make him bow before God and
teach him the right method of prostration. At the age of seven, tell the
child to wash his hands and face (ablution) and pray.”[^23]

Parents and instructors should be aware that religion is of the greatest
help to them because faith is like a burning torch that lights up the
way and awakens the conscience. It can easily show the right path
wherever there is deviation.

### Effects of Instructing the Child in the Right Way

Properly instructing children can enable them to have independence of
will and self-confidence and respecting them gives them a strong
personality and the awareness of their true value and when they grow up,
they are less likely to experience humiliation. According to Islamic
sayings, “The child and his heart are like a land with no seeds or
plants. Whatever seed one casts therein, it will take root.[^24]

For example, the character of Imam ‘Ali blossomed as a result of being
instructed by the Prophet. Although Imam ‘Ali was not a normal child
physically or psychologically, and he had special merits in himself, yet
one should not ignore the special care that the Prophet took of him.

An effect of proper instruction of a child is that he will be brave.
This can well be seen in the case of Imam Husayn.

Ibn Shahab says, “On a Friday, the second Muslim caliph was at the
pulpit in the mosque. Imam Husayn, who was only a little child, entered
the mosque and said, ‘O ‘Umar, come down from my grandfather’s pulpit!’
‘Umar cried: ‘You have spoken the truth. This belongs to your
grandfather. Wait nephew!’ Imam Husayn grasped ‘Umar’s clothes and
tugged at them, saying, ‘Come down from my grandfather’s pulpit.’ ‘Umar
was forced to stop his speech. He descended the pulpit and began
praying. After the prayer, ‘Umar sent someone to fetch Imam Husayn. When
he arrived, ‘Umar asked him, ‘Nephew, who told you to do this to me?’
‘No one.’ replied Imam Husayn. Imam Husayn repeated this three times
even though he had not yet come of age.”[^25]

It has been quoted about Imam Jawad, that after Imam Ridha passed away,
Ma‘mun, the Caliph at the time, came to Baghdad. One day, he went
hunting. On his way, he reached a place where some children were
playing. Imam Jawad, Imam Ridha’s son, who was 11 years old at that
time, was among the children. When Ma‘mun and his company arrived there,
all the children ran away except Imam Jawad. When the Caliph approached,
he looked at him and was strongly attracted to his appearance. He
stopped and asked, “Why didn’t you run away along with the other
children?”

Imam Jawad responded immediately, “O Caliph of the Muslims, the way was
not so narrow that I should widen it for the Caliph to pass by running
off. I haven’t done anything wrong that I should try to run away. I am
optimistic about the Caliph and think that he will not harm the
innocent. This was the reason why I did not leave.” Ma‘mun was surprised
by his logical reply and his attractive appearance and asked, “What is
your name?” “Muhammad,” he answered. “Whose son are you?” Ma‘mun asked.
He replied, “‘Ali ibn Musa ar-Ridha.”[^26]

Chapter Two: Affection
----------------------

The Prophet:
*“Love children and be kind to them.”*

### Affection for Children

As a child needs food and water, he also needs to be caressed and to be
treated with love and affection which is the best food for a child’s
psyche. Children love to be kissed and hugged. The one, who from early
childhood receives an adequate amount of love from his parents, is
likely to have a pleasant disposition.

In many of the narrations of our religious leaders, affection for
children is expressed and advised in various forms, some of which are as
follows:

In the Sermon of Sha‘baniyyah, while outlining various duties, the
Prophet advised: “Respect your elderly and be kind towards
children.[^27]

The Prophet is quoted elsewhere as saying, “He who does not have
affection for children and does not respect the elderly is not one of
us.”[^28]

According to a narration, the Prophet also said, “Love the children and
be kind to them.”[^29]

Just before his martyrdom, ‘Ali thus advised, “In your family, be kind
to children and respect the elderly.”[^30]

In another account, he said to his followers, “The child must follow the
elderly in his behavior and the elderly must be kind to children. Be
careful not to behave like the oppressors of the Age of Ignorance.[^31]

Imam Sadiq said, “A man who has much affection for his child will
receive special mercy and attention from God.”[^32]

### The Prophet’s Affection for Children

‘Ali said, “When I was a little child, the Prophet would sit me on his
lap, hug me and sometimes let me sleep in his bed. He would kindly put
his face on mine and let me smell his fragrant body.”[^33]

Yes, a child needs to be caressed. He should be stroked gently and
lovingly on the head and looked at with affection. Looking at a child
warmly and kindly will make him happy.[^34]

The Prophet was so kind to children that it was said that on the
occasion of his trip to Ta’if, the Prophet did not react to the children
who threw stones at him. Rather, it was ‘Ali who chased them away.[^35]

When the Prophet saw the children of the Helpers, he would stroke their
heads, give them *salams* and pray for them.[^36]

Anas ibn Malik said: I saw no one kinder to his family than the
Prophet.[^37]

Every day, he would caress his children and grandchildren on the
head[^38]. Kindness and affection for children were characteristics of
the Prophet.[^39]

One day, the Prophet and his companions were passing by a place where
children were playing. The Prophet sat next to one of them, kissed him
on the forehead and treated him kindly. Someone asked the Prophet about
the reason for his behavior and he said, “One day, I saw this child play
with my child Husayn. He took earth from under Husayn’s feet and rubbed
it on his face. Therefore, since he is a friend of Husayn’s, I like him
too. Gabriel told me that this child would be one of the companions of
Husayn in Karbala.”[^40]

Imam Sadiq said, “Musa ibn ‘Imran asked in his prayer, ‘O God, what
deeds are the best ones to Thee?’ It was revealed to him, ‘Friendship
with children is the best of all deeds to me, as children are
god-fearing in essence and love me. When a child dies, I will mercifully
make him enter Paradise.’”[^41]

However, one should not show excessive affection for children as this
will be harmful. There are many Islamic narrations which forbid such
excess.

### The Prophet’s Affection for Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn

The prophet had much affection for his children, Imam Hasan and Imam
Husayn. Some examples of this fact as verified in various documents are
listed below:

Sunni books quote ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar as saying, “The Prophet said,
‘Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn are my sweet-smelling flowers in the
world.”[^42]

Anas ibn Malik is quoted as saying, “The Prophet was asked, ‘Which
member of your family do you like the most?’ The Prophet said, ‘I like
Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn more than the others.’”[^43]

In another account, Sa‘id ibn Rashid says, “Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn
ran towards the Prophet. He embraced them and said, ‘These two are my
sweet-smelling flowers in the world.’”[^44]

Imam Hasan said, “The Prophet told me, ‘O my child, you are like part of
my body, good for those who love you and your children and woe to the
one who kills you.”[^45]

The Prophet’s affection for Husayn was so much that he could not bear
his crying.

Yazid ibn Abu Ziyad said, “The Prophet left ‘Aishah’s house and passed
by Fatimah’s house. He heard Husayn crying and said to Fatimah, ‘Do you
not know that Husayn’s crying hurts me?’”[^46]

### The Prophet Prayed for Children

The Muslims would bring their children to the Prophet and ask him to
pray for them.

Jamarah, ‘Abdullah’s daughter, quotes a girl as saying, “My father took
me to the Prophet and asked him to pray for me. The Prophet sat me on
his lap, put his hand on my head and prayed for me.”[^47]

### Tolerating Children

Umm al-Fadhl, ‘Abbas ibn ‘Abd al-Mutallib’s wife, who was Imam Husayn’s
nanny, says, “One day, when Husayn was still a nursing baby, the Prophet
took him from me and hugged him. The baby wet the Prophet’s clothes. I
took the baby back hastily and he began crying. The Prophet told me, ‘Do
not rush! My clothes can be cleaned with water, but what can remove the
memory of pain from the heart of my child Husayn?’”[^48]

It has been narrated that, when a child was taken to the Prophet either
for prayers or to be named, the Prophet would open his arms to take the
child and put the child on his lap. Sometimes the child would wet the
Prophet’s clothes and those present would scold the child and would
treat him harshly in order to stop him from urinating. The Prophet would
stop them and say, “Do not stop a child from urinating by being harsh.”
Then he would allow the child finish.

When the praying and naming ceremony was finished, the child’s relatives
would happily take their child and the Prophet would not be the least
bit upset with the child for wetting him. After the relatives left, the
Prophet would wash his clothes.[^49]

### The Prophet’s Gifts to Children

One of the practices of the Prophet towards children was giving gifts to
them.

‘Aishah reported, “Najashi, the king of Abyssinia, sent a golden ring to
the Prophet, which had been made in Abyssinia. The Prophet called
Umamah, the daughter of Abu al-‘AS (the Prophet’s stepdaughter) and
said, ‘My dear little daughter, adorn yourself with this gift.’”[^50]

There is a story quoted from ‘Aishah: “A gold necklace was brought to
the Prophet as a present. All the wives of the Prophet were present and
Umamah the daughter of Abu al-‘As, who was a child, was playing in the
house. The Prophet showed the necklace and asked, ‘What do you think of
this?’ All of us looked at it and said, ‘We have never seen anything
more beautiful than this!’ The Prophet said, ‘Give it to me.’ It seemed
as if everywhere around me became dark. I was deathly afraid that he
might put it around someone else’s neck and everyone else thought the
same. All of us were silent until Umamah came to the Prophet and the
Prophet put it around her neck and left.”[^51]

It was reported that an Arab man came to the Prophet and said, “O
Prophet, I have hunted a fawn, which I present to you for your children,
Hasan and Husayn.” The Prophet accepted the present and prayed for the
hunter. Then he gave the fawn to Imam Hasan. He took it and showed it to
his mother, Fatimah. Imam Hasan was very happy with this gift and he
would play with the fawn.[^52]

### The Way the Prophet Treated the Children of Martyrs

Bashir, son of ‘Aqriyah ibn Jahni, says, “On the day of the Battle of
Uhud, I asked the Prophet, ‘How was my father martyred?’ The Prophet
said, ‘He was martyred in God’s way, may God’s mercy be upon him.’ I
cried. The Prophet hugged me, stroked my head and put me on his steed
and said, ‘Do you not like me to be like your father?’[^53]

In the month of Jumadi al-Awwal of the 7th year after the Hijra, the
battle of *Mawtah* occurred, in which three of the commanders of Islam
namely, Zayd ibn Harithah, Ja‘far ibn Abu Ṭalib and ‘Abdullah ibn
Rawahah were killed. The army returned to Madinah.[^54] The Prophet and
the Muslims went to welcome them, chanting hymns. The Prophet was riding
on an animal. He said, “Take the children for a ride. Give Ja‘far’s
child to me.” They brought ‘Ubayd Allah, son of Ja‘far ibn Abu Ṭalib.
The Prophet took him and put him to ride in front of himself.[^55]

Ibn Hisham wrote: “Asma’, the daughter of ‘Umays, the wife of ‘Abdullah
ibn Ja‘far said, ‘The day when Ja‘far was martyred in the battle of
Mu’tah, the Prophet came to our house. I had just finished the housework
and grooming the children. The Prophet told me, ‘Bring me Ja‘far’s
children.’ I took the children to him. He embraced them and began
caressing them while shedding tears.

I asked, ‘O Prophet, why do you cry? Has there been any news of Ja‘far
and his companions?’ The Prophet said, ‘Yes, they were martyred
today.’”[^56]

Other children were also not deprived of this kind and fatherly attitude
by the Prophet. It has been told that the Prophet would embrace the
children and would carry some of them on his shoulders and back. (He
told his companions, “Embrace the children and put them on your
shoulders.”) The children loved such displays of kindness and would be
endlessly happy and would never forget such sweet memories. After a
while, they would get together to recount the event for each other. Some
would proudly say, “The Prophet took me on his back.” And another would
say, “The Prophet ordered his companion to take you on his back.”[^57]

### The Way the Prophet Treated his Children during Prayer

Shaddad ibn Had said, “The Prophet had one of his two children, either
Hasan or Husayn, with him during prayer. He stood in front of the rows
and had his child stand on his right side. He lengthened his
prostration.”

The narrator quoted from his father, “I raised my head and saw the
Prophet with the child sitting on his back. I returned to my
prostration. When the prayer was finished, the people said to the
Prophet, ‘The prostration was so long in today’s prayer. Has there been
an order to you about this or has there been a revelation to you?’ The
Prophet said, ‘None of these. Rather, my son was sitting on my back and
I did not want to bother him. I let him do what he wanted.’”[^58]

There is a narration by Abu Bakr, “I saw Hasan and Husayn while the
Prophet was saying his prayer. They jumped on his back. The Prophet held
them when he was standing up so as to let them smoothly stand on the
ground. He would put them on his lap and caress their heads and say,
‘These two boys are my two sweet-smelling flowers in this world.’”
According to another saying, the Prophet said, “A child is a
sweet-smelling flower and my sweet-smelling flowers are Hasan and
Husayn.”[^59]

In another narration, it is said that, “One day, the Prophet was saying
prayers with a group of Muslims. When the Prophet prostrated, Husayn,
who was a little child, mounted on the Prophet’s back and move his legs
as if urging his steed forward.

“When the Prophet wanted to sit up from prostration, he took him and put
him at his side. This continued to the end of the prayer.”

A Jew witnessed this event. After the prayer, he said to the Prophet,
“You treat children in a way we have never done before.”

The Prophet said, “If you believed in God and his messenger, you would
be kind to your children.” The Prophet’s kindness strongly impressed the
Jew and he converted to Islam.[^60]

Chapter Three: Kissing Children
-------------------------------

*“A child is a sweet smelling flower.”*
The Noble Prophet

When a parent kisses his child, such behavior strengthens the affection
between the parent and the child and it is the best way to quench a
child’s thirst for love. A kiss shows that parents are kind to their
children. It feeds the seedling of love in the child’s soul while it
makes him aware of his parents’ love for him and it stimulates the
creation of a new force within the child.

The Prophet also kissed children. Interestingly, his love for children
was publicly displayed. This has two advantages:

Firstly, a child’s personality is radically reinforced by being
respected in public.

Secondly, the Prophet thus taught the people how to strengthen and
encourage their children.

Islam often emphasizes kissing children.

The Prophet said, “One who kisses his child does a pious deed and one
who makes his child happy will be made happy by God on the day of
Resurrection.[^61]

‘Aishah said, “A man came to the Prophet and said, ‘Do you kiss
children? I have never done so!’ The Prophet responded: ‘What can I do
when God has taken his mercy from your heart?’”[^62]

It has also been reported that a man came to the Prophet and said, “I
have never kissed a child!” Later the Prophet said, “I think this man is
one who will end up in the fire of hell.”[^63]

There is another saying that, “The Prophet kissed Hasan and Husayn.
Aqra‘ bin Habis said, ‘I have ten children, none of whom I have kissed.’
The Prophet turned to him and said: ‘What can I do when God has taken
his mercy from you?!’[^64]”

‘Ali said, “Kiss your children because there is a rank and position for
you in every kiss you give.”[^65]

Imam Sadiq said, “Kiss your children often because every time you kiss
them, God gives you a rank.”[^66]

Ibn ‘Abbas reported: “I was with the Prophet. Ibrahim, his son, was on
his left knee and Imam Husayn was on his right. The Prophet sometimes
kissed Ibrahim and sometimes Husayn.”[^67]

### Justice for Children

One thing that parents have to consider about their children is
establishing justice among them. Children should taste the flavor of and
feel justice from the very beginning, become familiar with it and
consider it as a necessity for the society and for their lives, while
avoiding any injustice and oppression. Therefore, the smallest matter
should be treated with importance and administered with justice.

‘Ali said, “The Prophet saw a man with two children, one of whom he
kissed and the other he did not. The Prophet said, ‘Why do you not treat
them with justice?’”[^68]

Abu Sa‘id Khidri said, “One day, the Prophet went to his daughter’s
house.

‘Ali was sleeping in bed and the children Hasan and Husayn were beside
him. The children asked for water. The Prophet fetched them water.
Husayn came forward first. The Prophet said, ‘Hasan asked for water
first.’ Fatimah asked, ‘Do you like Hasan more?’ The Prophet answered,
‘Both are equal to me [but justice demands that each one takes his turn
to drink water].’”[^69]

Anas said, “A man was sitting with the Prophet. The man’s son entered
the room. The father kissed him and sat him on his lap. Then the man’s
daughter came and [without kissing her], he sat her next to himself. The
Prophet said, ‘Why did you not treat them with justice?’”[^70]

‘Ali said, “Do justice to your children as you yourself wish to be
treated with justice.”[^71]

### The Prophet Kissed Fatimah

The Prophet loved his daughter Fatimah and still kissed her even when
she had a husband and children.

Aban ibn Taghlab said, “The Prophet often kissed his daughter
Fatimah.”[^72]

Imam Baqir and Imam Sadiq have said, “The Prophet kissed Fatimah at
night, when she was asleep and put his face on her chest and prayer for
her.[^73]

‘Aishah said, “The Prophet once kissed Fatimah on the neck. I told him,
‘O Prophet, you treat Fatimah in a way that you do not treat others.’
The Prophet said, ‘O ‘Aishah, whenever I take interest in the Paradise,
I kiss her on the neck.’”[^74]

### When Should One Stop Kissing Children?

One may ask, at what age should one stop kissing children. To answer
this, we have referred to the words of the religious leaders.

Islam pays special attention to the ages of 6 to 10 in the upbringing of
children and gives special instructions to its followers while taking
into consideration the divine laws and the physical and spiritual
conditions of children. Therefore, with practical applications, it has
controlled the sexual urges of children so as to prevent the development
of immoral practices in them.

Islam keeps children 6 years of age or older away from any sexual
provocation and instructs parents to provide a favorable environment in
order to control their children’s sexual tendencies.

The Prophet said, “A 6-year-old girl should not be kissed by a
6-year-old boy and women should avoid kissing boys 6 to 7 years of
age.”[^75]

### The Prophet Kissed Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn

In addition to kissing his daughter, the Prophet loved her children
Imams Hasan and Husayn and kissed them.

Abu Hurayrah said, “The Prophet was kissing Hasan and Husayn when one of
the Helpers said, ‘I have ten children none of whom I have ever kissed.’
The Prophet responded, ‘One who shows no mercy will be shown no
mercy.’”[^76]

Salman Farsi (Salman the Persian) said, “I came to the Prophet and saw
that he had put Husayn on his lap and was kissing him on the forehead
and lips.”[^77]

Ibn Abu ad-Dunya’ said, “Zayd ibn Arqam saw in ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziad’s
court that the latter was hitting the lips of Imam Husayn’s severed head
with his cane.

“Zayd ibn Arqam said to ‘Ubayd Allah, ‘Take away your cane. I swear by
Allah that I saw the Prophet kiss these two lips many times.’ He said
this and he began to cry. ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad replied, ‘May God make
you cry. If you were not a senile old man, I would order you to be
beheaded!’”[^78]

Zamakhshari said, “The Prophet embraced Hasan and kissed him. Then he
put him on his knee and said, ‘My meekness, patience and dignity I have
given to him.’ Then he embraced Husayn, kissed him, put him on his left
knee and said, “I have given him my bravery, generosity and
magnanimity.’”[^79]

Chapter Four: Playing with Children
-----------------------------------

*“Anyone with whom there is a child shall treat him as a child.”*
The Noble Prophet

One thing that affects a child’s personality is adult participation in
children’s games. A child tends to imitate adult behavior firstly
because of his physical weakness and secondly because of the force and
power he sees in adults and the love that he naturally has for growth
and development.

When parents descend to the level of children and take part in their
games, children will indeed be happy, excited and feel inside that what
they do is very important.

Therefore, it is very important to play with children as part of their
upbringing. This is considered by psychologists to be a parental duty.

T.H. Morris wrote in *Lessons for Parents*, “Be friends with your
children and play with them. Tell them stories and have friendly chats
with them. Parents should especially know that they have to come to the
same level as that of children and speak to them in the language they
understand”[^80]

Another psychologist stated, “It is necessary for the father to take
part in his children’s entertainment and games. This mutual
understanding seems necessary. Indeed, there are different times, places
and chapters in life. A father who takes part in his children’s games
indeed does not spend much time for this, but he is aware of the great
importance for the child of the fact that the father descends to a
child’s level to take part in children’s games, however little the time
may be that the father spends for this.”[^81]

### The Playing Instinct in Children

One of the instincts that God has endowed children with is the interest
in playing. Children run, jump, are sometimes entertained by toys and
take pleasure in moving them around. Although such movements may appear
useless in the beginning, they are necessary for the development of
their tender bodies and souls and improve their abilities of thought and
innovation. This is perhaps one of the reasons why Islamic narrations
advise playing with children.

Playing with children is a practice that is important in the development
of independence of will and the stimulation of creativity and
innovation. When a child makes a structure with his toys, his thought
mechanism functions like that of a construction engineer and he takes
pleasure in his successes. When he faces a problem in his task, he
thinks of a solution. As a result, all his actions strongly affect his
personality.

The Prophet said, “One who has a child with him has to treat him like a
child.”[^82]

The Prophet also said, “God’s mercy be upon the father who helps his
child for good purposes, treats him well, is his friend and educates him
well.”[^83]

‘Ali said: “Let your child be free, until the age of 7, to play.”[^84]

Imam Sadiq said, “The child plays in the first seven years of his life,
spends his time learning in the second seven years and learns about
religious permissions and prohibitions in the third seven years.”[^85]

‘Ali also said, “One who has a child has to behave in a childlike manner
in training his child.”[^86]

### The Prophet Played with Children

The Prophet played with his children, Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn. There
are many narrations in this respect, some examples of which are provided
below.

It has been reported that the Prophet caressed his children and his
grandchildren on the head lovingly every morning and that he played with
Husayn.[^87]

Ya‘la ibn Marrah said, “The Prophet had been invited to lunch. We were
with him, when all of a sudden we saw Hasan playing in the alley. The
Prophet saw him and ran towards him with arms outstretched to catch him.
However, the child ran this way and that, escaping from the Prophet and
making him laugh. Then the Prophet caught Hasan. He put one hand under
his chin and the other on his head. He brought his face close to the
child’s and kissed him, saying, ‘Hasan is a part of me and I am a part
of him. God will love those who love him.’”[^88]

Many narrations report that this incident was about Imam Husayn [rather
than Imam Hasan].[^89]

Imam Sadiq said, “One day, Imam Husayn was sitting on the Prophet’s lap
and the Prophet was playing with him and laughing. ‘Aishah said, ‘O
Prophet, you play so much with this child.’ The Prophet said, ‘O no, how
can I fail to love him when he is the fruit of my heart and the apple of
my eyes?!’”[^90]

Jubair ibn ‘Abdullah said, “The Prophet played with the children of his
companions and comrades and let them sit beside him.”[^91]

Anas ibn Malik said, “The Prophet had the best manners among the people.
I had a little brother who had just been weaned and of whom I took care.
His nickname was Abu ‘Umayr. When the Prophet saw him, he would say,
‘See what weaning has done to you!’ and he would begin playing with
him.’”[^92]

There is a saying that, “The Prophet would call the children of ‘Abbas.
They were young and still loved to play. Then he would tell them, ‘He
who comes to me the fastest will be rewarded.’ The children would race
towards the Prophet. He would embrace and kiss them.[^93] Sometimes, he
would give them a ride on his back and he would caress them on the
head.”[^94]

### Giving a Ride

The Prophet would give rides to the children, seating them in front of
or behind himself while riding. This had a very positive psychological
effect on the children as they would consider this to be a very valuable
and an unforgettable experience.

It is worth noting that the Prophet would sometimes carry children on
his back and sometimes on his shoulders. Examples of these are provided
in this chapter.

Jabir, a companion of the Prophet, said, “I came to the Prophet while
Hasan and Husayn were on his back. The Prophet was walking on hands and
feet and saying, ‘You are having a good ride and you are good
riders!’”[^95]

Ibn Mas‘ud says, “The Prophet was carrying Hasan and Husayn on his back,
with Hasan on his right and Husayn on his left side while saying, “You
are having a good ride and you are good riders. Your dad is better than
you.’”[^96]

### The Prophet Let Children Ride on His Steed

The Prophet treated the children of his companions just like his own and
he would let them ride on his steed. Some examples of this are as
follows:

‘Abdullah, the son of Ja‘far ibn Abu Talib, said: “One day, the Prophet
let me ride behind him and told me something that I will not tell
anyone.”[^97]

It has been said that whenever the Prophet returned from a trip and saw
children, he would stop and order the others to pick the children up and
he would let one of them ride in front of him and another behind him.
After a while, the children would say to each other, “The Prophet let me
ride in front but you rode behind.” Others would say, “The Prophet
ordered his companions to let you ride behind them.”[^98]

Fudayl ibn Yasar said: “I heard Imam Baqir say, ‘The Prophet was going
somewhere when he saw Fadhl ibn ‘Abbas. He told his companions, ‘Let
this child ride behind me.’ They put the child behind the Prophet and he
was very careful with him.”[^99]

‘Abdullah, the son of Ja‘far said: “I was with Qutham and ‘Ubayd Allah,
the children of ‘Abbas and we were playing. The Prophet passed by and
said, ‘Lift this child and let him ride.’ They lifted ‘Abdullah and put
him in front of the Prophet. Then the Prophet said, ‘Bring this child
too!’ They lifted Qutham and put him behind the Prophet.”[^100]

Certain things have been said about the way the Prophet carried children
on his shoulders:

1. He put the children on his shoulders in such a way that they faced
each other.

2. He put them on his shoulders in such a way that one’s back faced that
of the other.

3. He put one on his right shoulder and the other on his left shoulder.

4. He put one on his right shoulder, facing the front and the other on
his left shoulder, facing the back.[^101]

Chapter Five: Feeding, Greeting and Punishing Children
------------------------------------------------------

It has been said of the Prophet:
*“He would greet both children and adults.”*

One of the great requirements in the education of children is to
maintain justice among them. Therefore, parents with more than one child
should treat them with justice, fairness and equality and in practice,
include all of them so that none feels humiliated. This was how the
Prophet treated his children. In accordance with this, the following has
been cited.

‘Ali said, “The Prophet came to our house while Hasan, Husayn and I were
sleeping under a blanket. Hasan asked for water. The Prophet rose and
fetched a dish of water. At the same time, Husayn woke up and asked for
water, but the Prophet did not give him water first.

Fatimah said, “Apparently you love Hasan more than Husayn.” The Prophet
said, “Hasan asked for water before Husayn did. You, Hasan and Husayn
and this one who is sleeping [i.e. ‘Ali] and I will be in the same place
on the Resurrection Day.”[^102]

The Prophet also fed his children. This shows how fully he paid
attention to his children’s needs.

Salman said, “I entered the Prophet’s house. Hasan and Husayn were
eating food with him. The Prophet would put some food in Hasan’s mouth
and some in Husayn's mouth. When they had finished eating, the Prophet
put Hasan on his shoulder and Husayn on his lap. Then he faced me and
said, ‘O Salman, do you like them?’ I said, ‘O Prophet, how can I not
like them while I see their position and value to you?’”[^103]

### Greeting Children

One of the good practices of the Prophet was greeting children. Even
though they are young, playful and free from responsibilities, they are
very clever and well understand the meaning of kindness and love.

This practice of the Prophet contradicts the view of some short-sighted
ignorant people, who have no place for children and consider them to be
separate from themselves and of no importance. However, in Islam, it has
been advised that they are worthy of the same respect as an adult. Yes,
the Prophet respected children and acknowledged their presence in the
society. Concerning greeting children, there is an infinite number of
narrations.

Anas ibn Malik said, “The Prophet passed by some little children,
greeted them and gave them food.”[^104]

He says in another narration, “While we were children, the Prophet came
to us and greeted us.”[^105]

Imam Baqir said, “The Prophet said, ‘There are five things that I will
not give up to the moment of my death. One of these is greeting
children.’”[^106]

There is another saying that, “The Prophet greeted the people, young and
old alike.[^107] He was the first one to greet others, even
children.[^108] Whomever he saw, he would greet first and shake his
hands.[^109]”

In another saying, he [the Prophet] said, “I am very careful about
greeting children, so as to make it a tradition among Muslims and to
make it a practice for all.”[^110]

### Did the Prophet Punish Children?

Did the Prophet punish children physically as part of their training?

A careful study of the Prophet’s practice reveals that he never punished
children physically. Punishment of some sort is inevitable. One can
hardly find a child who has never been punished or faced strict behavior
during his upbringing. What is to be discussed here is whether or not
one can punish a child physically.

A study of Islamic traditions and the behavior of the religious leaders
reveals that one should never punish children physically. In today’s
world, beating a child or harming him for purposes of behavioral
correction is deemed to be scientifically and pedagogically incorrect
and almost all countries prevent such beating and physical punishment.

However, some people who are ignorant and uninformed about the practice
of the leaders of Islam have been negligent and do not pay attention to
the traditions concerning the beating of children.

Imam Kazim explicitly told a man who was complaining about his child,
“Do not beat your child, simply refuse to talk to him in order to punish
him. However, be careful not to refuse to talk to him for a long period
of time and reconcile with him as soon as possible.[^111]

The Prophet of Islam never punished his children physically and would
strongly oppose anyone who did so. Many examples of this are recorded in
Islamic history.

Abu Mas‘ud Ansari said: “I had a slave whom I beat. I heard a voice from
behind me, saying, ‘Abu Mas‘ud, Allah has given you power over him [has
made him your slave].’ I turned around and saw the Prophet.”

“I said to the Prophet, ‘I freed him for God.’ The Prophet replied, ‘If
you had not done this, the flames of the fire of hell would have
engulfed you.’”[^112]

Imam Sadiq said, “The Prophet saw a man of the Bani Fahad [tribe], who
was beating his slave and the slave was crying aloud, ‘O God, help me!’
However, the man was not paying attention. When the slave saw the
Prophet, he said to himself, ‘I will get help from him [the Prophet].
The master desisted from beating him.’

“The Prophet told the master, ‘Fear God, stop beating him! Forgive him
for God.’ Yet the man refused to free him. The Prophet said, ‘Give him
away for Muhammad, but it is better to free someone for God than for
Muhammad.’”

“The man said, ‘I freed the slave for God.’ The Prophet said, ‘I swear
by God who chose me as a prophet that if you had refused to free him,
the heat of the fire of hell would embrace you.’”[^113]

A study of history reveals that the Prophet did not punish even
delinquent children and he had a kind attitude towards them. It has been
reported that when the army of Islam left for the Battle of Uhud, there
were children among them who were eager to take part in the war. The
Prophet pitied them and made them return. Among them was a child by the
name of Rafi‘ ibn Khadij. The Prophet was told that the child was a good
bowman. The Prophet therefore gave him permission to accompany the army.

There was another child who cried out that he was stronger than Rafi‘.
The Prophet told them to wrestle. Rafi‘ was defeated. Then the Prophet
allowed them both to take part in the war.[^114]

Physical punishment should never be considered as a determining factor
in the upbringing of children. Particularly, if this practice continues
for a long time, it could harm the child’s personality while it ceases
to be effective. In addition, the child could consider it to be normal
practice, do nothing to avoid it and not feel inhibited when subjected
to it.

Imam ‘Ali said: “Wise people accept advice through good manners and
training. It is the beasts who are corrected by flogging”.[^115]

Abstaining from the use of physical punishment is so important that
there have been orders concerning those under the age of adulthood who
violate the law. In such cases they shall not be subject to flogging;
rather, they shall receive correction.[^116]

Therefore, there is no trace in the history of the Prophet of Islam or
the other leaders of the religion of the need to beat children as part
of their training. They were always kind friends and loving leaders who
were sympathetic to children. This method of conduct should open the way
for the followers of Islam in various times and places as the religion
of Islam is not for a particular time, place, sect or group. Rather, it
is for all times and places and for all humanity.

[^1]: Ba Tarbiyat-e Maktabi Ashna Shavim [Let’s Get Familiar with
Scholastic Upbringing], PP.77-78.

[^2]: Rawan-Shenasi-ye kudak [Child Psychology], P.77.

[^3]: Rah va Rasm-e Zendegi [Ways of Life], P.118.

[^4]: Ghurar al-Hikam, P.697.

[^5]: Kudak az Nazar-e Wirathat va Tarbiyyat [The Child in terms of
Heredity and Upbringing], PP.223-4.

[^6]: Ahzab [The Confederates], 21.

[^7]: Al-Mahajjah al-Bayda’, Vol.3, P.366.

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.35, P.350; al-Bidayah wan-Nahayah, Vol.8,
P.37.

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.104, P.95, h.44.

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.295, P.72; Amali Saduq, P.252.

[^11]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Vol.2, P.626; Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, Vol.5,
P.126, the old print.

[^12]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, Vol.5, P.126.

[^13]: ‘Usul al-Kafi, Vol.6, P.50.

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.15, P.376.

[^15]: Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, Vol.9, P.286.

[^16]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.43, P.285, h.51; Manaqib ibn Shahr Ashub,
Vol.3, P.388.

[^17]: As-Sirah al-Halabiyyah, Vol.3, P.48.

[^18]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.43, P.25, h 22.

[^19]: Qurb al-Asnad, P.31.

[^20]: Surah ar-Ra‘d, 13:28.

[^21]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, Vol.2, P.3.

[^22]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Vol.1, P.171.

[^23]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, Tabarsi, P.115.

[^24]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Fayd, Letter Vol. 31, P.903.

[^25]: Tarikh al-Madinah al-Munawwarah, Vol. 3, P.799.

[^26]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.50, P.91; Kashf al-Ghummah.

[^27]: ‘Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 1, P.295; Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 96,
P.356; Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, Vol. 5, P.126.

[^28]: Majmu‘ah al-Warram, Vol. 1, P.34; al Mahajjah al-Bayda’, Vol. 3,
P.365.

[^29]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, Vol. 5, P.126; Man la yahdiruh al-Faqih, Vol.
3, P.311; Furu‘ al-Kafi, Vol. 6, P.49; Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 93, P.104.

[^30]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 42, P.203; Amali Mufid, P129.

[^31]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Fayd, P.531.

[^32]: Makarim al-Akhlaq by Ṭabarsi, P.115.

[^33]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Mulla Fathullah’s version, P.406.

[^34]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Vol. 2, P.626; Makarim al-Akhlaq, P.113.

[^35]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.20, P.52 & 67; Qummi’s Exegesis, Vol.1,
P.115.

[^36]: Sharaf an-Nabi, Khargushi, Vol.1, P.115.

[^37]: Sirah Dahlan on the margins of Sirah Halabiyyah, Vol.3, P.252;
as- al-Sirah an-Nabawiyyah, ibn Kathir, Vol.4, P.612.

[^38]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.104, P.99; ‘Iddah ad-Da‘i, P.61.

[^39]: Al Mahajjah al-Bayda’, Vol.3, P.366.

[^40]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.97, PP.104 & 105.

[^41]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.44, P.242, h.36.

[^42]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol.10, P.595, quoting Sunni documents.

[^43]: Ibid, PP.655, quoting various documents.

[^44]: Ibid, PP.609, 621, 619, 623, quoting a large number of documents.

[^45]: Appendices to Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol. 11, P.316.

[^46]: Appendices to Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol. 11, PP.311-314.

[^47]: Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, Vol.9 , P.266.

[^48]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 80, P.104; al-Lahuf, ibn Tawus, P.12;
Hadiyyah al-Ahbab, P.176.

[^49]: Ma‘ani al-Akhbar, P. 211; Makarim al-Akhlaq, P. 115; Bihar
al-Anwar, Vol. 16, P. 240.

[^50]: Sunan ibn Majah, Vol. 2, P. 1303.

[^51]: Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, Vol. 9 , P. 254.

[^52]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43 , P. 312.

[^53]: Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, Vol. 8 , P. 161.

[^54]: Sirah ibn Hisham, Vol. 2, P. 381.

[^55]: Musnad Ahmad Hanbal, Vol.1, P.334; Sirah Muslim, Vol.15 , P.196;
as- Sirah al-Halabiyyah, Vol.3, , P.69.

[^56]: Sirah ibn Hisham, Vol.2, P.252-Translator.

[^57]: Al-Mahajjah al-Baydha’, Vol.3, P.366.

[^58]: Mustadrak Hakim, Vol.3, P.165; Musnad Ahmad Hanbal, Vol.3, P.693.

[^59]: Maqtal al-Husayn Khwarazmi, P.130; al-Irshad Mufid, Vol.2, P.25;
appendices to Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol.10, P.615 & Vol.11, P.50.

[^60]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.43, P.294-296.

[^61]: Kafi, Vol.6, P.49; Makarim al-Akhlaq, P.113; Bihar al-Anwar,
Vol.23, P.113.

[^62]: Sahih Bukhari, Vol.8, P.9.

[^63]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.104, P.99; Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, Vol.15, P.202;
Kafi, Vol.6, P.50.

[^64]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.104, P.93.

[^65]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘a, Vol.15, P.126.

[^66]: Ibid.

[^67]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘a, Vol.43, P.161 & Vol.22, P./153; Manaqib ibn
Shahr Ashub, Vol.3, P.234.

[^68]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.104, P.97; Nawadir Ravandi, P.6.

[^69]: Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, Vol.9, P.171.

[^70]: Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, Vol.8, P.158; Makarim al-Akhlaq, P.113.

[^71]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.104, P.92; h.16.

[^72]: Ibid, Vol.8, P.142.

[^73]: Ibid, Vol.43, PP.42-55.

[^74]: Dhakha’ir al-‘Uqba, P.36; Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, P.260.

[^75]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, P.115.

[^76]: Mustadrak al-Hakim, Vol.3, P.170; al-‘Adab al-Mufrad, Bukhari,
P.34.

[^77]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.36, P.241; Kamal ad-Din wa Tamam an-Ni’mah,
P.152; al-Khisal, Vol.2, P.76; Kifayah al-Athar, P.7.

[^78]: As-Sawa‘iq al-Muhriqah, P.196; Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol.10, P.746.

[^79]: Rabi‘ al-Abrar, P.513.

[^80]: We and Our Children, P.45.

[^81]: Ibid, P.22.

[^82]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, Vol.15, P.203; Man la yahduruh al-Faqih,
Vol.3, P.312; Kanz al-‘Ummal, Sermon 45413.

[^83]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Vol.2, P.626.

[^84]: Al-kafi, Vol.6, P.47.

[^85]: Ibid.

[^86]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, Vol.5, P.126.

[^87]: Sunan an-Nabi, Rahmat-e ‘lamiyan [Blessing of the World
Settlers], Vol.658; Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.43, P.285.

[^88]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.43, P.306.

[^89]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Vol.2, P.626; Sahih Tirmidhi, Vol.5, P.615;
Mustadrak al-Hakim, Vol.2, P.177.

[^90]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.44, P.260; Kamil az-Ziarah, P.68; Hayat
al-Hayawan, Vol.1, P.111.

[^91]: Sharaf an-Nabi by Khargushi, P.102; Nihayah al-Mas’ul fi Riwayah
ar-Rasul, Vol.1, P.340.

[^92]: Sahih Bukhari, Vol.8, P.37 & 55; Dala’il an-Nubuwwah by Beyhaqi,
P.154, tr. Damghani, quoted from Sahih Muslim.

[^93]: As-Sirah al-Halabiyyah, Vol.3, P.340; Usd al-Ghabah, Vol.5,
P.210; Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, Vol.9, P.285.

[^94]: Majma‘az-Zawa’id, Vol.9, P.285; Musnad Ahmad, Vol.1, P.337.

[^95]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol.10, P.714; Bihar al-Anwar, 43/285; Sunan
Nisa’i, Vol.2, P.229; Mustadrak al-Hakim, Vol.3, P.166; Majma‘a
az-Zawa’id, Vol.9, P.182.

[^96]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.43, P.286.

[^97]: Masnad Ahmad Hanbal, Vol.1, P.335; Sahih Muslim, Vol.15, P.197.

[^98]: Al-Muhajjah al-Baydha’, Vol.3, P.366.

[^99]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.77, P.135; Amali al-Saduq, Vol.2, P.287.

[^100]: Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, Vol.9, P.285; Musnad Ahmad, Vol.1, P.337.

[^101]: Manaqib ibn Shahr Ashub, Vol.3, P.387; Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.43,
P.285.

[^102]: Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, Vol.9, P.169.

[^103]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.36, P.304, h.143; Kifayah al-Athar, P.7.

[^104]: Sunan ibn Majah, Vol.2, P.2220.

[^105]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, PP.14,31; Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.16, P.229.

[^106]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Vol.2, P.96; Amali al-Saduq, P.44; ‘Uyun
Akhbar ar-Rida (‘a), P.235; Al-khisal, Vol.1, P.130, ‘Ilal ash-Shara’i,
P.54; Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.16, P.215, h.2.

[^107]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Vol.2, P.69.

[^108]: Rahmat-e ‘lamiyan, [Blessing of the World Settlers], P.663.

[^109]: Nihayah al-Mas’ul fi Riwayah al-Rasul, 1/341; Makarim al-Akhlaq,
Vol.1, P.23.

[^110]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, Vol.3, P.209.

[^111]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.104, P.99; h.74; ‘Iddah ad-Da‘i, P.61.

[^112]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.74, P.143, h.15.

[^113]: Ibid, h.15.

[^114]: Islam va Tarbiyyat-e Kudakan, [Islam and the Upbringing of
Children], Vol.1, P.224.

[^115]: Sharh Ghurar al-Hikam, Vol.1, P.10, h 81.

[^116]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Vol.3, P.223.


