Part 2: The Prophet’s Attitude Towards Youth
============================================

Youth is one of the valuable gifts of God and a great asset for the
happiness of human life.

Chapter One: The Life Force of Youth
------------------------------------

*“I advise you to be good to adolescents and youth.”*
The Noble Prophet

\*\*\*

In Part 1, the Prophet’s attitude towards children was briefly
introduced. In Part II, consideration will be given to the Prophet’s
attitude towards the youth. It is hoped that this may be a guideline for
Muslims and the society in general. Manpower is one of the greatest
assets of any country and the most important part of this asset is the
youth, for it is a force that can overcome the problems of life and
progress beyond the difficult and rough pathways.

If the farms are green and the big wheels of heavy industries are
functioning properly, if underground deposits are mined from the depths
of the earth, if there are grand palaces that ascend to the sky, if
cities are developed and the economic bases of countries flourish, if
the borders of countries are protected against foreign invasion and
there is complete security, all these are due to the effects of the
valuable activities of young people. These indefatigable forces are the
reason for hope among all nations.

One ends childhood by entering into the phase of youth, the phase of
personal responsibilities and social and public duties. Therefore, the
world today pays special attention to young people and they have gained
a special position in all affairs, including political, social,
economic, industrial and moral.

For the last fourteen centuries, the holy religion of Islam, within its
comprehensive, revivalist program, has paid special, unique attention to
the young generation. Islam makes provision for young people in all
material, spiritual, psychological, educational, moral, social, worldly
and otherworldly matters while other religions and cultures only
consider certain aspects of the world of the young.

### The Value of Youth

As was mentioned, in today’s world young people and their value is noted
by all nations and peoples and everywhere there is talk of the young
generation. Therefore, researchers, thinkers and writers have discussed
the subject of the young generation from various intellectual
perspectives.

The religious leaders have considered youth to be one of the valuable
blessings of God and a great asset for happiness in life. Muslims have
been reminded of this in various ways.

The Prophet said, “I advise you to do good to young people as they have
a tender heart that is keen to learn. God chose me as a prophet to make
people aware of the divine mercy and to warn them of his chastisement.
Young people accepted my words and pledged allegiance to me but the old
refused to do so and rose to oppose me.[^1]

‘Ali said, “There are two things whose size and price are unknown except
to one who has lost them: One is youth and the other, health.”[^2]

When Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah ibn Hasan rose up and got the people’s
allegiance, he went to Imam Sadiq and asked for his allegiance. The Imam
refused and reminded him of certain things, one of which was advice
about young people. The Imam said, “You have to keep young people close
and keep old people far away from yourself.”[^3]

This advice of Imam Sadiq shows the value and importance of young people
and calls attention to this great divine blessing. The Prophet told Abu
Dhar:

“Appreciate five things before you lose them. One is youth, which you
must learn to appreciate before you get old…”[^4]

### Attention to Youth

The true leaders of Islam have given valuable advice about the pure
spirit of young people and their interest in moral and humane
principles. They have constantly reminded teachers and guides to make
good use of this valuable investment through the proper training of the
young generation.

A man by the name of Abu Ja‘far Ahwal, who was a friend of Imam Sadiq,
spent some time promoting Shi‘ism and transmitting the teachings of the
Prophet’s family. One day, he came to Imam Sadiq. The Imam asked him,
“How did you find the people of Basrah in accepting the practice of the
Prophet’s Household and what was the pace at which they adopted Shi‘ite
beliefs?”

He answered, “A small number of them adopted the teachings of the
Prophet’s Household.” The Imam told him, “Focus your promotional
activities on the young people and concentrate your energies in guiding
them as they accept the truth faster and incline towards good things
sooner.”[^5]

Isma‘il, the son of Fadhl Hashimi, asked Imam Sadiq, “Why did Jacob,
delay in forgiving Joseph’s brothers who had thrown Joseph into the well
but Joseph himself forgave his brothers immediately and prayed for
them?”

Imam Sadiq said, “Because the hearts of the young people accept the
truth sooner than those of the old people.”[^6]

These two narrations show that young people love virtue and good and
naturally incline towards and are keen in the performance of gentlemanly
acts, speaking the truth, fulfilling promises, returning items that have
been entrusted to them, serving the people, devotion and other similar
virtues and they despise and turn away from undesirable characteristics.

### Some Points

According to religious leaders, youth is a great asset. If there are
those who seek happiness and want to make good use of this valuable
force, they have to pay full attention to some points:

1. Youth is one of the best, most valuable and fruitful opportunities in
one’s life.

2. A basic condition for success is using the strength of youthfulness
and putting it in action.

3. The happiness and misery of any person is based in his youth. He can
guarantee his happiness by making good use of his abilities and
opportunities.[^7]

### Questions about One’s Youth on the Day of Resurrection

The Prophet said, on the Day of Resurrection, no one can take a step
unless he answers the following questions:

First, for what did he live his life?

Second, how did he spend his youth?[^8]

These words of the Prophet well indicate how Islam has appreciated and
paid attention to the life force of youth. This valuable asset is so
important that one will be asked about it on the Day of Resurrection.

The worth of young people with moral virtues is like a flower with a
sweet perfume which, in addition to freshness, has natural beauty and a
pleasant smell. However, if youth is not accompanied by divine values,
it is like a thorn that will never be loved by others.

The Prophet said, “A faithful person has to use his abilities for his
own good and has to make use of this world for the afterworld and has to
make use of his youth before becoming old.”[^9]

He also said, “Every night, the divine angel tells the 20-year-old young
people to be hard-working and serious in order to achieve perfection and
happiness.”[^10]

Therefore, the period of youth is the period of individual
responsibility, awareness, preparedness and hard work. Those who do not
make use of this divine gift will be blamed.

God says,

***“Did not We grant a life long enough for him who reflected to reflect
therein?”***[^11]

Imam Sadiq said, “This verse blames the negligent young people who have
reached the age of eighteen and do not make use of their youth.”[^12]

Chapter Two: Young People are Attracted to Religion
---------------------------------------------------

*“If a faithful young person reads the Qur’an, the Qur’an will be mixed
with his flesh and blood and will affect all the members of his
body.”*
Imam Ja‘far Sadiq

Interest in religion is one of the intrinsic human inclinations that
emerge in young people as they mature and like other natural
inclinations, it urges them to make certain efforts.

Young people by nature are strongly interested in understanding
religious issues. Therefore, they openly accept discourses on religion
with love and interest. This opinion is held by many great thinkers and
educational psychologists.

John B. Cyzyl said, “According to tests that have been carried out,
generally the force of faith in religion begins at the age of
twelve.”[^13] According to most scientists, at the age of twelve, i.e.
the beginning of youth, another interest emerges in young people and
this is love of and interest in religion.

This tendency develops along with the other natural interests and
inclinations in young people and increases until it reaches its peak at
the age of sixteen.[^14] As a result, young people are troubled by the
wrongdoings and bad conduct of others and lament the deviations of
others while always seeking the development of moral virtues throughout
the world and attempting to promote true values.

### The Effect of Religious Teachings upon the Youth

The teaching of religious precepts and the development of faith and
moral virtues among young people have two great effects:

1. The intrinsic religious feelings in youth are thus satisfied.

2. The force of belief and religion controls the other natural and
instinctive feelings in young people and prevents them from going to
extremes or becoming rebellious. Consequently, they are saved and
protected against misfortune and misery.

It is important to note that Islam has developed programs for training
and for increasing faith and morals as essential aspects of the most
basic elements for the development of young people in harmony with their
intrinsic needs.

Therefore, when the desire to learn more about religion is aroused in
the youth and they become interested in learning religious precepts,
without wasting this opportunity, religious leaders must offer them
constructive religious programs and encourage them to learn the Qur’an,
religious precepts, ways of serving [God], ways of preventing violations
and concentrating on doing good.

Imam Sadiq said, “One who reads the Qur’an, if he is a faithful young
person, the Qur’an will become mixed with his flesh and blood and will
affect all the members of his body.”[^15]

He also said, “Boys play to the age of seven, learn writing for seven
years and learn the religious permissions and prohibitions for seven
years.”[^16]

Imam Baqir said, “If I see a young Shi‘ite, who is not learning
religious precepts and who compromises this responsibility, I will
punish him.”[^17]

Therefore, young people who want to grow up with valuable moral and
human qualities and who want to acquire the brightest spiritual
personalities, exercise control over their personal desires in normal
and critical conditions and spend their lives in purity and
righteousness, must pay attention to religious beliefs from the
beginning of youth and, by applying practical programs and following
religious orders, consolidate their spiritual commitment with God and
always remember Him.

### The Result of Inattention to the Religious Feelings of the Youth

Inattention to the feelings of adolescents and young people contradicts
the nature of creation. Refusing the orders and regulations of creation
will not remain unpunished because the result of these refusals will be
increased perversities and the uncontrollability of the youth throughout
the world. Statistics show that crimes committed by youth are increasing
in the western world and in countries that are away from religion and
religious beliefs. Such tendencies towards violations, theft, breaking
laws, inattention to education and the acquisition of knowledge, drug
addiction and promiscuity are the outcome of a faithless upbringing and
violating the laws of creation because sins and impurity are the result
of irreligiousness which makes life undesirable for young people and
difficult for all.

Therefore, in modern countries today, the issue of young people is one
of the biggest social problems which occupy the minds of scholars.

The 3rd United Nations Congress for the Prevention of Crimes and Control
of Criminals, which was held in Stockholm with the participation of
thousands of judges, sociologists and police, ended after one week of
meetings. In this Congress, all the countries of the world were asked to
rise up against juvenile delinquency and take the necessary steps for
the prevention of such crimes of which the world has grown tired.[^18]

The National Crime Prevention Committee (Canada), *Annual Report*, 1991,
stated:[^19]

“In 1991, 1,200,000 children lived in poverty, 500,000 of whom were less
than 7 years old, and who had the highest delinquency rate. The cause of
the crimes of these children was parental inattention and watching
violent TV programs and movies.

“Children growing up in highly violent families are seven times more
likely to commit suicide than those growing up in other families. This
group is 24 times more prone than their peers to sexual violation and
76% of delinquent children in the United States are from among such
families.

“The cause of murder of 63% of the fathers killed by their children who
were between the ages of 11 to 20 was that these children had witnessed
domestic violence in the home, i.e. their fathers beating their
mothers.”

The 1993 report by the National Advisory Council for the Status of Women
in Canada stated:[^20]

“Every 17 minutes, one woman in Canada is sexually assaulted and 25% of
Canadian women are surely sexually assaulted once in their lifetime
while 50% of the men assaulting women are so-called respectable married
men of the Canadian society and 49% of such assaults are done in
daylight. 80% of assaulted women are between the ages of 14 and 24.

“In 1993, 26.8% of female students in Canadian universities and colleges
were sexually assaulted by male students and 13.6% of these assaults
were committed while intoxicated.

One out of three females and one out of six males were sexually violated
by the age of 18 and 98% of the criminals were young people.

“80% of children less than 10 years of age, whether male or female, are
sexually violated by their fathers and therefore, sexual relations
between fathers and daughters are increasing.

“It is worthy of note that 80% of incarcerated juveniles have confessed
that they were sexually assaulted by their parents or other men in
childhood.”

### The Prophet and Youth

Young people are by nature, fond of truth, piety and salvation.
Therefore, they are very keen to do right and good. They take pleasure
in doing so and always think of piety and divine values while trying to
base their words and deeds on righteousness and true values.

Young people regret when they see that others are not following the
right path and they suffer on seeing people doing wrong. They also think
that they should gain the power to prevent such unrighteousness.

When the Prophet publicly invited the people to Islam, the first people
who followed him were young people. The important point to note is that
these youth were the sons and daughters of the nobles, rich and renowned
families of the Quraysh.

The youth who were tired of the miserable conditions of the backward
Arab nation, and the outdated superstitious practices of the Age of
Ignorance, warmly welcomed the spiritually liberating invitation of the
Prophet of Islam.

The valuable words of the Prophet were effective for all walks of life
but the young people expressed more interest than others. The Prophet’s
words responded to their internal thoughts and nourished their spirits.
When Mus‘ab ibn ‘Umayr, the Prophet’s special representative for
teaching the Qur’an and propagating Islamic teachings arrived in
Madinah, the number of young people who accepted his teachings was
larger than that of the elderly. Mus‘ab resided in As‘ad ibn Zararah’s
house. During the day, he would go to where the Khazraj tribes gathered
and invite them to Islam and mostly young people accepted his
invitation.[^21]

### The Struggle of the Youth against the Ideas of the Age of Ignorance

As we have already mentioned, the valuable words of the Prophet of Islam
made a great impact on the youth, to the extent that they would defend
their religion and religious beliefs at all times and in all places and
would resist the ideas of the Age of Ignorance.

Sa‘d ibn Malik was one of the passionate young Muslims during the early
period of Islam. He converted to Islam at the age of seventeen,
expressed his faithfulness to Islam and his opposition to ignorant ideas
everywhere. This caused the polytheists to persecute him. In order to be
safe from persecution, young people would pray during the day in the
mountain passes of Meccan so as not be seen by the Quraysh infidels.

One day a group of infidels saw some young people engaged in worship.
They began deriding them and insulting their beliefs.

This made Sa‘d ibn Malik very angry. He took a camel’s chin bone and
struck one of the polytheists on the head so hard that it began to
bleed. This was the first bloodshed in defense of Islam.

On another occasion Sa‘d said, “I loved my mother very much and was very
kind to her. When she found out about my conversion to Islam, she said
to me, ‘O son, what religion is this that you have adopted? You shall
give it up and remain an idol-worshipper or else I will stop eating and
drinking until I die!’

Sa‘d, who loved her mother very much, told her politely and kindly, “I
will not give up my faith and I ask you not to stop eating and
drinking.” But his mother did not pay any attention and did not eat for
one whole day and night. She thought Sa‘d would give up his faith,
rather he told her, “I swear by God, if you have one thousand souls and
you lose them one by one, I still will not give up my faith!” When his
mother realized that he would not abandon his faith under any
circumstances, she began eating again.”[^22]

Sa‘d fought against the mode of thinking prevalent during the Age of
Ignorance and the other young people joined him and broke the idols,
destroyed idol temples, eliminated oppression and founded a new society
based on faith, knowledge, piety and moral values. In this way they
brought the most backward nation to the highest degree of spiritual
perfection and moral values.

Chapter Three: State Employment of Youth
----------------------------------------

*“Wise young people make use of their transient youth, make good their
deeds and work hard to acquire knowledge”*
Imam ‘Ali

In developed countries, full attention is paid to respecting young
people and acknowledging their worthwhile employing their tremendous
energies. In various instances, sensitive state jobs have been entrusted
to them and their youthful energies employed in the interest of country
and nation.

Fourteen centuries ago, the leader of Islam paid special attention to
this important social issue and, in his established state, he employed
worthy young people in important, sensitive state jobs and supported
them with his words as well as his actions.[^23]

Such conduct was hardly acceptable in the ignorant and prejudiced
atmosphere of that time, for the elderly were not willing to follow the
youth. When the Prophet appointed a young person to a high position, the
old people became upset and openly complained to him. Such was the case
in the incident of the first invitation to his family.[^24]

The Prophet always insisted on solidifying his practice and resisted
ignorant prejudices and false ideas. He would finally convince the
people with his wise words and infinite reminders or they would have
nothing to say. In addition to this, from the pulpit he would praise and
express support for deserving young people and would establish them in
high state positions.

It should also be noted that the basic condition for selecting young
people was their qualifications and merit. This can be well understood
by examining the Prophet’s words. Young people chosen by the Prophet to
basic state positions were wise, thoughtful, intelligent, faithful,
moral, provident and deserving.

Provided are some examples of youth chosen by the Prophet for executive
state jobs. In this way there will be no mistake in recognizing the true
right of youth for the criterion in the selection of youth was their
faith and spiritual values.

### ‘Ali ibn Abu Ṭalib

One of the young people who served by the side of the Prophet to the end
of his life was ‘Ali. He actively participated in all events and was a
favorite of the Prophet and from the beginning of Islam was a soldier
for the cause.

‘Ali, the son of Abu Talib, was from the biggest and the noblest tribe,
i.e. The Quraish. His mother, Fatimah, the daughter of Asad ibn ‘Abd
Manaf, was a great woman of the Bani Hashim family. Therefore, ‘Ali was
a Hashimi from both his father’s and his mother’s side.[^25]

‘Ali was miraculously born in the Ka‘bah. This was an honor that was not
bestowed on anyone else. He was in the Ka‘bah for three days and then
left it in his mother’s arms.[^26]

Abu Talib, ‘Ali’s father, had been the Prophet’s guardian since he was
eight years old. He defended the Prophet in the critical days of Islam,
when all were mobilized against him. In the 10th year of appointment to
prophecy, Abu Talib and Khadijah, the Prophet’s wife, both died. This
year was known as the ‘Year of Sadness’.[^27]

When ‘Ali was a young boy, the Prophet took him to his own home.
Therefore, ‘Ali grew up in the Prophet’s house and under his
guardianship.

After Gabriel revealed himself to Muhammad in the cave of Hira and
informed him of his appointment as a prophet, the Prophet went home and
told ‘Ali of the revelation. In spite of his young age, ‘Ali accepted
the Prophet’s invitation to Islam and became the first male Muslim.[^28]

After being appointed as prophet, Muhammad did not openly reveal his
appointment for three years. In the third year, he was ordered by God to
reveal his appointment and he made the first invitation to his
relatives. He invited them to a feast, in which he told them, “O
children of ‘Abd al-Muttallib, God has sent me to lead all people and
especially you, my relatives and has told me, ‘First warn your nearest
relatives of refusing to obey [God].’”[^29]

He repeated this twice more and no one responded to his call except ‘Ali
who was only thirteen at that time. The Prophet said, “O ‘Ali, you will
be my brother and substitute, inheritor and minister.”[^30]

### ‘Ali Risks His Life in the Prophet’s Bed

In the 13th year after the appointment to prophecy, the leaders of the
Quraish plotted to kill the Prophet. One person was selected from each
tribe and it was decided that as a group they would attack and kill the
Prophet one night. The Prophet was made aware of their evil plan and he
asked ‘Ali to sleep in his bed so that the enemies would not find out
about his absence from the house.

‘Ali was 23 years old at that time. He responded positively to the
Prophet’s request and slept in his bed. The Prophet left the city and
hid in the Thur cave close to Mecca. At the end of the night, forty
conspirators raided the Prophet’s house and found ‘Ali asleep in the
bed.[^31]

### The Battle of Badr

Badr was the first battle fought in the history of Islam. In this
battle, the army of Truth faced the polytheists, the army of Falsehood.
It occurred in the second year after the Hijrah between the leaders of
the Meccan infidels and the army of Islam, in a place known as the Badr
Wells, some 168 km. away from Madinah and 6 km. away from the Red Sea.

The army of the infidels consisted of more than 1,000 well-equipped
fighting men. The Prophet, however, had only 313 soldiers. Three
well-known heroes of the infidelity army, namely ‘Atabah, his brother
Shaybah and his son Walid were killed by ‘Ali, Hamzah and ‘Ubaydah. ‘Ali
was 25 years old in this battle.[^32]

### The Battle of Uhud

One year after the Battle of Badr, the infidels replenished their armies
and remobilized them under the command of Abu Sufyan. With three
thousand fighting men from various tribes armed with adequate weaponry,
they gathered to face the Muslims at the foot of Mount Uhud, 6 km. from
Madinah. The Prophet’s army consisted of only 700 soldiers. He sent 50
archers under ‘Abdullah ibn Jubayr’s command to a mountain pass behind
the Muslims and ordered them not to abandon their post under any
circumstance.

Heroes such as Ṭalhah ibn Abu Ṭalhah, Abu Sa‘id ibn Ṭalhah, Harath ibn
Abu Ṭalhah, Abu ‘Aziz ibn Ṭalhah, ‘Abdullah Abu Jamilah and Irtat ibn
Sharhabil came to the battlefield one after the other and all of them
were killed by a brave 26-year-old young man named ‘Ali. The army of
Islam was winning in the beginning but, as the mountain pass was
abandoned by the archers, Khalid ibn Walid and his horsemen attacked the
Muslims from behind and defeated them. 70 Muslims, including Hamzah,
were martyred. ‘Ali, the Prophet and a few others fought bravely. ‘Ali
was wounded 90 times and in this battle a voice from the sky was heard
saying, “There is no young man like ‘Ali and no sword like
*Dhu’l-Faqar*.”[^33]

### The Battle of Khandaq (Ahzab)

In the month of Shawwal, the 5th year A.H., the Meccan infidels in
cooperation with the remaining Jews in Madinah and with the help of
other tribes, prepared for war with over 10,000 fighting men, in order
to destroy the Muslims. ‘Amru ibn ‘Abdawadd, an 80-year-old Arabian
champion, was also present. He had been wounded in the battle of Badr
and sought revenge on the Muslims. He had vowed not to rub oil on his
body until he took revenge on the Prophet and the Muslims.

When the Meccan army reached Madinah, the Jewish tribe of Bani Qurayzah,
which had previously made a contract with the Prophet, broke its promise
and prepared to fight in the company of the infidels. Following the
advice of Salman Farsi, a ditch was dug around Madinah so that the
enemies would not be able to enter the city. The Muslims were under
siege for 28 days until the infidel hero, ‘Amru ibn ‘Abdawadd crossed
the ditch and challenged them to fight. No one but ‘Ali volunteered to
fight him as ‘Amru was a renowned, brave and valiant man. As ‘Ali walked
courageously to the battlefield the Prophet remarked, “All of faith is
facing all of polytheism.”

After some moments of intense fighting, ‘Ali killed ‘Amru ibn ‘Abdawadd
and threw his head in front of the Prophet. The Prophet said, “The blow
of ‘Ali’s sword in the battle of Khandaq is superior to the worship of
all humans and Jinn.”

‘Ali, who did such great service for Islam and the Muslims on that day,
was a 27-year-old young man. After this battle, the Prophet along with
an army under ‘Ali’s command, set out for the Jewish tribe of Bani
Qurayzah. When the Jewish elder, Huyy ibn Akhtab was killed, the people
of Madinah were safe from the danger of the Jews and Jewish properties
and women were possessed by the Muslims.[^34]

### The Conquest of Khaybar by ‘Ali

In the year 7 A.H., the Jews of Khaybar plotted against the Muslims. In
keeping with this, they filled some of the 7 castles of Khaybar 200 km.
to the northwest of Madinah with arms. 14,000 Jews lived in these
castles. The Prophet went to Khaybar with 1,400 foot soldiers and 200
horsemen. ‘Ali, who was a 30-year-old young man, was the flag bearer.

In this battle, ‘Umar and Abu Bakr were defeated. ‘Ali entered the
battle upon the Prophet’s order. He struck Marhab, the Jewish hero, with
a thunderous blow and threw him to the ground. Then the Muslims attacked
and ‘Ali removed the iron gate of Khaybar and held it on his hand like a
shield. In this battle, Murhab, Harith and Yasir were killed by ‘Ali and
Khaybar was conquered. Afterwards, forty people were needed to help in
returning the gate to its original place.[^35]

### The Conquest of Mecca

In the year 8 A.H., Mecca was conquered by the Prophet without a fight.
The Prophet entered Mecca with 12,000 troops and he himself broke and
threw down many of the idols in the Ka‘bah. Then he ordered ‘Ali to put
his feet upon his shoulders in order to climb the wall and break the
remaining idols. ‘Ali obeyed the order but when he was finished, he
jumped down.

The Prophet asked, “Why did you not put your feet on my shoulders?” ‘Ali
responded, “To climb up, you ordered me to step on your shoulders and I
complied, but while climbing down, you said nothing and therefore, I
jumped down rather than rudely step on your shoulders. Thanks to God
nothing happened to me!”[^36]

This great hero of Islam was present on all occasions against the
enemies and infidels in their attempts to wipe out Islam and the
Muslims. ‘Ali defended Islam with all his power and might and was
honored with many great and singular achievements.

### Ja‘far ibn Abu Talib

Ja‘far ibn Abu Talib was a companion of the Prophet and ‘Ali’s older
brother by 10 years. He was a brave man and one of the pioneering
Muslims. He is also known as Ja‘far Tayyar (‘the flying Ja‘far’) as he
lost both his arms in battle and the Prophet said, “God gave him two
wings in heaven.”[^37]

The Prophet liked him very much. In the year 5 A.H., he migrated to
Abyssinia with the other Muslims and was chosen as the spokesman of the
migrating delegation while he was only a 24-year-old young man. The
Muslims were in Abyssinia until the year 7 A.H. and then they returned
to Madinah. Their return to Madinah coincided with the Prophet’s
victorious return from Khaybar.

Once the Prophet saw them, he went towards his strong cousin, put his
arms around his neck, kissed him on the forehead and cried. Then he
said, “I do not know for which event I should be more happy; the arrival
of Ja‘far or the conquest of Khaybar.”[^38]

In 8 A.H.—i.e. one year after the return from Abyssinia, he was selected
by the Prophet to command an army of 3,000 soldiers on its way to fight
the Romans. The army of Islam departed from Madinah and faced the Romans
in *Mu’tah* in Syria.

Ja‘far fought with unparalleled valor. He lost his two hands. In spite
of this, he still managed to hold the flag of Islam to his chest rather
than let it fall to the ground. He was martyred after having sustained
over 70 wounds to his body.[^39] When the Prophet heard of Ja‘far’s
martyrdom, he burst into tears and then he remarked, “One has to cry for
a person like Ja‘far.”

### Mus‘ab ibn ‘Umayr

Mus‘ab ibn ‘Umayr was a bright, well-built young man. He was very
handsome, chaste, determined and noble. His parents loved him very much
and he was respected by everyone in Mecca. He wore the most beautiful
clothes and enjoyed a high standard of living.[^40]

He became fond of the Prophet’s words and, after spending some time in
the Prophet’s company and hearing the verses of the Qur’an, he embraced
Islam. In Mecca conversion to Islam was considered to be the biggest
crime. Therefore, many people hid their belief in Islam. One such person
was Mus‘ab ibn ‘Umayr, until his parents found out and he was
imprisoned. He escaped however, and went to Abyssinia with the other
migrants and after a while, he returned.

On the occasion of *‘Aqabah Awla’* one moonlit night, 12 important
persons from Madinah met the Prophet and converted to Islam. When they
wanted to return to Madinah, two people by the names of As‘ad ibn
Zararah and Zakwan ibn ‘Abd Qays asked the Prophet to send a
representative to Madinah in order to teach the Qur’an to the people and
call them to Islam.

Madinah was then one of the most important cities in the Arabian
Peninsula and two large tribes, Aws and Khazraj lived there. They were
sworn enemies of each other and had been at war for several years.

From among all the Muslims and his companions, the Prophet chose none
other than the young Mus‘ab ibn ‘Umayr. He sent him along with As‘ad ibn
Zararah to Madinah for this important mission.

Mus‘ab, who had learnt the recitation of the Qur’an very well, entered
Madinah and passionately began the promotion of Islam, with pure
intentions and hard work. He resided in the house of As‘ad, who was
among the seniors of the Khazraj tribe. In the company of his host, he
went to the house of Sa‘d ibn Mu‘adh, the leader and chief of the Aws
tribe, and called them to Islam, which they accepted. In addition, Asid
ibn Hudayr also converted to Islam with Mus‘ab. Mus‘ab, the well-built
young man, carried out his mission in Madinah in the best way possible.
He was the first one who performed communal and the Friday prayer in
Madinah and he made honorable achievements.[^41]

The effective promotional activities by Mus‘ab prepared the ground for
the Prophet’s arrival in the city of Madinah and the people warmly
welcomed the leader of Islam and his followers. This was but for the
providence, piety, virtues, knowledge and insight of Mus‘ab as he was
the one who attracted the attention of women, men, the elderly and the
young people as well as the leaders of the tribes and the common people
of Madinah to Islam. They learned the Qur’an, converted to Islam and
drove away from their hearts all the old enmities and became brothers to
each other and took part in Friday and communal prayers in a friendly
atmosphere.

After the arrival of the Prophet in Madinah, Mus‘ab took part in the
battles of Badr and Uhud. In the battle of Uhud, he held the Prophet’s
flag and was finally martyred. He was buried next to Hamzah, the
Prophet’s uncle, the renowned champion of the army of Islam.[^42]

### ‘Atab ibn Usayd, the Governor of Mecca

In the year 8 A.H., Mecca was conquered by the army of Islam without any
bloodshed. After this conquest, the battle of Hunayn took place within a
short period. The Prophet and his companions had to leave Mecca to go to
the warfront.

On the other hand, a competent person had to be appointed as governor to
administer the city of Mecca, which had just been taken away from the
infidels and polytheists. The governor had to be able to manage the
people’s affairs and to impede any action by the enemies.

From among all the Muslims, the Prophet chose a 21-year-old young man by
the name of ‘Atab ibn Usayd, and issued him an order to pray with the
people. He was the first amir to hold communal prayers in Mecca after
the conquest.[^43]

The Prophet told ‘Atab, his selected governor, “Do you know what a
position I have appointed you to and for which people I made you the
governor? I chose you as the emir of the people of God’s shrine, the
residents of holy Mecca. If I knew a more worthy person than you among
the Muslims, I would surely appoint him to the position. When ‘Atab was
appointed as the governor of Mecca by the Prophet, he was about 21 years
old.”[^44]

The selection of this young man to such a great position strongly upset
some Arab elders and the heads of Mecca. They objected and complained,
saying, “The Prophet wants us always to be humiliated. This is why he
made a young man governor over us, the elders of the Arabs and the
seniors of Mecca.”

These words reached the Prophet’s ears. He therefore wrote a long letter
to the people of Mecca, in which he reminded them of ‘Atab’s merits and
emphasized that the people should obey his orders.

In the final part of the letter, he thus responded to the inappropriate
objection of the people:

“None of you shall object to a young man like ‘Atab as superiority among
people is not to be judged by age. Rather, it is virtue and spiritual
perfection that must be considered.”[^45]

‘Atab remained governor of Mecca even after the death of the Prophet
until he died in early 23 A.H.[^46]

### Mu‘adh ibn Jabal

Mu‘adh ibn Jabal ibn ‘Amru Ansari was from the Khazraj tribe and was
known by the nickname of Abu ‘Abd ar-Rahman. He was one of the
well-known companions of the Prophet and was very wise, handsome,
generous and well-mannered. He converted to Islam at the age of 18 and
took part in all the battles during the Prophet’s lifetime.[^47]

Mu‘adh learned the Islamic sciences with hard work and natural talent;
he was able to learn a considerable amount of Islamic teachings within a
few years and became one of the outstanding companions.

He was 26 during the conquest of Mecca. A merited person was needed to
be appointed to that city at that time to teach the people the orders
and regulations of Islam concerning worship and transactions.[^48]
Mu‘adh was selected for the intellectual affairs of Mecca and for
teaching religious precepts. In fact, he was chosen as the cultural head
of the city.

After the Tabuk campaign, the Prophet sent Mu‘adh to Yemen to be a judge
and governor there. In a letter to the people of Yemen, the Prophet
wrote, “I have sent you one of my best men.”

The Prophet ordered Mu‘adh to teach the members of the army the Qur’an
and the religious precepts and to collect the religious tax (*zakat*)
which was to be sent to Mecca for the Muslims.[^49]

When the Prophet wanted to send this young man to Yemen, he asked him,
“O Mu‘adh, if there is a quarrel, how will you judge?” He replied, “I
will judge based on what is in God’s book.”

The Prophet then asked, “If there is no order in the Qur’an, what will
you do?” He answered, “I will judge according to the Prophet’s
practice.” The Prophet continued, “If you do not find any order
according to my practice, what will you do?” Mu‘adh said, “Then I will
judge according to my own opinion.” Then the Prophet put his hand on
Mu‘adh’s chest and said, “Thanks to God for you have satisfied the
Prophet with that with which prophets are satisfied.”[^50]

When the Prophet died in the year 11 A.H., Mu‘adh was in Yemen. Abu Bakr
reinstated him in his position. Then, during ‘Umar’s caliphate, he went
to Sham and died in ‘Imwas[^51], in 18 A.H., at the age of 34 due to the
plague.[^52]

One thing that proves Mu‘adh’s merits is that during the Prophet’s
lifetime, he was authorized to issue *fatwas* and would infer religious
precepts according to the Qur’an, *Sunnah* (the tradition) and reason.
This shows the outstanding qualifications of this young man at the dawn
of Islam.[^53]

### Usamah ibn Zayd

Usamah ibn Zayd was a Christian child of Arab origins from Syria. His
nickname was Abu Muhammad and he was one of the respected companions of
the Prophet. He was born in Mecca 7 years before the Hijrah. The Prophet
loved him very much. He was a clever, worthy and intelligent
person.[^54]

His father Zayd, was killed in the war against the Romans in Mu’tah. He
had been the second commander after Ja‘far ibn Abu Talib. The Prophet
therefore decided to appoint Usamah, who was only 18, as the commander
of the army of Islam to fight the Romans, in spite of the fact that all
the high-ranked commanders of Islam, all the senior Immigrants, Helpers
and prominent Arabs were present in the army. The Prophet went out of
the city of Madinah to visit the army. He saw that all the senior
Muslims were prepared to fight.[^55]

The selection of the 18-year-old commander by the Prophet surprised many
people and this practice made them look at each other with astonishment.
As a result, some companions of the Prophet expressed their objection,
saying, “Why was this young man selected as the commander of experienced
Immigrants and pioneers of Islam?”

The Prophet was upset on hearing the sarcastic remarks of some officers.
Therefore, he ascended the pulpit and after praising God, he said, “O
people, what do you mean by the words that I have heard about the
commandership of Usamah? Your sarcastic remarks today are not new. A few
years ago, when I appointed Zayd, Usamah’s father, as the army commander
in the Mu’tah war, you also made blaming remarks.

“I swear by Allah that yesterday Zayd ibn Harithah deserved to command
the army and today his son Usamah deserves the same and all of you must
obey him.”[^56]

Such insistence by the Prophet in support of worthy young people had a
deep effect on the thoughts of the Muslims in general and those who had
incorrect thoughts about young people gradually became aware of their
wrong attitudes. The selection of an 18-year-old person is rare in the
military history of the world.

### Usamah’s Story‑‑The Outcome

The story of Usamah’s commandership and the Prophet’s insistence that
everyone should follow orders under his flag is an interesting story in
the history of Islam. When the Prophet was sick and on his deathbed, Abu
Bakr and ‘Umar went to his bedside; once the Prophet saw them, he said
to them, “Go to Usamah’s army. O God, damn the one who is prepared to
fight but refuses to join Usamah’s army.”[^57]

After the Prophet passed away, Usamah awaited further orders in the camp
that he had arranged outside Madinah. When Abu Bakr became the caliph,
he sent Usamah to the same place that the Prophet had ordered. Usamah
left for Syria but, when he arrived there, Abu Bakr deposed him and
appointed Yazid ibn Abu Sufyan instead.

When the young commander was deposed, he went to Madinah and stood next
to the Prophet’s mosque, shouting, “O Muslims, it is surprising that the
man whom yesterday the Prophet had appointed me as his commander is
today commanding me and deposing me as the commander of the army.”[^58]

Usamah lived in Madinah until the year 54 A.H. He died in a place known
as “Jurf” during the rule of Mu‘awiah.[^59]

These historical examples indicate the true value of young people in
Islam.

Chapter Four: Characteristics of Youth
--------------------------------------

*“If a person is pious and worships in his youth, in the future his
spiritual value will be increased several times”*
Imam ‘Ali

The fact is that one needs guidance and advice from others throughout
one’s life. Even elders whose powers of reasoning have reached the
ultimate degree of maturity and those who have had a great deal of
experience in their lives are likely to deviate and need the advice of
others, let alone young people whose thoughts are not yet
well-developed. They, therefore, need more guidance. The following story
is a confirmation of this fact.

Muhammad ibn Muslim Zahri was a great scholar in his time. His love of
wealth and power led him away from the right path and he became
miserable in his old age.

The physician of the soul of that time, i.e. Imam Sajjad, wrote him a
letter in order to give him advice, in which he reminded him of the
dangers to which young people are exposed because of their unproven
ideas:

“When the love of the world can lead a person like you to such a low
level, despite the long life that you have lived and the scientific
education that you have received and you are so close to death, then how
can one expect a young person to remain unharmed by his sensual desires?
A young person who has just come of age and is void of knowledge, while
on the other hand he has weak opinions and his reason is insufficient
and deviant.”[^60]

Imam ‘Ali said, “The young person’s excuse that he did not know is
acceptable because his knowledge is limited and insufficient.”[^61]

Therefore, inexperience and ignorance are characteristics of youth. This
should be considered in their upbringing. Therefore, God has left open
the way of remorse for all his creatures and has advised young people
more than others to resort to repentance because ignorance and madness
in youth may be the cause of many errors and mistakes and the only way
to be saved is to repent, turn to God and follow the religious orders.

Young people are not stable in the various issues they face and their
views keep changing. Sometimes they tend to go this way and sometimes
that way while they are under various threats at any given moment. Thus,
the enemies take advantage of this characteristic in young people in
order to achieve their goals.

Another characteristic of young people is their power, ability,
liveliness, dynamism and activeness, which if not used for the right
purposes, will make them subject to many mistakes that cannot be easily
corrected. Therefore, this power and ability has to be coordinated with
experience, knowledge and thought in order to achieve the desired
result.

Imam ‘Ali said, “The clear thoughts of old people are more lovable to me
than the strength and force of youth.”[^62]

### The Characteristics of Faithful Young People

Faithful young people have certain characteristics, some of which are
briefly stated below.

#### 1. Familiarity with Religious Precepts

The most basic and the most important knowledge that a young person has
to acquire is religious knowledge. Young people alienated from religion
will destroy themselves. An understanding of religious precepts will
lead to happiness for young people.

Imam Baqir said, “If I see a young Shi‘ite, who is not learning
religious precepts and has no knowledge of religion, I will punish
him.”[^63]

Musa ibn Ja‘far said, “If I find a young Shi‘ite who does not seek to
know the religion, I will give him 20 lashes.”[^64]

#### 2. Familiarity with the Qur’an

The Qur’an is the word of God, the eternal miracle of the God’s
Messenger and a valuable book that contains the message for leading
humanity to the right path and providing him with divine teachings. It
is the duty of every Muslim to be familiar with the Qur’an and Qur’anic
sciences.

When a child becomes familiar with the Qur’an in his youth and reads it
continuously, he will gain more spirituality from the Qur’an and it
becomes mixed with his flesh and blood and affects all parts of his
being.[^65]

#### 3. Familiarity with the Words of the Imams

Adolescents and youth must become familiar with the teachings of the
Shi‘ite Imams and the religious leaders, in order to keep their hearts
clean and in order for their hearts to be adorned with such valuable
gems. There is a saying about this:

“Young people have to brighten their hearts with the sayings of the
religious leaders in order to make their speech and expressions tender
and give merit to their ears by hearing those words.”[^66]

#### 4. Acquiring Knowledge

Imam ‘Ali said, “The experimental sciences, which provide for the
material needs of young people and serve the needs of the society; the
literary sciences and the humanities, each of which will be needed by
the individual as well as the society, are all suitable to be learned by
young people.”[^67]

#### 5. Worship

The other characteristics of a worthy young person is that he pays
attention to worshipping God, thus keeping his soul clean from any rust.
It has been said, “If someone is pious in his youth, in the future his
spiritual value will be increased several times.”[^68]

#### 6. Repentance

Another characteristic of faithful young people is that they repent of
their errors and mistakes. Young people are constantly developing and
sometimes have spiritual inclinations and at other times they may act
foolishly. Therefore, it would not be wrong to call youth the period of
instability. Thus, believing young people are constantly repentant. This
practice will save them from falling into misery.

The Prophet said, “The most beloved of God is the youth who repents his
sin and asks God for forgiveness.”[^69]

#### 7. Hard Work

The period of youth, which begins around the age of 18, is the period of
hard work. Any feebleness and laziness will result in a well-rooted lack
of will in him. There is a saying in this regard.

“If one does not control one’s desires in youth (when one has an
infinite source of physical and spiritual energy), how can one perfect
his character in old age? One should not waste one’s sources of energy
as it would be very hard in old age to correct one’s character.”[^70]

#### 8. Pleasant Appearance

Islam pays special attention to beauty and the religious leaders have
noted many points about beauty, which indicate the importance of this
issue in one’s life. The desire for beauty is stronger in young people
and the leaders of Islam have not rejected this; rather, they have
approved it in practice.

While rubbing oil on his hair, Imam Sadiq said, “O God, I ask you for
beauty.”[^71]

He is also quoted as saying, “A man invited the Prophet to his house.
When the Prophet was preparing to leave home to go and visit him, the
Prophet stood in front of a mirror or a big dish of water and tidied up
his hair and face.

‘Aishah was surprised by this. When the Prophet returned, she asked, ‘O
Prophet, why did you stand up in front of the dish of water and tidy
your hair and face?’

The Prophet said, ‘God would like, if a Muslim is going to see his
Muslim brother, he prepares a pleasant appearance.’”[^72]

Islam has paid attention to beauty of the appearance and the clothes,
but this should not overshadow spiritual values and spiritual beauty
which is the essential true beauty. A beautiful appearance is good if it
is accompanied by beauty of the soul and conduct.

### Threats to Youth

Although youth is one of the great blessings of God, it is under certain
threat, some of which are provided below.

#### 1. Inattention to the Power of Youth

One of the threats against youth is failing to use the power of
youthfulness or wasting it. This has been mentioned in many of the
Islamic narrations.

The young person who has failed to use opportunities appropriately, when
he reaches old age, he finds that he is no longer able to follow God’s
orders. [^73]

#### 2. The Transient Nature of Youth

Another threat to youth is procrastination.

Imam ‘Ali said, “An intelligent young person will make the best use of
his youth as much as possible and will improve upon his good conduct
while trying to acquire knowledge.”[^74]

### How to Tackle the Mistakes of Youth

As we noted, the Prophet showed special respect to young people and was
always interested in them. However, a careful examination of the
Prophet’s conduct also reveals the way he dealt with violating and
sinful young people. Some examples have been provided below.

Imam Baqir said, “On the Feast of Qurban, Fadhl ibn ‘Abbas, who was a
handsome youth, was riding alongside the Prophet. A beautiful woman and
her brother from the Khath‘am tribe came to the Prophet to ask about
religious precepts. The woman’s brother was asking questions while Fadhl
ibn ‘Abbas was looking at the woman.

The Prophet took Fadhl by the chin and turned his face away from the
woman so that he would not look at her anymore. The young man, however,
was looking from the other direction, until the Prophet turned his face
again.

When the Prophet finished answering the questions, he took Fadhl ibn
‘Abbas by the shoulder and told him, ‘Do you not know that time is
passing and the one who protects his eyes and tongue will be rewarded by
God as if he had performed the *hajj* pilgrimage?’”[^75]

In another narration it is reported that, “‘Abbas, the Prophet’s uncle,
said, ‘Why did you turn your cousin’s face?’ the Prophet replied, ‘I saw
a young man and a young woman who were not safe from trouble and
sin.’”[^76]

It has been reported that one day a young man went to the Prophet and
said, “O Prophet, allow me to commit fornication.” The people became
angry and objected to him aloud. However, the Prophet said mildly, “Come
close.” The young man went close and sat before the Prophet. The Prophet
asked him kindly, “Would you like if people do it to your mother?” He
said, “No, dear Prophet.” The Prophet said, “The people do not like it
the same way.”

Then the Prophet asked the young man, “Would you like if people do it to
your sister?” He said, “No.” The Prophet said, “The people feel the same
way.” Then the Prophet asked, “Would you like if people do it to your
daughter?” He said, “No.” The Prophet said, “The people would also get
upset if someone does it to their daughter.”

After this conversation, the Prophet put his hand on the young man’s
chest and said, “O God, clean his heart of sin, forgive his sins and
keep him away from fornication.” After this event, fornication was the
most undesirable thing to the young man.[^77]

The Prophet’s behavior towards sinful young people is itself the best
example for Muslims. However, one point worthy of careful consideration
is that the commission of sins should be prevented according to the
principle of encouraging good deeds and forbidding bad actions.

### Imam Khomeini’s Wise Advice to Young People

Imam Khomeini, the founder of the Islamic Republic of Iran, made
recommendations about young people on various occasions, including the
following remarks:

“We need our young people to be brought up in the right way, i.e. with
an Islamic upbringing. These young people who have to protect the future
of this country, who have to run this country, have to be brought up in
the right way and have to be corrected. Islam has not paid more
attention to anything than to the edification of our children and
youth.”

“I ask the young people, girls and boys not to give up their
independence, freedom and human values, even if they have to work hard
for them, in return for luxury, pleasure, irresponsibility and attending
centers of corruption that are offered by the West and their agents.
Those who want to plunder us have tried throughout history and
especially in the last fifty years or so to make our youth indifferent.”

“You, young Muslims, have to consider Islamic principles in researching
and studying the truths of Islam from political, economic, social and
other perspectives and should not fail to consider the advantages that
distinguish Islam from the other schools of thought. The youth should
know that if someone does not have spirituality and belief in monotheism
and the Resurrection, he will be unlikely to give himself for the
nation.”

“You, dear youth, do not despair. Truth will be the victor. This country
has to be formed and shaped by your strength young people. How fortunate
we are that strong young people in our country are serving Islam. You,
young people, who are my hope, maintain unity in your speech.”

“You, the young generation, must awaken the followers of the West and
expose the crimes of the inhuman governments of the West.”

“Some of our youth gave up their national pride for the West. This was a
spiritual defeat which was the most significant of our defeats. Our
youth should not think that the West has everything and they have
nothing.”

“Be diligent now that you are young and have the strength of youth
within you to tackle the sinful desires of your soul. The spring of
repentance is youth, when the load of sin is light and the heart is less
dark, the soul is less defective and the conditions for repenting
easier.”[^78]

Let us hope for a day when adolescents and youth will listen to this
fatherly advice of the late Leader of the Islamic Revolution in Iran,
follow his path and shatter the hopes of all the enemies of Islam.

[^1]: Ba Tarbiyyat-e Maktabi shna Shavim, [Let’s Get Familiar with the
Scholastic Upbringing], P.320.

[^2]: Sharh Ghurar al-Hikam, Vol.4, P.183.

[^3]: Al-kafi, Vol.2, P.163.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.77, P.75; Vol.81, P.173 & Vol.71, P.180;
al-Khisal, Vol.1, P.113.

[^5]: Rawdah al-Kafi, P.93.

[^6]: Safinah al-Bihar, the article on ‘Qalb’[The Heart], Vol.2, P.442.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.71, P.180; Amali Saduq P.25.

[^8]: Goftar-e Falsafi, Javan [Philosophical Discourse, The Young],
Vol.1, P.71.

[^9]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘a, Vol.4, P.30.

[^10]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Vol.2, P.353.

[^11]: Surah Fatir, 35:37.

[^12]: Al-Burhan Exegesis on the abovementioned verse.

[^13]: Shad kami [Happiness], P.41.

[^14]: Goftar-e Falsafi, Javan [Philosophical Discourse, The Young],
Vol.1, P.375.

[^15]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, Vol.2, P.140.

[^16]: Al-Kafi, Vol.6, P.47.

[^17]: Safinah al-Bihar, Vol.1, P.680, the article on Shabab [Youth].

[^18]: Ittila‘at Daily, no. 11765.

[^19]: National Crime Prevention Committee (Canada), Annual Report,
1991.

[^20]: National Advisory Council on Status of Woman, 1993 Annual Report.

[^21]: I‘lam al-Wara, P.68.

[^22]: Usd al-Ghabah, Vol.2, P.290.

[^23]: Dar Maktab-e Ahl-e Bayt [In the School of the Ahl al-Bayt],
Vol.2, P.117; Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, Vol.5, P.125.

[^24]: Tarikh Tabari, Vol.2, P.62; al-Kamil, Vol.2, P.40; Musnad Ahmad,
Vol.1, P.111; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn abi al-Hadid, Vol.13, P.210.

[^25]: Tarikh-e Anbiya’ [History of the Prophets], Vol.1, P.76; Bihar
al-Anwar, Vol.35, P.68; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Ibn Abu al-Hadid,
Vol.1, P.6.

[^26]: Mustadrak al-Hakim, Vol.3, P.483; Kifayah at-Talib, P.260;
al-Ghadir, Vol.6, P.22.

[^27]: Usul Kafi, Vol.1, P.448; al-Ghadir, Vol.7, P.330; Bihar al-Anwar,
Vol.35, P.68-183.

[^28]: Tarikh Tabari, Vol.2, P.212; al-Ghadir, Vol.3, P.226; Bihar
al-Anwar, Vol.38, P.262; Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol.4, P.153.

[^29]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:215; Tafsir-e Furat, P.112.

[^30]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol.6, P.449; Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.38, P.244;
Manaqib ibn Shahr Ashub, Vol.2, P.180; Kanz al-‘Ummal, Vol.6, P.397.

[^31]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol.3, P.26 & Vol.6, P.479; Bihar al-Anwar,
Vol.19, P.60; Sirah Halabiyyah, Vol.2, P.26.

[^32]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol.8, P.352; Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.41, P.80; Irshad
al Mufid, Vol.1, P.62.

[^33]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol.8, P.359; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Ibn Abu
al-Hadid, Vol.3, P.401; Tadhkirah al-Khawas, P.30; Tarikh Tabari, Vol.3,
P.37.

[^34]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol.8, P.378; Mustadrak al-Hakim, Vol.3, P.32;
Tarikh-e Baghdad [History of Baghdad], Vol.13, P.19; Maqtal al-Husain
Kharazmi, P.45.

[^35]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol.5, P.420; Kanz al-‘Ummal, Vol.5, P.283; Irshad
Mufid, Vol.1, P.114; Mustadrak as-Sahihayn, Vol.3, P.37.

[^36]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol.8, P.682; Sirah ibn Hisham, Vol.2, P.429; Usd
al-Ghabah, Vol.3, P.102; al-Isabah, Vol.1, P.318.

[^37]: Al-A‘lam Zarkli, Vol.2, P.125; al-Isabah, Vol.1, P.237; Sifah
al-Safwah, Vol.1, P.205; Maqatil at-Talibiin, P.3.

[^38]: Al-Isti‘ab fi Hamish al-Isabah, Vol.1, P.212; Hilyah al-Awliya’,
Vol.1, P.114; Tabaqat ibn Sa‘d, Vol.4, P.22.

[^39]: Al-Isabah, Vol.1, P.239; Sirah Halabiyyah, Vol.2, P.786; Mu‘jam
al-Buldan, Vol.5, P.219; al-A‘lam Zarkli, Vol.3, P.125.

[^40]: Al-A‘lam Zarkli, Vol.7, P.248.

[^41]: Tabaqat ibn Sa‘d, Vol.3, P.82; al-Isabah, Vol.3, P.401; Hilyah
al-Awlia’, Vol.1, P.106.

[^42]: Sirah ibn Hisham, Vol.2, P.294; Asad al-Ghabah, Vol.4, P.369;
Sifah al-Safwah, Vol.1, P.125; Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.6, P.405.

[^43]: Tarikh al-Islam [The History of Islam] by Dhahabi, Vol.1, P.380;
Shadharat al-Dhahb, Vol.1, P.26; Sirah Halbiyyah, Vol.3, P.120.

[^44]: Asad al-Ghabah, Vol.3, P.358; al-A‘lam Zarkli, Vol.4, P.200.

[^45]: Nasikh at-Tawarikh, Salat-e Payambar [The Prophet’s Moods],
P.378.

[^46]: Al-A‘lam Zarkli, Vol.4, P.200; al-Isabah, Vol.2, P.451.

[^47]: Asad al-Ghabah, Vol.4, P.376; Tabaqat ibn Sa‘d, Vol.3, P.120;
al-Qism ath-Thani.

[^48]: Sirah al-Halbiyyah, Vol.3, P.120.

[^49]: Hilyah al-Awlia’, Vol.1, P.228.

[^50]: Al-Isabah, Vol.2, P.357.

[^51]: ‘Imwas is a region of Palestine close to Bayt al-Muqaddas where
in the year 18 A.H. an epidemic disease broke out for the first time
that killed many Muslims and companions of the Prophet. The disease was
caused by a microbe which entered the blood and could kill the affected
person within a few hours. Mu‘jam al-Buldan, Vol.4, P.157.

[^52]: Ṭabaqat, Vol.3, P.120; al-Isti‘ab in the exegesis of al-Isabah,
the article an Mu‘adh.

[^53]: Majma‘az-Zawa’id, Vol.9, P.310; Ghayah an-Nahayah, Vol.2, P.301;
Sifah as-Safwah, Vol.1, P.195.

[^54]: Al-A‘lam Zarkli, Vol.1, P.291; al Isabah, Vol.1, P.29.

[^55]: Tabaqat, Vol.4, P.42; Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.21, P.50; Usd
al-Ghabah, Vol.1, P.64.

[^56]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.21, P.50; Usd al-Ghabah, Vol.2, P.81.

[^57]: Ṭabaqat ibn Sa‘d, Vol.4, P.42; Tahdhib Tarikh ibn ‘Asakir, Vol.2,
P.391.

[^58]: I‘lam al-Wara, P.145.

[^59]: Al-A‘lam Zarkli, Vol.1, P.291; al-Isabah, Vol.1, P.29.

[^60]: Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, P.277.

[^61]: Ghurar al-Hikam, P.372.

[^62]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Fayd, P.1114.

[^63]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.1, P.214.

[^64]: Safinah al-Bihar, Vol.1, P.680.

[^65]: Al-Kafi, Vol.6, P.47.

[^66]: Ibid.

[^67]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abu al-Hadid, P.20, Hikmah, P.817.

[^68]: Majma‘ al-Bayan, Vol.2, P.385.

[^69]: Majmu‘ah al-Warram, Vol.2, P.118; Mishkat al-Anwar, P.155.

[^70]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Vol.2, P.353; Tafsir Burhan, P.882; Ghurar
al-ikam, P.645.

[^71]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, P.51.

[^72]: Ba Tarbiyyat-e Maktabi Ashna Shavim [Let's Get Familiar with the
Scholastic Upbringing], P.113.

[^73]: Usul al-kafi, Vol.2, P.135;Tarikh ya‘qubi, Vol.2, P.59.

[^74]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Fayd, Sermon 82.

[^75]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.9, P.351, h.3; Fiqh ar-Rida, P.73.

[^76]: Islam va Tarbiyyat-e Kudakan [Islam and the Upbringing of
Children], P.383.

[^77]: Ravesh-e Tabligh [The Way of Propagandizing], P.63.

[^78]: Kalamat-e Qisar, Pand-ha Va Hikmat-ha-ye Imam Khomeini [Pithy
Aphorisms: Wise Sayings and Counsels of Imam Khomeini], P.216.


