Preface
=======

We observe very clearly that everything in this world is in a state of
flux and change. The process of renewal in life is a principle
underlying the law of creation. In the same way as we believe in the
immutable and enduring character of the law of change, we are also
forced to believe in certain immutable concepts and to consider them
eternal and everlasting. Among these immutable principles are the laws
of morality and human excellence which we are forced to observe of the
judgements of sound reason and to lead our lives in accordance with
them.

One of the most significant factors underlying the success and failure
of societies, their triumph and defeat, is the moral factor, whose
decisive role in the lives of nations is so evident and conspicuous that
no one can deny it.

The real nature of the human being lies in its unlimited capacity for
development and perfection. These capacities, faculties, and aspirations
are embedded in man's very being and precede his consciousness of his
own self. In the opinion of educationists and experts in training, the
control of emotions and feelings and their confinement within certain
moderate limits is the most fundamental problem of human life. Any kind
of development in a person's spiritual faculties must be regarded as an
enduring asset. Their growth and nurturing is far more important than
the knowledge and information that persons gather at various levels,
because they use their inner capacities at every moment of their lives.

Though the light of reason with its natural radiance illuminates the
panorama of life, it is possible that man's innate and deep-rooted
instincts, which are the vital sources of every activity in life and
which should be obedient tools and means at the disposal of reason, may
go out of its control. By getting disoriented from their true axis, they
may obstruct reason's vision and restrict its influence in such a manner
that the thoughtless person is compelled to follow such inclinations as
are opposed to logic and his personal interests. It is here that we
realise the important role of morality in life and the great
responsibility that lies on the shoulders of experts in matters of
guidance and training.

On the other hand, the practice of moral principles involves a certain
amount of hardship and privation. Often there is a contradiction between
these principles and certain human urges. As a result, the satisfaction
of these urges becomes possible only by turning one's back on those
principles. Hence a training that does make spirituality its basis
cannot resist the shattering blows of instinct. Those who lack the
safeguards provided by spirituality are soon carried away by the winds
of desires. Because such a training lacks a force that is durable and
stable so as to be able to sustain a person in advancing against the
pressure of desires in all circumstances.

Religious faith is the most important guarantee for the practice of
human principles and the biggest support for ethical values in man's
struggle against passions and instincts. Man can liberate himself from
the clutches of harmful urges and motives through faith in a Creator
Whose sovereignty extends over all creation and Who knows the secrets
that lie hidden in every creature, and through faith in the reward and
punishment of the Day of Judgement, as well as through pure and
wholesome ideas.

The aim of the prophets, especially the Prophet of Islam, may God bless
him and his Household, was to educate and train human beings to attain
the higher goals and to purge their thoughts of pollution and
impurities.

The ethical campaign of Islam, which was launched by the Noble Prophet,
was a unique movement, without a parallel, from the viewpoint of its
constructive ethos, depth and originality. It was unique in the sense
that it encompassed all the subtleties of the human spirit and paid
special attention to every movement of human thought and consciousness
which has its origin in man's inner being.

The unprecedented impact that it made on the human psyche and the
reality of life was to elevate a degenerate and barbaric people from the
depths of abasement to the heights of human dignity and honour. When
this degenerate society was given the lamp of faith and guidance, it
laid the foundations of a new order in the world and advanced in such a
manner on the road of progress and development that it became a model of
morality and human merit, a model whose like history has not seen.

Even today when spiritual hollowness marks the character and spirit of
the twentieth-century West, whenever persons grown up in its environment
take refuge in the arms of Islam, there occurs a total change in their
spirit and ethos. American scholars have admitted that when the
Afro-Americans embrace Islam all aspects of their lives undergo a
profound change. This is the case despite the fact that in many cases
their knowledge of Islam is not free of certain inadequacies.

Professor Eric Lincoln, Chairman of the faculty of sociology of religion
in an American university, in a speech delivered on the topic of the
impact of Islam in America, remarked:

The impact of Islam on American Blacks has been extraordinary. Until
before they embraced Islam, the erstwhile non-Muslim Blacks lived in
worst conditions of life, whereas at present they have a much higher
level of social and economic life. Among Black Muslim families there is
nothing of the kind of deviations and addiction among youth that hold
American society in a state of panic.

Even non-Muslim drug addicts who embrace Islam receive a training that
enables them to give up addiction and become highly productive members
of society. The American Black Muslims are not at all troublesome for
others. Only when they are intimidated or attacked do they defend
themselves with all power and force at their command. In this matter
they have always been successful. [^1]

The present laws and legal systems prevailing in the world can never
penetrate to the depths of man's being, which is the source of his
actions and efforts, and mobilise his energies for building a wholesome
society and shaping human beings who possess sublime qualities and are
endowed with a cosmic vision.

In the first place, man is constituted of two different principles, body
and spirit. He has, therefore, two dimensions, a celestial as well as
terrestrial one, an aspect that is eternal and enduring and another
which is ephemeral and transitory. Those who possess a genuine
scientific insight and experience know well that these two aspects are
so closely linked that any kind of disorientation in one of the two
affects the other.

Accordingly, any program that addresses solely one of the dimensions of
his being will fail to achieve his all-round felicity and happiness,
since it does not correspond to actual reality.

In present-day societies we do not find any balance in their systems of
thought, and all of them incline towards one or the other of the
extremes. They either incline totally towards the sensible and the
material aspect or towards the intellectual and spiritual aspect.

Their attention is centred either on the universe or on man. But the
Islamic system of education focuses its attention on man's eternal
nature as it really is, and, more than any other school of ethical or
educational thought, makes him conscious of his duties. Its
comprehensive and original ethical system is a totality of general and
specific laws framed for man's individual and social existence. With its
material and spiritual dimensions, it ensures the salvation and success
of humanity, and by following it individuals in a society can become
worthy and happy human beings.

The improvement of one's environment must begin from oneself. Without
doubt anyone who attempts to reform his own person as one of the cells
of the social organism and endeavours to develop his higher qualities
and spiritual faculties with courage and patience, will be one of those
who strive for the betterment of humanity, because a reformed human
society is the result of reformed and mature individuals.

It is hoped that the contents of this book, which draws its material
from the rich Islamic sources and represents the ethos of religious
teachings and, in addition, presents the views and opinions of Western
scholars concerning the problems relating to education and psychology,
will serve as a beneficial moral and social guide. It is hoped that it
will make a contribution however humble, to highlighting the true goals
of education. It will be a matter of great satisfaction for me if I
succeed in elucidating in this book a part of the great truths
communicated by the guides of humanity and teachers of morality.

It should be mentioned that a summary of this book (perhaps less than a
third of its length) was published in the valuable religious and
scholarly journal Maktab-e Islam, and now it is offered to the honoured
reader in a more complete and comprehensive form. I beseech God
Almighty, Who is the source of all being and before Whose glory and
splendour we are no more faded murals, to grant us success and welfare
in the shelter of the blessed teaching of Islam.

Tir, 1353 (June-July, 1974)  
 Sayyid Mujtaba Musawi Lari

[^1]: Persian daily Ittila'at, no. 14812, 26 Shahrivar, 1354 H. Sh.
(1975).


