Chapter 9: The Psychological Needs
==================================

Besides his basic physical needs, the human being also possesses a
series of psychological needs whose powerful and decisive pressure for
satisfaction is so obvious and evident as to be beyond question. If
anyone of these needs is not met properly and in a timely manner, it
leaves the path of moderation, leading to disruption in the life of the
individual and the community and giving rise to painful disorders
difficult to remedy.

The scope of man's spiritual needs, contrary to his material needs, is
extensive and unlimited, and that is why these urges cannot be easily
confined within limits. Although scientific research concerning
psychological needs is of recent origin, these needs themselves are not
new and are as ancient as man himself.

All individuals do not stand at the same level in respect of their
psychological makeup, and it is the non-uniformity of this makeup that
makes them different from one another in respect of their ways of
thinking, feeling and behaving. No doubt the role of these factors in
the success and failure of individuals is much greater than the
differences occasioned by social conventions.

One of the basic psychological needs, which is a consequent of man's
love of perfection, is his urge to seek honour and respectability. Many
of his activities are directed to achieving this purpose, for man
cherishes honour and dignity to the same extent that he resents and
avoids indignity and dishonour. At times when his honour and position
are in jeopardy, he employs all his powers and means to avert this
danger and does his utmost to avoid such a crisis. The sense of failure
and the anguish felt at the aspect of dishonour are much more unpleasant
than the defeat and inadequacy itself and often turn life into a dilemma
or a frightsome nightmare.

The feeling of humiliation creates a terrible storm in some sensitive
souls. The world assumes a menacing and absurd countenance in their
eyes, and in order to escape its terror and torment they may even be led
to take refuge in the dark valley of suicide. However, in this way in
order to get rid of a small setback they surrender to the biggest
disgrace and humiliation.

In setbacks that reduce man into a wretched and despondent creature, one
should try to find a proper and wholesome way of confronting the
situation. The rational way is to channel one's capacities in a proper
direction and affirm one's personal worth by pursuing a course of action
for which one has a special talent. In this way one can restore
emotional balance and recover one's lost personal equilibrium. By
compensating for one's inadequacies one can build a life of highest
self-respect and self-reliance.

The urge for self-respect, which has been implanted in human nature by
the Creator, starts manifesting itself in various forms right from
infancy and earlier than other spiritual qualities. The sensitive heart
of a child needs love and affection and is eager to receive attention.
By nature he expects to receive the maximum attention from those around
him and cannot bear to share it with someone else. When another baby is
born in the family and receives the greater part of the mother's
attention, she cannot find the time to give the attention she gave
earlier to her elder child. The latter reacts violently to the presence
of the newcomer and views him with resentment and consternation. If the
child feels deprived, wronged and unwanted, he may come to harbour a
chronic feeling of acute jealousy and envy that manifest as deviant
conduct, making him prone to misguidance and deception. There are many
children who come to acquire such complexes that make them face many
problems in later life.

The rise and fall of nations and their honour or humiliation depends on
their spiritual state and qualities, which ultimately depend on their
ways of thinking and behaving. Such personal qualities as spiritual
merit and pure sentiments are not by any means comparable to other
advantages that one may acquire through life such as wealth and social
status. It is a fact that the inner causes play a greater role in
creating real honour than outward means, for real honour and happiness
and dishonour and wretchedness are subject to inner life, although
unthinking persons consider the differences of social status as the real
factor behind the diverse degrees of respectability.

False Advantages and Distinctions
---------------------------------

There are many people in society who make a mistake in identifying the
factors that bring respectability. Since their psychological need is not
fulfilled through the right means, they resort to deviant and
destructive ways to satisfy this urge. Like a drowning man who tries to
catch hold of every object in order to save himself, they do not leave
any stone unturned in order to earn false distinctions and fake
respectability and take recourse in every insignificant means.

For instance, in some persons the appeal of unlimited wealth and
innumerable assets may emerge as an urgent need and thirst. This urge,
like an inner tyrant, can overshadow their faculty of reason, their
sense of justice and awareness of their true interests. Such an
unwholesome state turns man into a most tormented and helpless creature
who tortures himself in addition to being harmful to others. If the
number of such persons were to increase in a community and were they to
become a majority, such a society would be in deep trouble.

The problem is that possessing wealth in excess of one's needs is
usually accompanied by one of these characteristics, each of which by
itself leads man into misfortune and wretchedness. Either it makes one
deviate from the straight path of moderation to indulge in the pursuit
of one's desires, or makes one so madly in love with riches that wealth
becomes for him an idol and object of worship, on whose altar he is
ready to sacrifice everything. Of course, this does not mean that one
should not try to obtain wealth and provide for the needs of one's life.
But it is a fact that a wealth in excess of one's needs does not affect
one's felicity in the least.

Nevertheless, such a feeling in a person is not the basic goal of any
psychological need, nor does it guarantee his welfare. The cause of most
psychological disorders in people is excessive attention to this
one-sided urge, which is far removed from the very notion of spiritual
need and its real satisfaction.

Obviously, improper goals cannot be expected to yield worthy and
satisfactory results. Inner anguish and dissatisfaction is the logical
result of choosing unreasonable and inappropriate goals. Thus we come
across countless people who are rich but who have no sense of personal
honour and dignity due to their being devoid of spiritual values. They
remain defenceless, perplexed and forlorn in the midst of roaring waves
of the sea of life, and ultimately their life ends in the same state of
defencelessness and forlornness when everything comes to an end with
them.

Inner dignity is a refreshing feeling that arises from the depths of
one's soul and pervades everything. One who has inner dignity will also
enjoy society's respect and honour. True, may people have the desire in
their hearts to obtain the highest degrees of honour and wish to shine
like stars on the horizon of their community and to impress others with
their personal glory and fortunes. They wish that their name be on
people's lips and their picture in their hearts. However, in order to
attain such a goal one must be realistic and base his life on the
foundations of true dignity.

A Western thinker says:

Wealth is not money alone. There are many people with apparently meagre
means of life, but if we look carefully we would have to count them
amongst the richest of men.  
 Self respect, personal dignity and other human virtues constitute a
spiritual asset safe from the hands of any thief. There are many people
who possess these qualities but lack material riches and who command the
respect of wealthy people. Money can be acquired with toil and
perseverance. How about honour and dignity? These are things which money
cannot buy.  
 I don't know why people ignore the truth and attach so much worth to
wealth that undaunted by any danger they run after it, eagerly exposing
their life to all sorts of perils. They squander their bodily health and
lose their peace of mind and spend a significant part of their lives in
toil and drudgery in order to become rich. Alas! For heaps of gold are
not worth a minute of human life.  
 People imagine that wealth can bring them happiness and with it they
can restore the lost paradise forever to their lives. They do not know
that money cannot buy happiness. Poor folk! The more they advance in its
search the farther they recede from themselves and ultimately get lost
in its labyrinths. They betray their own souls, their feelings and
merits. Neither money is necessary for happiness nor wealth. That which
is essential consists of things which are neglected by most people, and
one does not see a single one amongst the seekers of happiness who
should be in their quest.[^1]

When Alexander, the famous Macedonian conqueror was appointed the army's
chief commander at the time of the Persian campaign, people from all the
various classes came to congratulate him. Diogenes, the well-known Greek
sage, who lived in Cornith at the time, did not pay him any attention.
Alexander wanted to meet him personally and so he went to see him.
Diogenes, who was a self-respecting man, a free soul indifferent to
worldly glamour and riches-and these were his prominent qualities-was
lying in a tub enjoying the warmth of the sun. When he sensed that a
crowd of people was approaching him, he rose his head a little and his
eyes fell on Alexander who was coming towards him amidst pomp and glory.
As he reposed with indifferent equanimity, he did not see any difference
between Alexander and others who were coming with him. Alexander greeted
him reverently and said to him, "If you have any wish, I assure you that
will not be disappointed." Diogenes said to him, "I have only one
request. Until a moment ago I was enjoying the sun and you came and
stood in the way of sunlight. Please move a little aside."

Alexander's companions considered these words as foolish. They said to
themselves, "Truly, this man is a fool who misses such a golden
opportunity." However, Alexander, who felt small in front of what he had
observed of Diogenes' dignity and resignation, was deeply shaken. As he
returned with his companions, who ridiculed the philosopher's conduct,
he said to them, "If I weren't Alexander, I would have liked to be
Diogenes."[^2]

At all times there are some people who, ruled as their emotions and acts
are by an unhealthy spirit, cannot tolerate the noble station of others.
Accordingly, in their encounter with great men they try to project
themselves as at least their equals if not their superiors. And since
they are devoid of the. characteristics of greatness, they try with
different means to belittle great men and to block the light of their
radiance. However, they never succeed in detracting from the worth of
outstanding personalities by their subversive efforts. That is because
men of honour and dignity belong to all humanity. The distances of space
and time disappear in front of them and their memory leaves an indelible
impression in human souls and the star of their greatness and honour
acquires even greater brilliance with the passage of time.

The sense of person honour can be helpful in moderating and controlling
undesirable infatuations and desires. There may be some who might not
have sufficient moral competence and may even exhibit deviant
tendencies, yet their sense of self-respect and personal honour prevents
them perpetrating from immoral and undesirable actions. This innate
asset results in saving them from dishonourable actions.

Honour, from the Islamic Viewpoint
----------------------------------

Rising above the animal plane to the higher levels is something which is
possible for everyone. That is because the desire to attain perfection
is innate in human nature, and this inclination is deeply rooted in the
human soul. But, it definitely stands in need of guidance and care.
However, one does not need to be forcefully dragged in order to traverse
the downward course of degeneration, because one's base inclinations
automatically lead one down the steep path of moral decline.

The real development of man occurs when he has released himself from the
grip of base animal desires to become acquainted with the expansive
horizon of sublime thoughts. Thus the human being can fall to the low
level of a beast, while possessing at the same time the capacity to cast
away destructive motives before they become potent and to make the
angelic ascent towards the higher world.

The harmony created by Islam between inward and outward factors in the
sphere of spiritual development led to a conspicuous success, and
throughout history there emerged many individuals who attained through
perseverance the high station worthy of their humanity.

From the viewpoint of Islam, everyone's worth and station depend on the
extent he partakes of the higher values. Otherwise one would not be
worthy of being called a 'human being' in its real sense, and there is
no criterion of personal honour and nobility except piety and
God-fearing, other outward advantages being insignificant in this
respect.

Imam 'Ali, may peace be upon him, said:

*There is no honour greater than personal piety.*

And the revered Prophet of Islam, may God bless him and his Household,
declared:

*Whoever desires to be the most honourable of men, let him be wary of
God, the Almighty and the Glorious.*[^3]

From the first moment that the light of God-wariness shines into the
heart of a human being possessing faith, he becomes conscious of its
worth and significance. It is by virtue of this awareness and his
far-reaching vision that he does not seek honour and merit in power and
possessions, race and descent. Rather, he evaluates his own personal
worth with the criterion of faith and conviction-a power that is truly
and definitely effective in this world-and the merits that he has
cultivated within. He feels himself to be superior to persons who are
devoid of God-fearing and refrains from any kind of humiliating
humility. That is because humility and modesty are proper only before
God, Who created all the existents and the world of being with His Will,
and human beings are His real servants. Basically, humility in front of
the unequalled Creator of the world is itself the greatest source of
human honour and dignity. The superiority and precedence attained by the
pious human being through his relation with the real Source of the world
inalienably accompanies him in all phases and situations of life. The
light of piety and the purity of soul is so luminous and attractive that
others also sense that there is something firm and enduring embedded
within the spirit of such a person, which is not hollow or capable of
being vanquished by a simple collision. The vital force that lies within
a pious person keeps him aware of the realities of life and he never
gets swallowed up by the deep and shoreless sea of mundane things for
the sake of enjoying life. That is because his intellect and soul are
infused with the truths of Islam and he views everything in the
perspective of an Islamic world view. False values are never equated
with real values in his realistic evaluation, and it is not possible for
base motives to capture his mind and perceptive faculties and to invade
his undefeatable spirit.

He courageously resists temptations and illusory desires, for he has
understood that no matter how important and precious some things should
appear to be, they are insignificant and worthless before God's
greatness and majesty and his own higher feelings. With all their
abundance they are after all transitory and passing. The Qur'an says:

***That is, 'Do not view with eager eyes the insignificant things that a
certain group or community may have been given to enjoy by Us, for the
sake of a test, as a manifestation of the transitory life of the world,
for your sustenance and provision, which is with your Lord, is much
superior and enduring.' (20:131)***

Islam attaches so much value to the affairs of the faithful that their
station of honour is mentioned along with the majesty of God and His
Messenger:

***Yet honour belongs unto God, and unto His Messenger and the believers
. (63:8)***

Refraining from Humiliation
---------------------------

There are many traditions from the honoured sages of Islam about
personal honour and its ethical and social value, and they themselves
have practically given this great lesson to the people. Husayn ibn 'Ali,
the Leader of free men, may peace be upon him, was once asked as to
wherein one's honour lay. He said that it lay in the absence of reliance
on others:

The Noble Messenger, may God bless him and his Household, points out the
same fact in this statement:

*The absence of need does not lie in the abundance of wealth but it lies
in inner plenitude.*[^4]

A writer says:

Imagine for a moment the richest of men lying in his sick bed and
picture his condition in your mind. Wait until his fever rises to a
feverish degree burning his body all over. Then cover his bed sheet with
a thousand fistfuls of gold and silver and put him in a bed draped in
soft silk. If this treasure and adornment can ameliorate his helpless
and desperate condition, then you can claim that riches are effective in
bringing one happiness. If wealth cannot effect physical well-being, how
is it possible for it to rescue the soul from suffering and grief and
bring it joy and happiness?[^5]

Dr. Marden writes:

If the edifice of our happiness were to be built on material means, it
would soon fall and turn into a ruin. That is because the material world
is transitory and subject to change, and all its means are fleeting like
flashes of lightning, unenduring like vapour and unstable like fire. It
is evident how much one can depend on such fleeting and passing means.  
 One who seeks joy and comfort through material means is like one who
goes to sleep on an iceberg in a tempestuous sea, heedless of the world
around him. Soon the iceberg melts and the poor man slips into the arms
of its angry waves.  
 Wealth is a means to remove need, not the asset of felicity. That which
make us happy is the soul's comfort, and here material means have no
role. Do not imagine that I wish to underrate the importance of wealth,
for it can be an aid to achieving inner comfort if accompanied by wisdom
and moderation.  
 It is certain that excess in the pursuit of material means leads to a
spiritual imbalance. Soon our souls are invaded by envy, hostility, and
violence which are an essential part of a materialistic attitude. We
need moderation in order to be happy and to be constantly watchful of
ourselves so as not to deviate towards either extremes on the path of
life.  
 We have read in religious stories that in the other world the sinners
will pass over a path 'which is hotter than fire, sharper than a sword's
edge, and thinner than a hair.' Such is the path of life, as it is finer
than a hair and a moment of neglect makes us deviate from it. It is
sharper than a sword's edge and we are done with if we are not careful.
It consumes like fire and a moment of carelessness is enough to make its
sparks set the harvest of our being afire.  
 If you wish to be happy, do not be unruly and avaricious like fire.
Happiness does not harmonise with greed and avarice. The greedy nature
is like a disturbed sea and wretched is the man who pins his hopes of
peace and tranquillity on a storm.[^6]

One of the most important duties of every Muslim interested in his own
welfare and desirous of liberating himself from inner bondages is to
abstain from every indignity and humiliation. The leaders of Islam have
always exhorted people to refrain from pursuing mean goals which do not
accord with the real dignity of a Muslim. The Eleventh Imam, may peace
be upon him, said:

*How ugly it is for a person of faith to cherish something that would
lead him into humiliation!*[^7]

One must not pay excessive attention to things of little value in life,
becoming so infatuated with them as if there were nothing to be desired
beyond them. Such a condition leads to mental degeneration, also
subjecting one's emotional being to the degrading influence of
insignificant matters which never arise for a moment above their low and
limited terrestrial level, and moreover erode the significance of one's
humanity. Imam 'Ali, may peace be upon whom, said:

*Hold your own personal worth high by indifference to lowly things and
base goals.*[^8]

Some people are so possessed with the passion for mundane pursuits that
they severely compromise their personal honour and dignity in order to
achieve materialistic ends and submit to every humiliation and disgrace.
In their pursuit of mundane profit, they approach everyone with whom
they come into contact with a feeling of inner need. They adopt peculiar
tactics in life and social intercourse and go to extremes in
implementing their plans. They become used to being obsequious and
saying things which do not have any meaning beyond expressing personal
humiliation and abasement. Such an approach in life reflects the
corruption and abasement that have settled on their inner spirit and
have run deep roots therein. Imam 'Ali, may peace be upon him, said:

*An hour of humiliation is not effaced by ages of honour.*[^9]

Emerson says:

Experienced men of the world know very well that it is best to pay scot
and lot as they go along, and that a man often pays dear for a small
frugality. The borrower runs in his own debt. Has a man gained anything
who has received a hundred favours and rendered none? Has he gained by
borrowing, through indolence or cunning, his neighbour's wares, or
horses, or money? There arises on the deed the instant acknowledgement
of benefit on the one part and of debt on the other; this is, of
superiority and inferiority. The transaction remains in the memory of
himself and of his neighbour; and every new transaction alters according
to its nature their relation to each other. He may soon come to see that
he had better have broken his own bones than to have ridden in his
neighbour's coach, and that "the highest price he can pay for a thing is
to ask for it."[^10]

The Spirit of Self-Reliance
---------------------------

Self-reliance and high-mindedness are qualities of those who have truly
perceived their human worth. If a Muslim inspired by the invaluable
teachings of Islam faces a financial crisis, he would continue to endure
this unhappy, and occasionally paralysing, condition, but he would never
yield to humiliation and abjectness.

Although Islam lays abundant emphasis on effort and activity for earning
a legitimate income so that one lives with a head held high, at the same
time it warns people from aggravated greed which leads to the slavery of
wealth. That is because the bondage of wealth and riches is as much a
source of self-abasement and erosion of one's human dignity as
dependence and reliance an others.

Imam 'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, may peace be upon him, makes
the following remark concerning the humiliation that results in both the
cases.

*Dependence on others and appealing for help impairs the speaker's
tongue and vitiates the mind of the courageous and the heroic, and
degrades a free human being to the level of an abject slave, besides
tarnishing one's dignity and spoiling one's livelihood.*[^11]

*How often richness is more degrading than deprivation!*[^12]

*How often there are poor people who are actually rich, and how often
there are rich people who are in fact impoverished and wretched.*[^13]

The Noble Qur'an describes the people who are without means but
dignified in these words:

***The ignorant (who are misled by their dignified appearance) suppose
them rich because of their abstinence (from asking others for help), but
thou shalt know them from their faces; they do not beg of men
importunately. (2:273)***

Imam Sajjad, may peace be upon him, said:

*I would not exchange my self-respect for the most precious thing in the
world.*[^14]

Islam considers the expression of gratitude and appreciation as a
desirable and outstanding virtue, but it does not permit that one should
resort to flattery in the garb of appreciation of others. No Muslim has
a right to contaminate himself with a flattery contrary to the dignity
and freedom of his self.

The basic condition for expressing gratitude is the spiritual
independence and inner satisfaction of one who expresses gratitude and
fulfils his human duty when required to do so. However, some people who
suffer from moral inadequacy and inner weakness try to conceal their
inner abjectness and self- contempt with humiliating and obsequious
expressions of admiration. Without doubt, such a condition, which is a
reaction prompted by spiritual weakness and is an evidence of inner
degradation, does not possess any kind of ethical or educative value.

Imam 'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, may peace be upon him, makes
it explicit in one of his aphorisms that an appreciation mixed with
flattery has two harmful and undesirable results; on the one hand it
tarnishes the self-respect of the flattering person and on the other
causes the other person to be afflicted with the vice of pride:

*Excessive praise amounts to flattery, which, on the one hand, causes
pride and haughtiness in the addressee and deprives the flatterer of his
personal honour on the other.*[^15]

Persons of a noble temperament do not lose themselves regardless of the
status and fame they might attain, while persons wanting in self-respect
are swept off their feet at the smallest success in attaining status and
position.

Imam 'Ali, may peace be upon him, makes this point in an interesting
manner:

*An honourable person does not act like an insolent ingratiate no matter
how high the position he may attain to, being like a mountain that
remains unmoved by the gales. But a base person rises to insolence and
ungratefulness on attaining the meanest position, like a plant that is
shaken to its roots by the softest draft of wind.*[^16]

Foresight
---------

Everyone must weigh the consequences before deciding to do something and
he must always take his own self-respect and personal honour into
consideration. Those whose intellects are extinguished and whose spirits
are dark submit to every kind of ignominy and slavery for the sake of
the meanest of goals and they do not refrain from anything in order to
attain their petty goals. But are such goals worthy of an honourable
human being?

Once a man requested the Noble Messenger, may God bless him and his
Household, to give him counsel. The Prophet accepted his request but
asked him, \`Do you promise to be careful to act according to my
advice?" "Yes, I promise," he replied. Thrice the Prophet put this
question to him, and after taking his pledge and drawing his full
attention to the importance of the matter, he told him: \`Whenever you
decide to do something, think about its consequences and reflect over
the matter. If its consequences appear to be good and proper, pursue it
until you get results. But if the consequences appear to be devious and
destructive, refrain from carrying out your decision and from performing
that act." A European scholar writes

One should carefully examine the pros and cons of an action before it is
carried out, to see whether the desired goal is worth the effort and
sacrifice. Views and opinions differ in this regard, and everyone
considers one's goals as better and superior to those of others, and as
Marcus says, "The spider is as happy to catch a fly as a hunter to
capture a deer in the desert."

Accordingly, everyone has his own goals. Fame should be accompanied by
honour, otherwise by itself it is of no use. In bygone days there were
some persons who were as famous for being scoundrels as much as the sun
is known for its light and the fire for its heat. But what did they get
out of this fame except curses and denunciation?[^17]

The great men who spent their lives in propagating justice and human
merit and for the advancement of civilisation are immortal, and time
cannot diminish their greatness. This kind of persons transcend space
and time by virtue of their brilliant deeds. In all ages and eras their
name is on the tongues of men and their memory is inscribed in their
hearts and the repute of their greatness reaches new heights every day.

History has nothing to do with the bodies of famous men, but it
preserves their spirit in the amber of their beneficial deeds. Men of
deeds have a will, sublime like the mountain peaks and a spirit as great
as the ocean. Their determination overtakes everything in its stride and
their spirit encompasses everything. They do not know despair and give
no significance to defeat and, aside from all this, they have a
perspicacity of mind. They recognise opportunities when they arise and
know how to use them, for opportunity is like a wild deer which does not
return once it is lost.[^18]

True Freedom
------------

The human being is the highest and the most developed of creatures on
the surface of the earth. With positive power, effort, and will the
human being can grow in all its various dimensions. But if a person
concentrates all his energy and effort on the pursuit of base goals and
devotes all his power to such matters, how can he realise his true human
potential?

The selection of improper goals and their pursuit gradually depletes
one's stores of energy, not leaving any sufficient power for the
heavenward journey. In that case, the soul begins to stall and incline
towards degeneration. Gradually its faculties of consciousness and
awareness reach such a low point that it resists any obstacle in the way
of its worthless goals and insists on pursuing its self-destructive
course.

The developed self which has attained to a degree of humanity possess a
characteristic freedom. One who possesses true freedom neither debases
himself nor tarnishes his human dignity. He feels life to possess higher
goals which are more worthy of being realised than anything else.
Desires cannot dominate such a person's will and drive him in any
direction they want. Rather, he is in control of his desires and, at the
same time, his vital and vivid capacities correctly fulfil their
original duties in all the spheres of life.

The worthy human being has a pure soul, a great will, and a sublime
goal. The position and station of every individual should be assessed by
this criterion: the greater his will, the higher would be the degree of
his human personality.

Imam 'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, may peace be upon him, said:

*A person's worth is proportional to his determination*[^19]

*The proper thing for someone who has discovered his human dignity is to
keep himself at bay from life's abasements and contaminations.*[^20]

Aligning Goals with Capacities

While choosing one's goals, one should keep in view one's power,
potential, and capacities and refrain from being unreasonably ambitious,
for that would lead to failure and disappointment.

Imam 'Ali, the Master of the Pious, may peace be upon him, makes this
interesting remark:

*Whoever asks for something beyond his limits deserves
disappointment.*[^21]

*Whoever demands something he does not deserve will face
Disappointment.*[^22]

Psychologists describe ambitious goals that are not consonant with a
person's capabilities as one of the causes of failure:

The causes of failure lie either within the person himself or in the
environment or both. The internal conditions of failure relate to mental
and physical ability and health. The other internal conditions consist
of personal goals and ambitions. Individuals differ in their capacity to
face obstacles. Many people cannot succeed in overcoming their problems
due to inadequate capacity. The causes of failure lie within the person
himself when he expects more in order to fulfil his needs than he has
the capacity to procure. For instance, Ahmad is a healthy young man and
an athlete. He takes part in most of the sports at his college and is
someone who can make many friends and enjoy their company. However, he
is always sad and depressed. Ahmad thinks that people do not appreciate
him as much they as should, that he did not get the medals that were
received by others, that the newspapers do not print his pictures on the
first pages, and things of this kind.  
 Ahmad's expectations are more than what his abilities would permit. His
problem is a product of his own thinking, and it is something commonly
observed in individuals, especially young people. If we observe
carefully, we would see that many people are not satisfied with their
work and their expectations are greater than their abilities would
warrant.  
 Those who have too many expectations from the world are never at peace
or happy. If their personal capacities were enough to fulfil their
expectations, these expectations would definitely be realised. But the
main problem is that expectations often exceed capacity. We have been
taught that one can achieve whatever one wants, but we have not been
told that this is true when one has the necessary capacity and power. Of
course, effort is necessary at all times. Defeat must not stop one from
making effort, and everybody must struggle to reach his goal. But goals
must be chosen in accordance with one's capacities.[^23]

Humiliation and Sin
-------------------

Of the things that severely affect one's sense of personal dignity is
vice and commission of sin. One who violates laws and perpetrates
actions that are contrary to human honour and merit, will be haunted
with a feeling of abjectness and degradation. The sense of shame and
guilt continually haunts the sinner as a result of his sinful deeds
severely affecting his sense of self- respect and personal dignity.
Those who are masters of their desires and in control of their urges
restrain themselves from falling into error and corruption and do not
approach sin. They have a characteristic sense of personal dignity and
mental peace. But such people are a minority in every society, while the
majority of people get more or less contaminated with vice in the course
of life, and sin casts of its dark shadow on the tablet of their heart.

However, in the same way that physical diseases are capable of
treatment, the human spirit and soul is also curable when affected by
inner disease. Islam has shown the way of treating this kind of
maladies, opening the way of return to health, virtue, and felicity
through the means of repentance, and giving the good news of Divine
mercy to the penitent.

The Divine emissaries, whose lives were totally free from the traces of
sin, have always inspired in the sinners hopes of the Creator's mercy
and pardon in order to deliver them from degeneration and wretchedness
and to save them. Through penitence before God and repentance for sins
they sought to rescue the sinners from the dangerous spiritual
repercussions of inner anguish. Thus by refraining from vices and trying
to compensate for their past errors they can efface the remarks of
transgression to the extent possible. As a result of it they are freed
from self-blame and the anguish of a guilty conscience. That is because
the continual feeling of sinfulness is extremely painful and
debilitating, and despair from purging of the soul of sin and loss of
hope in Divine forgiveness bring irremediable harms as well as many
dangers for the victim of vice and the society in which he lives. A
human being who values his own personal dignity and felicity should
immediately implore God's pardon as soon he falls into sin as a result
of carnal urges and feels the burden of sin on his shoulders and the
guilt of violating the Lord's commands. By attending to the great
station of God, he should ask for pardon and forgiveness. The Qur'an
considers this characteristic as a merit of the God-wary:

***[The believers are those] who, when they commit an indecency or wrong
themselves, remember God, and pray for forgiveness for their sins and
who forgives sins but God? and do not knowingly persevere in the things
they did. (3:135)***

But one who becomes addicted to sin due to its repetition and is
enveloped in the darkness of sinfulness does not feel that he is doing
something evil or have any scruples. He continues to advance on the
filthy path until the moment that the agony of death seizes him. He is
neglectful of the great station of his Lord as well as forgetful of his
own state. He is devoid of this virtue of the God-wary, and his
repentance (at the encounter with death) is not accepted.

Imam 'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, may peace be upon him,
considers refraining from contamination with sins as one of the factors
that lead to the attainment of personal honour and dignity:

*One who believes in his personal dignity and honour does not debase
himself with sin and vice.*[^24]

*If you desire to attain honour, seek it through obedience (to
God).*[^25]

The confession of guilt and the imploring of pardon and forgiveness from
God removes the dark stains of sin from one's dignity and recovers one's
lost tranquillity of the soul.

Imam Baqir, may peace be upon him, said:

*By God, none is relieved of sin except one who confesses his
guilt.*[^26]

Confession of guilt and compensating for past misconduct are also
considered among the most essential means of relief from the painful
pangs of guilt by psychologists, one of whom says:

When someone commits a wrong, he has a feeling of guilt. In such cases,
a mild form of anxiety takes hold of us. Such a feeling is quite proper
and appropriate, because it produces a feeling of shame in regard to the
mistake that we have committed and restrains us from committing it again
in the future. When someone feels guilty, it is better to consult an
elderly and experienced person who is wise and objective. One should do
that in order to get rid of this feeling, which is painful in many
cases, and also to know to what extent the feeling of guilt is
justified. By this method one would have relieved oneself of one's
anxiety as well as sought advice and guidance.

Many people conceal their sense of guilt and in this way torture
themselves, a punishment dealt out by the subconscious. That is why such
a person is always in a state of agitation. But the right way is not
that the subconscious be prompted to deal out its punishment. The
correct way is to confess one's mistake and find the way to compensate
for it.[^27]

It is here that repentance and confession of sin before God bring back
one's lost peace, making one stronger to compensate for the past errors
and to acquire spiritual merit and edification.

A Big Fault
-----------

One of the big moral faults is to constantly complain concerning the
conditions of life and to discuss the problems and hardships of one's
life with people. In this way one detracts from one's personal worth,
belittling oneself and compromising one's dignity.

Mufaddal ibn Qays, one of the disciples of Imam Sadiq, may peace be upon
him, was once in trouble due to financial problems and his failure to
pay back his debts. One day, he went to see the Imam and began
complaining about the conditions of his own life. He described his
problem in these words: "I am in debt, and I do not know how to repay
it. I have no income to meet my daily expenses. I am perplexed, reeling
under the pressure of financial problems. To whatever door I turn, I
find it closed upon me." Then he requested the Imam to pray for him so
that God Almighty may solve his difficulty.

Imam Sadiq, may peace be upon him, called his servant and said to him,
"Bring that bag of gold that was sent by Mansur." The bag was
immediately brought. Then the Imam said to Mufaddal, "There are four
hundred golden dinars in this bag. Use them to meet your expenses."
Mufaddal said, "I did not mention my problems for this. I only wanted
you to pray for me." The Imam replied, "Very well, I will also pray for
you. But remember, do not discuss your personal problems and
difficulties with people, for the very first effect it will have is to
make it appear as if you have faced a defeat in life and have been
knocked down. Obviously that will belittle you in people's eyes and harm
your personal worth and dignity."[^28]

Imam 'Ali, may peace be upon him, said:

*To disclose ones personal problems and difficulties for others is
actually to expose oneself willingly to indignity.*[^29]

Gillett Berghes writes:

Why do many people deliberately expose their failures and inadequacies
and discusses them, while it is better to keep silent about them? They
do so for several reasons, perhaps all of which are wrong and off the
mark. Some people imagine that they would receive other people's
applause and admiration and start complaining as a prelude. For some
others, it is the result of their self-pity which has taken the form of
a chronic illness with them. To say, 'I am at a loss! I don't know how
to make ends meet until the end of the month,' indicates an inferiority
complex.  
 Apart from the fact that refraining from discussing one's inadequacies
and troubles has certain benefits, the very act of self-restraint is
effective in improving your moral character. In the same way that a
closed boiling vessel produces high pressure steam, self-restraint also
strengthens one and raises the degree of one's self-respect. A man who
takes his defeat with a smile, a boy who suffers from a physical
difficulty but who does not complain about it or fret over it-these face
hardship with a stronger spirit and morale than those who have no
control over their tongues and complain continually. Fortitude and
self-reliance also enhances their personal worth, wisdom, and
influence.[^30]

[^1]: John Lubbock Baron Aveberry, On Peace and Happiness, Persian
trans. by Mehrdad Mehrin, "Dar justotu-e khushbakhti" p. 146.

[^2]: George Sarton, A History of Science, vol. 1 (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press,1952), Persian trans. "Ta'rikh-e 'ilm" p. 525.

[^3]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-anwar, vol. 17, p. 48.

[^4]: Nahj al-fasahah, p. 504.

[^5]: Jagot, Paul Clement, Theories et procedes de l'hypnotisme cours
d'entrainement experimental, Persian trans. "Talqin beh nafs" by Mahmad
Nawa'i (Tehran 1362 H. Sh.), p. 19.

[^6]: Marden, Orison Swett, Persian trans. Asrar-e nikbakhti, pp.
98-101.

[^7]: Al-Harrani, Tuhaf al-'uqul, p. 489.

[^8]: Ibid., p. 224.

[^9]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar al-hikam, p. 434.

[^10]: Emerson, "Compensation," cf. Commins & Linscott, The Social
Philosophers (New York: Modern Pocket Library 1954), p. 448.

[^11]: Al-Amidi Ghurar al-hikam, p. 98.

[^12]: Ibid., p. 4i4.

[^13]: Ibid ., p. 552.

[^14]: Al-Nari, Mustadrak al-Wasa'il, vol. 2, p. 364.

[^15]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar al-hikam, p. 563.

[^16]: Ibid., p. 407.

[^17]: Al-Hurr al-'Amili, Wasail al-Shi'ah, vol. 2, p. 457.

[^18]: John Lubbock Baron Aveberry, Persian trans by Abul Qasim
Payendeh, Dar aghosh-e khushbakhti, pp. 114-115.

[^19]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar al-hikam, p. 536.

[^20]: Ibid., p. 860.

[^21]: Ibid., p. 665.

[^22]: Ibid., p. 662.

[^23]: Margguerite Malm & Herbert Sorenson, Psychology f or Living,
Persian trans. by Mahdi Jalali, Rawanshendsl baraye zistan (Tehran: Amir
Kabir Publications 1348 H. Sh.), pp. 337-339

[^24]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar al-hikam, p. 677.

[^25]: Ibid., p. 314.

[^26]: Al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 426.

[^27]: Margguerite Malm & Herbert Sorenson op. cit pp. 310-311.

[^28]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-anwar, vol. 11, p. 114.

[^29]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar al-hikam, p. 422.

[^30]: From Kelidha-ye khushbakhti, trans. from English by Ahmad Aram
(Tehran- Shirkat-e Sahami-ye Intishar, 1347 H Sh.), pp. 101-102.


