Chapter 10: Exaggerated Opinion Of Oneself
==========================================

The scope of the influence and activity of the subconscious mind is many
time more powerful, complex, and deeper than those of the conscious
mind. The discovery of the subconscious mind in psychology reveals that
we are not aware of more than nine-tenths of our own inner mental
activity. Besides what one desires consciously, there are some other
very powerful urges that govern man's being and prompt him to do many
things of which his conscious mind is unaware. Most of the times it is
actually impossible for him not to comply with the commands of that
inner power that rules man.

Many vicious and deviant tendencies and harmful habits are in fact
manifestations of the vital activities of the unconscious mind. These
bear testimony to the fiery character of the human spirit, replete with
contradictions. It is through this channel that hidden motives in man's
psychological structure work either to his benefit or to his harm. In
Brief, subconscious desires, thoughts and motives can play a powerful
role in a person's behaviour; they can perform both a formative and
refining function as well as act as a destructive and subversive force.

Under certain conditions one may come to form an appealing picture of
oneself in his mind. But this mental picture may not always correspond
to reality. This picture of one's personality totally depends on one's
capacity for adjustment, on one's condition of satisfaction or anxiety,
mental health and sickness, and it manifests itself variously in the
behaviour and activity of persons.

In every society there are many individuals who have an exaggerated
opinion of themselves and who are inclined to be unrealistic and prone
to overestimation in regard to themselves. This is an undeniable fact of
psychology.

When the mind loses its balance and equilibrium as the mirror of
reality, one's narcissistic tendencies result in the formation of an
unreal and exaggerated image of oneself, easily leading one to lose
contact with reality. These tendencies can develop from the childhood
years. Before the child reaches the stage of self-awareness and is
capable of consciously employing his power of will for the purpose of
attaining to a better life, his mental constitution and world view, as
well as his mental growth-healthy or unhealthy-and his self-image are
greatly influenced by the reactions of his family and the suggestions
and judgements of those around him. As a consequence, occasionally he
grows either to be a self-indulgent person with high expectations and
lacking the power of adjusting to society and environment, or to become
socially isolated and withdrawing. On the whole, different kinds of
behaviour play an indescribably influential role on children, whether it
is positive or negative, constructive or destructive..

Many of those who appear to be composed, healthy, and resolute suffer
from acute psychological tensions. At times these tensions may surface
and manifest certain symptoms which may appear to be quite insignificant
to the person himself or to others. That is why these reactions go
unnoticed, although these symptoms might be signs of a dangerous
pathological mental condition. It may happen that a person does
something unexpected and unpredictable which causes surprise. Such
actions are a clear sign of some strong inner tendency and a latent
tyrannical power which takes control of a person's will, against his own
inclination and interests, and influences his conduct and character.

Every action that is performed satisfies some urge arising from a habit,
and habits are part of one's character and nature. Common experience has
established that when a tendency becomes strong, it overrides other
feelings and tendencies, making a person overlook all other
considerations at such times. A proud person forms a perfect image of
his conduct and speech in his mind, considering it to be something ideal
and faultless that satisfies his superiority complex. He tries to direct
all his activities and reactions according to that artificial and
contrived image. He imagines his personal qualities and merits to be so
high that he does not believe that there exists any defect in his being.
Therefore, he cannot tolerate hearing the smallest criticism. At times,
if someone points out one of his shortcomings without any selfish motive
and in a purely objective manner, he becomes angry and mad and accuses
the other person of being hostile and malicious and of possessing guile
and invidious motives.

Such painful occasions create a storm in the spirit of the proud person
and he recoils violently in an acutely hostile manner to humiliate and
shatter the critic and thus pacify his disturbed feelings.

A hidden and unconscious power constantly drives him on to prove his
superiority over others, and that's why he does not abstain from any
action that provides him with a chance to surpass others and to show
off. Most of his associations and activities, even those which are
socially useful, take place in the first place not because he has a love
or liking for them as such but because he wants to be considered worthy
and admirable and applauded on that account. He is always in a state of
anxiety and painful tension lest others should fail to perceive him as
he wishes to be perceived.

Spinoza, the Western philosopher, says:

Pride is a joy arising from a man's having too high an opinion of
himself. this opinion a proud man will endeavour, as much as he can, to
cherish, and therefore, will love the presence of parasites or
flatterers (the definitions of these people are omitted, because they
are too well known), and will shun that of the noble minded who think of
him as is right.  
 It would take too much time to enumerate here all the evils of pride,
for the proud are subject to all emotions, but to none are they less
subject than to those of love and pity. It is necessary, however, to
observe here that a man is also called proud if he thinks too little of
other people, and so, in this sense, pride is to be defined as joy which
arises from the false opinion that we are superior to other people. This
being understood, it is easy to see that the proud man is necessarily
envious, and that he hates those above all others who are the most
praised on account of their virtues. It follows, too, that his hatred of
them is not easily overcome by love or kindness and that he is delighted
by the presence of those only who humour his weakness, and from a fool
make him a madman.[^1]

Often those who rise from the lower levels of society become proud and
overbearing on obtaining some kind of social status. In this way they
seek to compensate for the self-contempt that they feel on account of
their inadequate family background.

However, noble souls are not satisfied with a petty and confined life.
When one's goals are high, the scope of one's efforts and endeavour
increase proportionately. When one ceases pursuing one's high goals,
life stagnates, coming to a standstill due to the absence of progress.
Those who have higher aims strive unceasingly in order to build the
edifice of their greatness on the foundations of true human merits and
obtain a distinguished station. But they never like to make themselves
appear great and worthy by taking recourse in pride and by promoting
their personality, for they know well that pride does not bring
greatness and merit to anyone. Men of merit are those who know
themselves well and make constant progress in all their activities; they
do not try to impress others with their imaginary greatness, expecting
their approbation and admiration.

Wealth and Pride
----------------

Among the things which often make men proud and conceited is affluence.
Those who fall prey to egotism in this way, due to their utter
ignorance, view the poor with contempt and consider their existence as
something superfluous and worthless, being oblivious of the fact that
wealth is not limited to money and material assets. There are many
people who live in conditions of material poverty but who must be
counted among the richest of men by virtue of their genuine spiritual
assets and merits. Often these individuals are held in honour and high
esteem by rich people due to their spiritual plenitude. This is also
entirely true of nations. A nation is richer which has a greater number
of great and wise men than other nations.

Material wealth is incapable of procuring felicity and comfort. Most of
the anxieties and miseries of people are a result of greed. There are
many persons who lack peace and comfort despite possessing enormous
wealth. Moreover, property can even be a source of evil and affliction,
darkening the heart of the rich with pride and landing them in vice,
corruption, and sin, thus obliterating the foundations of their
happiness like a devastating flood.

Material possessions make one of the prerequisites of comfort, not
comfort itself. It may be said that the quest of wealth is like an
endless chain; the wise person employs it by subjecting it to his
control, but the foolish man binds his neck with it.

Some people think that they can obtain peace and security through
affluence, but they do not know that the further one advances in the
quest of wealth, the farther does he recede from his own self, losing
his genuine human feelings in its mazes. It often happens that as soon
as a person outstrips his friends in respect of financial welfare, pride
and conceit lead him to sever the ties of friendship and attachment with
his comrades.

Epictetus says in this regard:

"Get them [i.e. riches] then," says he, "that we may have them." If I
can get them and keep my self-respect, honour, magnanimity, show me the
way and I will get them. But if you call on me to lose the good things
that are mine, in order that you may win things that are not good, look
how unfair and thoughtless you are. And which do you really prefer?
Money, or a faithful, modest friend? Therefore help me rather to keep
these qualities, and do not expect from me actions which will make me
lose them.

The Pride of Learning
---------------------

One of the dangerous stages in the course of personal advancement and
achievement where one may be affected with pride is that of scholarship.

One's learning may appear to be so important and precious that he comes
to consider his scholarly capacity and merit as being superior to that
of anyone else. It is interesting that most of those who fall prey to
the pride of knowledge and consider themselves extraordinary beings with
special rights, are those whose learning is of a low or mediocre level.

knew a person who looked down upon the admirable learning and scholarly
achievements of others, or basically he would not consider them
noteworthy at all. His own learning and knowledge, however, were of a
mediocre quality and his own personal worth was perhaps small. Whenever
in a gathering there was a mention of someone's scholarship and
achievements and everyone present expressed his opinion, he would nod
affirmatively with a contemptuous smile. But when speaking of some of
his own inconsequent achievements he would discuss the matter by giving
such a long prelude and with such elaborate flourish as if no one had
ever performed a greater service.

A Western scholar says:

Had we known the world better than we do and were it possible for us to
compare what we know with what we are ignorant of, we would have
believed differently. But it is a fact that our knowledge is no more
than a minute fraction of what remains unknown. What elements are there
all of whose uses are well understood by us? The complete natural
history of which plant and animal is known to us from the beginning to
the end? There are various forces and agents all around us about which
we still know nothing. The thick curtain that has hung for ages before
our eyes has not yet been removed. We are still like primary students in
the great school of nature. We only observe many things, but we are
unaware of their secrets.

The world of thought is like an endless ocean on whose shores one stands
watching the immense waters and the unceasing waves. Those who slip and
fall into the water struggle uselessly with the waves without hardly
getting anywhere.  
 Man always tries to unveil the face of reality and take a step forward
on the path of science and knowledge. But our problems increase with
every step that we advance on this path.

What we know is like the diameter of a circle and the unknown like the
area circumscribed by it. As we increase the diameter, the area of the
circle increases several times. Perhaps, in the future, our posterity
will be able to advance further on this path and discover new secrets of
the universe. But we, despite our unfortunate pride and egotism, are
forced to fall on our knees and confess that we are ignorant of the
secrets of existence and know next to nothing in this regard. Why go
far? We do not yet understand even ourselves. We do not know what we are
and what relation do we have to nature. Yes, we don't know anything, and
so are forced to put a question mark on everything that we come across,
and pass on.[^2]

The first prerequisite in the quest of knowledge and for understanding
any matter is that one's intent in study and discussion should not be
negative and hostile But the proud and narcissistic person tries to take
an unfair advantage of others' statements and argues in an unseemly
manner. Actually his aim is not to discover the truth but to establish
his superiority and prove his learning through debate.

In order to attain self-knowledge, it is necessary first to discover the
facts through a correct method and to be make sure of their truth and
correctness. We can reach the truth better in this way than through
sterile controversy. In matters whose exact nature is unknown to us and
which we understand only vaguely, our primary aim in discovering the
truth should be to resolve the ambiguities surrounding the issue so that
the matter can be seen in its simplicity denuded of complexities.

Destructive Activities
----------------------

The harmful effects of pride affect many aspects of life. In view of
their harm it is all the more necessary to give thought to curing this
spiritual malady.

If there were a lesser role of pride and conceit in conversations and
debates, there would be an automatic decrease in many hostilities and
confrontations. That is because many needless conflicts and
confrontations between individuals and groups arise only because they
are motivated by pride. In their effort to wrest some apparent gain
which is seemingly to their advantage, they cause themselves and others
much harm by failing to solve their problems through fair and sound
logic and mutual understanding.

A proud person may become prone to other such undesirable qualities as
envy, stinginess, and malice. A perpetual desire to see others fail may
take possession of his entire being. If he sees someone who is better
and more capable at performing some task, his heart overflows with envy,
even in matters essentially unrelated to his own profession. This
feeling may becomes so painful and unbearable and such a hostile passion
may gradually come to dominate him that all his productive efforts are
over shadowed by his urge to defeat his rival. His activities in life
are not of immediate concern to him. His ultimate goal is to see his
rival fail. As his activities assume a largely destructive aspect, his
mental and physical energies are wasted. Whenever he gets a chance he
tries by all means to satisfy the demonic urge that rules his being and
intentions.

Naturally, everybody shuns and avoids the company of proud and conceited
individuals, in the same way that they are scared of humility in their
relations with others. This acute tendency destroys even the most
valuable and strongest of bonds. It is an undeniable fact that
indifference to the feelings of others and a contemptuous disregard for
them produce a reaction resulting in one's being treated in a
contemptuous and insulting manner by them. The proud person gives
significance only to his own feelings and is totally lacks consideration
for others. This one-sided attitude creates a contradiction between his
wishes on the one hand and the insulting and indifferent attitude of
others on the other. With a shattered spirit and an agitated heart he is
forced to face the blows of unexpected and unceasing indifference that
he has to encounter.

Congenial manners, which have a close relation with a person's inner
moral state, not only leave a desirable effect on one's life but have a
profound influence on other people's hearts. Those who really possess
outstanding merits and moral virtues are like a refreshing spring which
appeases the thirst of their associates with its fresh and pleasant
water. Modesty and true refinement become real when they arise from
one's nature. Otherwise those who resort to artificial means in this
regard only deceive themselves. Everyone's spirit and mode of thinking
is visible through his conduct and it is not possible to conceal them by
any means.

Spiritual Health
----------------

Life is action and effort through and through. At times one is
successful and triumphant in the course of this struggle; at other times
one has to face defeat. Those who succeed on the stage of life may fall
prey to pride and conceit as a result of some limited success in their
work or profession. Pride overshadows their entire being. On occasions
those who are unsuccessful in some matters may ascribe their defeat to
bad luck or to the envy of malicious enemies and the obstacles created
by them. As a result they surrender themselves totally to despair.
Although failure and defeat are bitter and unpleasant and success and
triumph are pleasant and sweet, in success one should not become proud
of one's expertise and wisdom, nor should one fall prey to endless
despair and regret in failure.

If one were to remain realistic and composed in success as well as in
defeat and observe the golden mean between the two extremes, that would
be the sign of a healthy spirit. However, the attainment of this degree
of moderation requires a tough and serious struggle against one's ego.

The makeup of man's psychic life has been designed in such a way that it
has its own limits like everything else in this world. The tensions
caused by failure and deprivation may be evaded, but they would reappear
in disguise to take a destructive and rebellious form.

The difficulty of attaining to self-knowledge in regard to one's
spiritual needs is an undeniable reality. But short-sighted people think
that they know themselves better than anyone else, that they are aware
of the causes that lie behind their thoughts, motives and behaviour, and
they know their inner being thoroughly.

The real causes that lie behind wrong and unfair judgements and
misunderstandings are errors arising from self-knowledge. The main
factor in these difficulties should be considered to lie in the
ignorance of the limits of one's innate capacities, the role of
heredity, of education and environment, in one's psychological makeup,
and in the ignorance of one's inadequacies and the hold of desires and
lusts. In the same way that ancient philosophy stressed the principle of
knowing oneself, knowledge of the elements of self- knowledge is
considered the most important principle of mental health by contemporary
psychology, which has made interesting and valuable discoveries in its
study of human nature.

The development of good human qualities in the soul requires that one
should be aware of one's spiritual needs, the way the human psyche
works, and the implications of one's undesirable feelings, each of which
is a result of inner actions and reactions. Moreover, one should be
aware to some extent of the emotions that derive from complex sources so
as to be able to distinguish between misleading desires and genuine
aspirations and capacities. One should be capable of defending oneself
against dangers that constantly threaten one's personality and spiritual
well-being, being extremely vigilant not to surrender one's life to
illusive imaginings and vain dreams for the sake of some imaginary form
of happiness.

All those who suffer from psychological complexes and ailments are
either those who are constantly possessed by nightmarish despair and
despondency or are individuals who are ignorant of their latent
capacities and energies so as to be able to compensate for their
inadequacies with the help of their own powers and to replace
deficiencies with merits. Accordingly, it is necessary that they take
upon themselves the arduous task of self-discovery by making an
all-round effort.

As a matter of principle, man, by virtue of his passion for
acquisitiveness, is greatly troubled by every obstacle and hurdle that
frustrates the fulfilment of his desires and hinders his monopolistic
and unshared control over events. It is these obstacles that give rise
to aggression, malice, and anguish. Transitory desires and incendiary
lusts can easily cause failure in making correct judgements. The Noble
Messenger, may God bless him and his Household, warned people against
following desires:

*Beware of (misleading) desires, for desires make one blind and
deaf.*[^3]

Ignorance of One's Inadequacies
-------------------------------

Pride and vanity often do not allow one to be aware of one's
inadequacies and the limitations of one's abilities. This ignorance
about one's inadequacies is the main obstacle to spiritual maturity and
the development of an independent personality. As a consequence, one is
kept from compensating for these inadequacies and removing his defects
which can be easily amended in many cases,

Imam 'Ali, may Peace be upon him, said:

*The proud and vainglorious person is unaware of his own defects. Were
he to see the merits of others, he would have been upset by his defects
and inadequacies [and taken steps to amend them].*[^4]

'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, may Peace be upon him, considers
pride and complacency the result of the mental inadequacy of their
victims. He says:

Se*lf-complacency is the evidence of the weakness of one's
intellect.*[^5]

*Pride is destructive for one's intellectual faculty.*[^6]

Spinoza, the well-known European philosopher, writes:

The man ... who is ignorant of himself is ignorant of the foundation of
all the virtues, and consequently is ignorant of all the virtues. Again,
to act in conformity with virtue is nothing but acting according to the
guidance of reason, and he who acts according to the guidance of reason
must necessarily know that he acts according to the guidance of reason.
He, therefore, who is ignorant of himself, and consequently (as we have
just shown) altogether ignorant of all the virtues, cannot in any way
act in conformity with virtue, that is to say, is altogether impotent in
mind. Therefore, the greatest pride or despondency indicates the
greatest impotence of mind.[^7]

It is possible that things which appear to be real to us may turn out to
have no reality. It is with the criteria of intellect and reason that
realities are distinguished from illusions. Those whose eyesight is weak
use spectacles, but there are no spectacles to compensate for the
weakness of intellectual vision. To overcome it, one has to attend to
his inner being and resort to an analytic examination of one's inner
self. Carefully and vigilantly one must distinguish one's true
capacities from deceptive and harmful tendencies. There are many who
neglect their mental energies without using them for personal
improvement or social betterment. They remain without even a superficial
knowledge of their wonderful inner powers and energies, until there
emerges an opportunity for the manifestation of their fruitful
capacities. Therefore an enormous amount of beneficial capacities are
wasted by us without any knowledge of their potent character.

A person discovers his defects and inadequacies but does not give them
any significance, or considers them negligible, that means that he
considers them a necessary part of his being. Self-examination and self-
scrutiny, however, require time, attention and care. It is wrong to
imagine that one can discover one's spiritual characteristics in a short
time and identify one's weak points and inadequacies. Knowing oneself
and being able to confront certain terrible inner qualities require a
clear insight and great courage. These cannot be achieved except
gradually and with continuous care and perseverance. Nevertheless, man
can attain brilliant success in his struggle against inner indignities
by bringing about a beneficial change within himself with his faculties
of thought and will. Imam 'All, may Peace be upon him, said:

*One who examines his defects and inadequacies succeeds in discovering
them.*[^8]

Self-love, not Egoism
---------------------

Islam provides man with reliable criteria and adequate methods for the
fulfilment of his psychological needs. It devotes itself to the reform
and refinement of human nature through a comprehensive and all-round
program. The rules and regulating devices that Islam employs for
moderating human wants give a burnish to the human spirit and intellect,
thus basing all human effort on true reality. That is because if
emotions and feelings are left uncontrolled, they will not only be
harmful for others but will also create psychological disorders and
conflicts which will lead to the individual's degeneration and fall.

Self-love is one of the factors whose significant role in life cannot be
ignored. Were it to be oriented towards a sublime goal it would impel
man towards virtue and merit.

However, there is a great difference between self-love and narcissism.
Self-love is a sign of spiritual greatness and an expansive personality,
which prompts man toward humbleness and sacrifice. Egotism on the other
hand restricts the scope of one's thoughts and leads human nature into
abasement and indignity.

Imam 'Ali, may Peace be upon him, said:

*The humblest of men is one who has a high regard for his personal
worth.*[^9]

Jagot says:

Egocentrism means sacrificing others for the sake of one's wishes and
happiness, while self-assertion is a psychological state that is
distinguished by the determination to develop one's personality.
Egocentrism is always accompanied with extreme weakness, whereas
self-assertion is accompanied with an extraordinary strength.

If you resolve not to surrender to the will of others and you think that
its imposition is contrary to your health, vitality and personal success
and effectiveness, you are a self-asserting person.  
 But this does not imply that you should be insensitive and unresponsive
to others' indignity and misfortune. I am only suggesting that instead
of dissipating one's energies in a thousand directions one should store
them for opportune occasions. Self-assertion does not preclude self-
sacrifice either, but subjects it to a certain principle, and a
self-asserting person is most willing to assist someone in a desperate
condition or to make a friend happy.

Morally speaking, one who does not have sufficient strength to preserve
his courage and mental equanimity in the midst of problems should avoid
the company of weak people and join the ranks of the strong. Otherwise
he will soon find weakness settling upon him, leading to torpidity and
lack of courage. It is the duty of everyone to respond to the wishes and
aspirations of others. But on the other hand there is a simple criterion
of a correct balance between egoism and self-sacrifice, and that is
making an effort to accomplish one's duty whether it is meant for
personal or general benefit.  
 There is no doubt that if the members of a nation resolve to develop
their personalities they will attain to the highest degree of
equilibrium efficiency, and dynamism. Accordingly, there is nothing
better than spiritual training, and it is self-assertion that develops
self-denial to its highest degree. In fact, moral rectitude is a product
of spiritual balance.[^10]

Islam suggests every means that is required for the development of this
strong urge, which is based on very firm foundations, giving great care
to its refinement. But it also negates the same urge when it assumes a
destructive aspect under the influence of rebellious appetites. In fact,
one who allows himself to be led by this unguided and devastating urge
ruins the foundations of his well-being and will meet a blameworthy end.

Self-love is approved by Islam when it has a right and straight
orientation, is free from any kind of deviation and crookedness, and is
not subversive. It should be so oriented as to secure happiness in this
world as well as everlasting felicity, nothing greater than which is
conceivable. A Muslim who discovers reality with an open mind and a
clear insight will never surrender everlasting felicity for transitory
pleasures, which are moreover mixed with all types of pains and
anxieties. Real love and sympathy for himself do not allow him to yield
to the indignity and bondage of base and destructive appetites, which
would moreover invite everlasting punishment and endless torment. A
self-love that leads one to such a fate is not at all worthy of the
sublime station of the human being.

Real and Abiding Love
---------------------

Islam wants man to attain to the various degrees of love in life and to
prove his worthiness for reaching them. It begins by infusing the love
of God into the souls of human beings, teaching them to put the love of
God, Who has bestowed upon him the gift of life and all his powers,
faculties, and talents, before attachment to everything else, for this
love is the most significant principle of life in the real world. In
view of all this grace and munificence, no one is more worthy of love
and sincere devotion than the Divine Being. This fact becomes totally
clear to us when we examine all the various levels of love, from passing
and transitory attachments to real and eternal love. Having filled the
heart with the love of God, it creates in every individual in society
the bonds of deep and heartfelt love between humans As all men have been
created from a single soul and have descended from one ancestor, they
should love each other mutually and treat each other with kindness and
sincere feeling, as they are brethren in respect of their origin and
common interests. It presents such a wonderful picture of the rights of
human brotherhood that it drives the inner being of humans to movement
and action and furnishes the motives and the zeal for initiating men
into such a sincere and pure love. It is in this way that it creates a
self-love within man's being that is balanced and harmonious, developing
it in such a fashion as to liberate him of the bondage of pride and
egoism in the shadow of that balance and equilibrium so that he never
develops any extreme egocentric tendencies.

Greatness and majesty exclusively belong to the Divine Being, Who in Its
Holiness transcends need and dependence. In fact all existents are
dependent upon Him in all aspects:

***O mankind, you are all dependent on God and God is Self-sufficient,
All- laudable. (35:15)***

It is as a result of deviance from the heavenly program of human
education that leads men into the afflictions of pride and conceit. In
one of its passages, the Noble Qur'an calls the proud person's attention
to his abjectness and lowliness and brings down his spirit from the
heights of conceit and baseless imaginings:

***And walk not in the earth exultantly; certainly you will never pierce
through the earth, not reach the mountains in height. (17:37)***

Those who have fixed their eyes on the highest Source of being do not
become subject to pride and exultation when blessed with affluence. That
is because Islam enjoins modesty and moderation and does not like pride
and self-aggrandisement.

***Turn not thy cheek away from the people in scorn, and walk not in the
earth exultantly; God loves not any man proud and boastful. (31:18)***

The Characteristic Sense of Worthiness
--------------------------------------

The Muslim's sense of worthiness is not related to any success in life
and on account of living in ease and prosperity. Rather he has a feeling
of worthiness and merit from the first moment that the light of faith is
illumined in his heart. He is not moved by false and fake values
fabricated by humans and is aware of the realities of life. Islam
blesses him with a free spirit, a clear vision, and an inner moderation
with the help of which he is able to rise above the abject level of
corporeality and climb to the heights of human sublimity. He makes use
of the material world without becoming bogged down in the mire of
terrestrial pleasures.

It is not possible for fake values to overshadow his divine values and
to dominate his spirit and perceptions, for they are too worthless to
form the basis of his sense of worthiness. Furthermore, he does not bow
his head before anyone and does not feel lowly and weak in front of any
power. He refrains from any kind of undignified humility which may
compromise his personal worth. His humility is exclusive to his relation
with the Sacred Divine Being and Its Majesty, but he feels powerful and
steady in all other states.

God exhorts the faithful to preserve this station in all situations and
stages:

***And you are the upper ones it you are believers. (3:139)***

***If a wound touches you, a like wound already has touched the heathen;
such days We deal out in turn among men. (3:140)***

In this verse, the Qur'an reminds the Muslims of their superiority at a
moment when they had been defeated in battle and the enemy had been
victorious. That is because this superiority arises from their faith in
God and attachment to the Source of reality, and these qualities
transform them into a dynamic force. This superiority is not obtained
through victory against the enemy so as to be lost at the moment of
defeat.

The Muslims enjoyed an upper hand over others because they believed in
faith as the highest of human merits and assets. This infused them with
an enthusiasm and zeal arising from faith. They had been emancipated
from all the bondages that had bound them and had triumphed over them.
This discovery was solely a product of the guidance provided by the
Qur'an and the Prophet's teaching.

Pride and egoism are big hurdles in the way of progress and advancement
in life. The complacency created by pride results in the stagnation and
backwardness of the proud. In the same way, the lack of self-
satisfaction and possession of higher aims in life lead to continuous
progress and edification.

'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, may Peace be upon him, makes this
point in two of his aphorisms:

*Pride and vanity are obstacles in the way of man's progress and
growth.*[^11]

*One who is dissatisfied with his performance is prompted thereby to
improve his work.*[^12]

He also says:

*One who is proud of his fair state and characteristics will fail to
improve himself.*[^13]

William John Reilly, the famous scholar, writes:

I have found that certain troublesome and harmful ideas and beliefs in
my mind, which cause me mental pain and sorrow more than any other
beliefs, are those which relate to myself! Now how did r discover this
fact? Well, let me tell you something about my own opinion about my
voice, for most people like their own voices. The only thing whose
possession caused me satisfaction was having an exquisite voice.  
 I have made many public speeches and had even won a gold medal at the
age of eighteen years. I imagined that I had a melodious, refined and
pleasant voice.

One day I took a tape of one of my speeches on a topic made for the
radio and listened to it carefully as any other listener. This was the
first time that I was listening to my voice as any other listener. God,
suddenly I was shocked. My voice was much poorer than what I had
imagined it to be. It was like a moan, suppressed, inarticulate,
colourless, flat and painful to the ears. What was worse, while I
listened to it there were several other people in the room. I was upset.
I explained to those present that I was not feeling quite well when I
had made this speech, that I had no experience of the radio and sound
recording when my voice was being recorded.

But while their attention was turned elsewhere I played other tapes of
my raucous voice and the same kind of sounds that wounded one's nerves
arose from them. Finally after listening to all the tapes of my speeches
I had to admit that the belief that I had held for several years about
my voice was wrong. For the first time I had to set aside my vanity and
try hard to improve and refine my voice. It seemed a hopeless job at
first, but whenever I remembered what Demosthenes had done I would cheer
up. I am still working on it.

This experience with my voice taught me one thing, that it was possible
to launch a prolonged struggle for my self-improvement. Until I could
bear the humiliation of having to accept this defect of mine I did not
begin to make any progress in improving myself.

A shattered pride and conceit make man realistic and lead to improvement
and advancement. This reform and progress take place only when we attend
to facts and set aside our vain ideas and beliefs about ourselves.
Otherwise we remain in ignorance and darkness and keep our own cherished
self from reform and progress.[^14]

Due to the aberrations in his outlook, the vain person at times imagines
himself to possess certain merits that are in fact absent in him. Imam
Sadiq, may Peace be upon him, said:

*One who is proud of himself and his conduct is such due to deviance
from the right path of guidance, and, contrary to reality, he claims to
possess merits which he lacks.*[^15]

The proud and egocentric person is like a silkworm wound up in the
cocoon of his own fancies. He is so intoxicated with the liquor of
egoism that he considers the whole world to revolve around himself.

Imam 'Ali, may Peace be upon him, said:

*The intoxication induced by ignorance and pride is more lasting and
enduring than the intoxication produced by liquors.*[^16]

[^1]: Spinoza, Ethics, cf. Persian trans. Falsafeh nazari, p. 106.

[^2]: Dar justoju-e khushbakhti, pp. 58, 219.

[^3]: Nahj al-fasahah, p. 201.

[^4]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar al-hikam wa durar al-kalim, p. 95.

[^5]: Ibid., p. 424.

[^6]: Ibid., p. 26.

[^7]: Spinoza, op. cit., cf. Falsafeh nazari, p. 106.

[^8]: Ghurar al-hikam. p. 614.

[^9]: Ibid., p. 195.

[^10]: Paul Clement Jagot, Persian trans. Qudrat-e iradeh, pp. 70-71.

[^11]: Nahj al-balaghah ed. Fayd al-Islam, p. 1157.

[^12]: Ghurar al-hikam, p. 668.

[^13]: Ibid., p. 677.

[^14]: Tafakkur-e sahih, pp. 50-53.

[^15]: Shaykh 'Abbas al-Qummi, Safinat al-Bihar, vol. 2, p. 161.

[^16]: Ghurar al-hikam, p. 440.


