Chapter 11: The Waves of Change Created by Outstanding Personalities
====================================================================

In times of utmost darkness in the history of mankind there have
appeared certain geniuses whose names shine on the forehead of the proud
pages of history. With their outstanding spiritual qualities, these
historic men could bring about great changes on the stage of human life.
They dazzled the world with their actions as if their very being were
like a brilliant torch whose light would endure forever.

At times the waves of change created by outstanding personalities who
enter the social arena are so wide and extensive that they encompass all
human societies and they make an intense and far-reaching impact on the
ideas of mankind. In fact it is these brilliant figures who change the
countenance of the world and they even conquer weak and feeble
temperaments with their powerful influence and draw them after
themselves, giving them morale and the light of hope.

On the contrary, there are many people whose arena of activity in life
is very limited and confined. The book of their life draws to a close
with feeble movements and their lives terminate in oblivion. The
flickering and slim candle of their existence is at last extinguished in
total darkness.

The difference between these kind of personalities is to be sought in
their ethos, because the variance in the levels of persons depends on
the extent and scope of their spirits and the amount of their inner
power.

What is the relation between personalities and social change? Are
persons a product of the world's events or is it that the events are
brought about by outstanding individuals? Scientific studies show that
the individual and society reciprocally influence each other, and while
man is influenced by environment, he also brings about changes in the
environment. It is not possible to study the individual by placing him
outside the environment of social life. However, at the same time, it is
individuals who can change the conditions of their environment with
their spiritual power and transform the face of society.

The basic factor in social changes and relations is the power of will,
whether it belongs to an individual or to a community. But the
significance and value of the individual is greater, because it is the
leaders who guide the national potentials towards desirable goals and
lead the destiny of society towards a shining and glorious future.

In order that we may be able to carry out the judgements of reason, our
being grants us a faculty called will. The human will is the resultant
of two forces that act upon it. On the one hand is the force of instinct
that acts upon it. On the other it is influenced by the intellect and
reason.

The inability arising from the weakness of will is the result of the
opposite forces within man. Inability does not mean that one is totally
devoid of the power of decision making. Rather, he is capable of
carrying out any act that he wants. But he has no power to translate his
intentions from the stage of the mind to that of external reality.

There are many individuals who suffer with the inadequacy of an inner
light. They might possess extensive means in life. However, despite
their capabilities and the special and valuable opportunities that may
arise for them, they are not very effectual, although they have fixed
their gaze on a higher plane of life. They lack the power and
determination to climb the ladder of progress and expect others to
perform hard and taxing tasks for them, tasks which are themselves the
means to growth and development. If they do not themselves take an
initiative to realise their goals and endeavour for their sake, what
else can help them in materialising their hopes?

Often they make beneficial and profound plans, but they fail to obtain
any kind of results. They draw up great practical plans which never
reach the point of implementation.

Lack of Will Power, the Obstacle to Success
-------------------------------------------

With a weak will, one's life in its different aspects is sure to end in
defeat. Misfortunes multiply as a result of an inert will, and neither
talent nor genius can be substitutes for a powerful will. What is the
use if one possesses outstanding talents and gifts but is unable to
employ them beneficially in reaching his goals? Knowledge and learning
are useless when one cannot employ these assets fruitfully with the help
of will in reaching one's goal.

Think what would have been the state of man if he had been devoid of the
faculty of will and determination. What would have been the state of the
world and what results would have been achieved by the law of evolution
and progress? A study of history reveals the fact that basically all
human inventions and discoveries have been due to men of determination,
who overcame all the obstacles and hardships in their way through
perseverance and an unflagging determination, as a result of which they
attained brilliant victories. Problems and hardships are bound to vanish
before the genius and determination of someone who does not know defeat.

When Napoleon wanted to take his heavily armed forces through the
dangerous and difficult pass of Saint Bernard, he consulted his military
experts. He asked them if it was possible to get through the pass. The
experts went into deep thought and they replied with doubt and
hesitation that there might be a very slim chance of getting through the
pass. On hearing their statements, Napoleon made a firm decision, and
with a strong determination and without loss of time he gave the orders
to advance.

England and Austria considered the decision of this powerful French
general as a form of madness and recklessness, for it seemed improbable
that he would be able to cross the Alps with all his equipment, heavy
artillery and sixty thousand soldiers. But Napoleon had in his mind
Messina, which was then under siege and the Austrian forces also
threatened Nice.

When this dangerous and most difficult operation was carried out
successfully and Napoleon crossed the Alps with his armies, some said
that what Napoleon had done was not a difficult task after all. Others
said that if they had done it before Napoleon, they would certainly have
succeeded.

Many military commanders had the capacity and adequate power like
Napoleon to carry out such an amazing operation. Only they lacked the
necessary determination, and uncertainty, doubt and vacillation kept
them from taking a decisive step and utilising appropriate
opportunities. Instead of advancing they retreated, while Napoleon's
firm decisions and quick movements earned this great French general such
victories which left the world in amazement and wonder. The
extraordinary volume of his daily work amazed everyone who knew him. He
had the power to instil dynamism in the most dispirited of soldiers and
to put the spirit of courage into the most timid of individuals. He
would often sit through the night reading reports and answering letters.

There is no secret formula of success. Rather success is the natural
result of effort and endeavour in carrying out one's work. The foremost
of persons in this world who overcome obstacles and difficulties are
those who have a strong will power and who, like the eagle, make use of
strong winds to climb to elevated heights. For this kind of individuals,
who have initiative, no difficulty can cause them to abandon their
decisions; rather, they consider defeat as a bridge to victory. Their
morale grows in the midst of hardships and whatever the stage of life
they may be in, they can always make a mark in the world.

Vigilance in the Midst of Problems
----------------------------------

Basically some persons do not come to themselves and wake up unless
confronted with hardship. A tree that has been forced to make a place
for itself in the midst of rocks grows to be hardy and strong due to its
constant struggle against unfavourable factors. It will be able to
withstand storms and resist unfavourable conditions.

A psychologist writes:

Young people should be made to understand that in order to achieve their
goals, they should not expect a smooth ride over a well-paved road. Few
have ever gotten anywhere without facing disappointing obstacles.
Whenever we confront problems in the right spirit, not only they will
not be a hindrance but will be helpful to our progress. No exercise is
more beneficial than the effort to overcome problems.

The psychologists have shown that more than thirty-five per cent of
ordinary people do not make use of the years of their lives. Even those
who are conspicuously active and attain to considerable positions and
ultimately obtain success, make use of only a fifty per cent of their
lifetime.

There are some people who cease making progress on reaching a certain
stage and they cannot extend the scope of their activity to advance
beyond the point they have reached to a higher altitude or a more
distant horizon. This kind of persons actually possess the essential
merits necessary for growth only to an inadequate extent and their
capacity for progress is limited. One's ability and will power are the
greatest asset for progress and development, and one may either squander
this capital or invest it with profit.

Every step that one takes is the product of one's ideas, will, and
determination. If these are weak and insignificant, the product of one's
work will also not be significant or valuable. When persons with a weak
will make a decision, they are shaky and beset with doubt and
hesitation. A small remark from others makes them change their mind and
revise their plans. Weak persons are perpetually vacillating and of a
divided mind. With their uncertainty and flickering character they prove
that they are not their own masters and, like a leaf carried about by
the wind, have to follow the will of others in all situations.
Hesitation and indecision are often equal to failure.

One who constantly wastes his time worrying about trifling details and
delving on insignificant matters, only fretting and brooding over his
problems under the influence of diverse motives without taking action,
certainly wastes his ability, energy and time by delay and
procrastination. He will be unable to reach the sources of success.

How often it happens that precious time and valuable talents are wasted
as a result of indecision and delay, and a promising life is turned into
defeat and failure! When one falls victim to such a fruitless and
sterile spirit, what power can help him overcome the obstacles faced in
life? Imagine a contrary situation, of someone who is not of a divided
mind and stable in his decisions. He does not waste his time waiting for
some favourable accident to occur. Rather, having a determined faith in
his own ability, he does not abandon his righteous goal due to the
objections of critics. Nothing can make him turn away from the path that
he has chosen rightly. He discards any kind of stray thoughts and plans
contrary to his goal which may cross his mind. On encountering such
persons in life one can well appreciate the strength of their character
and the great value of the achievements of those who combine within
themselves the power of several individuals.

In any case, success is not possible without decisiveness, because faith
in one's success is itself half of success, and victory comes to those
who are determined to be victorious.

There are many people who cannot pursue a task to its end due to
indecision. For instance, if they are attracted by a profession and
trade, for some time they pursue it with great interest and enthusiasm.
But as soon as they face difficulties, their interest and enthusiasm
disappears and they become disappointed. Next time they take up some
other trade that has brought success and advancement to some people.

Thus they remain shaky and uncertain all their lives and constantly keep
on shifting from one profession to another. While selecting a profession
or trade they do not make use of their minds and their power of
judgement . Before they can discover the secret behind others' success
and evaluate their own performance and achievement in life, suddenly it
dawns upon them that they have spent a lifetime in learning and
abandoning various trades. That is because they could not remain firm in
their decisions or persevere in their work until the final fruitful
stages. They discover that throughout life they have missed all the
appropriate chances and opportunities, which arise only rarely.

One of the afflictions of the person with a weak will is that he is
always subject to his desires and caprices. He might be able to
distinguish the right way, but unfortunately what he chooses is a
deviant path. He continues on a course of action so long as his desires
and appetites do not dissuade him. Moreover, even a minor accident is
sufficient to render him helpless and despondent and to bring him on his
knees.

We need a strong and steady will in order to resist the pressure of
misleading and destructive desires. A basic condition for being able to
derive a right and desirable result from our will is to follow the
dictates of reason in our decisions and exercising our will. There is a
world of difference between a higher will reliant on reason and
conscience and an impulsive will that acts under the impulses of
perverse feelings, pride and egoism. While the first is the source of
human felicity and happiness, being fundamental to success, the other
leads to wretchedness and degeneration.

One who employs his will to satisfy his selfish motives and to commit
all sorts of offences and acts contrary to human dignity is in fact
devoid of freedom and is a captive of carnal appetites. One comes across
many dark and bloody pages in the history of mankind which are a
consequence of this kind of unruly will.

The person who resorts to suicide on encountering the slightest hardship
in life has a weak intellect and lacks courage and manliness. That is
because he succumbs to the problems and difficulties of life, which
proliferate in all spheres of human life, and confesses to his own
weakness and abasement by his action.

The Scope of Human Possibilities
--------------------------------

Everything in the realm of being has to begin its journey on the path of
growth and development and advance towards perfection in order to be
able to realise its capacities and potentialities to the highest degree.
Man is also not an exception to this general law.

One of the fundamental problems of the human being is how is it to
develop its essential being during different phases of life in order to
attain to the highest degree and peak of humanity. Before everything
else man should become aware of the extent of his capacities and
potentialities that lie latent in his being. He should realise that he
has all the worthiness to acquire the greatest gifts that God has
bestowed upon him. In that case the very foundations of his
self-confidence would be more stable and firm. His latent energies and
faculties would awaken and become active. These faculties have an
extraordinarily great power in broadening the scope of life and have
sufficient capacity for growth and edification.

The lack of self-confidence on the part of most persons is not due to
the lack of possibilities but due to the absence of self-knowledge.
There are some people who have useful and effective scientific ideas,
but due to the lack of confidence in their innate gifts and capacities,
they never cross the threshold of their thoughts. Doubt, uncertainty,
and fear of defeat are signs of weakness. How often has this lack of
confidence buried talented and innovative minds and what great
innovations and original and profound ideas have been buried under the
ashes of oblivion!

When one realises that every task and activity involves a new power, an
asset which one never imagined that one possessed before it came to
one's knowledge, its manifestation paves the way for further progress
and one becomes ready to acquire more significant powers. Hence one who
wants to draw the maximum benefit from life and to benefit from every
opportunity must first acquire confidence and will power and then devote
himself to developing and strengthening it.

Alexis Carrel says:

For the preservation of life it is not enough to protect it; rather,
life must be made simple, more profound, dynamic and noble. That is, we
must increase our physical and psychological activities in respect of
intensity, quality, and quantity. Only strength leads to edification.
The power that we need is not like the muscular power of an athlete or
the spiritual power of an ascetic, or the mental power of a philosopher
and scholar. The power that we seek is the harmony as well as the
endurance of physical organs and the mind. Also the capacity to endure
fatigue, changes of weather, hunger, lack of sleep, grief, suffering,
and ultimately the will to hope and act, a physical and mental strength
immune to defeat, and a joy that fills all our being.  
 How can we acquire this power? The only way to attain it is daily and
regular moderate effort. That involves the involuntary effort of all the
bodily organs and the voluntary effort of will and intelligence. In the
course of daily and regular exercises one must gradually learn how to
create discipline in life, how to follow the said principles and become
master of oneself.  
 Similarly, with brief and regular effort one must try to master one's
emotions, anger, indifference, lethargy, pride, desires, fatigue and
pain. This exercise is necessary for all civilised people and the great
error of modern education is to ignore it. One cannot extend the scope
of the force of life within oneself without the intervention of the
will.[^1]

Some people do not wish to pay the appropriate price for a brilliant
life. They are always after some quick and simple means, although its
outcome and product should be of little significance and worth. They
refrain from endeavouring for what may give dignity and brilliance to
life. They avoid the responsibilities which play a basic role in
improving their selves and purifying their souls and which would broaden
their mental horizon and pave the way to success.

However, those who have trained themselves to shoulder various
responsibilities become fitter and their state would be many times
better than of those whose lives revolve around petty responsibilities.
They have a much wider field open before them and can traverse the
various levels of advancement more easily.

The higher one's ideals are, the greater is the power that drives one
towards his goals and this depends on his faith and on the extent of the
effort that he makes for their realisation. Ultimately, it is here that
one must seek the secret of man's triumph over obstacles and hardships.

The capacity to distinguish between what is good and bad and the
understanding of vices and virtues is not solely sufficient for the
attainment of felicity. Rather, that which is of utmost importance is to
possess the power of action in life. A person may know perfectly what is
good and bad and may even consider himself responsible in relation to
the various duties that surround him and feel the necessity of
fulfilling them scrupulously. But at the same time he may lack the power
to carry out these duties and the necessary determination to put his
intentions into effect.

The most basic duty of everyone is to be constantly and continually
vigilant of his conduct, to reinforce his creative powers, and to avoid
negative and vicious factors that destroy his positive powers, so that
it becomes his second nature to rely on his power of will in times of
necessity. That is because a firm will would keep one steady in critical
moments of life and while making sensitive decisions, when the least
amount of infirmity and laxity might be awfully dangerous.

Moreover, one should not plunge into a course of action without paying
attention to its consequences and sufficiently examining its various
aspects. Otherwise he would be like a mariner who sets out on the sea
without a compass. It is a mistake to take the ship of life without a
compass into the ocean of being. One must know the direction in which
one is moving and where his actions and efforts would take him.

The Criterion of Responsibility in the View of Islam
----------------------------------------------------

In Islam the will is considered the axis of duty and the focus of all
human affairs. It is what distinguishes the human being from other
animals. The will is the sole means for checking the excesses of carnal
drives and with it man can resist his violent urges and guide his
energies in a beneficial direction. Ultimately, he is free whether to
attain real human perfection by overcoming his unruly ego, or to wander
in the realm of bestiality by giving a free rein to his animal urges and
to become an unruly beast that knows no restraints.

There is no exaggeration in the adoption by Islam of this criterion of
distinction between man and other animals, because the meaning of
humanity is nothing except this, and basically persons without a will
are not human in the real sense.

Islam is not at all unaware of the reality of human nature and the
various faculties and constitutions that lie within it. Similarly, it
has a clear and precise view of man's capacity to pursue the higher
ideals and the possibility of his fulfilling the duties required of him.
It summons man to rise above the animal plane with all his faculties in
the shadow of will, asking him to attain to the highest degree of
perfection possible to the extent of his powers and potentialities. One
who forfeits the real distinctive criterion of humanity and surrenders
himself totally to subversive impulses has his faculties polluted and
disabled, and his thinking faculty is severely damaged. As a result he
would be incapable of achieving the real goal of life.

The exercise of the soul appears to be a difficult in the beginning. But
with some mental effort the obstacles are gradually removed and the way
is opened to the fulfilment of various duties. When the will, which is
the guarantee of progression in life and the means of advancement and
edification, is employed in the way of sacrifice, sincerity, and any
kind of sublime feeling and sentiment, it will contribute to the
person's greatness. When one acts with such a spirit he would obtain
wonderful results whatever his field of activity, and will leave
luminous pages in the book of his life.

Under the inspiration of the educative programs of Islam, individuals in
society are motivated to employ their will power for the realisation of
the higher objectives of life. From the viewpoint of psychology also the
consequence of a resurrected will is positive and strong motivation.

Mann writes in The Principles of Psychology
-------------------------------------------

That which is usually called will power is in the view of the
psychologists the relative power of motives. Decision-making in a given
case is the resultant of motives in a dynamic equilibrium.

In other words, in every case the alternative chosen is one which
satisfies our motives to a greater extent in respect of natural drives
and previous experiences. For instance, when the Japanese soldier is
defeated in battle and he finds resistance to be useless, he is
confronted with two alternatives. One is to surrender and to save his
life. But he has been trained since childhood to believe that by
surrendering to the enemy he would be compromising his honour in his own
eyes and those of others as well as before the spirits of his ancestors
(whom he believes to observe him). The other alternative before him is
to kill himself and to find everlasting honour and dignity in the life
that he has been promised after death. That is why he prefers to kill
himself. As we have had a training different from the Japanese, we
cannot properly understand his way of thinking. But in fact anyone under
the influence of the same factors as the Japanese soldier would hardly
do anything else.[^2]

The Firm Support of Will Power
------------------------------

In every task, the will needs a strong support to lean upon. That firm
support of will is faith. Faith and will are interdependent. If one were
to possess faith without employing will to fulfil it and without making
effort, he would never achieve his goals. That is because everyone's
success depends on his efforts. The Qur'an says:

***[Or has he not been told of what is in the scrolls of Moses, and
Abraham] ... that a man shall have to his account nothing but his
endeavour? (53:39)***

On the contrary, if one were to possess will power without the effective
weapon of faith, he would not cease making effort until he reaches a
dead end in life. But when he finds that natural factors and causes have
frustrated his efforts and he encounters problems and obstacles that
cannot be overcome, the fire of hope and confidence begins to die out
within his spirit. In such testing conditions nothing except faith in
the eternal power of God can rescue one from anxiety and anguish. The
person possessing faith and the asset of a firm will relies on God in
the toughest of moments and conditions. The light of hope is never
extinguished within him and he always seeks assistance from the infinite
grace of the Almighty.

God instructs the Noble Messenger of Islam that whenever he were to
resolve on accomplishing a task he should pursue his goal
single-mindedly with trust in the eternal power of the Almighty.

***So when you are resolved, then put your trust in God. (3:159)***

In order to weaken the determination of a person in carrying out some
task, it is sufficient to weaken his faith in relation to it.

If one were to understand and believe that every effort and endeavour
that he makes is affirmed by the Almighty, Who governs the entire order
of existence, he would pursue his goal with constancy and perseverance.
He would discover the basic source of success and, with such a spirit,
he will overcome all obstacles and hardships in the way that he has
chosen, as if the obstacles were actually the steps to his upward
ascent. Dangers will add to his courage, and failures will multiply his
efforts, and whatever the obstacles he would not abandon his path.

A study of history introduces us to persons who have contributed to the
advancement and felicity of mankind with their firm determination and
high goals. They did not abstain from any kind of effort and struggle
meant for the sake of the progress and edification of nations and, in
fact, they made their way through hardship and persecution.

Foremost among them are the elect of (God and men of saintly excellence
and freedom. The courage, perseverance and invincible will of these
individuals, employed in the way of the deliverance of mankind and for
the sake of their sacred goal, serve as a sublime and radiant example
for mankind in general and their followers in particular. It were these
outstanding religious figures who despite the torture and torment faced
by them at the hands of their contemporaries are today regarded as holy
by the human community.

'Ali, may Peace be upon him, was a perfect example of an undefeatable
human being. In one of his precious sermons he declares:

*By God, if all the Arabs were to join together in battle against me, I
would not withdraw from it.*[^3]

In the sermon addressed to Humam, he says:

*O Humam, the spirit of the man of faith is tougher than granite.*[^4]

In the Battle of the Camel, when the forces of those who had broken
their allegiance were prepared to confront 'Ali's army, he gave the
banner to his son Muhammad ibn Hanafiyyah, and taught him the lesson of
decisiveness and strengthened his will power with these words:

*Even if the mountains were to crumble, you should not tremble. Clench
your teeth tightly (so that spirit of determination takes hold of your
entire being); pledge your skull with God; and let your feet be nailed
into the ground. Cast your sight on the furthest fringes of the enemy
and overlook (whatever may be an unpleasant sight), knowing that victory
is from God, the Glorious (and our duty is only to pursue our goal
resolutely).*[^5]

Tenacity and Victory
--------------------

A leader's iron will and tenacity of purpose can bring about a sudden
change in the course of events and mobilise the masses in a wonderful
manner. The resoluteness of such men in the way of their goal removes
great obstacles from their path, as if there were something iron-like
within them. At times their courage and alacrity often averts dangerous
crises when the smallest delay and uncertainty would cause them and
others to perish.

At the time of the conquest of Spain by Islamic warriors, Musa ibn Nadir
was the chief commander of the Islamic armies in north Africa. For the
conquest of Europe, he dispatched his slave Tariq ibn Ziyad towards
Spain to gather intelligence concerning the enemy forces and to report
to the chief commander. When Tariq arrived with his small force at the
point of his assignment and made a reconnaissance of the position of the
enemy, he found that it was an opportune time to attack. He thought that
if he were to report to the headquarters and wait for orders, the enemy
would be alerted and prepare for battle. The moment of decision had
came.

In order to make his soldiers abandon all thoughts of possible retreat,
he ordered all ships with which he had crossed the sea to be burnt. When
the ships were burnt down, all hopes of retreat disappeared. In answer
to those who were dismayed by his action and were critical of it he
said: "The Muslim is not a bird to have a nest of its own." Then
standing at the foot of the mountain known today as 'Jabl al-Tariq"
(Gibraltar) and facing the roaring waves of the sea, he delivered a
speech. He said:

*O People! There is the roaring sea behind your backs and the enemy's
army in front of you. The stores of the enemy are full of weapons and
food supplies while you have recourse to nothing except what you may
seize from the enemy with your iron will. You do not have access to any
weapon except the swords that you carry. Now there you are and the
strong enemy!*

This fiery and impassioned speech of Tariq gave the soldiers the
resoluteness and courage for a decisive battle. Then with appropriate
tactics, he launched a terrible offensive and fought unflaggingly until
victory.

Self-Suggestion
---------------

Self-suggestion is one of the means for strengthening the will to
realise goals. Possessing higher aspirations and fixing one's gaze on
the shining horizons of life induce one to make a wilful and persisting
quest for attaining those goals.

Imam 'Ali, the Master of the Pious, said:

Vie with one another in acquiring worthy qualities and merits, in
possessing great ideals, and in entertaining majestic thoughts, so that
you may receive their mighty reward and attain their momentous
results.[^6]

Jagot says:

So long as you think that you cannot and that you do not have the
capacity, the chances of success are small, and even if you possess the
most brilliant of talents, they would come to nothing. Conversely,
someone who is of ordinary intelligence and ability but is self
confident will be successful. He would succeed because in the course of
his quest and endeavour to realise his plans, he will discover the
source of the qualities that he needs after making some effort. He
succeeds due to his confidence in his progress and is not discouraged by
the failure of others. He begins his work by utilising his experience,
and rest assured that he would succeed much sooner and in a better
manner than you ever imagined. In order to have the courage to launch a
project, drive away doubt and hesitation from yourself. Perhaps others,
out of caution and sympathy, may want to make you doubtful and hesitant
about your own capacities. But don't you have doubts about the
correctness of their prophecies? Will you permit everyone to put any
suggestion that he likes into your mind?

Listen to others with an intelligent ear, but continue to develop and
strengthen your courage. Observe those who possess this precious quality
and make an analysis of it. Every night reassure yourself with a series
of far-reaching suggestions and imagine yourself to be in the skin of
the courageous person that you would soon be. Whenever you get an
opportunity-and be boldly innovative in creating one-take up a task that
involves the making of decisions, and in testing times remember this
suggestion: "I can and I will!" If you resolve upon an important task
involving problems you are well familiar with, tell yourself that you
can do it. Raise your vigilance to the required pitch and you will
become used to confronting them.[^7]

In the same way that pessimism is a kind of negative self-suggestion in
the view of psychologists that leads to worry and anxiety, optimism is a
self- suggestion to reinforce one's spirit and to make up for inadequate
will power. Accordingly, Imam 'Ali, may Peace be upon him, said:

Be optimistic about the future in order to succeed in overcoming
obstacles.[^8]

[^1]: Alexis Carrel, Refexions sur la conduite de la vie, Persian trans.
Rah warasm-e zindagi, p. 87.

[^2]: Mann, The Principles of Psychology, Pers. Trans. Usul-e
rawanshendsi, p. 145.

[^3]: Nahj al-balaghah, ed. Fayd al-Islam, p. 922.

[^4]: Bihar al-anwar, vol. 15, p. 94.

[^5]: Nahj al-balaghah, ed. Fayd al-Islam, p. 53.

[^6]: Ghurar al-hikam, p. 355.

[^7]: Jagot, Persian trans. "Talqin be-nafs," pp. 212-213.

[^8]: Ghurar al-hikam, p. 347.


