Chapter 12: Secured Spiritual Well-Being by Means of Fruitful Social Contracts
==============================================================================

The influence of social surroundings is a basic problem of education and
a topic that has been given special attention by moralists. In general,
man leads his life among people, and the fabric of his personal
existence is made in society. The role of society in laying down the
foundations of an individual's personality, moral character, and conduct
is one of the self-evident facts of human existence.

Man cannot break his links with his fellowmen or live in isolation,
because the frightful darkness of loneliness would make his life grim
and unbearable, and make his spirit languish in solitary confinement. If
one did not have ties of friendship and love with anyone and were one to
feel that there isn't a single heart in the whole world that throbs for
him and that one can find no emotional refuge, one would be in deep
anguish and the skies of one's being would become dark and gloomy.

On the other hand, in the same way that the body needs various kinds of
nourishment for its health and strength, our souls also draw their
nourishment from the company of friends, often acquiring virtues and
merits from them, and at times becoming tainted with their vices and
sins.

Everyone has strong feelings of attachment for the way that he has
chosen in life. He also desires others to adopt it and tries to create,
through those with whom he associates, an environment for himself that
is harmonious and pleasant. Regarding the world through the window of
his world outlook, he gives a certain hue and perspective to its
problems, and actually tries to find justification for the way that he
has chosen for himself. Obviously he would find any opposition to his
chosen lifestyle to be very painful.

Accordingly, the character of one's company and the understanding of its
limits is something on which our happiness profoundly depends. It is by
the means of fruitful social contacts we cultivate today that our future
spiritual well-being and individual independence are secured. Hence it
is necessary to understand one's psychological needs in the sphere of
social relations, and, on the basis of these requirements, to carefully
develop and follow a program.

Some scholars believe that the tendency to emulate others is innate in
the human nature. This tendency is so imperceptible that it is not so
simple to discover its profound effects. The study of various situations
relating to emulation indicates that one is influenced by others in
one's conduct, feelings, decisions, and even in one's opinions and
judgements. One tends to mould oneself in accordance with the principles
subscribed to by one's community and group. Others influence one's
development in proportion to their personal power and influence over
one, and no matter how much a person may be educated and intelligent, a
part of his independence vanishes in the company of other people and his
personality is overshadowed by the spiritual domination and pressure of
the beliefs of his community. Of course, those who suffer with spiritual
inadequacies are more acutely susceptible to the influence of others, as
their mental powers are relatively more deficient.

According to the view of a group of psychologists, a person emulates
others when he finds a mental satisfaction in doing so, or because he
imagines that his conduct would win the approval of others, or that such
conduct has been the cause of others' success. For instance, the
emulation of heroic figures, or children's imitation of the conduct of
the elders, occurs for this reason. Even in animals it occurs under
particular conditions when an animal imitates others when it achieves
something by that means.

Brown says:

People resort to imitating others when that helps them reach goals in
the psychological sphere. In other words, the condition of latent urges
leads to imitation, not that these goals are created by an urge called
the urge to imitate. When a saleswoman adopts the hair-style of some
celebrity, that is not because she is driven by an urge to imitate.
Rather, the reason behind her action is that for her it is a means to
realise the lifestyle of that celebrity or other stars whom she
represents.[^1]

Although special attention to the problem of social intercourse is
necessary at all stages of life, it has a greater importance for the
young who, having left behind the traits of childhood years, stand at
the threshold of a serious career, in social life and relations. That is
because, due to spontaneous emotional factors and passing motives, they
are prone to being drawn into friendships and close relations without
carefully examining the spiritual and moral condition of those with whom
they associate or make friends and without evaluating their way of
thinking and fitness for friendship. This lack of attention to what is
reasonable and proper may divert the youth from the real highway of life
and land him in corruption and vice. Accordingly, we should neither
ignore their natural inclination for associating with persons of their
age group, nor neglect the need for effective guidance and logical and
well-reasoned advice, to make them resistant to influence of any kind of
vicious and destructive elements, so that they may grow in a way free
from all kinds of educational hazards.

At this stage, which are tense years of unrest, the personality of the
youth advances towards independence. The heroes whom he adulates and the
persons whom he admires disclose his need for a guide, a model, and
source of inspiration to be emulated. Similarly, the state of
uncertainty and doubt that takes hold of his being derive from his
inadequate intellectual power of judgement and his effort to obtain
mental independence.

With attention to the fact that the youth has an innocent and receptive
heart, as he passes through a period of passion and emotional
excitement, one may well assess the magnitude of the big role played by
his associates at this sensitive stage in the development of his
spiritual and mental faculties. Accordingly, for the sake of precaution
against any deviation, failing, and setback it is essential for them to
be acquainted with the principles of healthy and fruitful company and to
be guided towards true personal development.

True Worth of a Friend
----------------------

In choosing a friend one must employ one's judgement in a manner free
from emotion and try to find the criterion for assessing his real worth.
One must know his inadequacies and weak points, his ideas, feelings,
dislikes and infirmities. Ultimately, one must discover the human merits
and desirable qualities that he carries in the depth of his spirit so
that one may benefit from his outstanding virtues.

One may discover many sublime moral qualities in persons whose outward
appearance indicates no sign of their existence. Continuous contact and
company of worthy and good-natured persons brings about remarkable
changes in the constitution of one's personality. One's vital energies
are directed in new channels, and they take a new form, forming one's
faculty of will into a creative and innovative source of outstanding
achievements. On the other hand, the lack of sufficient care and
negligence in this regard can be the biggest mistake one can make,
damaging seriously the foundations of one's felicity and welfare.

Avebury, a well-known British writer, says:

One is thrown in life with a great many people who, though not actively
bad, though they may not wilfully lead us astray, yet take no pains with
themselves, neglect their own minds, and direct the conversation to
petty puerilities or mere gossip; who do not seem to realise that
conversation may by a little effort be made instructive and delightful,
without being in any way pedantic; or, on the other hand, may be allowed
to drift into a mere morass of muddy thought and weedy words. There are
few from whom we may not learn something, if only they will trouble
themselves to tell us.[^2]

Sensitivity and Touchiness
--------------------------

One of the basic necessities of social life is learning to get along
with other people. One can hardly find two persons who have beliefs,
thoughts, and feelings that are identical in all respects. Even in
regard to the most insignificant matters of life it is rare to find
people who are in complete agreement. This fact must always be kept in
mind and one must try, so far as one can, to get along with different
kinds of temperaments and personalities, so that one is able to adjust
and develop friendly and harmonious relations with associates and
companions.

Some individuals, due the lack of a certain degree of maturity necessary
for social coexistence, are so sensitive and touchy and so rigid and
unforgiving in their relations that they cannot overlook the smallest
thing that happens against their expectations. A lapse on behalf of
their friends makes them simply succumb to their violent and immature
feelings, leading them to abandon all hopes of arriving at a mutual
understanding. They allow good relations to be severed on account of a
deep resentment and ill feeling. Life, however, has its bright and dark
sides, thorns as well as flowers, beauty as well as ugliness, and these
always go together. One's approach, from the outset of social life,
should be based on pleasant manners and sound moral principles. One
should learn the law of social life that it is necessary to bear some
unpleasant things for the sake of its numerous advantages. At the same
time, one should refrain from misplaced expectations and pursuing idle
dreams. The art of living lies in being as flexible as one can in regard
to one's expectations, and very often stable peaceful relations cannot
be maintained and friendship and intimacy cannot prevail without it.

One should try to understand and accept people and their needs as they
are, not as we would like them to be. This depends on the measure of
one's moral development, emotional refinement, and spirit of
understanding.

It is a mistake to judge everything from the perspective of our own
wishes and desires. But there are many people whose feelings are
adversely lopsided; selfishness and egoism are so strong in their
character that they totally lack the capacity to be objective. Moreover,
thereby they torture and torment themselves, whereas objectivity and
reasonable expectations would have secured them mental peace.

A psychiatrist recounts the tale of his inordinate expectations. During
World War II, he wanted to leave his hometown for a distant city.
Despite his insistence, they declined to give him an air ticket. They
told him that priority lay with the transportation of army personnel,
and he was forced to go by the train and that, too, in the third class.

"A few moments after that I took my uncomfortable seat in the third-
class compartment," he says, "I felt furious. I saw that it was a
torture for me to continue my journey on these hard benches. Immediately
I began to analyse my perturbed state. After a while I asked myself
whether the torture I felt was really due the uncomfortable seats, or if
it was because I was upset that a respectable and dedicated psychiatrist
like me had been denied the consideration of being favoured with an air
ticket, so I wouldn't be compelled to waste hours of my valuable time on
journey by train. Then I asked myself if I had a right to expect such a
favour during wartime and if my expecting them to be treat me as an
exception was selfish and stupid. Immediately I realised that it was an
unjustified expectation, because certainly at a time when my brothers
were under the rain of bullets and shells, their work had a priority
over everything else.

"As soon as the matter thus cleared up in my mind and I was convinced
that I should not be upset, the hard seats not only did not bother me
any longer, I spent the rest of the journey, happily reading or
conversing with other passengers. I did not feel tired by the journey at
all, although neither the seat had become softer, nor the duration of
the journey had become shorter."

At times, selfish and hollow people cultivate social relations for some
particular purpose. Their relations and contacts with others, which
should be untainted by personal gain and purpose, are meant to obtain
some particular goals of their own. They continuously hunt for friends
through whom they might make some personal gain. For instance, they
would never seek the friendship of those who have sublime feelings and
sincere intentions but whose company would not procure any material
gain. As a result, their friendly relations are sustained so long as
there is some hope of a gain. But if they do not get any nearer to their
goal in this way, sensing that the friendship would not help them in
achieving their ends, a peculiar coldness replaces the previous warmth
and they terminate their hypocritical relationship.

Obviously, when unsteadiness and infirmity cloud all aspects of
someone's social life, the reality is gradually exposed and others, too,
on recognising such a character, treat him coldly and contemptuously and
avoid him. And this is an injurious spiritual condition that we often
observe among many people.

Emerson says:

We pass for what we are. Character teaches above our wills. Men imagine
that they communicate their virtue or vice only by overt actions, and do
not see that virtue or vice emit a breath every moment.  
 There will be an agreement in whatever variety of actions, so they be
each honest and natural in their hour. For of one will, the actions will
be harmonious, however unlike they seem. These varieties are lost sight
of at a little distance, at a little height of thought. One tendency
unites them all. The voyage of the best ship is a zigzag line of a
hundred tracks. See the line from a sufficient distance, and it
straightens itself to the average tendency Your genuine action will
explain your other genuine actions.[^3]

A Warning Against Corrupt Company
---------------------------------

In general there exist two alternatives for man, either to surrender
totally to his corporal and natural faculties and subjugate his soul
absolutely to his instincts and appetites, or to answer the summons of
his higher spiritual aspirations and to cultivate the higher part of his
spirit and realise the vital significance of this precious gift.

Man is constantly under the pull of the two opposite poles of virtue and
vice. Therefore, he should pay undivided attention to the great mission
that he has to fulfil in this inner conflict. He should select for
himself a way that is worthy of man and choose the most reliable means
for attaining his high human goal in order to realise the full
significance of life.

This choice is something continuous and perpetual, and it should be made
in such a way that at every moment one makes a forward movement as long
as one is alive without either coming to a standstill or going back. In
view of the brevity of human life, that which is important is to obtain
a worthy provision out of this brief, transitory existence for the life
of the next world, which is everlasting. Without doubt, one would derive
the most lasting and precious benefit by dominating destructive desires
and by refraining from submitting to deviant urges.

Islam wishes to develop a capacity for discernment and bring about an
inner discipline in the human mind by making people reflect on the
significance of social intercourse and selection of one's companions. It
desires to habituate people to observance of discipline in their
activities and decisions. Besides, in this manner it draws their
attention to real human merit so that they come to have in it a faith
arising from the depths of their hearts, perpetually keeping the higher
planes of reality in their view to attain to the utmost human
perfection, a perfection whose worth cannot be measured by any
materialistic criteria.

Islam has pointed out to man each of the two paths of human progress and
edification, the outward and the inward, and it is now up to him to
utilise that guidance in choosing his mode of thinking and formulating
his approach in action.

The company of pious persons committed to moral and human considerations
provides an appropriate opportunity for the nourishment and growth of
man's spiritual faculties. Minds grow and develop in the radiance of
their sublime thoughts and the inclination to virtue and piety is
awakened in one's mind. As a result of personal contact with them, one
becomes more conscious of one's spiritual inadequacies, and that
provides one with the chance to judge one's own capabilities by
comparing them with those of worthy and competent humans.

It is through such a comparison that one can gradually free oneself from
the influence of vicious and undesirable qualities, and derive light
from the most hidden depths of one's soul. The significance of the moral
and spiritual qualities of one's associates is not something which has
been studied for the first time by modern psychology. In fact, the
necessity of identifying the qualities of friends and one's intimates
has been recognised for centuries, and this is dealt with clearly and
abundantly in religious texts and traditions. What modern psychology has
done is to reaffirm the value of those profound prescriptions and to
reiterate the beneficial and fruitful guiding principles that have been
recognised since long in this regard.

The Prophet of Islam, may God bless him and his Household, declared in
an eloquent and absorbing statement of his:

*Persons follow the ways and conduct of their friends. Hence everybody
should be careful in choosing his friends, and study the character of
those with whom he wishes to develop terms of friendship.*[^4]

In one of his aphorisms, Imam 'Ali, may Peace be upon him, points out
that one should avoid associating with degenerate persons, as one tends
to pick up their personal traits:

*Avoid the company of the vicious, because your character would pick up
their degenerate and deviant qualities without your knowing it.*[^5]

Dr. Alexis Carrel, the well-known scholar, writes:

The psychological state of the social group determines, in a large
measure, the number, the quality, and the intensity of the
manifestations of individual consciousness. If the social environment is
mediocre intelligence and moral sense fail to develop. These activities
may become thoroughly vitiated by bad surroundings. We are immersed in
the habits of our epoch, like tissue cells in the organic fluids; like
these cells, we are incapable of defending ourselves against the
influence of the community. The body more effectively resists the cosmic
than the psychological world. It is guarded against the incursions of
its physical and chemical enemies by the skin, and the digestive and
respiratory mucosas. On the contrary, the frontiers of the mind are
entirely open. Consciousness is thus exposed to the attacks of its
intellectual and spiritual surroundings. According to the natures of
these attacks, it develops in a normal or defective manner.

The education of the intelligence is relatively easy. But the formation
of the moral, aesthetic, and religious activities is very difficult. The
influence of environment on these aspects of consciousness is much more
subtle.

Man is powerless against such psychological attacks. He necessarily
yields to the influence of his group. If one lives in the company of
criminals or fools, one becomes a criminal or a fool.[^6]

In the course of their experiments, social psychologists have made
interesting findings on the tendency to imitate others.

In the spring of 1953, a group of hundred male candidates applying for
managerial jobs involving leadership qualities ere subjected to a three-
day test in order to evaluate their mental abilities in the psychology
lab of the University of California.

On the third day, it was the turn to precisely measure their personal
susceptibility to the influence of others. First, these hundred men were
divided into two groups of fifty, the group under test and the group of
spectators. The purpose was that when those in the test group were
subjected to the influence of the opinion of the group, each of the
individuals in the group of spectators was individually and
independently tested in relation to the opinion of their group. Then
arrangements were made to divide the test group into ten subgroups of
five. There was a device in front of each individual so that when a
question was put to him he could know the result of the answers given by
others in his group by the means of special lamps.

However, the secret of the experiment lay in the point that the answer
that appeared on the board was one manipulated by the experimenter, not
one that reflected the group's response. In fact, in every case, by
creating an artificial and arbitrary majority the experimenter duped
those who were under test, and they, unaware of this secret, thought
what they saw on the board to be the opinion of the majority, and mostly
followed it blindly.

To the astonishment of the experimenters, in a case involving the
solution of a mathematical problem, seventy-nine per cent of men
thoughtlessly followed the incorrect and illogical answer of the hoax
majority.[^7]

Helping the Victims of Vicious Company
--------------------------------------

One should know that if one associates with corrupt persons for the sake
of rescuing them from their wretched condition, it is something very
commendable and praiseworthy. Islam approves of the method of
associating with persons who have violated moral norms for the purpose
of helping them through beneficial guidance. However, such a task
requires a sophisticated approach, since mere reproach and censure will
not give the desired results. In many cases, it would not be effective.
However, a careful approach will not only be effective in most cases, it
might bring about a positive change. For the awareness that is created
in the victim may lead him to strive towards the path of real humanity,
piety, and salvation. That might lead him to discover his real worth and
dignity as a human being, and the one who keeps him company for the sake
of helping him would have fulfilled the rights of companionship in the
worthiest manner.

Imam Sadiq, may Peace be upon him, has said in this regard:

*When someone observes a friend taking a wrong and sinful course and,
while possessing the capacity restrain him, does not so out of
indifference, he has actually betrayed his friend.*[^8]

It is has been said since ancient times that it is unpleasant to be told
about one's faults. This is a fact. However, sympathetic advice should
be given in a soft and gentle tone, and someone's weak point or moral
inadequacy should be pointed out in an effective manner, suggesting in a
friendly way that the path selected is one that would result in
misfortune and ruin. At the same time one should try to secure the
companion s confidence in one's objective attitude, while being careful
to deliver one s counsels privately in a manner unnoticed others.

A friend may point out someone's shortcomings in an unwise manner and
his exhortations may produce the very opposite result, whereas an advice
given in a wise and skilful manner, even by someone himself suffering
from some moral infirmity, can prove to be fruitful.

Imam 'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, may Peace be upon him, makes
this points in the following manner:

*Pointing out someone's shortcomings publicly is censure, not
advice.*[^9]

*At times one is betrayed by the advice of a trusted friend, and the
advice of someone of whose betrayal one is wary may prove to be
effective.*[^10]

Dale Carnegie says:

If you want to prove a point, act cleverly and skilfully so that no one
guesses what you have in mind. Use the advice of the poet who said,
"Preach without being anyone knowing that you are preaching." The people
who have a power of clear judgement are a rarity. Most of us are
stubborn and prejudiced, and envy, suspicion, fear, greed, and pride
cloud our reason Study your own character; if you see that most of the
time you are after picking others' faults, you must start thinking of a
remedy.  
 When we make a mistake, we would easily admit it to ourselves. Others,
too, if they have the ability and skill, can, with the sweetness of
their speech, grace, and charm induce us to confess our errors. In such
cases, we might even congratulate ourselves for our candour and courage
in confessing to our shortcomings. But if the other person were to
attempt to compel us to make this unpleasant admission, he would never
succeed. [^11]

The Eleventh Imam, may Peace be upon him, said:

*One who exhorts his brother privately in fact helps him to appear in a
good light, whereas one who exhorts him publicly and indiscreetly spoils
his image.*[^12]

On the other hand, when someone suffering from an infirmity is exhorted
by a far-sighted friend who seeks to rescue him from moral degeneration,
it is essential for him accept the well-meaning advice of his friend and
to make an effort to reform himself. Imam 'Ali, may Peace be upon him,
said:

*Someone who exhorts you is your well-wisher and benefactor. He foresees
the consequences of your conduct, and seeks to restore what you have
lost. Therefore, your welfare lies in obeying his counsel, and any
disobedience or indifference to his fruitful guidance will be ruinous
for you.*[^13]

On noticing the traces of moral corruption, the sooner one can correct
oneself, the better it is for him, and any kind of delay and negligence
in this regard will lead to regret and, ultimately, might be ruinous for
his repute and personal dignity.

Imam 'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, has said in this regard:

*One who does not get rid of his infirmities while he is still held in
good repute will be forced to remove them after falling into disrepute.*
[^14]

Not only the admonishment of one's associates but also the criticism of
one's enemies can be effective in making one mend his ways. Imam 'Ali,
may Peace be upon him, said:

At times one's enemy is more helpful than one's friends, because he
makes one aware of his shortcomings, leading one to overcome them.

An American philosopher writes:

A great man is always willing to be little. Whilst he sits on the
cushion of advantages, he goes to sleep. When he is pushed, tormented,
defeated, he has a chance to learn something; he has been put on his
wits, on his manhood; he has gained facts; learns his ignorance; is
cured of the insanity of conceit; has got moderation and real skill. The
wise man throws himself on the side of his assailants. It is more his
interest than it is theirs to find his weak point. The wound cicatrises
and falls off from him like a dead skin, and when they would triumph,
Lo! he has passed on invulnerable. Blame is safer than praise. I hate to
be defended in a newspaper. As long as all that is said is said against
me, I feel a certain assurance of success. But as soon as honeyed words
of praise are spoken for me I feel as one that lies unprotected before
his enemies. In general, every evil to which we do not succumb is a
benefactor. As the Sandwich Islander believes that the strength and
valour of the enemy he kills passes into himself, so we gain the
strength of the temptation we resist.[^15]

Of the most injurious is the company of stupid persons, which might
bring about a setback in one's life and land one in misfortune. At
times, the dangers and harms arising from a foolish friend are greater
than what an enemy might inflict. That is because one is seldom on his
guard against a friend on account of one's confidence and goodwill and
might be easily taken by surprise, and when he wakes up there might be
no way of retreat, whereas one is on his guard against the possible
dangers of an enemy.

His wrong judgements which lead his friend into trouble might be due to
goodwill and a desire to be useful, but often his counsels land his
friends in trouble and bring loss of face.

There is an ancient tale that once an intelligent and wise person went
on a journey with a fool. While travelling they reached a place where
the road branched out into two directions. One way was smooth and level
and the other was rough and uneven. The foolish companion insisted that
they take the better road. The wise man knew that the rugged road was
shorter and safer, and he suggested to his companion that they take it.
However, he submitted to the insistence of the fool and both of them
went along on the good road.

Shortly afterwards, they encountered a band of robbers and were taken
captive. Later on, the two friends were captured along with the robbers
and taken before the judge. The wise man told the judge what had
happened, putting the blame on his foolish companion for misleading him
and forcing him to take the dangerous road.

When it was the fool's turn to defend himself, he admitted that he was
merely a fool. But, he said, his friend who was intelligent should not
have yielded to a fool's suggestions and abandon a decision made wisely.
After hearing them the judge condemned each of them to a similar
punishment.

Hence mere attachment and loyalty in mutual relations are not sufficient
grounds for the selection of a friend. Rather, the quality and degree of
his wisdom should be given the foremost importance. Undoubtedly, those
who refrain from cultivating the intimacy of fools should be ranked with
wise men of foresight.

Imam 'Ali, may Peace be upon him, said:

*Never make someone who is brainless your friend*.[^16]

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir, may Peace be upon him, speaks in these words of
the harms that result from improper associates and unworthy company:

*Never associate with four kinds of persons and don't make them your
friends: the fool, the niggardly, the coward, and the liar. As to the
fool, he will bring you harm despite his good intentions to do something
for your benefit. As to the niggardly man, he will only grab from you
without giving you anything in return. As to the coward, he will flee at
the smallest danger* *abandoning not only you but even his own parents
to their fate. As to the liar, you cannot trust him even if he tells the
truth.*[^17]

Mental immaturity and inattention to consequences lead one into bad
company and ultimately into a catastrophe. It is frequently observed
that those who give in to the temptations of their vicious friends and
compromise their honour and well-being by attending their sinful
gatherings and parties fall into ruin.

They might be aware that they are treading a dangerous path, but they
are afraid lest they be considered timid or prude. In order to avoid
this charge they surrender without resisting to the insistence and
demands of their vicious friends and ultimately bring disgrace upon
themselves and fall headlong into the ravine of moral corruption and
abasement. However, one day they would realise their irreparable mistake
and their thoughtlessness, which was merely a product of their mimicking
others and without foresight. But unfortunately this realisation comes
when they have already spent a considerable part of their lives and
after a precious lifetime has been ruined by vicious conduct. At times,
their state of negligence and inattention continues to the end of their
lives and they are left with an everlasting regret.

The Noble Qur'an mentions the wails of regret as uttered by a lost and
sinful person on the Day of Resurrection. He would say:

***Woe to me! Had I never taken so and so for my intimate friend.
(25:28)***

Imam 'Ali, The Commander of Faithful, may Peace be upon him, warns in
these words against associating with a certain group of people who are
unfit for company and whose friendship is to be avoided:

*Avoid making friends with worldly people, who will start looking down
upon you once your wealth and means are diminished and who will be
jealous of you if you become wealthier.*[^18]

*Do not keep company with someone who remembers your vices and forgets
your merits and excellences.*[^19]

*Do not befriend someone who conceals your merits and publicises your
faults.*[^20]

*Do not take a flatterer for your friend, who will make even your
erroneous acts appear in a good light and who wants you to be like
him.*[^21]

*Should you know it, the company of someone who is of no avail to you in
acquiring spiritual and human merits is an encumbrance.*[^22]

Moderation in Friendship
------------------------

The policy of the wise and the foresighted is to observe certain
criteria and exercise caution in friendly relations. Immoderation in
this regard may lead to deplorable consequences and bring regret and
pain. That is because the bond of friendship and intimacy might not
endure under all conditions and circumstances.

Perhaps some event or a rivalry might lead to disagreement and tension
in relations and vitiate cordial and sympathetic terms of friendship.
Warm and intimate terms of friendship have often turned into violent
enmity and fiery hostility due to such matters, and there are not few
who have faced merciless attacks of an old friend familiar with one's
secrets and weak points, whereas earlier none of them ever expected such
a painful reversal in mutual relations.

However, a friendship founded upon wisdom and moderation would not only
be free of such dangers, it would be stable and enduring. It is with
such a subtle consideration in view that Imam Sadiq, may Peace be upon
him, strictly warned his disciples against immoderation in friendly
relations and the disclosure of one's secret matters:

*Don't inform your friends of your secret matters except those whose
disclosure to your enemy would be harmless. That is because in the
vicissitudes of life today's friend might be tomorrow's enemy.*[^23]

A Western Scholar writes in this regard.

It has been said that it is wise always to treat a friend, remembering
that he may become an enemy, and an enemy, remembering that he may
become a friend; and whatever may be thought of the first part of the
adage, there is certainly much wisdom in the latter.[^24]

An advice of Imam 'Ali, may Peace be upon him, which is full of wisdom
is to be observed in this regard also:

*Be moderate in your friendly relations, for today's friend might be
tomorrow's enemy. And be moderate in your hostility towards your enemy,
for today's enemy be tomorrow's friend.*[^25]

Pretence and Hypocrisy
----------------------

Perhaps everyone has come across in his social surroundings persons who
chum up with everybody, but their only goal is to attract others'
attention to themselves, although their hearts are devoid of any
fraternal feeling. They hide their real face under the mask of
friendship and take resort in flattery and affected geniality. As and
when required by circumstances, they consider their pretence to
genuineness a means of achieving their social ends, and that is their
trade. This hidden tendency overshadows their entire character, conduct,
and mind. They forget that a real personal merit is a thousand times or
incomparably more precious than others' opinion about oneself. When one
observes such people, striving hard single-mindedly in pursuit of their
selfish ends instead of responding to the call of their own conscience,
one realises to what extent they are victims of their exhibitionist
urges.

Others' opinion is not so significant as to be allowed to influence
one's happiness. Of course, the opinions and feelings of other people
are to be respected to a certain extent, but the source of one's
happiness lies within oneself, not in what others may think of one.
Otherwise if one were to become used to the habit of looking at oneself
from the eyes of others, he would become a hapless captive of other
people's ideas, losing one's freedom and independence.

Moreover, the judgements that people make concerning one another are
mostly inspired by their personal interests and prejudices, and they
change with conditions and circumstances. The value of such judgements
would be realised when we keep this point in our view. ' Hence if one
chooses a correct path in life that is not regarded by others with
approval, one should not be pained by their futile critical remarks.

Imam 'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, may Peace be upon him, said:

*Don't be grieved by the remarks that people may make about you, because
if what they say is true, you will have been reattributed for your
misconduct in this world itself [instead of the Hereafter] and if what
they say is untrue, it is a reward that you got without having worked
for it.*[^26]

Bertrand Russell says:

Fear of public opinion, like every other form of fear, is oppressive and
stunts growth It is difficult to achieve any kind of greatness while a
fear of this kind remains strong, and it is impossible to acquire that
freedom of spirit in which true happiness consists, for it is essential
to happiness that our way of living should spring from our own deep
impulses and not from the accidental tastes and desires of those who
happen to be our neighbours, or even our relations.[^27]

William John Reilly, an American writer, says in this regard:

There is no one more lacking in personality and content than the self-
seeking people who are inert and impassive They are always curious as to
what other people think of them, and therefore are ever after something
that may be regarded by others with approval  
 This sort of persons actually sacrifice their personality and will to
the collective prejudices of others if you allow yourself to be
influenced by others beyond measure, you will never find the courage to
accomplish anything, and will not succeed in life  
 Of course, this does not mean that one should totally ignore the useful
and well-meaning suggestions of others and not put them to use. However,
that which is to be remembered is that one should accept and act upon
only those suggestions which one believes to be more worthwhile and
useful and those which offer a more complete and sound solution  
 If you follow the prejudice and personal preferences of others you will
be confronted with a social quandary and personal misfortune On the
other hand, if you are steadfast in regard to your ideas that you
believe to be useful, you will feel relaxed, strong, independent, and
self-assured. The futile pursuit of others' prejudices and judgements
will mar whatever significant inspiration and valuable idea that you may
have, divesting you totally of your personal liberty, independence, and
personality, and you will never be able to be your own self. If you give
up your freedom of thought, you will lose everything.  
 The state, circumstances and beliefs of people are changeable and
conflicting in societies The more you strive to achieve general
approval, the lesser results will you obtain, and the lesser attention
you pay to it and avoid submitting to it, the more it will incline
towards you The world, by nature, admires men who have the courage to
decide for themselves and have a strong determination.[^28]

Isolation and Unsociability
---------------------------

One of the causes of social isolation and unsociability is the feeling
of resentment towards people which results in a stunted emotional and
social personality. The dream of amicable relations is changed into a
nightmare of despair and inability to socialise with others.

Imam 'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, may Peace be upon him said:

*One who is always distrustful of others' motives develops a phobia of
everyone.*[^29]

Schachter, the well-known psychologist, writes:

Everyone likes to socialise with others and aspires to receive their
attention and love and enjoy their company But when this wish is not
satisfied, it seems easier to flee from people than to adjust, whereas
the truth is something else If the failure to adjust and avoidance of
the company of others provide a temporary relief, it neither satisfies
our innate urge and need nor does it offer any solution or remedy

Isolation and fleeing from people may have various degrees, and it may
reach the point where, out of despair and a sense of defeat, one
distances oneself from his friends, family, and the whole world.

I used to know an engineer who was highly qualified and had complete
mastery over his profession But in the factory he behaved with outright
dryness and brutality with his subordinates He would eat alone and did
not participate in conversation, nor would he take part in their
amusements. Laughter or humour never came out of his mouth and he would
not allow anyone to be critical of him.

But we knew that in the depth of his heart he underwent a torment on
account of his state and conduct, and that he longed to be able to
converse with others, laugh and dine with them at the same table, and to
be on friendly and fraternal terms with others. When the professor of
psychology studied his case, it was known that, without himself knowing
it, he was suspicious of the loyalty of his subordinates and imagined
that they did not consider him fit to lead them, and therefore he had to
impose his authority upon them in a brutal manner.[^30]

Books, Precious Companions
--------------------------

One can have a friend and companion even when one is alone and relaxing
in solitude. These companions are books that provoke one to think upon
matters that contribute to one's mental growth and edification. By
reflecting upon the writings of great men, who passed away centuries
ago, we become familiar with their valuable thoughts and their wisdom
and profit from their teachings. The wonderful advancements and progress
made by man in the various sciences and arts is not the result of a
sudden leap, but the product of his experience through long eras of
history as the knowledge and the sciences of earlier generations was
transmitted to succeeding ones by the means of books and writings.
Although the illustrious lives of great thinkers lie concealed behind a
curtain of darkness and uncertainty, the essence of their thought and
work has been preserved in the safe custody of books. It is as if the
study of these works allows one to travel a distance of several
centuries to become acquainted with outstanding human beings, who are
now gone, and discover great truths by exploring the vast panorama of
their works. One of the advantages of reading is that everyone, rich or
poor, can equally benefit from the company of great minds and spend
one's time with great heroes, and all that is needed to enter their
company is the license of literacy. Reading can be a good means of
relief from loneliness and bring peace of mind.

Imam 'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, may Peace be upon him, says:

*One who derives consolation from books will never lose his peace of
mind.*[^31]

*One who pursues knowledge in solitude is never scared of
loneliness.*[^32]

A European scholar writes:

The debt we owe to books was well expressed by Richard de Bury, Bishop
of Durham, author of Philobiblon, written as long as 1344, published in
1473, and the earliest treatise on the delights of literature. "There,"
he says, "are the masters who instruct us without hard words and anger,
without clothes or money. If you approach them, they are not asleep; if
investigating you interrogate them, they conceal nothing; if you mistake
them, they never grumble; if you are ignorant, they cannot laugh at you.
The library, therefore, of wisdom is more precious than all riches, and
nothing that can be wished for is worthy to be compared with it.
Whosoever therefore acknowledges himself to a zealous follower of truth,
of happiness, of wisdom, of science, or even faith, must of necessity
make himself a lover of books ..."

This feeling that books are real friends is constantly present to all
who love reading. "I have friends," said Petrarch, "whose society is
extremely agreeable to me; they are of all ages, and of every country.
They have distinguished themselves both in the cabinet and in the field,
and obtained high honours for their knowledge of the sciences. It is
easy to gain access to them, for they are always at my service, and I
admit them to my company, and dismiss them from it, whenever I please.
They are never troublesome, but immediately answer every question I ask
them. Some relate to me the events of the past ages, while others reveal
to me how to live, and others how to die. Some, by their vivacity, drive
away may cares and exhilarate my spirits; while others give fortitude to
my mind, and teach me the important lesson how to restrain my desires,
and to depend wholly on myself. They open to me, in short, the various
avenues of all the arts and sciences, and upon their information I may
safely rely in all emergencies. "

"Books," says Jermy Collier, "are a guide in youth and entertainment for
age. They support us under solitude and keep us from being a burden to
ourselves. They help us to forget the grossness of men and things;
compose our cares and our passions; and lay our disappointments asleep.
When we are weary of the living, we repair to the dead, who have nothing
of peevishness, pride, or design in their conversation."[^33]

Even the study of the biographies of eminent figures who have brought
about fruitful changes in the world and changed the course of human
destiny is not without a formative influence on one's mind and soul. It
can reveal to one the meaning of life and initiate him into outstanding
spiritual virtues. If historic events and the character and conduct of
everlasting personalities are so absorbing and fascinating for the
reader, that is because of their intimate relationship and bond with the
thoughts and feelings of the great men who authored them. In the same
way as the moral character of every person can be judged through the
character of his friends and associates, so also one's selection of
books and one's interests provides a clue to one's intellectual and
spiritual calibre and character. In the same way as one should be
careful in the selection of friends to avoid the dangers of
inappropriate company, so also a great care is to be exercised in the
choice of books. That is because the study of improper material is not
only without benefit, their toxic effects poison ours ideas and vitiate
the purity of one's soul.

This is especially true of the young people, who have not acquired moral
maturity and stability. Their minds are impressionable and they readily
digest the contents of such books, subjecting themselves to the danger
of deviance and degeneration.

Unfortunately, these days barren and misleading published material,
whose evil and harmful influence on youth is not at all hidden, has
acquired great currency. These books are like invisible robbers who
enter the privacy of one's mind and soul and, with a surprising
alacrity, devastate the foundations of one's faith and human merit
Mostly base and vulgar writings form part of the means of amusement of
young people, and that is the reason why there is an increasing tendency
among them to a fantastic approach towards life. For this group of
people, that which matters is not the educative content and impact of a
book but its soporific and intoxicating power, as is the case with many
novels and much fiction. These make their basic conditions for the
selection of a book. Obviously, when the material one reads is not
selected with care and insight, and amusement and sexual excitement is
the only end of reading, apart from the time wasted, that would result
in moral degeneration and ruin of one's constructive faculties

Raymond Beach, a Western psychologist, says:

The matter of reading should be given careful attention by the youth
Although all sorts of newspapers, and various weekly, monthly and other
periodicals make up the most important source of reading by the youth
today, it must said that we come across fewer outstanding minds and
ideas than in the past

When boys and girls select light and nonsensical material for reading,
they gradually lose sight of that which is beautiful, valuable and
sublime in life Bad books incite feelings of anger, rage, and excitement
in the reader and bring him to the verge of moral degeneration These
books enfeeble the will, create intellectual torpor, and debase
spiritual life.

The study of worthy and beneficial books, besides giving a special
clarity to one's insight, may even open a new chapter in one's life,
giving a new direction and impetus to one's energies and efforts and
bringing one's spiritual personality to a definite fruition There are
many people who have obtained their moral and spiritual vigour and power
from this plenteous and fecund source and have been drawn towards
personal sublimity and edification.

Thomas Hood writes

My born interest and attachment to books rescued my life from foundering
in the vortex of ignorance and moral ruin in the early years of my life,
though someone like me who had been deprived of the blessing of parental
care and sympathy in childhood years can rarely escape this frightful
danger.  
 My books restrained me from getting involved in gambling, drinking and
visiting improper places Truly, it is impossible for anyone who benefits
from the precious and sublime ideas of great men to incline towards the
company of base and frivolous characters.[^34]

[^1]: J. A. C. Brown, The Social Psychology of Industry, Persian trans.
Rawanshendsi-ye ijtimaa'i, p. 399.

[^2]: John Lubbock Baron Avebury, On Peace and Happiness, Persian trans.
Dar aghosh-e khushbakhti, p.p. 66-67.

[^3]: Emerson, "Self-reliance," cf. Commins & Linscott, The Social
Philosophers (New York: Modern Pocket Library 1954), p. 399.

[^4]: Al-Nuri, Mustadrak al-Wasail ii, p. 62.

[^5]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-balaghah, xx, p. 272.

[^6]: Alexis Carrel, Man the Unknown (Bombay: Wilco Publishing Co.), pp.
146,147,149.

[^7]: Gardner Murphy, Persian trans. by Sahib-zamani, Raz-e karishmaha,
p. 39

[^8]: Bihar al-anwar, xv, "kitab al-'ishrah," p. 52.

[^9]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar al-hikam, p. 775.

[^10]: Ibid., p. 587.

[^11]: Dale Carnegie, How to Win Friends, Persian trans. A'in-e
dastyabi, pp. 156,159,161.

[^12]: Al-Harrani, Tuhaf al-'uqul, p. 489.

[^13]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar al-hikam, p. 765.

[^14]: Ibid., p. 641.

[^15]: Emerson, "Compensation," cf. Commins & Linscott, The Social
Philosophers New York: Modern Pocket Library 1954), p. 451.

[^16]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar al-hikam, p. 800.

[^17]: Bihar al-anwar, xv, ' kitab al-'ishrah," p. 52.

[^18]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar al-hikam, p. 812.

[^19]: Ibid., p. 827.

[^20]: Ibid., p. 827.

[^21]: Ibid., p. 707.

[^22]: Ibid., p. 812.

[^23]: Al-Hurr al-'Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, "al-ahkam al-mu'asharah,"
bab 101.

[^24]: Avebury, On Peace and Happiness, Persian trans., Dar aghosh-e
khushbakhti, p. 66

[^25]: Al-Hurr al-'Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, "al-ahkam al-mu'asharah,"
bab 101.

[^26]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar al-hikam, p. 820.

[^27]: Bertrand Russell, The Conquest of Happiness (London: Unwin Books
1975), p. 106.

[^28]: William John Reilly, Twelve Rules of or Straight Thinking,
Persian trans. Taf akkur-e sahih, p. 122.

[^29]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar al-hikam, p. 712.

[^30]: Rushd-e shakhsiyyat; p. 111.

[^31]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar al-hikam, p. 632.

[^32]: Avebury, On Peace and Happiness, Persian trans., Dar aghosh-e
kaushbakhti, pp.46-448

[^33]: Raymond Beach, Persian trans. by Banu Munir Mehran, Ma wa
farzandan-e ma p. 83.

[^34]: Akhlaq-e Samuel, p. 124.


