Chapter 13: Success, a Human Right
==================================

The brilliant achievements of world's historic men as well as the
amazing progress made by humanity in all the various technical, economic
and social fields, have all been achieved through self- reliance and
perseverance. Without self-confidence one cannot attain one's cherished
goals and nothing worthwhile can be achieved without faith in one's
capacities. Only with faith in one's success can goals be achieved, for
this faith is the first step on the path of success.

Every undertaking is the result of one's determination, confidence, and
ideas, and should these be deficient or inconsequential, the results
would also be insignificant. One should not enclose one's mind within
the confines of a single activity, big or small. Rather, every task,
regardless of its magnitude, should be carried out with self-reliance
and utmost care and sincerity. In every society there are self-made
persons who, in the struggle of life, employ their inner merits and
spiritual resources to pursue their high human goals. The more this
original human-source is tapped, the more abundantly does it flow, and
it is their timely use and the superior qualities of these individuals
that put them in the rank of outstanding and great men, bringing them
remarkable success in different stages of life.

The lack of hope and inner strength leads to personal stagnation and
degeneration. Those who do not rely on their determination and effort
and pin their hopes on others for securing material and spiritual
happiness always need the support of some strong person. The doors of
success remain closed for them and they are continually driven back by
the advancing waves of life.

If the lack of self-confidence, which is the sign of belief in one's
incapacity to perform tasks, were to take root in someone's mind, it
would be rendered incapable of getting to the heart of anything. Such a
person's power of thought would be paralysed and one cannot expect him
at all to attain any kind of human perfection and sublimity.

How often it happens that outstanding capacities and talents die in
their infancy as a result of lack of self-confidence, and how often
edifying and brilliant aspirations remain sterile and unproductive for
this reason! Someone with an average capacity but with an undefeatable
determination and self- confidence can be many times more successful
than one with outstanding abilities but possessing a shaky will and
lacking self-confidence. That is because such a person is unable to
mobilise his powers which might enable him to overcome obstacles and
release the energies required for consistent effort and necessary for
resolving complex and difficult situations.

There are many people who possess only an average level of abilities,
but who advance in life and succeed brilliantly due to their spirit of
self- confidence. In critical situations they take resort in their
genuine inner powers in order to rescue themselves from dangers and thus
remain unharmed by this means.

As a principle, difficult times of crisis become turning points in the
lives of such persons, creating a positive and stable power within their
minds, and anything that strengthens one's determination and will would
undermine the negative forces that are harmful to one's self-confidence
and activity.

Someone who reaches a firm decision with all his being will avoid
negative thoughts with all his power, and he will resist any false idea
of weakness and inadequacy. Nothing can make him abandon the correct
path and goal that he has chosen and has faith in its being the right
path. He has a firm faith that God does not deprive anyone from
attaining the means of success and felicity, and he believes that
deprivation and inability are products of the human mind. That is
because it is a human right to attain success, and achievement of a goal
is definite if pursued with a positive and constructive frame of mind
and with faith and discipline.

Dr. Marden, a Western scholar, says:

Faith and self-confidence are a creative, constructive, and positive
force while the lack of faith is a negative, retarding, and destructive
force. Self-conscience removes doubt and vacillation and allows One to
Advance firmly without halting and without spending extra energy. All
inventors, reformers, explorers, discoverers, warriors and victors have
had faith in their ability and power. On the contrary, if we were to
study the personality of weak and defeated persons, we will find that
most of them have lacked self-confidence and steadiness.

We do not know what kind of gifts God has bestowed upon persons who
possess the ability to perform great tasks. All that we know is that the
absolute confidence of a human being in the success of his work is a
prominent sign of his ability. Those whom God has equipped with the
weapon of absolute faith, He also assists them in succeeding in their
efforts. Never lose your self-confidence, and do not permit others to
shake it, because it is the basis of all your big achievements. Should
this foundation be damaged, the superstructure will also collapse, and
should it remain intact, the doors of hope will always remain open.[^1]

One's way of thinking is contagious, and its reflections have a great
effect on the lives of other people as well as on various social
relationships. If courage and confidence were to prevail over one's
thoughts, one would carry along one's self-confidence and self-assurance
wherever one went. On the contrary, if doubt and uncertainty were to
overshadow one's mind and should one's self-assurance be nil, one's
weakness will also spread to others' minds.

Some people have the capacity to poison the entire atmosphere around
themselves. They infuse doubt and uncertainty into the minds of other
people who have the capacity to grow into free and happy human beings.
Persons with a negative bent of mind are like weeds in society who do
not perform any function except weakening the creative spirit of others.
It is natural that when there are a large number of such people in an
environment, not only happiness and success will not flourish in it, but
also self-confidence and determination will be cast into oblivion and
there will be a general lack of interest in anything vital.

On the other hand, life become quite intolerable for the dynamic people
who are forced into direct and continuous contact with such people. They
feel light and relieved as soon as they get a chance to get away from
them, as if a great burden has been removed from their shoulders.

You come across another group of people in society who have grown up to
be such weaklings that they lack the determination to accomplish the
simplest of tasks. Even at critical movements when they are required to
take an irreversible decision in a situation which can give a new
direction to their lives, they become so agitated and shaky that they
immediately change their decisions at the smallest criticism from
someone, however logical and correct it might have been.

Fears of failure and inability prompt them to give up and surrender
immediately and unconditionally under the influence of others' remarks
and suggestions without carefully examining them. As a result they leave
unfinished even the tasks that they begin. Without doubt this great
spiritual deficiency will not bring anything except retardation and
stagnation in life, confining it within narrow limits.

The greater the degree of one's self-confidence, the more is the amount
of confidence placed by others in one, as the influence one has on
others depends on one's self-assurance and the strength of one's faith
in one's capacities. If you have self-assurance and are confident of
your abilities, you can acquire the confidence of those who come into
contact with you. But as soon as your self-confidence is shaken and
doubt and hesitation take hold of your mind, you will immediately find
others losing their faith in you. Ultimately, any move on your part,
whether it is inspired by self-assurance or doubt, will be echoed back
to you in the form of others' reaction.

Depending on Misleading Hopes
-----------------------------

In the same way that self-assurance and reliance on one's efforts and
perseverance for the sake of attaining one's goal are the biggest
factors behind success, so also depending on baseless hopes and
cherishing unrealistic aspirations in one's heart, instead of effort and
action, are the result of distancing oneself from realities of life.
Sometimes certain pleasing desires and sweet fancies leave such a deep
impression on one's mind that one gets captivated by impossible dreams,
becoming unable to perceive facts and see realities. Such persons never
succeed in attaining perfection and felicity. 'Ali, the Commander of the
Faithful, may Peace be upon him, said:

*Consider illusory hopes as false, and do not rely upon them. Such hopes
are misleading and one who entertains them falls victim to their
deception.*[^2]

One of the dangers of relying on inappropriate and illusory expectations
is that when they are shattered due to obstacles they give rise to a
psychological complex in people. In one of his precious sayings Imam
'Ali, may Peace be upon him, considers failed expectations as one of the
factors leading to psychological complexes. He says:

*The feeling abasement and inferiority in men arises due to failed hopes
and expectations.*[^3]

The psychologists also consider defeat and failure as one of the
important causes of an inferiority complex and a lack of self-assurance.

Perhaps no factor is more damaging to one's sense of self-respect than
failure and blame for failure. Failure leads a person to consider
himself inferior to others, and on facing defeat he begins to imagine
that he is inferior to other people. Failure destroys self-assurance and
as a result defeatism takes the place of self-confidence. Hence when
children and young people face recurring failure. they feel humiliated
and an inferiority complex is formed in them[^4]

A Lesson Taught by the Noble Messenger
--------------------------------------

One of the man-making methods of the Prophet of Islam, may God bless him
and his Household, was to develop the spirit of self-assurance and self-
reliance in his followers. In the shadow of the guidance and teachings
of the Prophet, Muslims acquired a profound sense of self-confidence, a
sublime courage, a firm determination, and superior ideals, instead of
being swept away by ill-founded hopes and falling victim to ruinous
appetites. They would continually seek God's support in all their
actions and activities by paying continuous attention to the Source of
all virtue.

One of the companions of the Prophet (S) was once faced with great
hardship due to poverty. One day he felt that could not bear it anymore
and the cup of his patience was full. After consulting his wife he
decided to visit the Messenger of God and tell him about his own
destitute condition and ask him for help. Having made up his mind he
went to the Prophet (s). However, before he could express what he had in
his mind, he heard the Prophet (S) say: "We will not grudge our
assistance to anybody who asks for help. But if one adopts self-reliance
and abstains from making appeals of help to the creatures, God will
fulfil his needs."

On hearing these words, he refrained from expressing his intent and
returned home. However, his poverty and destitution made him impatient
and the next day he set out again to see the Prophet (s) and carry out
his resolve. But again he heard the Prophet (S) saying the same thing:
"We will not grudge our assistance to anybody who asks for help. But if
one adopts self-reliance and abstains from making appeals of help to the
creatures, God will fulfil his needs."

This time also he abstained from expressing his need and returned home.
However, as he saw no hopes of any relief coming, for the third time he
went again to see the Prophet (S). This time the Prophet (s) again
repeated the same words. However, on this occasion he had a feeling of
strength and self-confidence on hearing the words of the Noble
Messenger, may God bless him and his Household. He felt as if he had
found the key to his problem. As he returned, he walked with steady and
resolute steps. He went into deep thought. He told himself that he would
no more make appeals of help to creatures of God. Rather he would rely
on the eternal power of God and make the utmost use of his own God-given
capacities. He prayed to God to assist him in the work that he was about
to take up and make him self- reliant. Then he thought for a while about
what he could do. He came to the conclusion that he should set out for
the desert, gather firewood and sell it. He set out to carry out his
decision. He borrowed an axe and set out towards the desert.

Every day he would gather firewood, carry it to the town, and sell it.
He had a pleasant feeling of satisfaction that he was making an earning
with his own work. Several days passed in this manner and he continued
until he made enough money to buy his own implements and an animal to
carry the firewood. After pursuing this occupation for some time he came
to possess sufficient wealth and even bought several slaves.

One day the Messenger of God, may God bless him and his Household, saw
him and said to him with a smile: "Didn't I tell you that we would not
grudge our assistance to anyone who asks us for help. But if someone
adopts self-reliance and abstains from appealing to creatures for
assistance, God will fulfil his needs?"[^5]

Samuel Smiles, a well-known scholar, writes:

Self-confidence is the basis of every success and progress. Should the
majority of people in a nation possess this virtue, it would become a
great and powerful nation. The secret of its rise and power lies only in
possessing this quality, because it strengthens one's determination
which is weakened by dependence on others.

The help that a person receives from outside mostly weaken his power of
perseverance and struggle; for in that case there is no reason for him
to endeavour and make effort. This is especially true when the outside
assistance goes beyond the bounds of necessity. At such times the mind
becomes lethargic and the spirit of determination and the capacity for
effort die in man.

The best laws and regulations give man the freedom in life to rely upon
himself and to manage his own life. But men always think that it is laws
which provide felicity and comfort, not their own conduct and effort.

If we look deeply, we will find that the vices that are attributed to a
nation are actually the vices of a group of individuals. Should we want
to check those vices by the means of laws, they will reappear somewhere
else in another form1 until there is a basic change in the spirit and
character of a nation.[^6]

'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, may Peace be upon him, said:

*One who cannot raise himself and ascend to the ultimate height of which
he is capable, will not be lifted by anything else.*[^7]

*One who fails to make effort due to negligence or laziness will find
his state deteriorate and decline.*[^8]

A Western thinker writes:

Nature suffers nothing to remain in her kingdoms which cannot help
itself. The genesis and maturation of a planet, its poise and orbit, the
bent tree recovering itself from the strong wind, the vital resources of
every animal and vegetable, are demonstrations of the self-sufficing and
therefore self- relying soul ...  
 But now we are a mob. Man does not stand in awe of man, nor is his
genius admonished to stay at home, to put itself in communication with
the internal ocean, but it goes abroad to beg a cup of water of the arms
of other men ...  
 If our young men miscarry in their first enterprises they lose all
heart. If the young merchant fails, men say he is ruined. if the finest
genius studies at one of the colleges and is not installed in office
within one year afterwards in the cities or suburbs of Boston or New
York, it seems to his friends and to himself that he is right in being
disheartened and in complaining the rest of his life. A sturdy lad from
New Hampshire or Vermont, who in turn tries all the professions who
teams it, farms it, peddles, keeps a school, preaches, edits a
newspaper, goes to Congress, buys a township, and so forth, in
successive years and always like a cat falls on his feet is worth a
hundred of these city dolls. He walks abreast with his days and feels no
shame in not "steadying a profession," for he does not postpone his
life, but lives already. He has not one chance, but a hundred chances.
Let a Stoic open the resources of man and tell men they are not leaning
willows, but can and must detach themselves; that with the exercise of
self-trust, new powers shall appear.[^9]

Although self-assurance is one of the biggest and most beneficial of
moral virtues, one should be careful lest this merit is not confused
with pride and self-esteem. That is because there is a world of
difference between a realistic outlook and self-conceit. One who has a
greater confidence in himself than his abilities would warrant, being
inordinately impressed by them and having an exaggerated view of his
talents, is a victim of pride and conceit. Such a person commits many
errors as a result of the illusions of pride, relying as he does on his
imagined extraordinary powers. By failing to see the difficulties
involved in a task, or by overlooking them or failing to judge their
real importance, he fails to equip himself properly in order to confront
them. Accordingly, he cannot prove himself at the time of necessity and
the test of his ability and expertise.

On the contrary, the realistic person is wary of consequences and has a
natural and healthy optimism. He makes a careful judgement of his powers
and capacities at the outset and does not trespass their limits.

The Pessimists Lack of Self-assurance
-------------------------------------

In the same way that talents and faculties develop in a person
possessing self- confidence, making him progress and lead a free and
happy life, so also a pessimistic individual under the influence of
negative thoughts weakens his constructive faculties and undermines his
capacity for action. Someone who constantly complains about the evil of
the times, problems, and daily tensions only invites failure instead of
making his own destiny. He becomes a captive of events and the waves of
life would constantly drive him backwards without permitting him to
approach his ideals.

This negative spirit is a typical and prominent characteristic of
persons who are devoid of the sense of self-assurance. Accordingly to
psychologists:

At times one finds pessimistic persons who are not confident of
themselves due to their lack of self-assurance and the inadequacy they
observe within themselves. That is, they are not sure that they would be
able to carry out a task that is delegated to them or one they are
requested to accomplish Accordingly, they refuse to carry out any demand
that is made of them, fearing that if they give a positive response and
fail to meet it others will discover their inability and that will bring
them a loss of face. Therefore, by saying 'No' they draw a protective
wall around themselves, for a 'No' simply ends the matter.

A negative person generally sees everything from the wrong side and has
a negative opinion on every matter that is under discussion. His conduct
and attitude towards persons, things, and opinions is negative, and
therefore he hardly every derives joy from persons and things. He is
always critical, constantly finding faults and shortcomings. He puts on
airs, dislikes old ideas, and is suspicious of the new.

Those who have a negative attitude have a hostile view of persons they
do not know. Should they encounter people they have not met before in a
gathering, they are hardly drawn to them. They are drawn only towards
those that are like themselves, and that, too, because they imagine that
their friendship will help in the propagation of their views.[^10]

Islam and Personal Independence
-------------------------------

The quest for personal independence arises from the depth of man's
emotional being. This natural desire can be realised only when one's
behaviour and approach is based on this inclination.

Islam takes a frank, wholesome, and healthy view of the source of all
human tendencies. It not only does not require the repression of man's
genuine and constructive inner urges, it does not believe in inhibiting
their appearance into the consciousness. Rather, it employs them for the
sake of man's edification and his ascent towards sublime human goals. It
pays a simultaneous attention to the dynamic urges as well as the
principle that can control and discipline these urges.

With such a broad view it is possible to bring about a healthy state in
the psyche which is balanced in all respects, so that each of its urges
and faculties is properly employed, enabling man to make the ascent
towards perfection with steady and firm steps. He can spend the energies
accumulated within him in securing the basic goals of life and in
attaining the outstanding and sublime station which is worthy of a
genuine human being.

The desire for progress is a human aspiration. However, given his
limited powers, it is impossible for man to spend all his energies in
attaining base goals while still possessing the capacity to make the
upward journey towards edification and to establish a relationship with
the higher world.

Continual pampering of bases and degenerate motives and constant
catering to their demands is the real factor responsible for human
degeneration. In such a state it will be most difficult for a person to
have the capacity to act in a worthy and self-edifying manner.

In order to overcome all the obstacles that lie in the way, Islam
mobilises man's urge to become a positive being, so that he may remain
steadfast in the face of shattering events and overcome every problem
through an unrelenting struggle against obstacles, and remain firm and
steady in confrontation with powerful individuals. This is how one's
determination and courage develop and one comes to possess a wonderful
and invaluable spiritual power.

Man's independence and dignity lie in facing the struggle of life with
courage and fortitude and solving its problems by being self-reliant.
This goal can be realised only when a person can stand on his own feet
with all his power for the purpose of securing material and spiritual
felicity. 'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, may Peace be upon him,
said:

*One who elevates his will and attains to its higher degrees is
considered worthy of praise and honour by all nations*.[^11]

One who lacks self-assurance and personal independence is after some
refuge that may protect him in the hardships of life, like a creeper
which with its soft and delicate branches winds its way up a tall oak so
as to be secure from the wind and the vicissitudes of weather in the
shadow of its strength.

A negative spirit can also turn into a debasing slavery to a powerful
individual, and were someone to debase himself to that extent he would
completely undermine his own personality and forfeit the power to govern
his own affairs. He would be condemned to being always a follower and
not a leader or master of his own self and its independence and freedom.
And so long as such a frame of mind overshadows his being, it would be
impossible for him to acquire human dignity.

Imam 'Ali, may Peace be upon him, said:

*You will feel debased in relation to someone on whom you become
dependent.*[^12]

Individual Responsibility
-------------------------

In the system of Islamic teaching the realisation of eternal and
spiritual felicity also depends on one's personal conduct. Basically,
personal responsibility constitutes the foundation of Islamic teaching.
That is, man is expected to carry out all the duties that have been
assigned to him in the spheres of religion and worldly existence through
the various stages of life by reliance on his effort and action. The
concept of retribution and recompense, which is one of the self-evident
notions of Islam, is also founded on this basis. The Noble Qur'an
teaches that man will not get any reward except for his effort and
endeavour.

***Every soul is a hostage of its own deeds. (75:37)***

***We will give a pure and wholesome life to everyone, man or woman, who
acts righteously and has faith, and We will rewards them in accordance
with the best of what they used to do. (16:97)***

Aside from the reward and punishment of the Hereafter, man would see the
outcome of his conduct in this world itself. The Prophet of Islam said:

*Whoever commits an evil deed will receive its retribution in this world
Itself.*[^13]

*Whoever sows good will reap a good reward, and whoever sows evil will
not gather any fruit except regret.*[^14]

Emerson, an American philosopher, writes:

The world looks like a multiplication table, or a mathematical equation,
which, turn it how you will, balances itself. Take what figure you will,
its exact value, nor more nor less, still returns to you. Every secret
is told, every crime is punished, every virtue rewarded, every wrong
redressed, in silence and certainty. What we call retribution is the
universal necessity by which the whole appears wherever a part appears.
If you see smoke, there must be fire. If you see a hand or a limb, you
know that the trunk to which it belongs is there behind.

Every act rewards itself, or in other words integrates itself, in a
twofold manner; first in the thing, or in real nature; and secondly in
the circumstance, or in apparent nature. Men call the circumstance the
retribution. The casual retribution is in the thing and is seen by the
soul. The retribution in the circumstance is seen by the understanding;
it is inseparable from the thing, but is often spread over a long time
and so does not become distinct until after many years. The specific
stripes may follow late after the offence, but they follow because they
accompany it. Crime and punishment grow out of one stem. Punishment is a
fruit that unsuspected ripens within the flower of the pleasure which
concealed it.[^15]

The Criterion of Moral Worth of Actions
---------------------------------------

Besides, Islam takes an original view of the real inner motives of human
actions and makes intent the criterion for value judgements. Every
action has two aspects, and each of these two aspects has to be treated
separately from the viewpoint of good and evil. An action may be greatly
valuable from one aspect and worthless from another. What is significant
is the kind of inner moral motive that has prompted the doer to perform
that act and the kind of goal that was envisaged in his mental
perspective.

If in such cases our judgement relies on specific social and objective
values the intents of the doer are not relevant. It does not matter
whether a person's humanitarian act is performed with an ostentatious
motive and for the pursuit of material interests, or if he is driven by
a sublime motive and his act is inspired by a sacred intent. Hence from
a social point of view a virtuous person is one which is beneficial to
society. The individual's moral or spiritual maturity is not relevant,
nor the motive that drives him to perform his action.

However, in a divine perspective the quantitative dimensions of actions
are not important. That which makes an act worthy of acceptance by God
is the quality of an action and the inner spiritual condition of the
doer's person. Here, that which is significant is the kind of relation
that exists between the doer and the act, as well as the aim and intent
that have led him to perform it. If he performs a virtuous act to show
off and to impress others, such an action not only does not elevate him
towards the higher planes of being but also brings him down. In order to
be considered righteous, it is not just sufficient that an act should be
beneficial for society.

A socially beneficial action is useful from the viewpoint of spiritual
growth when it takes a spiritual and angelic form and the soul
transcends the confines of self-seeking motives and self-aggrandisement,
to reach the frontiers of inner purity and sincerity.

The Qur'an declares:

***And they were not commanded except to worship God with sincere
devotion. (98:4)***

The Noble Messenger, may God bless him and his Family, said:

*The value of works depends on intentions.*[^16]

This is a definite and unchanging basis on the basis of which the worth
and acceptability of deeds and actions can be determined. The basis
factor that results in one's edification and the acceptability and
sublimity of one's works is the honourable and sacred purpose that takes
the Lord's pleasure into account.  
 The best sign of a steady faith in God is the moral and spiritual
character of a person's intentions and motives. In that case his acts
assume a special value and merit, and he comes to partake of Cod's
support and His infinite grace. This firm and valuable-criterion does
not lie beyond the domain of human conduct, capacity, cognition, and
feeling.

One whose soul has not been lit with the rays of God's greatness and
whose heart is devoid of sincerity and faith, the motives that drive him
are those which derive from self-seeking desires and the love for a
passing reputation. The tasks that such a person begins and brings to
conclusion, being devoid of spirituality and truth, are performed, for
instance, so that others may respect him and consider him a man of human
merit. Such a worthless objective will have a degenerating effect on his
character and fail him as a human being. The specious achievements of
such a person will not possess any worth before Cod, and he will not
receive any reward for his accomplishments except achieving the limited
and insignificant purpose that he had in view.

The persons who are self-confident and reliant on their actions do not
feel any need for ostentation and show. Ostentation is the conduct of
those who lack action and confidence, and suffer from a spiritual
malady.

Imam 'Ali the Commander of the Faithful, may Peace be upon him, makes
this remark about such a person:

*The speech of an ostentatious person is pleasing, but there is a
far-reaching disease in his heart.*[^17]

*Self-conceit derives from the pettiness of one's values.*[^18]

Schachter, the well-known psychologist, says:

Another means that we employ in order to attract others' attention,
despite personal failure and lack of success, is bragging and self-
advertisement. We imagine that we have already achieved what we aspired
to achieve and done what we wanted to do, and we attribute them to
ourselves. Instead of the success that we could not achieve and the
important tasks that we could not accomplish, we content ourselves with
talking continually about what we have done and to magnify their own
deeds no matter how much insignificant they might have been.

Such persons are so mislead by their own bragging and self- complaisance
that they lose every opportunity to make any kind of achievement. If
their self-advertisement provides them with a passing relief from the
painful lack of success and inattention of others, and temporarily
deceives their listeners, it does not solve the real problem.

One who can carry out his job correctly and successfully and win the
hearts of others by his worthy conduct and speech, has no need to brag.
By devoting himself to action instead of vainglory, every day he makes
more friends and achieves greater success.[^19]

Schopenhauer says:

Vainglory produces contempt and resentment, because it is on the one
hand the sign of dishonesty and dissemblance, and, on the other, a
product of stupidity and ignorance. One who continuously claims to
possess a merit, is certain to be devoid of it. Those who ceaselessly
talk of their achievements, the brilliance of their minds, their
ingenuity and power, should know for sure that they lack all these
merits. Moreover, it should not be forgotten that deception and
vainglory cannot endure, and the truth will be ultimately revealed
resulting in a total loss of face and repute.[^20]

Making Oneself the Measure of Things
------------------------------------

A vicious and base person interprets the conduct and character of others
in accordance with his own filthy motives.

'Ali, may Peace be upon him, said:

*An evil person does not have a good opinion of anyone, because he does
not see anyone except through the medium of his own character.*[^21]

This subjective tendency to view others through the lenses of one's own
motives is a scientifically established fact, and this is what
psychologists have to say in this regard:

When our feelings, thoughts, and inclinations inordinately colour the
world, it is certain that we would view everything in it from our
subjective viewpoint, as if our feelings have cast their shadow on the
universe. Storms arouse within us feelings of despair and forlornness,
and a soft breeze makes us feel comfortable and satisfied. In this way
we view nature only through the window of our feelings. Our feelings may
lead us to regard the cat as a fine and loveable animal or as one that
is troublesome and detestable. Emotions and feelings totally transform
the world that we live in, or they create a new world for us.

A man once produced a sound with a sonometer and asked those who were
present as to what sound they had heard. Every one of them had a
particular answer. One said that he had heard the sound of a whistle,
another that of a trumpet, a third had heard a human voice, and each of
them said something different. Certainly, the sound that each person in
the audience had heard related to his personal experience. Obviously, a
single tune could not have all these different effects. Hence that which
varied the effect of the tune on persons was their own experience. In
the famous story of Edgar Allen Poe, the angry cries that come out of
the throat of the murderous child were interpreted variously by the
German, French, Italian and Russian listeners.

Prosecutors and lawyers know that it is a rare thing for witnesses who
have seen a quite simple event from a very close distance to report in
an identical manner. Even in matters which do not arouse emotions in us
we observe clearly the extent to which our opinions and beliefs differ.
In cases where emotions are involved our mental deductions are many
times more suspect.[^22]

The Marvellous Effects of Trust in God
--------------------------------------

Self-reliance is not only not contrary to trust in God, the reliance one
places in the Lord of the universe and the faith one has in the eternal
Divine power strengthen and develop one's personality.

The human being having faith, while possessing the assets of self-
reliance and an independent personality, utilises all the available
opportunities and means fully and carefully. He does not waste any
opportunity, but, at the same time, he does not confine his spirit
within the walls of material causes and factors. His humanity is not
limited by them.

Rather, his horizons are always open, to ascend to newer heights, and
the scope of his activity is wide and extensive. That is because a part
of his spiritual vigour and activity are devoted to higher purposes of
life.

The human being with a heart full of faith relies upon God, Who directs
all affairs with His infinite power and has no partner or collaborator
in any of His works.

***Whatsoever mercy God opens to men, none can withhold, and whatsoever
He withholds, none can release after His withholding it, and He is
Almighty, All-wise. (35:2)***

Where can man find a refuge that is beyond the realm of God's power?
Taking refuge in something other than God will have no result except
disappointment and humiliation. How can any creature be master and
arbiter of others' affairs, while it itself stands in need of God for
everything, and owns nothing that pertains to itself, and has no power
that is its own, nor is capable of offering refuge to anyone?

Accordingly, there is nothing more appropriate for the human being than
seeking to live under the shadow of support and grace of God, who
regulates all matters with His might and wisdom. Humility before God, at
all times, in hardship and ease, and the conviction that the infinite
power of God is above all ordinary powers, causes, and factors, that it
rules and governs everything, give a wonderful strength to the spirit.
It creates such a confidence and peacefulness within man's heart and
soul that one would not be swept away by events and lose one's human
equilibrium and worth, or be oppressed by anything big or small.

When one surrenders one's soul and mind to God, to the degree that one
is capable of, one becomes infused with a spirit of submission to God
and resignation towards His decrees. Then he neither complains of
unpleasant events nor is carried away or made proud by his success. He
is not affected by things that bewilder others and leave an undesirable
effect on them. Due to their steady determination and spirit filled with
confidence they would not submit to despair and desperation, which are
so often the source of defeat and failure.

Reliance upon God never leads to any kind of weakness or indifference.
Rather, it gives a self-confidence that strengthens the will and removes
all traces of doubt and vacillation from the heart.

The unrelenting struggles of men of God in the face of unfavourable
circumstances and against the destructive elements and degenerate ideas
in their communities, derived their strength from the infinite Truth.
They sought the help of this invisible agent for pursuing their plans of
reform and guidance of the people. That is because their souls had an
unbreakable bond with the indestructible power of God and then pursued
their goals resolutely to the very end.

A self-reliance that is devoid of reliance on God cannot deliver the
human spirit from agitation and anguish under hard and debilitating
circumstances. Hardships and unfavourable factors of life shatter the
spirit of those who lack trust in God and whose vision does not go
beyond matter and corporeal reality. A feeling of gloom builds up within
them and in such an oppressive state they cannot make the ascent towards
perfection and edification and perceive truths which are greatly sublime
and luminous. A crushing feeling of anguish settles upon them at
encounter with unwanted events of the smallest significance, or they are
shattered by catastrophic hardships of life.

This point becomes clear when we observe the spirit and conditions of
Muslims during the early era of Islam, for they were the best symbol and
example of trust in and reliance upon God. One does not observe any
impotence, lethargy, or a negative indifference in those who make
sacrifices for the advancement of their faith and work for their goals.
Relentless effort, under the most difficult and taxing conditions, for
building a new, prosperous society was their patent method. Those who
have been brought up in this dynamic school of thought never succumb to
loss of confidence. It was this steadiness of resolve and a composed and
confident spirit that paved the path of their progress and led to the
emergence of such a unique and matchless society in world's history.

Everyone should evaluate his situation in life and identify the road he
has chosen through the terrain of existence. He should find out whether
he is going towards felicity and goodness or towards wretchedness and
deprivation. By identifying one's spiritual needs, one can effectively
resist the conditions and factors that disturb one's spiritual
equilibrium, not allowing harmful elements to accumulate and consolidate
their strength. However, when it becomes evident that someone's being
has been overshadowed by some inadequacy or defect, it is not possible
to devise a basic remedy until the source of that inadequacy has been
traced within the depths of the victim's soul.

Those who are victims of lack of confidence are afraid of starting on
any venture due to their fear of failure. The best remedy is to find the
causes of this spiritual defect, for identification of causes of any
disease is essential for its treatment. In this way one can explore the
depths of one's being and discover the key to one's cure. Without doubt,
the effort that is made to overcome one's inadequacies yields remarkable
results, for man has the capacity to wage a consistent struggle against
unhealthy spiritual factors.

Every bad habit is the sign of a weakness that comes about as the result
of repetitive behaviour and takes the form of a harmful and chronic
disease. Though at first it seems difficult to change a habit, but it is
possible to alter one's habits through exercise and effort. Every
harmful habit that is overcome is to be counted as a great victory on
the path of attaining to human merit and sublime spiritual qualities.
Imam Ali, may Peace be upon him, said:

*It is by overcoming bad habits that man can rise to the higher
stations*.[^23]

[^1]: Marden, Orison Swett, The Victorious Attitude , Persian trans.,
Piruzl-ye fikr, p. 83.

[^2]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar al-hikam wa durar al-kalim, p. 113.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 405.

[^4]: Marguerite Malm & Herbert Sorenson, Psychology for Living, Persian
trans., Rawanshenasi baraye zistan, pp. 247-252.

[^5]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 139.

[^6]: Samuel Smiles, Persian trans., E'timad beh nats, pp. 14-16.

[^7]: Ghurar al-hikam wa durar al-kalim, p. 642.

[^8]: Ibid., p. G98.

[^9]: Emerson, "Self-reliance," cf. Commins & Linscott, The Social
Philosophers (New York: Modern Pocket Library 1954), p. 406-409.

[^10]: Marguerite Malm & Herbert Sorenson, Psychology for Living,
Persian trans., Rawanshenasi baraye zistan, p. 200.

[^11]: Ghurar al-hikam wa durar al-kalim, p. 661.

[^12]: Ibid. p. 668.

[^13]: Nahj al-fasahah, p. 592.

[^14]: Ibid. p. 622.

[^15]: Emerson, "Compensation," ef. Commins & Linscott, The Social
Philosophers (New York: Modern Poeket Library 1954), pp. 442-443.

[^16]: Nahj al-fasahah, p. 190.

[^17]: Ghurar al-hikam wa durar al-kalim, p. 610-

[^18]: Ibid ., p. 106.

[^19]: Rushd-e shakhsiyyat, p. 92.

[^20]: Afkar-e Schopenhauer, Persian trans., by Mushfiq Hamadani, 1326
H. Sh. p. 92.

[^21]: Ghurar al-hikam wa durar al-kalim, p. 104.

[^22]: Strecker, Wilkerforce & Appel, Rawanshenasi bardye hameh, Persian
trans. by Mushfiq Hamadsini, p. 259.

[^23]: Ghurar al-hikam wa durar al-kalim


