Chapter 14: Fear
================

Fear is one of the basic instincts of every living creature when
confronted with some kind of danger. Whenever in its struggle for life
the human being is confronted with the alternatives of either avoiding
danger or-facing harm or destruction, the feeling of fear gives it the
power necessary to secure survival. Hence the purpose of fear is to
mobilise one's energy and effort to find the way of deliverance from
danger and peril. Had the human beings of prehistoric times failed to
avoid the various dangers that threatened them, the human species would
not have survived.

This principle is valid not only in the case of dangers to physical life
but also holds in respect of any threat to man's personality that gives
rise to the feeling of fear. Common experience has shown that the danger
of becoming subject to the domination of others is a greater cause of
fear amongst individuals than anything else. Such a fear can paralyse
one's active life for months, or even years, and bring active life to a
standstill.

In fact, this anxiety arises from a threat to personality and the danger
of its toss. Someone who is faced with such a threat feels as if he has
no power to take any decision. He is compelled to seek others' help and
decide his affairs through their assistance.

The stronger one's fear of tossing one's personality, the more intense
is the anxiety that torments him. At times this condition may reach the
point of madness. That which is said concerning inherent instincts, that
they are beneficial for survival and for the preservation of life, is
true only when they do not exceed the limits of moderation. But when
they become extreme they can become harmful.

Imaginary fears born of ungrounded imaginings and expectations of
misfortune and grief are signs of a kind of painful pathological
condition which weakens the power of thought. As revealed by the
researches done by specialists in the field, this factor not only leads
many people to toss their well-being but also results in considerable
harm.

It has often been observed that the state of crisis resulting from panic
and anxiety becomes the cause of untimely death, for an unexpected bout
of panic can upset the mechanism of one's life and bring life to a
sudden halt.

Sometimes, the state of fear and anxiety is a prelude to severe psychic
illness caused by some radical changes in a person's psyche; for sound
and healthy persons do not ordinarily become subject to such states. On
the contrary, they try with all their mental capacity to maintain and
reinforce their mental equilibrium.

Some people are victims of vague and unknown fears. They cannot identify
what troubles them, nor are those closest to them aware of the cause of
their hidden anguish and pain. Age, of course, is of direct relevance in
relation to feelings of fear and anxiety. These feelings are
characteristic of childhood years, and all people, more or less,
experience states of agitation and panic during their childhood years
and well until the age of mental maturity.

In any case, this affliction destroys the urge for progress and
immobilises all elements of success, diminishing the level of one's
mental and physical activity. Its harmful effects become visible
throughout one's activities and conduct.

Aside from the fact that such fears are of no benefit, and regardless of
whether the expected dangers materialise or not, the fear that one feels
at the present has no result except causing waste of time and diminished
physical and mental vigour. Moreover, when the feared misfortune or
calamity actually does occur, one will lack the power and courage to
face it.

Fear and anxiety reveal themselves in various forms. Dr. Cowlest says:

Do you lack self-confidence and consider yourself incapable of facing
the conditions of life? Do you suffer from a painful feeling of shyness
and timidity? Do you find it difficult in social gatherings to face
someone whom you have not met earlier and does that make you
uncomfortable and anxious? Don't you feel really comfortable and at ease
when you are atone? I your answer to the above questions is Yes, then
you are afraid. Do you feel that people consider you to be senseless?
That they do not understand you? That everyone is against you? Do you
think and brood a time concerning your past and what you have lost? Do
you feel that you have committed a sin in the past in relation to a
certain person, regardless of whether such a sin has been committed or
not?  
 Do you continually think about yourself and are continually in a state
of anxiety about what will happen to you? Are you quickly affected by
people's idle talk and frivolous remarks? When you get angry and
inflamed, are you afraid that you would not be able to control
yourself?  
 Do you, in general, loath to associate with people and have strong
prejudices? Do you find it difficult to develop terms of attachment and
intimacy with others? All of these are different forms of fear.[^1]

When one resolves to act in accordance with certain principles that one
adopts in life and in a decisive manner, one will bear problems and
misfortunes with courage and fortitude. Such a person puts up a manly
resistance against hardships, and despair and despondency cannot subdue
his spirit.

Many talented people who could attain a distinguished position in life
by relying on this inner power and who possess adequate strength to
expel fear from their minds, cannot make an initial movement on his path
due to the lack of sufficient courage. As a result, they fail to climb
the ladder of progress and their capacities languish forever.

That which results in one losing control over one's life and affairs is
indecisiveness. Wasting time worrying about events that may never happen
will lead to irreparable harm. Shakespeare says: "Those who are afraid
of the sting of the honey-bee do not deserve to possess the hive's
honey."

It is possible for everyone at all times to get rid of unfounded fears
and baseless anxieties and to replace them with optimistic ideas. No
matter how strong one's will power may be, and however sublime one's
goals should be, one cannot get rid of some habits instantaneously. Such
habits must be eradicated gradually. It is not sufficient that one
should be merely aware of being a victim to groundless notions; rather,
one must make a consistent mental effort to guard one's personality
against illusory fears. One should stop ruminating over distressing
thoughts by opening one's mind to positive thoughts which are in
complete contrast to them. In this- way one can prepare the ground for
considerable progress.

A lamp is not lighted until it is turned on, and once lighted it will
not go off until it is switched off. Similarly, when the darkness of
anxiety overwhelms one's spirit, one should turn on the lamp of His
intellect and take a deep took at the realities of life and its bright
side so that one's mind is relieved from the stress of baseless fears.

Someone who is unusually prone to illusory fears even in trivial matters
should first examine these thoughts which upset his mental composure so
as to discover that fear and anxiety are incapable of producing any
positive results and that every difficulty requires thoughtful
attention, then he should plant the seedlings of hope and confidence in
the garden of his soul instead of cultivating the weeds of baseless
anxieties and devote himself to their cultivation and care like an
skilled gardener.

Without doubt, fear and anxiety are products of mans imagination and
have no place outside the mind. When one realises this fact, one would
be able to dominate fear to a considerable extent and obtain peace of
mind is which is the most valuable of things.

Neither Timidity Nor Rashness
-----------------------------

From the viewpoint of the science of ethics, virtue lies midway between
the two extremes of excess and neglect. Courage is a virtue that lies
midway between rashness and timidity. One who is free from recklessness
and fear possesses the virtue of courage. It is a veritable truth that
human advancement in various fields, and even vital discoveries and
explorations of unknown continents, owe their existence to the courage
of brave persons. It was their courage which was responsible for certain
crucial developments in science.

On the whole, spiritual strength makes up the real factor behind human
advancement and progress. The stronger one's spirit is in the struggle
of life, the more brilliant will be one's achievements.

Intellectual and social revolutions cannot succeed without the element
of courage. The role of this moral virtue in the course of human
advancement in the material and intellectual spheres, as well as the
results of practical experience, have convinced even the biggest
sceptics of the truth of this matter. The strength and power exhibited
by the character and conduct of positive personalities also effectively
proves it.

The great men of history, who have played the most effective role in the
deliverance of their nations and their release from distressing
conditions, have generally been men of great valour and courage. In
fact, the development of this quality will lead to the growth of other
capacities as well.

Hence it is the duty of every individual to himself to pay more
attention to the attainment of this great moral virtue which is one of
the most beneficial of human qualities. The problems that should be
solved, the tasks that must be carried out, and the results that should
be obtained from them, may vary from one individual to another; but in
practice their foundations rest upon personal courage. For often many
fruitful and formative ideas and innovative thoughts that come to the
minds of some persons never cross the frontiers of their private
thoughts due to fear and apprehension. They do possess the capacity and
talent to attain personal excellence, but they lack the spirit of
courage. Although in many cases they have faith in the validity of their
opinions and their creative ideas, but, unfortunately, they do not
possess the courage and confidence to express their fruitful opinions.

Whenever they are called upon to present their plans and proposals, they
immediately become alarmed and upset, like someone who distrusts
himself. Even in scientific and social debates, when faced with contrary
opinions they retreat without making the least defence of their
opinions. They withdraw their arguments, though their views are more
logical and better reasoned than those of others and based on firmer and
more valid foundations.

The causes and factors that lead to such a condition in persons should
be explored and investigated, and unless these factors are not
identified they will not achieve mental peace and personal courage.
Possibly, such a person might have been full of hope and courage in his
childhood years, but some unfortunate incidents might have arrested the
growth of those capacities, or his fruitful and superior thoughts might
have been repressed by his guardians and teachers due to neglect and
ignorance.

When it becomes established that one's creative and constructive
faculties have been weakened, one can take remedial steps for
strengthening them by resorting to certain fundamental means. If he can
expel the baseless fears that dominate his being, he will gradually
regain self-confidence. It is under the influence of the formative power
of courage that doubts and misgivings will give way to inner composure
and security.

Ignorance of the Character of Life
----------------------------------

One of the basic factors that lead to anxiety and its growth to a
dangerous point is ignorance of the characteristics of life. A person
possessing courage knows well that life involves various kinds of
hardships and setbacks. Whenever he encounters some difficulty, he
maintains his composure, and this prepares him to face future
adversities. For when one anticipates unpleasant events in the future,
one will be somewhat prepared to face them.

And when the event actually takes place it will not affect him in an
adverse manner. On the contrary, if someone does not possess the
readiness to face life's tragedies, as soon as one of them occurs it
will be a fearsome and shattering blow for him. Neglect and the lack of
attention to the realities of life magnify the effect of tragic events
and make them appear disproportionately deadly and frightful. Moreover,
the readiness to face future tragedies prepares one mentally for the
stage of recovery and smoothens the path of encountering them.

Voltaire says:

Throughout life man must advance like a warrior and die with his sword
in his hand. Only weak and feeble-minded persons are knocked down by
events. Only weak people constantly complain of the world's woes and
hardships. As long as there is uncertainty about the dangers involved in
an event and so long as there is any hope of averting it, don't give way
to weakness. Remain steadfast with all the determination at your
command.[^2]

In general, awareness and consciousness are the most basic means for the
reduction of anxiety and fear. With the advancement of human knowledge
and the growth of man's intellect there is a decrease in the stresses
caused by fears. That is why many factors that created fear in primitive
and semi-primitive men during the various eras of man's history have no
significance today for people due to advancement of knowledge and
intellectual growth.

Experience has shown definitively that knowledge by itself results in
confidence and tranquillity, which takes the place of distressing
anxieties. It is on this basis that all psychiatrists consider
consciousness of that was previously subconscious and awareness of the
causes of painful fears as part of the treatment for mental anxiety and
depressing thoughts.

We should not forget the point that although the ancient fears have been
dispelled to a considerable extent by the progress of science, the
changes in modern life have substituted new anxieties for the fears of
the past. In industrialised societies, which have created large cities
with huge conglomerations of people who remain strangers to one another,
human beings have become lonelier despite the heavy concentrations of
population. The intimacy, friendship and attachment that marked
interpersonal relations in the past have given way to feelings of
estrangement and isolation. The concentration of population has lead to
alienation and loneliness. Although people live close to one another,
they are not friendly and familiar with the moral, personal and
spiritual characteristics of one another. In times of need, they are
extremely parsimonious in offering one another help or consolation.

Indifference, injustice, different forms of vices, and neglect of duty
and moral criteria lead to the emergence of fear. In fact, fear is a
kind of punishment that man receives due to deviation from the course of
moral growth.

An American thinker says:

All infractions of love and equity in our social relations are speedily
punished. They are punished by fear. Whilst I stand in simple relations
to my fellowman, I have no displeasure in meeting him. We meet as water
meets water, or as two currents of air mix, with perfect diffusion and
interpenetration of nature. But as soon as there is any departure from
simplicity and attempt to partiality, or good for me that is not good
for him, my neighbour feels the wrong; he shrinks from me as far as I
have shrunk from him; his eyes no longer seek mine; there is war between
us; there is hate in him and fear in me.

All the old abuses in society, universal and particular, all unjust
accumulations of property and power, are avenged in the same manner.
Fear is an instructor of great sagacity and the herald of all
revolutions. One thing he teaches, that there is rottenness where he
appears. He is a carrion crow, and though you see not well what he
hovers for, there is death somewhere. Our property is timid, our laws
are timid, our cultivated classes are timid. Fear for ages has boded and
mowed and gibbered over government and property. That obscene bird is
not there for nothing. He indicates great wrongs which must be
revised.[^3]

The Combination Of Hope and Fear in Human Nature
------------------------------------------------

In human nature hope and fear have been put together. These two are born
with man in his infancy and grow with him. The fear of pain, suffering,
poverty, and disability is a feeling that arises from within. On the
other hand, there is the hope of security, comfort, prosperity, and
strength. Every wish and hope that is fulfilled is immediately replaced
by another. Fear and hope define and delimit our thoughts, conduct, and
goals, and the very direction of our lives. Man chooses his path through
life in accordance with their character and extent. The person whose
thoughts are occupied with expectations of wealth, position, and power,
defines his goals on their basis and directs his activities toward these
goals. That which preoccupies his mind and concerns is the choice of
such means and methods as will materialise his hopes and desires in the
shortest time.

However, one who has liberated himself from the bondage of such desires
does not devote his efforts to this kind of goals in an unlimited and
unconditional manner, for he is master of himself and is free from the
chains of such obsessions.

By relying on the principle of fear and hope, Islam relieves the human
being from every kind of fear which oppresses the soul and which has no
bearing on real life. Because a fear that does not help change the
unpleasant realities of life is futile. In this way, it liberates the
human soul from fears relating to mundane matters and the transitory
gains of life, calling it to effort and endeavour in all fields of life.
In the same way, it expels every deviant hope from the human soul and
thus preserves it from deviance, so that man may orient himself towards
a worthy and vigorous life and abstain from putting his reliance in
anything except the eternal power of God.

Islam believes that none of the ordinary factors, however imposing, has
essentially the power to cause benefit or harm. Hence they are not fit
to be feared. That which should be feared is that Power that embraces
every being in Its omnipotence, sovereignty and dispensation. It is that
which grants and deprives, gives and takes away. The Glorious Qur'an
refers to this truth in these words:

***(O honoured Messenger) say: "Who provides you out of heaven and earth
or who rules over hearing and sight and who brings forth the living from
the dead and brings forth the dead from the living and who directs the
affair?" They will surely say "God" Then say: "Will you not then be
God-fearing? (10:31)***

Moreover, since man's hopes are often related to various bounties of
life and comforts and joys of a corporeal kind, Islam does not deprive
anyone of wholesome joys and pleasures of this kind and does not ask
people to turn their back on worldly matters. However, it redirects
hopes from false and illusory values to real and true values and worthy
aspirations. It warns man that he should not be deceived by transitory
joys and get immersed in carnal desires and lusts, thus failing to
realise everlasting and true joys. At all times it impels him to seek
the pleasure of the sacred and glorious Essence of God:

***Indeed, it is the abode of the Hereafter that is (true) life, did
they but know! (29:64)***

The emphasis placed on God-fearing in Islamic teachings in fact refers
to the trepidation that one ought to feel concerning one's own conduct.
This kind of fear is not only not harmful but is of great benefit, as it
embraces the entire ambit of human conduct. The fear of the undesirable
consequences of misconduct sharpens one's sense of caution and
vigilance. It brings harmful urges under control and transforms man into
a self-disciplined and orderly being.

Solely placing hope in God and His infinite compassion without any fear
and trepidation concerning the consequences of one's conduct leads to
unbridled and unprincipled behaviour and gives rise to many vices.

A person who is not wary of his own conduct and who pins all hopes in
God's forgiveness and mercy can perpetrate any kind of inappropriate
actions without feeling any kind of trepidation and still remaining
hopeful. Possibly, his entire conduct and character may sink in
sinfulness while his hopes remain nigh.

Accordingly, this absence of fear vis-à-vis God will lead to the
degeneration of human conduct. That is why in religious teachings it has
been emphasised that man's ideal condition is one wherein he wavers
between fear and hope: while placing hope in God's infinite mercy, he
should be afraid of the consequences of his own conduct, refraining from
falling victim to pride and conceit.

Imam Sadiq, may Peace be upon him, said:

*Fear keeps a watch over the human heart and hope is the soul's
intercessor and that of its aspirations. Those who know God, fear Him,
while they place their hopes in His grace. This fear and hope are like
two wings of faith. By their means, those who study the order of being
and creation fly towards God's good pleasure, and they witness God's
promises and warnings with the eyes of their intellects. By inspiring
awe in respect of His warnings, the fear of God turns them towards God's
justice, and the hope in Him calls them toward His beneficence and
favour. This is how hope revives the heart and fear suppresses satanic
inclinations.*[^4]

These who are equipped with the weapons of knowledge and faith are
fearful of God's just retribution. In observing the Divine precepts,
their motive is to be complaint towards God and His commands and
prohibitions. A fear that arises from foresight serves as a warning that
leads one to take precautionary measures. It impels him on the path of
duty and draws him to observe his multifarious responsibilities. It
restrains him from becoming polluted with the filth of sin and causes
man to always keep his true felicity in view under all circumstances.

From the viewpoint of the Qur'an it is knowledge that produces awareness
of real dangers that arise from unprincipled conduct:

***Only those of His servants who possess knowledge fear God. (35:28)***

There is no doubt that the knowledge which raises a person to the rank
of men of knowledge and is the means of self-discipline and inner purity
is one which contributes to the development of the soul and guides its
possessor to the infinite power of God and draws him to His worship.
This knowledge preserves the human consciousness and intellect from
being polluted with sin, and it is itself the most significant means for
awakening the mind to the contemplation of the order of being and the
remembrance of God:

***[Surely in the creation of the heavens and earth and in the
alternation of night and day there are signs for men possessed of minds]
who remember God, standing and sitting and on their sides and reflect
upon the creation of the heavens and the earth: 'O Lord! Thou hast not
created this in vain. Glory be to Thee. Guard us against the
chastisement of the fire. (3:190-191)***

According to the Qur'an, guidance and insight are also products of the
state of awe and fear vis-à-vis the Creator

***And he who fears shall be heedful ... (87:10)***

A man questioned the Noble Messenger, may Peace and God's benedictions
be upon him and his Household, concerning the following verse of the
Qur'an

***[Surely those who tremble in fear of their Lord, and those who
believe in the signs of their Lord, and those who associate naught with
their Lord] and those who give what they have been given their hearts
quacking that they are returning to their Lord, [those vie in good
works, outreaching to them]. (23:60-1)***

He asked the Prophet (S) if the verse also applies to someone who
commits theft and adultery and drinks wine and yet fears God The Prophet
(S) told him "It means a person who performs prayer and fasting and
gives a helping hand to others, while fearing lest God should not accept
any of his works "

A harmful and blameworthy kind of fears is one which arises from
weakness and abasement. Such fears not only do not motivate anyone to
perform edifying deeds, but also hinder progress and become obstacles in
the way of human felicity. That is why in the course of their educative
programs the leaders of the Islamic faith have sought to liberate their
followers from the bondage of unrealistic fears which weaken man's will
power and destroy his self-confidence, through reliance on the great
power of the intellect and conscience.

When 'Ali, may Peace be upon him, was prepared to march towards the
scene of battle after having mobilised his army for war with the
Khawarij, one of his companions who had some knowledge of astrology told
him that it was not a propitious hour for setting out for battle and
that it would lead to his defeat. 'Ali, may Peace be upon him, gave him
the following reply dispelling his wrong ideas. He told him

Do you think that you can determine the hour during which evil would
befall people if they go forth? Do you claim to warn them of the hour
they would suffer harm if they go forth during it? Whoever confirms what
you say rejects the Qur'an, considering that by believing you he does
away with the need to seek God's help for attaining what he desires and
avoids what he shuns. You want someone who obeys your prescriptions to
praise you rather than His Lord, for as you claim, it is you who guide
him concerning the hour in which he can secure benefits and avoid harms!

Then turning to the warriors of Islam, 'Ali, may Peace be upon him,
declared "Set out in God's Name!"[^5]

In this way, the Prince of the Faithful ordered the soldiers to march
towards the battlefield by putting their reliance in the might of the
Lord and without paying attention to the nonsense of the astrologer and
heeding his prophecies Finally, the battle ended with the enemy's defeat
and victory of 'Ali's army

In another of his sayings 'Ali, may Peace be upon him, instructs his
followers in these words

Whenever you are apprehensive of the difficulty of some task, be
steadfast and forbearing until it becomes easy for you. With all the
hardship it may involve, make it appear simple and easy to those around
you. As a result similar task will become inevitably easy for you to
carry out.[^6]

Psychologists say in this regard:

We come across many people in daily life who are demoralised by fear,
which they allow to dominate them.  
 Many people refrain from participating in social activities due to fear
Overwhelmed by fear, they surrender to it and evade their social
responsibilities.

Many students do not question their teachers due to fear, or they are so
much overwhelmed by fear at the time of tests that they become incapable
of responding properly Many people do not admit their mistakes because
of fear, and there are some who do not have the courage say 'No,'
because they are afraid that something will happen to them if they do
not comply.

The consequence of this kind of behaviour is that fear is allowed to
dominate the person. Gradually it diminishes his capacity to overcome
his fear and increases his daily problems.  
 Someone who wants to have an exciting life in adult years should
develop courage within himself. Everyone needs one or another kind of
courage in life, and what could be better than acquiring it in
childhood? If we develop personal courage t the proper time in life, we
will have greater strength when it is needed.

There is a good way of developing courage and that is to carry out what
is essential for mastering one's fear. Everyone has faced situations in
life when he could carry out some task but refrained from performing it
due to some fear (conscious or subconscious). For instance, you had an
opportunity to participate in class discussions but did not because you
were afraid. Or a friend of yours made to you a proposal which was
against the principles you believed in, but you did not say 'No' to him
so as not to disappoint him. Or you made a mistake which you did not
admit due to fear. All these are forms of fear.

Now if you evaluate a situation and do what you must, you have been able
to create courage within yourself, and this is the way to develop
courage. Every time that you do this, you will be adding to your
courage, and gradually you will be able to overcome your fear. By
developing courage you will be quite able to solve your problems.[^7]

Today, despite all the advancements made by man in his struggle against
the forces of nature, people remain constantly obsessed in their lives
by anxieties concerning the future, by fears of failure, sickness,
defeat and so on. Baseless anxieties and fears of accidents and other
hardships of life paralyse many creative and vigorous minds and consign
many original and invaluable ideas to oblivion.

The Noble Messenger, may Peace and God's benedictions be upon him and
his Household, says

*The worst characteristics that may afflict a person are excessive
stinginess and inordinate fear and cowardice.*[^8]

Weakness of Will
----------------

A weak will is the product of irrational fears. Doubt and vacillation
may be the first signs of a deep-seated fear. Wherever there is doubt
and hesitation, faith is absent, for one who lacks a perfect faith is
constantly troubled by doubt and uncertainty. Vacillation and
indecisiveness become his habitual traits. A person possessing faith
does not fall victim to doubt and vacillation in his activities and
goals, and there is no room in his mind and consciousness for vexing
anxieties.

A human being whose spirit is full of faith and sincere intentions and
who has established an unbreakable bond with God's infinite power is
more powerful than any degenerate power in the whole world. Even if he
should suffer a setback and defeat in his confrontation with the
material power of evil, he will not consider himself insecure and
abandoned; for with all his being he relies on the great power of God
and is led by His guidance, which is true guidance.

Overcoming corruption and guiding the lost ones to the right path are
fundamental elements deeply rooted in the Islamic faith, traits which
become the part of the spiritual make up of the persons. By relying upon
the everlasting power of God, they can subjugate to their will material
powers, which are not the sole reality of the world.

In a letter that he wrote to the people of Egypt, Imam 'Ali, the
Commander of Faithful, may Peace be upon him, commends spiritual
strength and courage of his newly appointed governor, who was a man of
perfect faith, in these words:

*O people or Egypt! I have appointed for you as governor a man from
among the servants of God who allows himself no sleep in times of
danger, nor has the smallest fear of the enemy in times of panic. He is
severe against the wicked like a blazing fire. He is Malik ibn Harith,
of the clan of Banu Mudhij ... He is a sword from among the swords of
God: its edge never loses its sharpness, nor its blows ever go
amiss.*[^9]

In the Battle of Siffin, the forces of Mu'awiyah took over the control
of the river-bank and intercepted the supply of water to 'Ali's camp.
The Commander of the Faithful tried to solve the problem through
negotiations. Refraining from armed conflict so long as possible. But
Mu'awiyah considered his possession of the river bank as a major
military gain, and taking advantage of his position he refused to
negotiate. 'Ali's companions had a hard time due to the lack of drinking
water. Thereat 'Ali addressed his soldiers as follows:

*They are hungry of battle and are asking for it. Now you have no more
than two alternatives before you: either to submit to disgrace and
indignity, or to drench your swords in blood and obtain water. To live
in subjugation is death. Real life is to die while overpowering the
enemy and without yielding to indignity. Mu'awiyah leads a party of
deceived persons whom he has kept them in the dark about the truth, to
the point that they have made their arrows a target of your
throats.*[^10]

This fiery speech created a wonderful change in the morale of 'Ali's
soldiers and filled them with the spirit of courage. With a lightning
attack they threw back Mu'awiyah's forces from the river bank and took
control of it. But, then, with a manly spirit they allowed the enemies
to have access to water for their needs.

Courage in its Wider Sense
--------------------------

Courage is not confined to the battlefield. Rather, it extends to all
areas of life and is needed in all situations.

Dr. Marden discusses as follows the value of this outstanding moral
virtue in various circumstances:

It requires courage to wear coarse cotton clothing when one's fellows
put on garments made of broadcloth. Courage is needed to live a life of
rectitude in the midst of poverty while others gather wealth through
fraud and inequity. It requires courage to say 'No,' when everyone
around you says 'Yes'. It requires courage to carry out one's duty in
silence and anonymity when others hoard riches and acquire fame lay
abandoning their sacred commitments. It requires courage to appear what
you are and to disclose your shortcomings for critical eyes.

Ultimately, it requires courage to bear defeat and ridicule and not to
be understood by the people. The young man who begins by being afraid to
express what he thinks will end up being afraid of even thinking about
what he cherishes in his heart.

How afraid are we of acting according to our wishes. We want to live
like others. Our clothes, lifestyle, means of transport everything, must
conform to the day's fashion, or we would be social outcasts! It
requires courage for a man of social standing not to bow to common
prejudices and to refrain from complying with social customs injurious
to morality and health.[^11]

One of the salient qualities of those who had received an Islamic
upbringing was their disregard for tyrannical rulers, despotic caliphs
who had usurped power, so much so that they preserved their spiritual
poise and intellectual strength under the most difficult of conditions.

Once Hisham ibn 'Abd al-Malik went to Makkah during the days of his rule
to perform the pilgrimage of the House of God and the rites of hajj. He
ordered that any person who had seen the Prophet of God, may Peace and
God's benedictions be upon him and his Household, be brought into his
presence so that he may discuss certain matters with him. He was told
that no one from the Prophet's companions was alive. Hisham asked them
to bring someone from among the Tabi'un (the people of the next
generation after the Companions) so that he may benefit from his
discourse.

Tawus al-Yamani was invited to see the caliph. When Tawus came into
Hisham's presence, he took off his shoes before the caliph and saluted
him simply and unceremoniously: "Salamun 'alaykum." He did not salute
the caliph with the usual title 'Amir al-Mu'minin' (commander of all the
faithful) by which he was addressed by all classes of people. Then,
without waiting for the caliph's leave, he sat down on the ground facing
him. Then turning to Hisham he said: " O Hisham! How do you do?"

This informal conduct and speech of Tawus angered Hisham. Turning to
Tawus he said: "What is this behaviour of yours in my presence?" Tawus
asked him, "What did I do?" The caliph said, "Why did you take off your
shoes in front of me? Why didn't you address me with my appellation Amir
al-Mu'minin? Why did you sit down in my court without my permission? Why
did you inquire about my welfare in an irreverent manner?"

Tawus replied: 'As to my taking off my shoes in your presence, I do it
five times daily in the presence of God, and I am not considered worthy
of divine wrath on that account. The reason that I did not salute you
with the appellation 'Amir al-Mu'minin' is that you are not the
commander of all the faithful, many of whom are unhappy with your
caliphate and rule. As to my calling you by your name (and not by
kuniyah), God, in the Noble Qur'an, has called His apostles with their
names, addressing them with such words as "O David," "O Jesus," "O
John," and nobody considers that disparaging in respect of the sublime
station of the prophets. On the contrary, the Qur'an mentions Abu Lahab
with his kuniyah. The reason as to why I sat down without waiting for
your permission in your presence is that I have heard 'Ali, the
Commander of the Faithful, say: 'If you wish to see the inmates of hell,
then look at him who sits while those around him are standing.'"

When Tawus had made these remarks, Hisham said to him, "O Tawus, exhort
me! Tawus said, "I have heard 'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, say,
'In hell are creatures with venomous stings which have been assigned to
sting rulers who treat the people unjustly in the world.' " Having said
this, he rose from the caliph's assembly and left.[^12]

Hypocrisy, an Expression of Fear
--------------------------------

Hypocrisy and ostentation reflect an inner fear. Courage rescues man
from the clutches of hypocrisy and instils sincerity and authenticity
into his soul. Ralph Waldo Emerson says:

If we cannot at once rise to the sanctities of obedience and faith, let
us at least resist our temptations: let us enter into the state of war
and wake Thor and Woden, courage and constancy, in our Saxon breasts.
This is to be done in our smooth times by speaking the truth. Check this
lying hospitality and lying affection. Live no longer to the expectation
of these deceived and deceiving people with whom we converse. Say to
them, "O father, O mother, O wife, O brother, O friend, I have lived
with you after appearances hitherto. Henceforward I am the truth's. Be
it known unto you that henceforward I obey no law less than the eternal
law. I will have no covenants but proximities. I shall endeavour to
nourish my parents, to support my family, to be the chaste husband of
one wife-but these relations I must fill after a new and unprecedented
way. I appeal from your customs. I must be myself. I cannot break myself
any longer for you, or you. If you can love me for what I am, we shall
be happier. If you cannot, I will still seek to deserve that you should.
I will not hide my tastes or aversions. I will so trust that what is
deep is holy, that I will do strongly before the sun and moon whatever
innerly rejoices me and the heart appoints. If you are noble, I will
love you; if you are not, I will not hurt you and myself by hypocritical
attentions. If you are true, but not in the same truth with me, cleave
to your companions; I will seek my own. I do this not selfishly but
humbly and truly. It is alike your interest, and mine, and all men's,
however long we have dwelt in lies, to live in the truth. Does this
sound harsh to-day? You will soon love what is dictated by your nature
as well as mine, and if we follow the truth it will bring us our safe at
last." But so may you give these friends pain. Yes, but I cannot sell my
liberty and my power, to save their sensibility. Besides, all persons
have their moments of reason, when they took out into the region of
absolute truth; then will they justify me and do the same thing.[^13]

The relation of courage to personal capacity is like the relation of
will power to ability. Until one does not utilise one's will power one
will not succeed in accomplishing one's tasks regardless of the extent
of one's ability to perform them. Similarly, as long as the talents and
capacities of an intelligent and perspicacious person are not
accompanied by courage and action he will not attain any noble and
distinguished goal. A courageous person does not complain of being worn
out in confronting difficulties and bears the unavoidable tragedies of
life with a manly spirit.

It is an unfortunate man whose expectations are great but the amount of
whose courage is paltry. Thoughtful people know well that one must go
beyond one's expectations and wishes and resort to action; otherwise
weakness and lethargy will make even feasible tasks appear impossible.
It should however be opted that in the same way as at times in life one
has to get ready and fight, so also at times it is wiser to withdraw.
Those who never flag in asserting themselves and do not surrender in
face of dangers may achieve their goal, but that may be at the cost of
their own lives.

The most outstanding achievement of heroic persons is to conquer fear
and remain steadfast with all their strength and power in the face of
fear and without compromising the value of their own lives.

Of course, it is possible that one may achieve some success by appearing
to be undaunted in one's efforts, but in these conditions it is possible
that one may set out to do something which is impossible. When the goal
is not achieved he may end up losing self-confidence and faith in his
own capacities. Moreover, a great amount of his energy and power, which
might have been employed fruitfully, will be wasted.

The Eleventh Imam-may Peace be upon him-said:

*There is a limit to prudence, beyond which it becomes cowardice. There
is a limit to courage, beyond which it becomes rashness.*[^14]

On the whole there is a basic difference between fear and foresight.
'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, may Peace be upon him, points this
out in his sayings

*When fate is inevitable, caution and wariness are pointless.*[^15]

*When someone's resoluteness is accompanied with foresight, that would
lead him to consummate felicity.*[^16]

Bertrand Russell writes:

Life is full of perils, but the wise man ignores those that are
inevitable, and acts prudently but without emotions as regards those
that can be avoided. You cannot avoid dying, but you can avoid dying
intestate; therefore make your will, and forget that you are mortal.
Rational provision against misfortune is a totally different thing from
fear; it is a part of wisdom, whereas all fear is slavish. If you cannot
avoid feeling fears, try to prevent your child from suspecting them.
Above all, give him that wide outlook and that multiplicity of vivid
interests that will prevent him, in later life, from brooding about
possibilities of personal misfortune. Only you can make him a free
citizen of the universe. Fear, as an emotion, is disastrous in all cases
where the right course can only be discovered by thinking; we want,
therefore, to be able to foresee possibilities of evil without feeling
fear, and to use our intelligence for the purpose of avoiding what is
inevitable. Evils which are really inevitable have to be treated with
sheer courage ...[^17]

That which is certain is that one cannot succeed in overcoming life's
hardships through fear and anxiety. A cool head and a strong and
self-reliant spirit are needed to resolve knotty problems. One whose
thoughts are constantly assailed by fear and panic will find the world
grim and horrifying.

Those Who lack courage do not find refuge from the awesome tempests of
life. The danger exists that they may resort to suicide in order to
escape the torment of fear and anxiety.

Ali, may Peace be upon him, said:

*Worthy men are reserved for times of adversity.*[^18]

[^1]: Cowlest, Edward Spencer, Conquest of Fear and Fatigue, p. 510

[^2]: Akfar e Schopenhaur, p. 97

[^3]: Emerson, Ralph Waldo, "Compensation", in Man and Man: The Social
Philosophers., pp. 447-8

[^4]: al Fayd al Kashani, Muhajjat al bayda, vol. 7 p. 283

[^5]: Nahj al Balaghah, Khutab 79

[^6]: al Amidi, Ghurar al Hikam, p. 319

[^7]: Marguerite Malm & Malm Herbet Sorenson, Psychology for Living, p.
299

[^8]: Nahj al fasaha. p. 382

[^9]: Nahj al Balagha, Khutab 38

[^10]: Ibid, Khutab 51

[^11]: Marden, Orison Swett, Asrar e Kamiyabi, p. 14

[^12]: Safinat al Bihar, vol. 2 p . 95

[^13]: Emerson, Ralph Waldo, "Self Reliance" in Man and Man: The Social
Philosophers, p. 407

[^14]: Bihar al anwar, vol. 17 p . 218

[^15]: al Amidi, Ghurar al Hikam, p. 315

[^16]: Ibid

[^17]: Russell, Bertrand, On Education, pp. 66-7, 154

[^18]: al Amidi, Ghurar al hikam, p. 581


