Chapter 1: Man Moves Towards Perfection
=======================================

Every human being that is born in this world, regardless of its
individual or social circumstances, aspires to its own perfection in
accordance with its innate nature and its inborn intellect. It puts up
with all kinds of sufferings and hardships for its hope of a brighter
future. Its starting point is deficiency and its movement is directed
towards perfection. It grows and develops with every step forward on the
path of perfection. Man's intellect and spirit give such a profundity,
power and speed to his movement towards perfection that there is no time
limit to it except eternity itself.

This innate love for perfection is strong in the human being, but it is
also present in the animals. They overcome every hindrance that they
encounter in its way, avoid everything that they consider as harmful,
and advance towards their instinctive goals. It may be said that all the
phenomena that exist in nature, from infinitesimal atomic particles to
the magnificent world of the galaxies, all are part of this caravan.

A scholar writes:

The wheat plant has been given a movement that enables it to give a
greater yield, and the red rose a motion that gives it beauty and aroma.
Man, too, has a motion by mean of which he advances on the path of
wisdom and love. So if we observe certain ills that affect the growth of
the wheat or the beauty or aroma of the rose or the purity of the human
soul, we must not ascribe them to the motion itself but rather to a
contrary cause that emerged in the course of motion.

Now we can understand to what extent the word 'purpose' assists us in
thinking properly. It makes us understand that the universe, of which we
find ourselves to be a small member, is moral and conscious, that we do
not live in a dark and disorderly cosmos, that there is certainly a
mover behind all this motion and that there exists a great consciousness
and intellect behind all things. That is sufficient to convince us that
life is something great and glorious, and it is here that we can at
least prepare ourselves to co-operate and go along with the world's
conscious spirit, knowing that opposing it is harmful for our life.[^1]

Man's physical development lies beyond his will, whereas his spiritual
development is voluntary. Hence it is not worthy of him that man should
deviate from the general evolutionary trend of the universe and remain
deficient in the cosmic system of progression. It is evident that inner
development and perfection is something immaterial. Physical experiment
and study lead him to make discoveries of a material nature, but he can
never place himself on the highway of perfection and attain to the peaks
of spiritual ascension with the means of physical methods.

In order that a tree may realize the full potential of its growth it
must be freed of such hindrances to its growth as weeds and rocks and be
provided the benefit of such agents as water, sun and air, which are
essential for its growth. Man, too, in the process of developing the
different dimensions of his being (body, spirit, and mind) must equip
himself with the potent factors that contribute to his ascent towards
eternity and infinitude. That is, he must employ them as the means that
help him to achieve his ends and combat such factors that hinder his
movement towards that goal.

Man must regulate the dimensions of his being in different directions in
such a manner that would enable him to meet all his material and
spiritual demands and needs and live worthily by basing his life on a
precise and accurately worked-out plan. He must build an orderly society
free from conflict, injustice, aggression, ignorance and sin, in which
human beings can attain purity, light and intellectual sublimity and
reach the high peaks of humanity.

Man's being is a turbulent aggregate of various urges. These urges in
their natural and balanced state are not only not useless or harmful,
rather each of them plays a vital role in man's spiritual makeup.
However, an uncontrolled and unrestrained satisfaction of these urges is
contrary to development. Should these urges be left free and
uncontrolled in a person, he will become a slave of his savage and
primordial urges and desires. Falling down from the high peaks of
humanity, excellence and freedom he will sink into the mire of decadence
and destruction. An animal is compliant and submissive to its urges, but
a human being is loyal to his interests and obedient to his reason. He
has the power to oppose his injurious tendencies and to affirm his
beneficial and advantageous inclinations. For in the same way as
physical instincts spring from man's nature, so do his positive, benign
and truth-seeking impulses originate in his being, giving rise to his
titanic, effulgent spiritual powers that can give birth to purity,
dignity, power and righteousness.

Self-Purification as Agent of Development
-----------------------------------------

There is no doubt that if one wants to follow definite principles in
life-whether of a religious or a non-religious character-one must adopt
a well-defined approach. In order to adopt a well-defined approach it is
essential to select a single goal and move in a single direction. Hence
one must avoid desultory involvements that may suit one's passing
desires but are contrary to one's principles and goals in life. Hence
self-control and self-discipline is essential in life for every man who
wants to lead a human and rational existence. Man is a being equipped
with the power of intellect and possessing unlimited desires. Should he
recognize no restraint in life, he can become a bloodthirsty beast that
can cause great destruction.

Man's perfection and greatness does not depend on physical matters,
which can affect his experience only on a sensible plane. Scientific
advancements do not bring about an improvement in all the aspects of
man. Man's real perfection lies in his liberating himself from the
straits of illusory lusts and physical pleasures and in advancing on the
path of humanity by edifying his sensibilities, disciplining himself and
becoming acquainted with higher ideas and a wider horizon.

The idea of a *sumum bonum* (Highest Good) is deeply rooted in the human
spirit, otherwise man would not have been its seeker during his
childhood days nor would he have been able to take flights on its vast
horizons. The radiance of sublime values is so much attractive that men
fall in love with them willingly and voluntarily pursue them. There is
an upsurge of passion for strength from one's inner depths which is
followed by the endeavour to acquire it. All of these are indications of
the fact that love for perfection has deep roots in the human spirit and
it begins to reveal itself once there arises a suitable opportunity.

The muscles become strong and powerful as a result of exercise. This is
also true of the spiritual faculties, which become strong as a result of
exercise and persisting effort, with the difference that the physical
energies of the human body are limited and its powers are limited by the
capacities of the body's sinews and cells. However, the wonders revealed
by man's history are all manifestations of the power of the developed
soul, whose growth is the result of a gradual emancipation from the
limits and obstacles of material things. The horizons of self-knowledge
and self-consciousness expand only when it is realized that the human
spirit is a great and wonderful masterpiece of creation. It reveals
itself in its show of strength, in its dynamism, its domination over
material things, and especially in its capacity to lift man from the
depths of decadence, weakness and inadequacy to the heights of communion
with the Divine.

Of course, in the same way as the body is forced to endure a certain
amount of hardship in order to fulfil its vital functions, so also the
spirit must put up with pain and toil in the course of moral
development. All the various concepts and principles in the field of
character building revolve around the axis of the soul or the spirit. It
is spirit which is capable of reform and discipline. It is spirit which
is capable of attaining sublimity and acquiring higher human qualities
and excellences, loving as it does spiritual perfection. And finally, it
is spirit which generates a series of ethical laws for the human being
that the animal neither possesses nor requires.

Dr. Alexis Carrel, a French scholar, says:

We must habituate ourselves to distinguish between good and evil with
the same perspicacity that we distinguish between light and darkness and
between noise and silence, and then commit ourselves to avoid vice and
embrace virtue. However, abstinence from vice requires a healthy
physical and psychological makeup. The purposive growth of the body and
the soul is not possible except with the help of self-purification.  
 For those seeking spiritual edification, no kind of extravagance is
permissible. The inner order always takes its own requital. The
physiological and psychological state makes up the essential basis of
personality and is like a spring-board from which the soul can take its
flight.

The path of edification is directed upwards in time and the travellers
mostly slide into swamps or fall into ravines in the course of the
journey, or stay behind by the side of riverside gardens and go into an
endless sleep, whether in happiness or suffering, in affluence or
poverty, health or sickness. Nevertheless, one must carry on his
endeavour and rise to his feet after every fall and, little by little,
acquire the zeal, faith and the will to aspire and the spirit of mutual
help, the capacity to love and, ultimately, salvation.[^2]

There is an absence of a precise equilibrium, order and balance in the
world today between individual and society and between the body and the
spirit. When man allows his human specialties to remain idle and
suppresses the subtle, critical and vital aspects of his own being,
which are a necessary part of his unique vicegerency of God on the world
stage, when he repudiates his human dignity although created as a human
being, flouts his God-given nature and, ultimately, programs his life on
the basis of hedonism and pursuit of desires, that amounts to a negation
of his own being and his raison d'être. When that happens, it is
inevitable that the God-given nature should exact severe damages for his
unprincipled thinking and foolish conduct and wreck its revenge upon
him.

Right now humanity is paying a heavy compensation for its conduct in
terms of peace, happiness and its essential human characteristics. The
effect of this disorder and misconduct emerges in the shape of various
kinds of crimes and perversions. In the societies of today perhaps no
minute passes without there occurring a heinous crime and such crimes as
adultery, rape, theft and so on. This is one of the biggest problems of
the world's nations today and it must be considered a great human crisis
of world-wide dimensions. The yearly expenditure incurred for the
purpose of preventing crime or on the search, prosecution, trial and
punishment of criminals makes up a stupendous sum.

One of the factors responsible for the prevalence of callousness in
human relations, widespread cruelty, and the daily increasing moral
insensitivity in Western society lies in the way of thinking of some of
its teachers and philosophers. Nietzsche, the well-known German
philosopher, based his philosophy on pitilessness and racial
superiority, which became a motive that lay behind the savage bloodshed
and destructive wars of the last century. Such is the logic of this
Western philosopher:

Pity stands opposed to the tonic emotions which heighten our vitality;
it has a depressing effect. We are deprived of strength when we feel
pity...

Quite in general, pity crosses the law of development, which is the law
of selection. It preserves what is ripe for destruction, it defends
those who have been disinherited and condemned by life, and by the
abundance of the failures of all kinds which it keeps alive, it gives
life itself a gloomy and questionable aspect....

Pity is the practice of nihilism. To repeat: this depressive and
contagious instinct arouses those instincts which aim at the
preservation of life and at the enhancement of its value. It multiplies
misery and conserves all that is miserable, and thus is a prime
instrument of the advancement of decadence....[^3] An "altruistic"
morality-a morality in which self-interest wilts away-remains a bad sign
under all circumstances. This is true of individuals; it is particularly
true of nations. The best is lacking when self-interest begins to be
lacking. Instinctively to choose what is harmful for oneself, to feel
attracted by "disinterested" motives, that is virtually the formula of
decadence... Strong ages, noble cultures, consider pity,
"neighbour-love" and the lack of self and self-assurance something
contemptible...[^4]

Sensual pleasure, lust for power, selfishness: these three have hitherto
been cursed the most and held in the worst and most unjust repute-these
three will I weigh well and humanly.[^5]

The Causes of Crime
-------------------

The causes behind the commission of crimes as well as the character of
criminals must be studied to see whether they are such by nature and
birth. Those who are polluted by various moral vices and commit crime,
are they born with such tendencies or does their criminality originate
in some spiritual disease? If it does, then how can they be treated?

Some experts in the field believe that a group of criminals are
basically born such; criminality is inherent in their nature. This kind
of individuals have even certain apparent abnormal characteristics which
differentiate them from other people. They are, so to say, criminals by
nature. Lombroso, the well-known Italian criminologist, was a strong
defender of this theory of his own. His theory found many followers and
was received with great interest by his contemporary writers.

Without doubt man is a being susceptible to moral instruction. He
performs a part of his actions out of his own free will, and voluntarily
refrains from certain acts. Such a being is necessarily endowed with
free will, otherwise it would be futile to admonish and instruct a
creature whose actions are completely determined and which has no will
of its own and no control over its own destiny. Competent thinkers
consider man to be free in his actions and responsible for them.

Teachers of morality and ethics base their moral teachings and educative
efforts meant to bring welfare to man on the same approach that is on a
prescription consisting of certain do and don'ts and bidding one to
learn certain points and to abstain from certain actions in order to
achieve his personal welfare.

If one were to study the plight of juvenile delinquents in
reformatories, prisons and mental hospitals, it would be found that they
are those who have grown up in morally polluted or negligent families
and had no personal experience of moral rectitude and purity.

As to the group of criminals who feel no restraint against committing
any kind of crime or offence, most of them are those who opened their
eyes in families devoid of emotional warmth and moral virtues and
polluted with various sorts of vices and indecencies, or they are those
who have lived in a decadent social environment. It was family and
social factors that caused them to choose crime and vice rather than
rectitude and purity.

The Worthiest Duty of Man
-------------------------

The most important, as well as the worthiest, of man's duties is
education. Man discovered the value of education at the very dawn of his
existence. For the same reason, he laid down certain principles and
objectives commensurate with the development of his human environment
and in proportion to his perception of his real duties and mission in
life, though these objectives were sometimes correct and at times
misconceived.

We clearly witness the amazing changes brought about in the course of
human history by the various schools of thought that totally altered the
features of life. Our study of the world's realities makes us arrive at
the conclusion that man has not been created evil and satanic by nature.
Were we to accept that man is inherently evil, all the efforts to
educate him would be fruitless and futile and the endeavours and efforts
of all the divine prophets and world's educators would be an exercise in
futility. Had crime, murder and destructiveness been inherent in the
nature of the people of the Arabian peninsula, would it have been
possible for the Prophet of Islam, may God bless him and his Household,
to bring about such a comprehensive revolution in the spirit of
individual Arabs and transform their essential nature?

It is true that man is confronted with physical forces and urges at the
first stages of his life. From the moment that he opens his eyes on this
world, his faculties are realized gradually one after another and thus
he begins his activities. However, at the same time, by the side of
physical faculties he possesses an immense capacity and potentiality for
spiritual development and growth. There are capacities and aspirations
more sublime than needs that are latent in his being, and his energies,
while they are being utilized, may take various forms and flow in
different channels, although the phase of spiritual development
generally commences later than the phases of physical growth.

But in any case it is a natural process and man's higher aspirations are
capable of taking over and employing his other energies for their own
purposes. However, for this objective he stands in need of effective
external assistance, care and guidance. Because in the absence of such
assistance these aspirations may suffer deviation or misguide.

Of course, such external assistance is not something unnatural or
imposed but a part of the human nature. It is similar to helping a child
to learn speech although it possesses the natural capacity for speech
since the day of its birth. The principle of human development and man's
destiny as the noblest of creatures is described in the Holy Qur'an in
these words:

***O man! Thou art labouring unto thy Lord laboriously, and thou shalt
encounter Him. (84:6) And that the final end is unto thy Lord.
(53:42)***

Man, in the course of his flight on the horizons of being and towards
the infinite, must draw inspiration from the teachings of divine
prophets, which constitute a genuine and comprehensive program of
education. This is necessary in order to release the divine energies
latent, in his being and which he needs in order to be able to attain to
the ultimate end of his development, success and deliverance.

Gustave Lebon writes:

It was after relentless endeavours that philosophy realised that it
cannot make a way to the supernatural. Hence we are forced to follow the
prescriptions of the physicians of the spirit who have insight into the
peculiarities of the human soul and can be entrusted to take care of his
spiritual development. These spiritual physicians are God-sent prophets
and seers who propose prescriptions for man's welfare received from the
source of revelation and inspiration and aimed to achieve an inner
discipline, by means of which they can assist him to attain the
perfection of which he is worthy.

The Holy Qur'an refers to both the aspects of man's nature while
describing human nature.[^6] It points out that should man fail to
acquire the basic training, the tempestuous urges within him will begin
to advance, weakening the forces of reason and conscience and
subjugating other impulses within the soul, employing them for their own
purposes and ends. The greatest marvel of man's creation is that he
possesses a two-sided nature. Therefore, one must not ignore his
capacity for taking on different colours and the need to guide him in a
definite direction.

'Ali, may peace be upon him, said:  
*Beings endowed with the faculty of reason require education in the same
way as farms need rain.*[^7]  
 If the principles of education are not based on the regulating factors
and the human energies be left untended and un-channelled in a state of
wild freedom, they will always remain subject to the primary human
needs. That is why human character and conduct always stand in need of a
formative training through praise and reward and blame and punishment.

The Qur'an declares:

***Prosperous is he who purifies the soul and failed has he who soils it
with sin and impurity. (91:9-10)***

The very concept of punishment is based on man's innate power of
discrimination between good and evil, and exoneration from
responsibility requires the presence of some physical or mental
deficiency in a person. The viewpoint maintained by some modern trends
of thought that exonerate the criminal as a victim of social evils or
decadent and deviant training and consider the individual, despite his
possession of an innate power of discrimination, as a powerless and
negative being, cannot be considered as a scientific truth.

Of course, no one can deny the great role of upbringing and training or
ignore the momentous responsibility borne by society and environment;
for the various factors related to commission of crime share the
responsibility for it. But nevertheless it does not mean that the
culprit is devoid of responsibility for his act.

There is no doubt that a group of offenders consists of those who can be
reformed through a little guidance and direction. They are victims of
spiritual illnesses and their crime is a product of certain psychic
disorders and afflictions which are not deeply rooted. Or it is a result
of company and association with wayward and immoral persons. This kind
of sick persons should be identified and treated at the earliest
opportunity. On the whole, severity of reaction and intensity of
campaign against crime cannot by itself root out criminal conduct.

The punishment meted out to the criminal for the sake of safeguarding
social and individual welfare is necessary, because the sanctions
against him are a natural result and product of his own conduct and
essential for the maintenance of justice and equilibrium in society and
security of social life. However, punishment alone is not sufficient and
that which is more significant is the re-education of criminals, so that
their unhealthy approach to life can be altered through fruitful
instruction and so that their unlawful and aggressive spirit does not
infect other individuals in society.

Are There Any Born Criminals?
-----------------------------

Today the theory of Lombroso and his followers who believed in the
existence of born criminals has been rejected by experts in the field.
While serving as a doctor in the Italian army, Lombroso had noticed that
tattooing was very common among criminals. This led him to conclude that
criminals had a lower level of physical sensitivity than normal people
and that their lack of moral sensitivity was also a product of the lack
of physical sensitivity.

Later on, while dissecting the brain of a robber he noted that it
resembled in certain features the brains of lower vertebrae. Those
observations formed a prelude to the theory of the appearance of hidden
hereditary traits. Lombroso considered certain characteristics as being
indicative of a criminal temperament, some of them being: curly hair,
slanting eyes, a protruding chin, arching eyebrows, and abnormally big
or small head, protruding cheekbones, big ears, a disproportionate
relationship between the size of the skull and the face, and a
long-drawn forehead.

When several of these characteristics are present in a person, one could
ascertain with certainty his criminal nature, he believed. He named
these characteristics, 'the marks of decadence.' Dr. Alexis Carrel, a
French scholar, says:

The born criminal, invented by Lombroso, does not exist. But there are
born defectives who become criminals. In reality, many criminals are
normal. They are often more clever than policemen and judges.
Sociologists and social workers do not meet them during their survey of
prisons. The gangsters and crooks, heroes of the cinema and the daily
papers, sometimes display normal and even high mental, affective, and
aesthetic activities. But their moral sense has not developed. This
disharmony in the world of consciousness is a phenomenon characteristic
of our time.

We have succeeded in giving organic health to the inhabitants of the
modern city. But, despite the immense sums spent on education, we have
failed to develop completely their intellectual and moral activities.
Even in the elite of the population, consciousness often lacks harmony
and strength. The elementary functions are dispersed, of poor quality,
and of low intensity. Some of them may be quite deficient.

The happiest and most useful men consist of a well-integrated whole of
intellectual, moral, and organic activities. The quality of these
activities, and their equilibrium, gives to such a type its superiority
over the others. Their intensity determines the social level of a given
individual. It makes of him a tradesman or a bank president, a little
physician or a celebrated professor, a village mayor or a president of
the United States. The development of complete human beings must be the
aim of our efforts. It is only with such thoroughly developed
individuals that a real civilization can be constructed.[^8]

A contemporary psychologist writes:

Today it has been conclusively established, scientifically as well as
philosophically and beyond any doubt, that there does not exist an
'evil' human being; there exist only sick human beings. The realisation
of this matter is so significant that it may be said without any
exaggeration that no discovery or invention in the world since the
emergence of man until the present has had, not will ever have, an equal
impact on human welfare. That is, the day that people truly realise this
fact and the organisation of society and its regulating institutions is
based on this established truth the major part of human suffering,
wretchedness, enmities, conflicts and punishments will undergo a
moderation. Why?

Because when everybody comes to know, for instance, that stinginess,
envy, fear, cunning, prejudice, capriciousness, injustice and hundreds
of other vices of this kind are logical outcomes of spiritual illnesses
that are susceptible to treatment exactly like the common cold, sore
throat, indigestion and so on, that will yield two definite important
and useful results.

Firstly, the sick persons themselves, who are today regarded as 'evil'\*
will turn to treatment with a full hope and become healthy and good
human beings. Secondly, the people will not view them with hostility and
resentment as 'evil' persons, but will look upon them as sick human
beings deserving sympathy. And it goes without saying that there is a
great difference between these two outlooks and their results.

Right now this is the principle that is implemented in most schools in
civilised countries, and even in prisons, and this approach is gradually
coming to be used with very beneficial results. It is the duty of
humanist writers to make all efforts to propagate these extremely
beneficial truths, so that all societies throughout the world are
benefited by them.[^9]

This scientific and philosophical theory, whose discovery has been
ascribed here to the world of modern science, is one which has a history
of fourteen centuries in the religious texts of Islam. The Holy Qur'an
refers to the hypocrites as sick persons suffering from two-facedness
and malice:

***There is a sickness in their hearts. (2:10)***

Some moralists and adherents of certain faiths consider man's inner
nature as evil and sinful. John Dewey writes:

"Give a dog a bad name and hang him." Human nature has been the dog of
professional moralists, and consequences accord with the proverb. Man's
nature has been regarded with suspicion, with fear, with sour looks,
sometimes with enthusiasm for its possibilities but only when these were
placed in contrast with its actualities. It has appeared to be so evilly
disposed that the business of morality was to prune and curb it; it
would be thought better of if it could be replaced by something else.

It has been supposed that morality would be quite superfluous were it
not for the inherent weakness, bordering on depravity, of human nature.
Some writers with a more genial conception have attributed the current
blackening to theologians who have thought to honour the divine by
disparaging the human. Theologians have doubtless taken a gloomier view
of man than have pagans and secularists. But this explanation doesn't
take us far. For after all these theologians are themselves human, and
they would have been without influence if the human audience had not
somehow responded to them.[^10]

Man's Pure and Immaculate Nature
--------------------------------

The Holy Prophet of Islam, may God bless him and his Household, said:

*It means that every child is born with a pure and sinless nature. It is
its parents that bring him up as a Christian or Jew. The religious creed
of the parents and their mode of thinking affects its impressionable
mind.*[^11]

Imam 'Ali, may peace be upon him, is reported to have said to his son:

*A young heart is like virgin soil which accepts whatever kind of seed
is sown in it. My son, I took the opportunity offered by your childhood
years for training you, before that your impressionable heart should
become hardened and before that different things occupy your mind.*[^12]

A part from the fact that man is definitely not born with a criminal
disposition, there is a force latent in the primordial structure of
every human man that draws him towards goodness. This force makes him
return to his original state whenever he departs from his true
orientation. In the idiom of the philosophers, whenever a certain nature
is subject to and extraneous force, there comes into being an
inclination to revert it to its original natural state.

Since very ancient times, a group of philosophers has felt that
theoretical reason represents the highest faculty of the human soul,
although its capacity for comprehension is limited and the surety of its
practical effectiveness is not very considerable. Theoretical reason is
inadequate in some matters, such as in delivering just judgements, the
reproof of the criminal and the sinner, and prescription of a program
that may guarantee human happiness. Hence there should exist an
independent force in man's being that guides him to most of the virtues
and assists him to sacrifice and seek perfection and which explains his
moral behaviour.

The Holy Qur'an asserts that inclination towards faith and repulsion
from sin and disobedience exists in man's nature. God has not only
placed faith in the Source of Creation in man's nature and bestowed upon
him the capacity to know God, but has also created therein a natural
attraction towards virtue and a repulsion from vice, sin and indecency,
so that the soul is unconsciously attracted towards human merits.

***But God has endeared to you faith, decking it fair in your hearts,
and He has made detestable to you unbelief and ungodliness and
disobedience.*** (49:7)

According to Khwajah Hafiz of Shiraz:  
 This love and loyalty between me and thee, I have brought from there,
not developed them here.

Bertrand Russell writes:

The old idea was that virtue depends essentially upon will: we were
supposed to be full of bad desires, which we controlled by an abstract
faculty of volition. It was apparently regarded as impossible to root
out bad desires: all we could do was to control them. The situation was
exactly analogous to that of the criminal and the police. No one
supposed that a society without would-be criminals was possible; the
most that could be done was to have such an efficient police force that
most people would be afraid to commit crimes, and the few exceptions
would be caught and punished. The modern psychological criminologist is
not content with this view; he believes that the impulses to crime
could, in most cases, be prevented from developing by suitable
education. And what applies to society applies to the individual.[^13]

Ralph Waldo Emerson writes;

The simple rise as by specific levity not into a particular virtue, but
into the region of all the virtues. They are in the spirit which
contains them all. The soul requires purity, but purity is not it;
requires justice, but justice is not that; requires beneficence, but is
somewhat better; so that there is a kind of descent and accommodation
felt when we leave speaking of moral nature to urge a virtue which it
enjoins. To the well-born child all the virtues are natural, and not
painfully acquired. Speak to his heart, and the man becomes suddenly
virtuous.[^14]

Therefore, according to Islam as well as realistic thinkers of the
present-day world man comes into the world with a pure and wholesome
spiritual nature in accordance with the laws of heredity. The presence
of sin and corruption in him is accidental and extraneous to his
original nature. It is the violation of original nature or the misguide
and retrogression of instincts that leads not only to the emergence of
spiritual sickness but blocks the natural flow of the spirit by means of
certain complexes Otherwise he has the capacity to advance towards
perfection with rapid and sure steps in accordance with his genuine
impulses.

Of course, the influence of environment is not the same on different
brains with their different neurological makeup, in the same way as
environment does not have a similar effect on the growth of different
plants and herbs. Every individual lives with his own neurological
makeup which he has inherited in accordance with the law of heredity. No
two individuals in the world have an identical neurological structure
and makeup and they tangibly exhibit a difference from the viewpoint of
individual physiology and bodily hormones.

Hence, in the same way as a particular environment affects every seed
and plant in a specific manner, so also its effect on everybody's
brain's neurones is also specific, in the sense that life in a
particular environment has a specific effect on every individual and
produces a particular personality which is not comparable with that of
another individual.

Even two children of the same parents, who should apparently possess
certain common characteristics due to a common heredity and environment,
exhibit an amazing difference from the viewpoint of personal qualities.
The call of the prophets is based on man's inherent disposition towards
monotheism and his innate moral nature. These natural principles,
together with reason, constitute the fundamental basis of education.

The great role of the divine prophets, which they seek to fulfil through
their mission and teachings, is to awaken the inherent capacities of man
latent in his nature. It is possible that the inner light of nature may
become dimmed due to certain conditions, circumstance and various
factors relating to man's being, but the real nature is never
obliterated. The foundations of this nature have remained secure and
stable despite all the difficulties and impediments that rose in its way
throughout the course of history. Ultimately, deviation from the course
of nature is not related to man's innate makeup and reality.

That we can engage in training and self-discipline through reliance on
human nature is an extremely significant principle. But we must also not
forget that violent passions with their destructive power can weaken our
nature, and should we fail to channel them properly and to use them in a
balanced manner and prove to be incapable of checking their excesses,
our natural powers will be enfeebled and we will fail to utilise
fruitfully the potential offered by nature. The creation of balance in
passion and behaviour depends on recognition of the point of moderation,
on exercise, and on constancy of effort and sacrifice. Aristotle says in
this regard:

That moral virtue is a mean, then, and in what sense it is so, and that
it is a mean between two vices, the one involving excess, the other
deficiency, and that it is such because its character is to aim at what
is intermediate in passions and in actions, has been sufficiently
stated. Hence also it is no easy task to be good. For in everything it
is no easy task to find the middle, e.g. to find the middle of a circle
is not for everyone but for him who knows; so, too, anyone can get
angry-that is easy-or give or spend money; but to do this to the right
person, to the right extent, at the right time, with the right motive,
and in the right way, that is not for everyone, nor is it easy;
wherefore goodness is both rare and laudable and noble.

Hence he who aims at the intermediate must first depart from what is the
more contrary to it, as Calypso advises:Hold the ship out beyond that
surf and spray.

For of the extremes one is more erroneous, one less so; therefore, since
to hit the mean is hard in the extreme, we must as a second best, as
people say, take the least of the evils, and this will be done best in
the way we describe.

But we must consider the things towards which we ourselves also are
easily carried away, for some of us tend to one thing, some to another;
and this will be recognisable from the pleasure and the pain we feel. We
must drag ourselves away to the contrary extreme; for we shall get into
the intermediate state by drawing well away from error, as people do in
straightening sticks that are bent.

Now if everything the pressure or pleasure is that to be guarded against
for we do not judge it impartially. We ought, then, to feel towards
pressure as the elders of the people felt towards Helen, and in all
circumstances repeat their sayings for if we dismiss pleasure thus we
are less likely to go astray. It is by doing this, then (to sum the
matter up) that we shall best be able to hit the mean.[^15]

Spiritual training and growth should be our highest goal in life. It is
our duty to open the windows of our heart and mind to let in virtue,
righteousness, love and mercy. These are the things that enlighten and
burnish our hearts and make our Creator, unique in His essence, to be
pleased with us.

Most people engage in all kinds of labour and practise self-denial in
order to acquire the material means of life and comfort and go on
toiling until death. For this purpose they even deny themselves the
comforts that they are after and which they imagine to be the means of
happiness. That kind of thinking is erroneous and that is the cause of
the failure and wretchedness of most people.

They ought to know that they have lost the way and left the true path of
happiness and success. One cannot attain a life of peace, free of
anxiety, through the pursuit of passing pleasures and delights or
through gathering an immense amount of wealth. Such a program does not
sustain life or make it flourish. On the contrary, it quickly dries up
the vital resources of life and destroys them.

One who seeks happiness through the pursuit of pleasures will find
nothing except anxiety and bafflement. If we fail to keep in check the
rebellious passions and infantile inclinations within us, which
constantly keep on raising their heads, with the means of reason and
sagacity, they will overpower our conscience and make us their own
slave. The more that we succeed in subduing our lusts and desires, the
closer shall we move to happiness. To sum up, all our misfortunes,
afflictions and helplessness, and, in a word, everything that clouds the
horizons of our life, is a product of the domination of lusts over our
being.

Freedom and Restraint
---------------------

In all such cases the question is not one of having to make a choice
between freedom and bondage, but one between two kinds of bondage. In
other words, it is not one of having to weigh freedom against bondage,
but of choosing between two kinds of freedom. Man is free to choose
between a freedom that is human and another that is bestial. The
bondages or restraints applicable to man are those of conviction,
morality and human merit. The bondages peculiar to animals are instinct
and unrestrained impulse.

One who yields to the call of his carnal desires and follows them
obediently without paying heed to the outcome is one who has broken all
human restraints and freed himself from the bondage of religion,
morality and humanity. He is the one who has failed to resist the
temptations of the carnal self and to stand up against the pressure of
instincts. Liberation from all restraint for the sake of fulfilment of
instinctive urges is not real freedom, for in such a state man
unconsciously negates his own being and deviates from his raison d'être.
Then his ultimate destiny and end is decadence and inevitable
destruction.

However, a human being that has made a firm covenant with God and does
not seek to violate it in his life is one who resolutely employs his
energies and powers in the course that he has decided upon. The greater
the power of his conviction, the firmer is he in holding on to that
covenant. He has a sense of real emancipation in his encounter with the
tyranny of passions. That is, he is free from the oppression of desires
and resistant to their compulsion. When man undertakes to make a
dignified effort to obtain freedom and to become an active force in the
world of being and to make the ascent towards the sublime station of
which he is worthy, he will not accept any logic that violates his
genuine humanity.

The major part of the precepts of religion relates to the control and
moderation of passions and the development of the higher impulses; for
what force other than faith in the heart of the religious person can
moderate vital instincts and keep man from deviation by the means of its
spiritual power?

An inner sense of responsibility is essential to avert the disruption of
social order and the spread of crime and to preserve society from the
harms of aggression and violation of law. It is faith which is the
source of such an inner sense of responsibility and which has the power
to control man's behaviour, character and thought. It is the creation of
faith in God amongst people that Islam proposes as the foundation of
education as well as the basis of social and economic reform and as the
means of preventing crime and offence.

For this purpose it has also adopted the best possible method. On the
one hand it holds out a promise of highest reward for the virtuous and,
on the other, threatens with severest punishment those who surrender to
immoral and indecent conduct under the influence of rebellious passions.
This approach has the result that man advances with great eagerness
towards moral virtues and the fear of punishment makes him avoid vices
resolutely.

Habit and Its Constructive and Destructive Role
-----------------------------------------------

The positive and negative aspects of habit play a fundamental role in
man's growth and development as well as his corruption and decadence. A
study of history can reveal to one that heritage (which in essence
consists of collective habits) has been an effective and important
factor in determining the destinies of human societies. The spiritual
power of steadfastness vis-à-vis adversities, hardships and calamities,
a natural resistance to the negative aspects of events, and the capacity
to overcome their effects, are results of the positive aspects of social
heritage.

However, the harms ensuing from the negative aspects of heritage and
habit are very extensive and their damage is irremediable. Thus in the
same way as heritage plays an important role in making calamities and
their negative aspects bearable, it is also a powerful factor from the
viewpoint of destroying the positive and beneficial impact of
indubitable truths on the human spirit.

A negative heritage and custom becomes an impediment in the way of
perception of the real value of things and many principles and laws
pertaining to the world of matter and spirit, as well as to the
understanding of many beneficial and illuminating ideas. It does not
allow man to perceive facts with a clear vision and to know their
significance. In order to understand this matter, it is not necessary to
cite the history of some of the subtle and profound problems of science.

The majority of nature's most significant and wonderful phenomena have
remained unknown for centuries on account of the habitual familiarity
with the apparent character of the laws of nature. It has happened very
often that a moment of reflection and attention opposed to the course of
habit has been immensely rewarding in opening the path of progress and
advancement for man.

It is possible that even knowledge may encounter a spiritual impediment
and barrier and lose its value, becoming thereby equal to ignorance form
the viewpoint of effectiveness. That is because negative habit causes a
distortion in character and becomes an impediment in the way of the
fruitfulness of knowledge on the level of action.

There are many learned persons who are so thoroughly entangled in the
mysterious tentacles of habit that are rendered incapable in life of
implementing their knowledge and understanding either in their character
and conduct or for the betterment of others. They somehow lack
sufficient power to stop a chain of events which they know for certain
to be harmful and detrimental. This blindness and neglect is a result of
intellectual habit which results in a resistance to reason and knowledge
and stunts man's spiritual growth.

Many are specialists among physicians who possess a remarkable degree of
specialised knowledge but whose accumulated knowledge fails to make any
spiritual contribution and, on the level of action, is ineffective in
improving their conduct. In the view of Islam, merit is not confined to
knowledge. Rather knowledge is a means to understanding and one of the
essential means of spiritual growth, for this passive virtue, except for
introducing difference in the levels of understanding, is by itself
incapable of performing an active and effective spiritual function.

The Qur'an criticises the learned, who are devoid of character in these
words:

***O you who believe, wherefore do you say what you do not? Very hateful
is it to God, that you say what you do not (61:2-3)***

The emphasis of Islam on thought, intellection and contemplation in all
situations, reveals the importance of thinking in avoiding the possible
dangers of negative habits and in building up the power of resistance
against vicious habits and opposition to them. Thought and ideation
directed against the force of any kind of habit is a fruitful activity
and struggle that broadens one's vision and is an important factor that
strengthens will power.

The various kinds of deviations are actually a result of the failure to
think soundly and logically. Basically, it is due to negligence and the
absence of carefulness in thinking that many people deviate from the
highway of guidance to take to deviant paths. From this we realise why
Islam has singled out thinking and contemplation as the highest level of
worship, preferring an hour of genuine thinking to seventy years of
worship.

That is because this kind of thinking is basically responsible for the
eradication of ignorance and ignorance. It removes the veils that
conceal truth and reality from the human spirit and gives depth and
firmness to faith, and thereby does not leave any room for heresies,
wrong customs and negative influences that may enter the core of man's
being.

When man arrives at a veritable fact and truth as a result of thought
and contemplation, he acquires a power of will that is the result of
genuine thought and not something based on baseless fancies. This
strengthened will enable him to control his own behaviour and conduct.

Thinking transforms inactive reason into a reason that is active with
the coming to life of effective ideas and notions which can prove to be
very potent.

Good and evil moral traits take roots in man's inner being as a result
of repetition and exercise. Although they are acquired characteristics,
their influence is as powerful and far-reaching as that of natural and
innate qualities. When formed by habit into a stable quality and trait,
working like instinct they induce inner reflexes that powerfully direct
man's conduct.

Imam Hasan al-'Askari, the Eleventh Imam, may peace be upon him, said:

*One's abandoning of a habit is something like a miracle.*[^16]

Munn, in his work Psychology, writes:

In an earlier discussion we referred to the fact that some motives
developed in relation to physiological needs appear to function without
such a linkage in adult life. To quote Allport again, the bond that
remains in adult life is "historical, not functional." This concept has
also been applied by Allport and others to the persistence of habits
even though the motives which originally led to their acquisition are no
longer operative.

It appears, at times, that habits have themselves acquired the status of
drives. Some possible examples of functional autonomy are persistence of
sexual behaviour after the menopause, when estrogens are no longer
present, persistence of a vocational activity after the individual has
made his fortune and achieved distinction, and living to eat instead of
merely eating to live.

In most instances of apparent functional autonomy there is a possibility
that new motives have supplanted the original and that the habit in
question is not, in reality, operating without extraneous motivation....

In cases of functional autonomy... the habit is freed from at least its
original motivation. Force of habit, on the other hand, is persistence
of a particular way of satisfying a given motive. For example, if one
has regularly satisfied the hunger drive by eating foods prepared in a
certain way, there is often resistance to eating foods prepared in some
other way.

In other words, habit forces us "into a rut." This phenomenon is often
referred to as "force of habit", as though habits once formed act
somewhat as drives, impelling us to continue the accustomed ways instead
of taking up new ways of satisfying our motives.

James may have exaggerated somewhat the permanency of our habitual modes
of behaviour, for people often do change their prejudices and, during
war or other emergencies, their ways of living. However, there is
usually a very strong resistance to change. Anyone who wishes to change
the behaviour of an adult must take into consideration this tendency to
resist well-formed habits, even when these have become outmoded or
dangerous.[^17]

The Approach of Islam
---------------------

Though habit is a gift that human nature has been blessed with and which
directs a significant part of man's efforts in new and innovative
fields, despite its great role, in the absence of awareness it may take
the form of a deceptive and deviant tendency that results in the
corruption and perversion of the spirit.

When Islam arose on the horizon of pagan Arabia, it was dominated by
various harmful customs each of which was alone sufficient to destroy a
nation.

In that dark era when human awareness and consciousness were darkened by
vicious customs and perverse habits, Islam, with a great leap, which was
an unprecedented phenomenon in itself, shook the society out of its
state of slumber and neglect and called upon the people to abandon
customs and irrational and unreasonable practices.

A society that was sunk in various kinds of superstitions and savage
customs emancipated itself from the chains of wrong and absurd practices
through the teachings of the Prophet of Islam, may God bless him and his
Household. Though it had developed in an environment devoid of any
educative or formative influence, it soon abandoned all the customs and
ways of its ancestors to begin a new life that was free of the dominance
of perverse social customs and which held out t};e promise of felicity
and happiness.

The method of the holy founder of Islam in liberating mankind from the
bondages of social environment which had rendered incapable its inner
and outward sensibilities, suspended its rational faculties and blocked
its path of growth, was, to put it simply, to remove the many spiritual
curtains that obscured its vision. He called the attention of the people
to certain tangible, observable realities and, by relying mainly on
their faculty of reason and thought, induced them to resume the
interrupted process of thinking with the help of firm arguments and
proofs. In this way they were made capable of perceiving realities and
rational verities and of discovering facts.

Ultimately it was with the means of this great historical leap that the
society was able to free itself from the indignity of superstitions and
savage customs and man was emancipated from unmistakable ignorance and
misguidance.

In that dark age, there existed no force that could counter injurious
customs, break the hold of superstitions, open new vistas beyond the
barriers of existing customs, and relate human intellect and insight to
realities.

Islam adopted a special strategy prior to the building of a felicitous
society, which was to demolish the power of custom. This included those
habits which had to do with thought and belief as well as those which
related to conduct and behaviour. Those habits which were relatively
more harmful and dangerous-such as polytheism-were attacked first and
eradicated and dealt a decisive blow.

Other vicious social customs, which aside from their hold over the
public mind were linked to economic conditions-such as slavery, usury,
consumption of alcoholic drinks-were dealt with a gradual and milder
approach. In this case, it adopted a step-by-step strategy. As a result,
the people became gradually trained in self-control and the ground was
fully prepared for spiritual purification and edification; and this is
the most productive approach for the making of individuals in a society.

Prof. Carrel, the well-known French scientist, writes:

Before everything we must remove the impediments in the way of spiritual
growth. Before we move ahead on the road of edification we must drop
these habits and vices that paralyse spiritual growth. But what should
we do once these impediments have been removed? Thereafter we should
begin spiritual development in accordance with the genuine proclivities
of life.

Man has the amazing advantage that he can, if he wants to, form his body
and soul with the help of his consciousness. However, such a task
requires a special tactic.

One can learn to control oneself in the same way as one can learn to
pilot an airplane. Only those who are masters of their own selves can
take up this training. It is not necessary to be learned or intelligent
in order to acquire psychic growth. All that is needed is that one
should really want it. Without doubt no one can carry out this task
alone and everyone stands in need of guidance and counsel at some moment
in life. But in developing and organising one's intellectual and
emotional activities, which are the essence of personality, one cannot
benefit from the help of others.

The first principle is not the development of rational faculties but the
building of one's emotional infrastructure on which all other psychic
factors are based. The need for better conduct is no lesser than the
need for the visual and auditory senses.[^18]

'Ali, may peace be upon him, said:

*At the beginning obtain self control through abstention from sins and
vices. Then it will be easier for you to habituate yourself of the
obedience and service of God.*[^19]

*Acquire control over yourself by abandoning (bad) habits and fight your
desires so that they become subject to the power of your will*.[^20]

Islam makes use of the force of habit as an effective means for man's
spiritual training and for implementing its program for the creation of
happiness. Once it has created living ties between God and human hearts
and sown in them the seeds of virtue and human merit, it transforms them
into habit and custom. All religious customs spring from inner yearning
and the core of the human soul. Then this inner yearning is converted
into a specific conduct and practice with clearly defined features and
characteristics. Gradually it takes the form of a conscious habit based
on full consciousness. At the same time this change and transformation
saves the human being from what would otherwise be an unbearable and
exhausting exercise.

Childhood and Habit
-------------------

The recommendation of Islam concerning making children gradually used to
religious duties and higher virtues and restraining them from sinful
conduct constitute a powerful means for creating a firm and stable
foundation of faith and piety in their spiritual personality. The
implementation of such an educational program to a substantial degree
will neutralise the harmful effects of environment in later years.

The Noble Prophet, may God bless him and his Household, said:

*Accustom your children to prayer when they reach the age of
seven.*[^21]

Imam al-Sajjad, may peace be upon him, while counselling his children
said to them:

*Refrain from Lying in big and small matters and in jest and serious
talk; for when a man lies in petty matters he will be emboldened to lie
in bigger matters also.*[^22]

Imam al-Sadiq, may peace be upon him, used to say:

*Impart religious education to your children as soon as you can and
before your opponents take a lead over you and plant wrong and false
ideas in their minds.*[^23]

Bertrand Russell writes:

Every bad habit acquired is a barrier to better habits later, that is
why the first formation of habits in early infancy is so important. If
the first habits are good, endless trouble is saved later. Moreover,
habits acquired very early feel, in later life, just like instincts;
they have the same profound grip. New contrary habits acquired
afterwards cannot have the same force; for this reason, also, the first
habits should be a matter of grave concern.[^24]

[^1]: Encyclopaedia Britannica.

[^2]: Carrel, Alexis, Reflections sur la conduite de la vie, Persian
translation. Rah wa rasm-e zindagi, pp. 99-100.

[^3]: Nietzsche, The Antichrist, in Walter Kaufmann, The Portable
Neitzsche (New York: The Viking Press, 1970) pp. 572-573.

[^4]: Idem. Twilight of the Idols, in Kaufmann, op. cit., pp. 535-536.

[^5]: Idem. Thus Spoke Zarathustra (Penguin Books, 1975), trans. by R.
Hollingdale J., p. 206.

[^6]: The Qur'an, 43:14, 14:33, 95:4, 17:69.

[^7]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar al-hikam, p. 224.

[^8]: Carrel, Alexis, Man, the Unknown (Bombay: Wilco Publishing House),
p. 137.

[^9]: Ravankawi (Psychoanalysis), p. 7.

[^10]: John Dewey, Human Nature and Conduct (New York: Henry Holt and
Company, 1928), p. 1.

[^11]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-anwar, vol. 2, p. 87.

[^12]: Nahj al-balaghah, trans. by Fayd al-lslam, p. 93.

[^13]: Russell, Bertrand, On Education (London: Unwin Books, 1966), pp.
25-26.

[^14]: Emerson, Ralph Waldo, "The Over-Soul," in Man and Man: The Social
Philosophers (New York: Modern Pocket Library, 1954), ed. by Commins,
Saxe, & Linscott, Robert N., p. 423.

[^15]: Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, in Commins & Linscott, o p. cit.,
pp. 38-39.

[^16]: Al-Majlisi, Biharal-anwar, vol. 17, p. 217.

[^17]: Munn, Norman Leslie, Psychology: The Fundamentals of Human Ad
justment.

[^18]: Carrei, Alexis, Reflexions sur to conduite de la vie, Pers.
trans., pp. 98-99. (London: George G. Harrap & Co., 1966), pp. 185-186.

[^19]: Al-Amidi, Ghuraral-hikam, p. 508.

[^20]: Ibid.

[^21]: Al-Nurri, Mustadrak al-Wasa'il, vol. 1, p. 171.

[^22]: Al-'Amili, al-Hurr, Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, vol. 3, p. 232.

[^23]: al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, vol. 6 p. 47.

[^24]: Russell, Bertrand, op. cit., p. 50


