Chapter 2: Man's Most Distinctive Merit
=======================================

There are numerous urges rooted in man's nature each of which plays an
important role in his welfare and development. The greatest power that
moves the wheels of life and motivates individuals comes from the urges
whose source lies within their being.

As long as the bonds that relate a person to life are there, he does not
cease to crave and the flames of desire keep burning in his heart. All
the continuous hardships and pains that he bears and undertakes are for
the sake of satisfying his inner desires. As soon as one of his desires
is fulfilled, another sprouts in his heart, I impelling his body to
action and effort and compelling him to begin a new activity and
endeavour.

Man cannot find the path of happiness solely through the guidance of
nature. The animals, on the other hand, traverse the course of their
development through innate guidance by relying upon their instincts, by
the help of which they regulate and discipline their lives. It is
instinct that determines the functions of every animal species in
accordance with its laws and they do not stand in need of education and
training for knowing how to regulate their lives.

However, in the case of the human being instinct is not capable of
assuming this regulating role as in the case of animals and protecting
him from deviation and destruction. It is reason and intellect, man's
primary guide, that distinguishes him from other animals in showing him
the path of life. It is through intellect and thought that man can
recognise the path of his felicity and direct his efforts towards this
end, until he attains to the highest goal that is worthy of him.

The caravan of humanity makes its onward journey with the guidance of
intellect and thought, and it is with the assistance of reason that
humanity solves its vital problems, conquering a new front every day in
its struggle the problems posed by nature. In the great battlefield
within the human spirit there is always a tough battle going on between
reason and instinct.

These two powers are pitched in a relentless battle in which each of
them seeks to overpower the other. In order that we may benefit from our
inner powers and remain secure from their harm, we must bring instincts
under the domination of reason, to which all other urges, impulses and
motives of ours must submit in complete obedience. It is reason which is
our most invaluable asset that reveals to us the real dangers that we
face and gives an order and discipline to life by teaching us the right
way of employing our inner powers.

Of course, the intensity of desires is not the same at different stages
of life and the character and configuration of the urges and motives
changes according to age, conditions and circumstances.

In the same way as it possible for man to lay the foundations of his
welfare on the basis of reason and will power without allowing the
dangerous internal enemy to dominate his soul, it is also possible that
he may be overcome by rebellious urges and be ultimately drowned in the
dark and terrible vortex of corruption and decadence.

Hence if he is interested in his own welfare he must build a firm shield
to protect his soul from the harm of delusive urges and plan his course
from the very beginning. He should know where the blind alley of desires
would ultimately land him so that by the means of giving a system to his
thoughts he may spend the springtime of life in the shadow of virtue and
piety; for without sacrifice and forbearance, which are essential to
life, it is not possible to spend a 1ifetime with purity and dignity.

Someone who gives special care to the principles of human virtue from
the beginning of his rational existence, getting used to avoiding vices,
develops his spiritual capacities in the best possible manner. For him
the continuation of this policy will be easier at the more mature stages
of life. After passing safely out of the critical frontiers of youth,
the dangers of deviation will be reduced and the person will become
somewhat immune against corruptive influences.

An absolute freedom in regard to satisfaction of inner desires, in
addition to leaving evil and undesirable effects on the individual's
soul and personality, also weaken the very foundations of social
security. Hence, in order to attain personal welfare and happiness, as
well as to protect the order of society, it is necessary to overlook a
part of one's desires.

Professor Alexis Carrel says:

We have not yet learnt to submit to the laws of life in the same way as
we submit to the laws of physics and gravity. There is a tragic conflict
between human freedom and the laws of nature; a conflict to which modern
man is prey, for man wants absolute autonomy. Nevertheless, he cannot
without peril make use of his freedom beyond its permissible limits.

Freedom, like dynamite, as an effective but dangerous means whose way of
utilization has to be learnt. Fortunately, the one who can make use of
it is someone who possesses reason and will. Accordingly, this
submission to the natural laws involves the limitation of the freedom of
will. Life is not possible without an internal order.

The conflict between human freedom and the consequents of natural laws
necessitates an exercise in self-discipline. In order that we may
deliver ourselves and our descendants from the danger of catastrophes,
we must resist most of our wishes, expectations and desires. A harmony
with the order of the universe is not possible without sacrifice, and
sacrifice is a law of life. It is by refraining from satisfying some
desires that health and power can be secured. Greatness, beauty, and
holiness cannot exist without sacrifice.

Everyone must sacrifice because sacrifice is one of the necessities of
human life. This necessity has emerged from the time when instinct gave
way to free intellect in our ancestors Every time that man has made
total use of his freedom, he has violated the natural laws and faced
severe punishment.[^1]

The Capacities of the Intellect
-------------------------------

The intellect is one of the greatest gifts of God to man and with which
man has been blessed. God says in the Holy Qur'an:

***(It means:) O Prophet, declare that it is God Who has brought you out
of non-being and given you existence and bestowed upon you hearing,
vision and an aware heart (so that you should thank Him for His
bounties), though there are few persons who are grateful to their Lord
for His gifts. (67:23)***

The Master of the Faithful, may peace be upon him, says:

*The intellect is man's most precious asset, for it restores his dignity
after his humiliation, uplifts him if he falls, guides him if he is lost
and gives firmness and rectitude to his speech when he speaks.*[^2]

In Islamic teachings the intellect has been considered as man's 'inner'
prophet and guide and as God's 'proof'. Imam al-Kazim, may peace be upon
him, said:

*God has appointed two kinds of guides for mankind. One is outward and
manifest and the other is inward and hidden. The manifest proofs are the
prophets, messengers and the holy leaders of the faith. The hidden proof
is the intellect.*[^3]

Since the intellectual capacities of people are not of the same level
and are different in degrees, every man on the Day of Judgement will be
held responsible in proportion to his intellectual ability. The Fifth
Imam said:

*On the Day of Judgement God shall scrutinise the record of His
creatures', conduct (with a severity) in proportion to their
intellectual capacities in the world.*[^4]

In the present era man has been greatly fascinated by the wonderful
accomplishments of reason in the form of scientific discoveries,
considering them the ultimate purpose and end of life. This enchantment
has dealt an irremediable blow to the role of the intellect and its
place in human life. It has caused him to ignore and neglect the power
and faculty which has a direct connection with the supra- sensible and
the Source of being.

Had the enchanted man seen the distant and wider horizon and ventured
into the vast panorama of the supra- sensible, he would not have stopped
at the fascinating manifestations of reason. Islam is fully cognisant of
the real worth and capacity of the intellect and the scope of its
activity.

It is on the basis of this knowledge that it has given so much care to
the training and growth of the intellect so that it may view the
realities of existence with thoughtful care. The Qur'an asks the
intellect not to hold on to anything which has not been proved with
certainty and beyond doubt. It requires the intellect not to accept
anything until there is a clear and decisive proof to justify such
acceptance.

***And follow not that which thou hast no knowledge of; the hearing, the
sight, the heart-all of those shall be questioned of. (17:36)***

This express warning clearly underlines the necessity of making
sufficient investigation before accepting anything as true. Similarly,
the Qur'an points out the deviant character of those who do not base
their beliefs on certainty and merely follow their conjectures and
presumptions. It says about them:

***They follow only surmise, and surmise avails naught against truth.
(53:28)***

Thereupon by adopting a firm approach based on an unshakeable reasoning
it demolishes the intellectual foundations of blind imitation and
surmise. It warns the blind and unquestioning followers who blindly
imitate the creed and beliefs of their ancestors that their approach is
sheer folly.

***They say, 'No; but we will follow such things as we found our fathers
doing.' What? And if their fathers had no understanding of anything, if
they were not guided ? (2:170)***

These exhortations are aimed to develop a critical mind and to put the
intellect back in its true role by rejecting reliance on surmise and
conjecture. By this means it seeks to habituate the intellect to
discipline and critical scrutiny in its field of action, so that thereby
it may regulate the various faculties and set in order the ideas and
conceptions under its dominion. The kind of thinking that Islam requires
is not one of an abstract kind removed from concrete realities that
takes the form of philosophical speculation.

By calling attention to the signs (*ayat*) of creation it seeks to
awaken the intellect so that man may employ his conscious faculties to
contemplate profoundly regarding the signs of Divine Majesty and Wisdom
manifested in the system of creation. It is a thinking that is free from
fantasy, free and perceptive of realities, not one which is lost in the
dark wilderness of fancies. It is thinking that links man, with his
perception and senses, to the Divine Spirit that circulates through the
entire world of being, and this is the highest merit of the intellect.

Spinoza, the European philosopher, writes:

The highest thing which the mind can understand is God, that is to say,
Being absolutely infinite, and without whom nothing can be nor can be
conceived, and therefore that which is chiefly profitable to the mind,
or which is the highest good of the mind, is the knowledge of God.

Again, the mind acts only in so far as it understands and only in so far
can it be absolutely said to act in conformity with virtue. To
understand, therefore, is the absolute virtue of the mind. But the
highest thing which the mind can understand is God (as we have already
demonstrated), and therefore the highest virtue of the mind is to
understand or know God.[^5]

The ultimate purpose of thought and inquiry in Islam is to cure the
human heart and to lay the foundation of life on truth and justice. When
a person arrives at a certain conclusion through thinking and is made
profoundly conscious of its implications, he puts it into action and
implements it in his practical life. Once that dynamic conviction
informs his thought, behaviour and faculties of perception, he is
prepared for a serious struggle against every indignity that compromises
the real worth of the human being.

Although the intellect is the best guide and the biggest source of
discernment, it loses its brilliance as a result of the curtain that
obfuscating desires and lusts draw over the intellect and obstruct its
light. Then the intellect practically loses its capacity of guidance.
The Qur'an refers to the misguiding role of desires and lusts in these
words:

***Then (O Prophet) if they do not respond to thee, know that they are
only following their desires: and who is further astray than he who
follows his desire without guidance from God? Surely God guides not the
evildoers. (28:50)***

***Nay, but the evildoers follow their own desires, without
knowledge.... (30:29)***

***Had the Truth followed their desires, the heavens and the earth and
whosoever is in them had surely corrupted. (23:71)***

***Hast thou seen him who has taken his desire to be his god, and God
has led him astray out of a knowledge. (45:23)***

Without doubt, to overcome and control one's desires and negative urges
is a very difficult task. Only with persisting efforts and exercises can
one keep the rebellious passions in check and make them tractable and
subject to reason. This is the way to overcome the tyranny of desires
and to benefit from them in a right and worthy manner. The Noble
Prophet, may God bless him and his Household, once addressing a group of
warriors returning from the battlefield said to them:

*'Bravo to those who have accomplished the minor jihad and who yet
remain to wage the major jihad!' He was asked, 'O Messenger of Allah,
what is that major jihad?' He replied, 'That is the jihad against the
self.*[^6]

He who attains bliss and nearness to God is one who is vigilant over his
violent and dangerous urges and one who does not allow his carnal
motives to dominate his intellect and turn him to impiety and
aberration.

***But as for him who fears the station of his Lord and forbids the soul
its desire, surely Paradise shall be the refuge. (79:40-41)***

Is Conscience a Product of Internalised Prohibition?
----------------------------------------------------

Another major moderating agent of the instincts and impulses of the
human psyche is moral conscience. Since the beginning of man's
appearance on the earth until today long ages have passed and man has
throughout been inclined towards goodness and abhorred vice. He has
always heard an inner moral voice calling from within called
'conscience'. His rational life throughout the ages has existed by the
side of the life of conscience.

When man can distinguish between thorns and flowers, avoiding the former
and relishing the latter, when he can distinguish between filth and
cleanliness, certainly he does not confuse between virtue and vice. The
fundamental nature of the conscience is one of the most attractive
phenomena of creation.

Man in a state of spiritual equilibrium is attracted to honesty and
justice and is repelled by dishonesty and injustice. In fact moral
conviction is more pronounced than rational conviction, which has a
definite value for ascertaining facts. That is because the mind is well
aware that the knowledge of external objects perceived by it, which
carries the stamp of conviction put on it by the intellect, pertains to
a reality separate from and external to the mind, where as the certainty
created by the conscience stands above the kind of certainty that goes
with perception and observation. In the case of moral conviction, the
object is felt as a part of the subject.

Some psychoanalysts, like Freud and his followers, deny that moral
conscience is inherent in man. They believe that repressed wishes and
social inhibitions that become deposited in the unconscious mind make up
what is called 'conscience'. In other words, conscience is a product of
civilisation and has no essential roots in the human psyche.

Freud in his psychological investigations and analysis of various
phenomena looks for sexual roots and pays no attention to other inner
factors that form the source of good and bad actions.

There has been no society in the world that may consider dishonesty,
injustice and breach of trust as something good and honourable, or
honesty, justice and loyalty as bad and improper, or one which should
consider its welfare and felicity to lie in vices and moral evils.

Freud's theory would be applicable if man had learnt to distinguish
between good and evil through experience. But those virtues and vices
which have been recognised by all men on the surface of the earth,
civilised and savage, and even by peoples ignorant of the teachings of
prophets and reformers, can never be said to be products of social
prohibitions and repressed impulses.

Freud's denial of the innate nature of conscience-in the sense
understood by ethics-and his degradation of the human being to an
assembly of purely physical impulses and instincts, leads him inevitably
to a total negation of all moral values and spirituality as well as the
worth and sublimity of man's sacred urges so active in the depths of his
psyche. This denial makes all its manifestations, such as compassion,
justice, goodness, and helpfulness for the weak and the helpless,
meaningless and absurd.

On the basis of such a doctrine, no one can take a step towards the
world of spiritual and moral values without repressing his natural urges
and instincts and forego pleasures by relying on his will power. Rather,
according to it, all inner restraints are totally a product of external
forces of social compulsion.

Should the conscience be considered a product of the forces of external
environment, the actions of those who without any selfish benefit in
view voluntarily deny themselves many pleasures for the sake of
attaining to higher ideals and goals, and put up with pains and
sufferings in the way of higher interests, remain unexplained by Freud's
inadequate ideas, which view them as a subterfuge of the unconscious as
a compensation for repressed wishes. The majesty of surrender to the
guidance of the conscience will always remain a difficult and insoluble
enigma for such theories.

The great reformers who have been humanity's vanguard have drawn the
people to the world of human purity. The people too did not submit to
these leaders in the way tyrants and strongmen are obeyed. Man takes to
the path of merit and edification voluntarily and out of his free will
and love for sublimity, and he refrains from carrying out some of his
carnal impulses without confronting any psychic complex. It is with
voluntarily zeal and enthusiasm that he responds to his sublime human
feelings and performs goodly services which have not been forced upon
him by custom, religion and society.

These are facts which show that man's inner psychic reality is not made
up of a dark, pleasure-seeking principle pursuing merely the fulfilment
of base desires; rather there is also grounded in him the urge for the
highest good. There is a principle within him that is an independent
source of virtuous actions and conduct. It is the conscience that
reminds him that everything in life is not to be sought for selfish ends
and that life is not mere pursuit of desires.

There are many individuals in the world who consider a life devoid of
conscience to be a disgrace and an affront to their personal dignity as
human beings. They are prepared to forego life and embrace death but are
not ready to violate their conscience. When they perform a good deed by
following their inner impulse, they have such a profound feeling of its
worth and beauty that they would not be prepared to exchange the value
of that moment of life for the entire world.

Had the foundation of man's personality been a subjective principle of
an infantile character in which the pursuit of pleasure and avoidance of
pain are the only functions that count, man's science and industry would
not have attained such a level of progress and development.

The Domain and Role of Conscience
---------------------------------

Conscience seldom makes any error in its judgements. The various errors
of human beings in their social life either result from the errors of
reason and the senses or are a consequence of the conscience losing its
power of resistance against violent impulses.

Therefore, the numerous errors observed in the different walks of human
life are not related to any weakness or misjudgement on behalf of
conscience, because this innate faculty does not play any role outside
its domain of activity. Conscience examines the conclusions and data
provided by reason and the sensory faculties and its judgement is based
on these.

A person with a pure and wholesome nature is repelled by crime and sin.
Nevertheless it is possible that under the influence of certain factors
he may become tainted by sin and vice and these may cast a shadow of
shame and guilt over him. But after the offence has been committed once
man turns to himself and consults the most sublime light within him, he
realises the vicious character of that which happened and a burning
flame leaps up from the depths of his being. A painful feeling of guilt
and shame envelops his entire being. This is what is called conscience,
which censures the offender even after he has been punished and torments
him continually with the lashes of regret.

Conscience is not only a reliable guide in the course of life, it is a
just and honest witness over man's conduct that keeps a watch over it
and declares what it observes. A person may say with the tongue
something which is the opposite of that which is in his heart, or he may
hide his secret thoughts by controlling his apparent movements. But he
has no power to silence the voice of his conscience or to stop it from
reproaching him. Conscience cannot be deceived. It may be possible to
elude it through some mental deception or trick or even to put it to
sleep for a time. But once it wakes up and studies the sinful record of
one's deeds, it declares with perfect candidness the ugly character of
his vicious conduct and flogs him severely with the whip of guilt and
regret.

A human being loves nothing more dearly than its own 'self'. One who
suffers the most painful torture of guilt is in fact one who has been
disowned and abandoned by his own 'self'. He comes to feel as if his
crime and sin were a fire that consumes his being in its fierce flames.
Hence conscience is the most effective agent in avoiding crime and sin.

If the intensity of the pangs of conscience that he suffers were beyond
his power and tolerance, a feeling of anxiety and agitation fills all
his conscious state, overshadows all other feelings of satisfaction. The
tormenting pressure of the conscience in some cases disturbs the normal
course of the person's psychic activities and give rise to pathological
conditions. The study of psychic tensions in some cases of dementia that
have been studied show that such persons are those who lost their sanity
and rational faculties as a result of the shattering torment and
pressure of conscience resulting from commission of crimes and sins and
have fallen into the furnace of guilt and regret.

At times one's improper wishes and impulses are so strong that man wants
to deceive his conscience and to stall its activity. It is a marvellous
characteristic of the conscience that it can put up a steadfast
resistance against powerful impulses and fight against them. As long as
there occurs no failure in its resistance to the pressure of instincts,
it carries on its effort and does not neglect its duty.

Henri Baruk says:

Conscience is strong in its persistence, and even when its light becomes
so dim that it ceases to be visible it remains more or less vigilant and
aware. And even at times when its light can be perceived with
difficulty, it can, all of a sudden, begin to shine with a dazzling
brilliance.[^7]

Ultimately, everyone who has disobeyed his conscience and deviated from
the course of nature has always faced mental torment and anxiety. On the
contrary, one who heeds the warnings of the conscience and obeys its
commands finds mental peace and tranquillity, the peace and tranquillity
in whose search the misguided run after every mirage.

The Qur'an and the Voice of Nature
----------------------------------

Today many scientists reject Freud's view and consider the conscience to
be an innate part of man's nature. The thinkers who have employed the
powers of sound and active intellect for acquiring the knowledge of man
and the universe have affirmed the innate phenomenon of conscience. They
have been led to the conviction that inclination toward virtue and
repulsion from vice has natural roots in our being, that the system of
creation has placed this blessed asset in the innate nature of every
human being.

Here, along with some relevant verses of the Glorious Qur'an, we shall
cite the views of some Western thinkers and scholars concerning this
matter.  
 The Holy Qur'an considers man's inner faculty of discrimination between
good and evil, virtue and vice as a Divine inspiration invested in his
being.

***By the soul, and That which shaped it and inspired it to lewdness and
god-fearing! (91:7-8)***

Jean Jacques Rousseau writes:

Cast your eyes over every nation of the world; peruse every volume of
its history; in the midst of all these strange and cruel forms of
worship, among this amazing variety of manners and customs, you will
everywhere find the same ideas of right and justice, everywhere the same
principles of morality, the same ideas of good and evil.... There is
therefore at the bottom of our hearts an innate principle of justice and
virtue, by which, in spite of our maxims, we judge our own actions or
those of others to be good or evil, and it is this principle that I call
conscience...

Self-interest, so they say, induces each of us to agree for the common
good. But how is it that the good man consents to this to his own hurt?
Does a man go to death from self-interest? No doubt each man acts for
his own good, but if there is no such thing as moral good to be taken
into consideration, self-interest will only enable you to account for
the deeds of the wicked; possibly you will not attempt to do more. A
philosophy which could find no place for good deeds would be too
detestable.... If such doctrines ever took root among us, the voice of
nature, together with the voice of reason, would constantly protest
against them, till no adherent of such teaching would plead an honest
excuse for his partisanship...

The decrees of conscience are not judgements but feelings. Although all
our ideas come from without, the feelings by which they are weighed are
within us, and it is by these feelings alone that we perceive fitness or
unfitness of things in relation to ourselves, which lead us to seek or
shun these things.... To know good is not to love it; this knowledge is
not innate in man, but as soon as his reason leads him to perceive it,
his conscience impels him to love it, and it is this feeling which is
innate...

Conscience! Conscience! Divine instinct, immortal voice from heaven,
sure guide for a creature ignorant and finite indeed, yet intelligent
and free; infallible judge of good and evil, making man like to God! In
thee consists the excellence of man's nature and the morality of his
actions; apart from thee, I find nothing in myself to raise me above the
beasts- nothing but the sad privilege of wandering from one error to
another, by the help of an unbridled understanding and a reason which
knows no principle.

Thanks heaven we have got rid of all that alarming show of philosophy;
we may be men without being scholars; now that we need not spend our
life in the study of morality, we have found a less costly and surer
guide through this vast labyrinth of human thought. But it is not enough
to be aware that there is such a guide. We must know her and follow her.
If she speaks to all hearts, how is it that so few give heed to her
voice? She speaks to us in the language of nature, and everything leads
us to forget that tongue.

Conscience is timid, she loves peace and retirement; she is startled by
noise and numbers; the prejudices from which she is said to arise are
her worst enemies. She flees before them or she is silent; their noisy
voices drown her words so that she cannot get a hearing; fanaticism
dares to counterfeit her voice and to inspire crimes in her name. She is
discouraged by ill-treatment; she no longer speaks to us, no longer
answers to our call; when she has been scorned so long, it is hard to
recall her as it was to banish her.[^8]

Prof. Friedman says:

The voice of conscience is not a product of education or training or
some other agency; rather, it is a part of the human personality.
Whoever that rises to a high and distinguished position in society or
becomes a standard-bearer of humanity, it is the voice of his conscience
that guides him towards virtue and piety.[^9]

A psychologist says:

Conscience is not a contrived reaction but a most profound agent
inherent in the human nature. Despite various kinds of repressive
efforts, men cannot silence or expunge the conscience. Moreover, the
stability and extraordinary persistence of conscience, even in severe
illnesses and in the course of madness and psychic disorders, and its
survival even after the dimming of the light of intelligence, bear
testimony, as said earlier, to its greatly significant and prominent
position in the human psyche.

Some scientists ask themselves whether conscience is not a product of
education and upbringing or that of religion. But it must be pointed out
that salient features of this conscience have been found in primitive
rituals. The expression of awe and dismay accompanying the seeking of
forgiveness in these primitive tribes and also in many idol-worshipping
peoples bear witness to the ancient character of conscience which has
been with man since his beginnings. A denial of this fact is tantamount
to utter failure in understanding the human psyche.[^10]

The Holy Qur'an declares:

***Have We not appointed to him two eyes, and a tongue, and two lips,
and guided him concerning the two highways (of goodness and virtue and
of evil and vice)? (90:8-10)***

***We created man of a sperm-drop, a mingling, trying him; and We made
him hearing, seeing. (76:2)***

Samuel Smiles writes:

Conscience is that peculiar faculty of the soul which may be called the
religious instinct. It first reveals itself when we become aware of the
strife between a higher and a lower nature within us-of spirit warring
against flesh-of good striving for the mastery over evil... To enjoy
spiritual freedom of the highest kind, the mind must have been awakened
by knowledge. As the mind has become enlightened, and conscience shows
its power, the responsibility of man is increased...

Conscience is permanent and universal. It is the very essence of
individual character. It gives a man self-control- the power of
resisting temptations and defying them.... The only comprehensive and
sustained exercise of self-control is to be attained through the
ascendancy of conscience-in the sense of duty performed. It is;
conscience alone which sets a man on his feet, frees him from the
dominions of his own passions an propensities. It places him in relation
to the best interests of his kind. The truest source of enjoyment is
found in the paths of duty alone. Enjoyment will come as the unbidden
sweetener of labour, and crown every right work.

At its fullest growth, conscience bids men to whatever makes them happy
in the highest sense, and forbear whatever makes them unhappy....
Without conscience, a man can have no higher principle of action than
pleasure.... A race so constituted, with intellect and 1passions such as
man possesses, and without the paramount influence of conscience to
govern their deeds, would soon be consigned to utter anarchy, and
terminate in mutual destruction. The greatest intellectual power may
exist without a particle of magnanimity.

The later comes from the highest power in mans mind-conscience, and from
the highest faculty, reason, and capacity for faith- that by which man
is capable of apprehending more than the senses supply.... The great
lesson to be learnt is, that man must strengthen himself to perform his
duty and do what is right, seeking his happiness and inward peace in
objects that cannot be taken away from his. Conscience is the conflict
by which we get the mastery over our own failings. It is a silent
working of the inner man, bat which he proves his peculiar power of the
will and spirit of God.[^11]

The Qur'an declares:

***I swear by the Day of Resurrection I swear by the reproachful soul.
(75:1-2)***

In this verse the inner cry of reproach and blame that arises from the
depths of man's conscience has been called 'the reproachful soul'
(*al-nafs al-lawwamah*). This is the same inner faculty which the
psychologists called 'conscience'.

Prof. Otto Friedman writes:

Someone may spend many hours drinking wine in a bar or while away his
time on the gambling table or engage in playing tennis. In any case,
while he is occupied with all such diversions he might have an inner
feeling of disquiet which continuously torments him and deprives him
from drawing any pleasure from his pastime. An inner voice reproaches
him that you are wasting away the hours of your life. This voice
constantly echoes in his conscience.  
 On the other hand, instead of engagement in such pastimes the thought
may occur to one that it would be much better if he engages in the
training of his children or tending his garden and plants. It is here
that his conscience guides him towards good actions which are useful for
himself as well as beneficial for others. It is here that one always
keeps on comparing himself with others and his conscience keeps on
reproaching him. The greater and the steadier one's obedience to the
voice of conscience, the proportionately greater will be his creative
power and spiritual strength and the greater his zeal and vigour in
life. And the lesser is one's attention to the voice of conscience, to
the same extent he will be more violent and unrestrained.[^12]

The Holy Prophet, may God bless him and his Household,

*One who is overwhelmed by self-reproach loses all peace.*[^13]

It may happen that one loses his equilibrium in a moment of carelessness
and his base impulses get the better of him. As a consequence he is
rendered wretched and miserable and its regret and shame remains with
him for a lifetime. Imam 'Ali, may peace be upon him, said:

*How often does an hour of pleasure leave behind a long-lasting
misery.*[^14]

Human societies in all ages have benefited from the inner agency of
conscience in times of need. Individuals who are devoid of the moral
feeling, for whom virtue and vice have no significance and who see
pursuit of pleasure, food and lust as the purpose of life are like
pieces of straw carried away by the flood of animal instincts and have
no credibility or standing in any society, nation or community. When
someone is trusted with a job, the presence of conscience is the
presumed guarantee of its being carried out. There should be a good
measure of confidence that he will act according to his duty. Otherwise
it is unwise to delegate a task to someone whose conduct is suspect from
the viewpoint of conscience or opposed to conscientious behaviour.

Islam has paid special attention to conscience and it bases the efforts
at the improvement and betterment of social conduct on the individual's
conscience. Islam tries to convince individuals to place a watchman in
their inner souls which may restrain them from committing aggression and
offence against others even in conditions of hostility and anger. The
Qur'an warns human being in these words:

***Let not detestation for a people move you to commit in justice. Be
equitable-that is nearer to god-fearing. (5:8)***

Accordingly no one has the right to aggress against others or violate
the rights of others in any circumstances whatsoever. Positive law with
the limited means at its disposal tries to restrain the human being from
outside from committing acts of offence. But Islam lays great importance
on cultivating and nurturing the conscience of individuals. With a
developed conscience individuals themselves perceive the necessity of
refraining from certain actions so that they may achieve spiritual
edification and salvation. Without doubt, this kind of self-restraint
motivated by religious faith and moral sense offers a surer means and a
shorter way to the goal.

In the view of Islam the attainment of the higher goals of life is
possible only through co-operation and mutual love between individual
human beings. It invites the people to these virtues and asks them to
base their relations on co-operation and love. In the light of such a
teaching, everyone feels that his existence as a human being is like a
lamp that lights up the horizons of humanity when he, happily and
without any reservations, extends his co-operation and love to others.

Imam al-Sadiq, may peace be upon him, reports the Noble Prophet, may God
bless him and his Household, as having said:

*It is the duty of every person to observe the seven rights of his
brother in faith: (1) that one should not fail to show him respect and
reverence; (2) one should really love him from the bottom of one's
heart; (3) one should share one's belongings with him equally; (4) one
must refrain from backbiting him and mentioning unseemly things about
him in his absence; (5) one should visit him when he falls ill; (6) one
should attend his funeral on his death; (7) one should not mention him
except kindly after his death.*[^15]

Man listens to the summons of nature and discriminates virtue from vice
when there isn't anything to obstruct the course of nature. A conscience
in bondage and deprived of its free movement by the weighty chains of
lust and position and power seeking impulses, cannot manifest its real
character and be a trustworthy judge. Thus during crises of war and
revolution and such extraordinary conditions conscience suffers terrible
blows and its activity comes to a standstill. In such circumstances
perverse ideas and doctrines emerge as the most potent dynamic force and
the suppression of the collective conscience results in irremediable
losses and harms for mankind.

There is a great difference between a conscientious person and a person
without conscience; this difference is even greater than the one that
separates man from other creatures. If fire with its quality, which is
to burn, burns a human body, it is a consequence of its essential
nature. It has no consciousness that which it burns is a living
creature, a human being that intensely feels the torment of burning. But
whatever a person without conscience does is done with knowledge and
consciousness. Cruelty, injustice and suffering inflicted by men on
other human beings are acts performed consciously.

One of the things alters man's primordial nature and casts dark shadows
on the luminous face of pure nature is repetition of sin. A brutal
criminal commits many terrible crimes without feeling any psychic
torment for his ugly conduct. Such a sadistic condition is something
quite exceptional.

Society can attain social justice only when individuals accept an inner
agent that may act as a judge and invigilator over their acts and comply
with its commands. If all people in a real social unit that gives
meaning to their humanity possess a common and identical ethos, that not
only brings about a perfect condition of coexistence, but makes them
like parts of an organism and links of a mechanism.

The Bedrock of Reason and Conscience
------------------------------------

When the rebellious impulses try to undermine the role of reason and
conscience and make man a captive of lusts, faith turns out to be the
best support for relying upon. Faith is the greatest support and
foothold of conscience and reason. With its support reason and
conscience acquire the capacity to suppress rebellious instincts in all
circumstances, resist the hostile pressure of desires and to overcome
any kind of dangerous inclination. A human being armed with the weapon
of faith is one who, in the words of the Qur'an, "has laid hold of the
most firm handhold that can never break.''[^16]

The function of theoretical reason on which metaphysics, natural science
and mathematics are based, is to make judgements concerning reality.
However, it is practical reason that forms the basis of the sciences of
life and its function is to form judgements concerning the duties and
responsibilities of man. The path and approach selected by the human
being in life is related to the character of judgements made by
practical reason.

One of the important factors that gives clarity of vision to the
intellect is god-fearing (*taqwa*). The claim that god-fearing
illuminates the intellect and opens the window of wisdom before man is a
matter that does not relate to the theoretical intellect. It is with the
means of god-fearing that man is able to discern the correct way of
living and discover his own ailments and their remedies.

Since the domain of action of the practical intellect is the same as the
realm of desires, impulses, and passions, their unbridled violence has a
decisive effect on man's practical intellect and thought which have the
function of forming clear conceptions of duty and that which is right or
wrong. The uncontrolled passions raise a dense mist that obstructs the
light of the lamp of the intellect. In the words of Hafiz Shirazi:

The beloved's beauty has neither a veil nor a curtain before it, but,  
 The dusts of the road must be made to settle before the sight may work.

In Islamic teachings desire and passion have been considered hostile to
the intellect because their hold weakens the power of the intellect and
neutralises its influence. The Noble Messenger, may God bless him and
his Household, said:

*Your worst enemy is the one between your two sides;*[^17]

Imam al-Sadiq, may peace be upon him, says:

*Desire is the intellect's enemy.*

The Commander of the Faithful, 'Ali, may peace be upon him, says:

*Most of the falls of intellects occur under the lightning bolts of
greed.*[^18]

When god-fearing takes hold of the heart, it puts desires and passions
in chains, making them docile and tractable. As a result of it the
intellect becomes free and active. This shows the effectiveness of taqwa
in enhancing the vision and clarity of the intellect.

The Noble Messenger, may God bless him and his Household, mentions the
following characteristics while describing the qualities of men of
faith:

*Among the salient merits of a person possessing faith is that he does
not violate the norms of justice on account of resentment for someone.
His attachment for someone does not make him take a sinful course. He is
not a transgressor and does not oppress others. He does not accept
falsehood though it should come from a friend and does not deny his
enemy's legitimate rights.*  
[^19]  
 Man is completely free to utilise the precious assets of reason and
conscience that he has been endowed with and to benefit from them.
However, his ultimate freedom lies in overcoming some of his natural
desires; that is, when a part of his being- that is his reason and
conscience-dominates the other part, consisting of the natural
instincts.

Reason and conscience maintain their supremacy so long as there is no
conflict between them and turbulent psychic impulses, which are easily
kept under the control of these two faculties. These two have a greater
power than external police authorities, for their orders are considered
by the individual to be issued by himself and hence he cannot rebel
against himself by refusing to comply with them.

However, a major difficulty arises when the domination of reason and
conscience necessitates indifference to or repression of one of the
inner instincts. In such a situation, in many cases, the resisting power
of reason and conscience breaks down in front of the violent force of
instinct. They are forced to withdraw leaving the field to the marauding
forces of instincts. Whatever may be the conditions, man is always
threatened by his desires and passions.

But the man with genuine faith in God, whose faith has enduring roots in
the profound depths of his heart and who is especially attentive to
religious aspects, governs his tumultuous instincts by relying on this
faith. In dangerous moments of life and vis-à-vis the call of
illegitimate desires he rejects his improper impulses, and, with perfect
authority and power, puts up steadfast resistance against rebellious
passions.

Sophistry and Rationalisation
-----------------------------

Compliance with the edicts of reason and conscience and submission to
the demands of justice and equity are not simple tasks. Hence many
persons who should comply with the call of conscience, submit to the
judgements of sound reason in their encounter with moral, religious and
scientific duties and in confronting facts and realities, and overlook
some of their egoistic interests, are tormented by acceptance of
responsibility and the prospect of loss.

This anguish, which results from the absence of real faith and moral
courage, makes them suppress their conscience in the adversities of
life. Thereafter, in order to escape psychic pressures, they resort to
some kind of lame justification and rationalisation. Obviously when
someone takes resort in this improper approach several times, the
activity of the intellect suffers and is weakened. The person gradually
gets habituated to sophistry and moves away from correct logical
thinking. Then it takes the form of a negative habit and in the course
of time emerges as an enduring personal quality.

Another group of people, in order to escape responsibility and to avoid
confessing their mistakes, try to shift the responsibility for various
matters and in regard to certain crucial situations of life on to others
by finding justifications in their own favour, seeking to close the
issue by a one-sided judgement.

These kind of improper judgements are not a result of negligence and
absence of attention to the subtleties of an issue. Practically all
deviant persons, the terrible character of whose acts is beyond any
doubt, take resort in various kinds of justification and inadmissible
rationalisation in order to explain and justify their inhuman acts.

Dale Carnegie writes:

I have had some interesting correspondence with Warden Lawes of Sing
Sing on this subject, and he declares that "few of the criminals in Sing
Sing regard themselves as bad men. They are just as human as you and I.
So they rationalise, they explain. They can tell you why they had to
crack a safe or be quick on the trigger finger. Most of them attempt by
a form of reasoning, fallacious or logical, to justify their anti-social
acts even to themselves, consequently stoutly maintaining that they
should never have been imprisoned at all."  
 If Al Capone, "Two Gun" Crowley, Dutch Schulz, the desperate men behind
prison walls, don't blame themselves for anything-what about the people
with whom you and I come in contact?[^20]

At first every person has a feeling of guilt for having shelved the
burden of responsibility or for violating moral and social norms. But
the repetition of such mistakes and offences, by diminishing the feeling
of the negative and vicious character of such acts, makes one accustomed
to them. Thereafter, in all the crucial stages that follow, his psychic
responses vis-à-vis the offence unconsciously lose their sensitivity and
the person comes to have a perpetual feeling of immunity from inner
anguish and torment.

The Noble Qur'an describes such wretched creatures who have lost their
awake and sensitive intellect and conscience due to crime and the
pursuit of selfish gain and have sunk so irretrievably in the slumber of
neglect and the mire of decadence that nothing can make them think again
properly and discern between good and evil, as being more astray and
inferior than beasts:

***They have hearts, but understand not with them; they have eyes, but
perceive not with them they have ears, but they hear not with them. They
are like cattle; nay, rather they are further astray. Those-they are the
heedless. (7:179)***

[^1]: Carrel, Alexis, Reflexions sur la conduite de la vie, Pers.
trans., Rah-wa rasm-e zindagi, pp. 99-100.

[^2]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar al-hikam, p. 212.

[^3]: Al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 16.

[^4]: Ibid., "kitab al-'aql wa al-jahl."

[^5]: Spinoza, Ethics, in Man and Spirit: The Speculative Philosophers;
ed. by Saxe Commins and Robert N. Linscott, p. 175.

[^6]: Al-Saduq, Ma'ani al-akhbar, p. 160.

[^7]: Baruk, Henri, Psychoses et nervroses, Pers. trans., Bimariha-ye
ruh wa sasabi (Tehran, 1343) by 'Abd al-Husayn Mirsipasi, p. 73.

[^8]: Rousseau, Jean Jacques, Emile, trans. by Babara Foxley (Everyman's
Library, 1969), pp. 251-254.

[^9]: Friedman, Otto, Pers. trans., Rawanshi nasi dar khidmat-e siyasat,
p. 32.

[^10]: Baruk, op. cit., pp. 67-68.

[^11]: Smiles, Samuel, Duty (London: John Murray, 1926), pp. 19, 20, 21.

[^12]: Friedman, Otto, op. cit., pp. 31-32.

[^13]: Nahj al-fasahah, p. 621.

[^14]: Al-Kulayni, op. cit., vol. 2, p. 451.

[^15]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-anwar, vol. 15, "kitab al-ishrah," p. 61.

[^16]: The Qur'an, 2:256.

[^17]: Nahj al- fasahah, p. 66.

[^18]: Al-Amidi, Ghuraral-hikam, p. 195.

[^19]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-anwar, vol. 15, p. 82.

[^20]: Carnegie, Dale, How to Win Friends (New York: Simon and Schustar
Inc., 1937), p. 27.


