Chapter 3: A Criterion of Human Values
======================================

Personality is that which makes every individual different from others
and by means of which we determine the real worth and station of a human
being. Despite the fact that all persons possess common characteristics
as well as common reactions particular to the human species and are
similar in regard to the social instincts, nevertheless, every one of
them possesses certain congenital and acquired qualities and certain
particular gifts that distinguish him from the rest of his kind.

Personality does not consist of certain abstract characteristics of a
person; rather, it constitutes the totality of an individual on which
his identity is based, making him distinct from other individuals. It is
a unity comprised of a group of qualities and inner motives. Moreover,
only those qualities of a person are considered to be part of his
personality which have some degree of permanence.

Although the principles that govern the growth and development of
personality apply equally to all, but when these principles are applied
to two individuals the results obtained are not the same; when the
personalities of the two are compared, the difference and dissimilarity
between the two is clearly noticeable.

To be sure, certain observable aspects of personality are susceptible to
measurement, but it is not so simple to measure the deeper and inner
aspects of personality and the hidden motives and urges of a person.

Some of the qualities play a more important role in the structure of
personality than others. These qualities which are of a moral and
ethical character are more significant from the viewpoint of
personality. In fact, the 'character' of a person is his personality
when viewed from the moral angle.

The impact of personality, its character and strength, as well as the
acquisition of those qualities which go into the making of a person,
play a more profound and fundamental role in the welfare and woes of
individuals. This is so because human felicity and misfortune is
dependent, more than any external factor, on the level of thinking,
intellect, spiritual merits and the inner causes at work within an
individual. The differences of social and financial status have no
definite and decisive impact on anyone's felicity.

An individual's spiritual foundations and the development of his
personality are directly related to his attachment to and evaluation of
things. By nature he tries to establish a harmony between his
personality and the objects to which he is attached, in order to become
attuned to them. His behaviour and conduct are tuned to and in harmony
with what he considers to be of greatest worth and value in life. The
different hierarchies of values represent different ways of thinking and
differences of ethos. Here we have a way of judging the intrinsic worth
of every person and a criterion for measuring his personality.

Those who base their success and happiness on materialistic values-both
in respect of quality and quantity-directing their endeavours throughout
life to the attainment of materialistic objectives, and totally neglect
and reject the real values basic to the achievement of true happiness,
they in fact shatter their human personality. There are many people who
spend all their lives in unceasing pursuit of materialistic values, but
are not ready to devote a moment of their time to discovering the
invaluable treasure represented by spiritual merits and virtues.

Scholars have different views about the extent to which the problems of
personality are related to social psychology. Some of them regard
personality to be a product of hereditary and physiological factors.
Some others consider personality to be totally a product of social
factors. The truth lies somewhere between these two extreme positions.

Family, school and social environment constitute the three most potent
factors in laying the foundations of personality and determining the
character of a person. Modern psychology gives much importance to the
little-understood phenomenon of personality-something that did not
receive much attention in the old psychology. Without doubt, social
factors play an important direct role in the constitution of personality
and many of a man's qualities are those which have been formed by
external environment. Few are those who can resist the power and
influence of their environment and swim against the current.

Munn, in his work on psychology, says:

We would possess a very different personality if we had been brought up
by the Eskimos, the Sioux, the Balinese, or by some other cultural
group. Not only would we dress differently, live in a different kind of
dwelling, eat different food, use different implements and weapons,
speak a different language, and have different social customs, but we
would also have a very different conception of the world and of our own
place within it. Our egos and our superegos would differ greatly from
what they are.

Cultural anthropologists have rightly placed much emphasis upon the
"socio-cultural matrix" in which personalities develop. Children reared
in the United States, acquire a way of life, and with it, a personality,
which an outside observer might well characterise as "typically
American." But, even within this cultural matrix, aspects of personality
may differ depending upon whether we are reared in the North or the
South, the East or the West, whether we are reared in the country, in a
city or a town, whether we have grown up in the slums or in the best
residential section, whether our early life is spent in a house or an
apartment; whether our parents are rich or poor, together or separated,
cultured or uncultured, religious or irreligious; whether we go to a
standard, substandard or superior school; whether we have, or do not
have, close friends; whether they conform, or fail to conform, to the
mores of our culture; and so on.

Such socio-cultural influences are focused upon a child from the moment
of birth and they continue to influence him all the days of his
life.[^1]

There are many instinctive activities which can generally be shaped and
moulded by environmental conditions. Thus for the development of the
creative aspect of these activities, it is necessary to alter and
improve before anything else those conditions which can reinforce or
weaken these essential activities. Also, from an educational angle and
from the viewpoint of influence on habits, the effects of every human
action must be properly analysed in order to understand how a certain
inclination may be reinforced or checked.

From the viewpoint of laying the foundations of emotional growth and
moulding a proper social environment, the years of childhood are the
most important formative years. The early training is imparted through
parents and other close relatives within the family. Right conduct and
speech on the part of the teachers have a decisive impact on determining
the pattern of the child's life and in contributing to the development
of his personality and the blossoming of his inner capabilities.

On the contrary, improper and unprincipled methods of training harm the
development of the child's personality and repress his inner capacities.
The young seedling that has recently come out of the ground can easily
be bent and made to grow in any direction that one wishes. The beauty
and grace of the future tree depends on the attention paid to its
development during the period when it is still a young plant.

Similarly, the direction of development of personality can be determined
in the early years of life and the future personality of the child
formed by providing proper conditions and means. Hence it is possible to
picture the future personality of a child and the type of his
psychological reactions to adverse conditions that he may encounter by
studying the conditions of his family and his situation in it.

The cause of the backwardness and stunted growth of an individual or
society in life should be sought in the shortcomings of their
personality. Today, specialists doing research on personality, in some
respects, also pay attention to deeper factors.

The extent of a man's intelligence and problem-solving ability is
revealed during critical situations. Those who also pay attention to
their inner reactions in their decisions and activities attain a greater
sense of self-assurance and independence and acquire a greater
confidence in their own personality. As a result they are more efficient
and effective than others who pay greater attention to external factors.
Exclusive attention to external factors leads one not to pay the due
attention to his own self. Thought and carefulness play an effective
role in the development of the mind and intelligence and the edification
of personality and give additional worth and dignity to one's social
visage.

At a time when shallow and superficial people are after the satisfaction
of their vain desires and aims, endeavouring to fulfil them by resorting
to various kinds of means, the person with higher goals becomes keener
in his pursuit of spiritual delights by relying on the power of his
intellect. Therefore, those who possess the power of thought and an
active intellect and benefit from every opportunity to pursue their
worthy and sublime thoughts, are nearer to true happiness in this world.

Schopenhauer says:

A calm temperament, optimism, energy and vigour are the most important
factors responsible for man's happiness.

A wise man even in a state of isolation can enjoy the sweetest of
moments with the means of his thoughts and fancies, whereas the ignorant
man, no matter how much he should vary his diversions and undertake
enormous expenditures, cannot free himself from the malaise that
tortures his body and soul. The optimistic and patient man can in times
of penury conduct his life with contentment and forbearance, whereas the
greedy man, even if he should possess all the riches in the world, is
always downcast and dissatisfied.

The man of vigorous thought and sound intellect refrains from
superficial and transitory pleasures, to attain which the people of the
world kill themselves.

Socrates that intellectual, once on observing the ornamental stuff that
was put on exhibition remarked: "How many numberless things exist in
this world of which man has no need." Hence the most important factor
effective in the happiness of men is personality.[^2]

Personality should not be considered as possessing a single dimension or
measured with a single criterion and standard. Such a wrong approach is
hazardous and leads us away from facts. Many people when confronted with
a certain inadequacy or defect neglect the wonderful compensating power
of the other dimensions of their personality and equate the inadequacy
of one of its dimensions as the defect of the total personality. Such a
baseless notion drives them into a debilitating anguish, a condition
that may further result in irremediable harms and irreparable dangers.

Many historical crises and much ruthless bloodshed in history have been
the outcome of harmful prejudices based on a wrong conception of
personality in which a single dimension is made the sole criterion. An
unfounded pride inspired by such prejudice has led to many regrettable
events in the course of history.

Many people, while possessing certain remarkable abilities, suffer from
a deficiency in certain matters. This inadequacy becomes a hindrance in
their activity and progress. At times they ascribe their psychological
inadequacies to a bad luck, thus holding other factors responsible for
their own weakness. As a consequence, they carry the burden of this
weakness throughout their lives, whereas with a measure of will and
effort they could overcome that inadequacy and strengthen their
spiritual values.

As long as you continue to rationalise your own inadequacies and allow
ruinous thoughts to occupy your mind, you shall be reinforcing them. Any
success in this matter depends directly on the extent one is able to
take a serious decision, for the possibilities of developing oneself are
unlimited and promise extraordinary results. On the level of ideation,
the important point is what kind of person one aspires to become. This
reality is revealed with transparent clarity in times of life when one
has to make a critical decision, selecting a single course from among
the various alternatives that occur to the mind.

There is always an intense conflict going on among the human urges and
instincts. Each trying to pull us in a direction different from that of
another- Thought and reflection resolve this conflict and replace these
divergent goals with one integrated objective.

It should be remembered that there does not exist a finished and final
personality behind the character, conduct and activities of a person.
Rather, it is constituted of non-permanent and complicated habits and
behavioural modes that gradually fall into mutual harmony with one
another. Whenever there arises a new conflict between the urges, the
mind endeavours to establish a kind of balance and equilibrium between
them and to bring about a state of truce.

For this purpose, it sometimes brings about a compromise between the
various urges and thereby obtains at least a temporary state of peace
and satisfaction. Just like the physiological mechanisms that
automatically come into action for establishing an equilibrium in the
body whenever there occurs the smallest amount of disturbance, the mind,
too, acts to resolve the complicated inner problems and avert obvious
dangers by resorting to the means at its command.

For the purpose of achievement of mental balance and peace in a
disturbed and baffled mind, there exist certain ways some of which are
reasonable and satisfactory and some others that are irrational as well
as harmful.

The psychologists offer the following analysis in this regard:

An effective way of averting danger is to encounter and face mental
conflicts and their consequences with utmost candidness and courage and
reduce the intensity of this conflict and the pressure of some of the
urges, thus bringing about such a reconciliation among them that they
can enter the arena of consciousness without causing any trouble.

But often we cannot find an ideal solution for the resolution of these
mental conflicts and are forced to take resort in such means as
repression, introversion, extroversion, and self-deception.

Sometimes the mental conflicts remain unknown and indistinct, or they do
not come to one's attention. In this case, they give rise to a
particular kind of behaviour that does not harmonise at all with one's
personality and the person concerned has no knowledge of this
disharmony. As a result, his consciousness and self-perception get
divided into two different streams, none of which is in harmony with the
other, making the person appear double-faced and odd to others.

Thoughts, plans and urges are always in a state of conflict and
instability in the human mind. Those who have a divided personality
privately act in an incredible manner. The politicians who always scream
and pretend to defend the working class belong to this group. "We should
alleviate the hardships of the toiling class", they proclaim, but as
soon as they succeed, they take measures which make the life of workers
a thousand times gloomier and more difficult. To this group belong all
those who have two different ways of thinking and have two conflicting
personalities.[^3]

The Basic Role of Spirituality in Education
-------------------------------------------

The vital role of education as the supreme factor responsible for the
strength and vigour of societies has been admitted by all schools of
thought. It is not possible to ignore its fundamental role in the
welfare of individual men. However, what is crucial is the real meaning
of 'education' as well as the educational principles and criteria that
are acknowledged as standards for evaluating the individual's
intellectual and spiritual personality and applied to guide human beings
to a free and happy life.

Since man is made of the two constituents of spirit and body, we require
an educational principle that may harmonise his bodily urges with the
spirit. This principle can either be one based on religion or one that
is a product of the human mind. When we compare the two, we clearly
observe the primary and authentic character of the educational principle
based on religion.

That is because the religious motive is innate in man's nature and is
evident in him before he becomes the victim of various kinds of
blindness. If there be no external factor to obstruct the course of his
innate religious inclination, early in life its radiance illuminates
man's heart and conscience. As a result, he makes himself conform to
this inner urge, and with the increasing awareness of this hidden power
he becomes ever more compliant to its dictates.

On the other hand, the philosophers, with their divergent perceptions of
facts cannot attain a unanimity of opinion regarding education and man's
spiritual refinement. And even if supposedly such a unanimity were
attainable, that cannot, as a matter of principle, serve as a means of
educating the masses who are incapable of understanding philosophical
discourses.

That is because the force of moral restraint should emerge from the
depths of the human spirit in order to meet the demand of man's innate
urges; otherwise the prescriptions of ethical philosophy, being a
man-made product, are incapable of penetrating to the hidden reality
that lies at the core of man's being and are thus inadequate for
educating individuals and leading them to a life of felicity.

Even for individuals who accept to abide by them, these man-made rules
would be a tiresome burden to be carried about. Hence, on this basis, we
must admit the superiority of the religious principle-which is rooted in
the depths of man's inner being and conscience and is an eternal reality
that lies at the centre of his innate nature-over all other methods that
have been suggested in the field of education, and adopt it in order
that human endeavour may attain its desired goals.

It was through the admission of the pre-eminence of this principle that
man found a convinced faith in his genuine duties before humanity fell
into the captivity of materialism. As a consequence he became intensely
committed to it, and all the most sublime of human souls in the course
of history have discovered the delight resulting from compliance to its
commands and obeyed it with dedication.

Briefly, this is the same path as has been shown by the prophets and
revealed scriptures, which allows human nature to flow in its true
channel and satisfies all the aspects of man's being. Its objective is
no other than to guide human nature to its goal of eternal felicity.
Hence, if this primary principle be made the basis of education, all
individuals would be able to advance on the path of development and
perfection in its light and remain secure from every kind of deviation.

A glance at the people who lead a mechanistic existence-a phenomenon of
this perverse era-reveals the fact that despite the remarkable
advancements made by man in the field of science and the many
breakthroughs made in the knowledge of physical nature and in
unravelling its mysteries, he has, unfortunately, undergone a retrograde
and decadent course in regard to the knowledge of himself. Not only
this, he has failed to rescue his world-which is his only nursery and
place of development- from devastation and wretchedness; rather, his
multifarious sciences themselves have become a means of its destruction
and chaos. Moreover, the human spirit itself has fallen captive to
profound ignorance in the valley of an illusory civilisation.

The Western world has made man a means of its goals of
industrialisation, and it takes what is means for an end in itself. As a
consequence it has created a society based either on the principle of
conflict on the plane of the individual or that of conflict among social
classes. None of these two kinds of societies are worthy of man. Man
cannot attain his true humanity without resolving the contradiction
between his own being and civilisation.

Eric Fromm writes:

Modern man's feeling of isolation and powerlessness is increased still
further by the character which all his human relationship have assumed.
The concrete relationship of one individual to another has lost its
direct and human character and has assumed a spirit of manipulation and
instrumentality. In all social and personal relations the laws of the
market are the rule. It is obvious that the relationship between
competitors has to be based on mutual human indifference...

Not only the economic but also the personal relations between men have
this character of alienation; instead of relations between human beings,
they assume the character of relations between things. But perhaps the
most important and the most devastating instance of this spirit of
instrumentality and alienation is the individual's relationship to his
own self. Man does not only sell commodities, he sells himself and feels
himself to be a commodity. The manual labourer sells his physical
energy; the businessman, the physician, the clerical employee, sell
their "personality."

They have to have a "personality" if they are to sell their products or
services. This personality should be pleasing, but besides that its
possessor should meet a number of other requirements: he should have
energy, initiative, this, that, or the other, as his particular position
may require. As with any other commodity it is the market which decides
the value of these human qualities, yes, even their very existence.

If there is no use for the qualities a person offers, he has none, just
as an unsaleable commodity is valueless though it might have its use
value. Thus, then self confidence, the "feeling of self", is merely an
indication of what others think of the person, It is not he who is
convinced of his value regardless of popularity and his success on the
market.[^4]

The Development of Personality in Islamic Thought
-------------------------------------------------

Every existent has an individuality special to itself, and nothing can
possibly be conceived without taking into regard its individuality.
Hence judgements and conditions apply only to an existent that possesses
its own particular individuality. Moreover, the perfection of a being is
realised in its outward and inward aspects only when it has a sensible
as well as a spiritual personality. The sensible and outward personality
of human individuals is evident, but their spiritual personality depends
on certain human qualities and spiritual merits so that their being is
not confined to their sensible personality.

This is true of individuals as well as nations and societies, which with
their specific characteristics are scattered around different parts of
the world. The spiritual personality of any society relates to the
extent of its knowledge of realities and its approach to life.

It is essential for the development of personality to take into
consideration all the human dimensions and potentialities, so that an
overall balance and equilibrium, necessary for a balanced growth, is
achieved and a balanced personality is formed. The Islamic approach in
this regard consists of taking into consideration all the innate
characteristics of man.

It takes into view all his urges and instincts, and with a perfect
knowledge of the capacities that man has been endowed with, it guides
and develops them in a balanced manner. Neither it suppresses any
capacity by diminishing its due role, nor gives any of them an undue
predominance. It determines the extent of each capacity's role by
keeping in view the overall welfare of the human being, so that the
human personality develops in an optimum manner.

The human soul, like everything else in life, in its own orbit and
within the totality that is man, is always in a state of growth and
development in accordance with the laws of its nature. It grows and
develops with every movement that it makes. During childhood years, the
field of imagination is expansive, but the intellect is weak and closer
to the world of the senses than to the world of the spirit. However,
gradually there is a movement from the simple to the complex as he
undertakes bigger tasks. Imagination then mingles with facts and draws
closer to thought and intellection. As a result of this movement, his
maturity and constructive abilities constantly increase.

If this perpetual development does not follow the course of Divine
guidance and is not nourished properly, it inclines towards weakness and
disease, requiring remedial measures. Because in the same way as the
capacity to develop is innate in man, so also there is the vulnerability
to degenerate and decay. Both of them are innate and none of them is
imposed by anything outside the soul, and nature too, despite the
apparent change associated with each of these two opposite directions,
is itself unchangeable.

The guidance provided by Islam is the most sublime and the most valuable
of approaches aimed at the development of personality and sublimation of
nature, as well as mobilisation of the inner constituents of man's being
in conformity with their natural configuration.

In the view of Islam, real development lies in movement towards truth
and in uniting with the Divine glory and beauty. One who has been
brought up and nourished by Islamic principles rejects all misleading
temptations, whether they relate to the servitude to men, or submission
to his own base lusts and desires, or to other power in the world of
creation.

Human beings should develop their personality within the framework of
this objective and elevate their consciousness, because this path of
development and progress has been proposed by someone who is the Creator
of man, Who is well aware of his nature and needs. It is vital for every
person to know the situation of man and the ultimate end of his
existence so that he may discover through this knowledge the role of
man, his relationship to the world, and the frontiers of his
responsibilities.

However, such an awareness must be followed by action and movement and
this knowledge must be transformed into a dynamic force, so that the
inner self is mobilised toward the realisation of the ultimate purpose
assigned to human existence in this celestial plan. It is then that man
can attain to an enduring sublime life commensurate with his divine
destiny.

Islam came to build a unique community that establishes God's law on
earth, a community that should lead humanity and deliver it from deviate
paths and misleading schools of thought that lead it into suffering, a
community with a correct world view, which is the greatest means of
man's progress. It offers a world view which is in tune and harmony with
all the essential constituents of the human personality-i.e. intellect,
thought, emotion, and all other elements of man's being and his
faculties of perception-and is capable of bringing up intellectually and
spiritually as well as from the viewpoint of conduct and action, unique
and magnificent examples of humanity.

It reminds man that the pursuit of lusts leads the soul into a darkness
where his light-the principle that draws him naturally towards human
merit and excellence-is concealed by the enveloping gloom.

Accordingly, it is necessary that man should get rid of this obstructing
darkness if he is to discover his genuine functions and identify the
true and beneficial values, so that he may get a positive view of life
and fulfil his urge for perfection by adopting a sound educational
policy.

Finally, Islam intends to bring up an integrated human personality
which, on the physical plane, utilises all the possibilities offered by
the world of physical nature and on the spiritual plane benefits from
the unlimited opportunities offered by the world of spirit and
immortality. It does not cease reminding the individual that within this
corporeal, earthly frame there is a celestial light, a sacred fire, and
a Divine breath that can raise him to the exalted station of being God's
vicegerent.

The Constructive Role of the Intellect and Faith
------------------------------------------------

Islam considers the faculty of the intellect to have a fundamental role
in the development of human beings and emphasises its employment for
free thought and action throughout life, so that every person may put to
use his powers of cognition in order to realise his genuine humanity.
Nevertheless, it does not place an excessive reliance on this
fundamental element and does not consider it sufficient to extinguish
the flames of desires. The intellect should not play an ineffectual role
in the transitions of life and it must be capable of raising man from
the animal plane to a plane above the rule of instincts and lusts.

From the viewpoint of Islam that which distinguishes man from other
animals is not limited to his perceptual and rational faculties. Rather
it is faith and a special mode of cognition that makes man superior to
all other animals. Here he has been burdened with responsibility by the
system of creation and so, in a way fitting his human functions, he must
employ his faith and cognitive faculties throughout the ups and downs of
life and in the conduct of his individual and social affairs.

For his salvation and happiness man stands in need of a spiritual means
that may give him a clear vision of life. That illuminating agent is
insight in relation to the sacred Essence of God, which is the sole
means that can remove the scales of ignorance and every kind of deviance
from the eyes of the soul and bring about spiritual resurrection.

The faith in God produces many results of a positive character in human
life. It is the source of the individual's freedom and a change that
plays a crucial role in the growth of the human personality- When the
effects of faith in God appear in all the vital functions, there is a
decisive reduction in the pressure of animal urges that helps liberate
the individual from the terrible grip of the carnal self.

That is because faith in the Sustainer makes the individual steadfast in
his resistance to passing corporeal pleasures and expands the soul's
capacities; whereas turning one's back to God and spirituality and
inclining towards such pleasures produces emotional stagnation and the
degeneration of one's spiritual personality, bringing man down from the
sublime station of humanity and moral excellence to the decadent level
of savageness and ignorance.

None of the systems of education that are products of the human mind has
the power and ability to bring under control man's unbridled greed and
psychic deviations, because these new systems of education rely solely
on reason and science.

Max Planck, the well-known German physicist, says;

Mankind in its daily life stands in need of a principle, a principle the
need for which is more pressing than the thirst for scientific
knowledge. It is necessary that man should possess a source of guidance
other than that of pure reason. The law of causality is the guide of
science. It is here that reason should give way to morality, and
scientific knowledge to religious faith.[^5]

Accordingly, as long as the light of guidance does not illuminate the
world's horizons and human hearts are not revived through the growth of
the religious motive, human principles and doctrines cannot bring about
the vigour and sublimity in society necessary for it to shoulder the
burden of civilisation and its crucial responsibilities.

It should be noted that Islam never demands abstinence from the
legitimate pleasures that have been created by God for the benefit of
His creatures. On the one hand the Noble Qur'an declares that it does
not befit the exalted station of humanity that man should get drowned in
the fierce waves of lust, sink into neglect and ignorance of the
realities of life, and curtail the scope of his thought:

***Tempting and pleasing to (short-sighted) people is the love of carnal
lusts-women, children, heaped-up piles of gold and silver, horses of
mark, cattle and tillage. All that is the enjoyment of the present life,
but God-with Him is the fairest resort. (3:14)***

On the other hand, it not only acknowledges the role of material things
in the life of man, but even condemns the negative kind of asceticism
and abstinence from lawful pleasures:

***Say (O Prophet): 'Who has forbidden the ornament of God which He
brought forth for His servants and the good things of His providing?'
Say: 'These in this world are for those who have faith and on the Day of
Resurrection they shall have purer and better than these. 'So do We
expound Our sings for a people who have a clean perception and
knowledge. (7:32)***

Submission to transitory materialistic pleasures amounts to degrading
the faculty of thought and granting them a fundamental role in life. The
glamour of mundane enjoyments draws a veil over the hearts of hollow and
misguided persons lacking will that stops the Diving light from shining
upon it. As a result, they are deprived of thought and constructive
ideas without realising it themselves.

Islam gives to man a wholesome personality, the power of thoughts and a
valuable stability, so that the individual may properly fulfil his basic
role in the making of himself and society and liberate himself from the
bondage of lust without being deprived of bodily pleasures.

The person presented by Islam as a finished product of its education is
a thoughtful human being, positive, active and disciplined, a human
being whose cognition, thoughts and conduct, and, ultimately, all the
aspects of whose life are informed with a peculiar moderation and
harmony. His free and well-developed psyche brings about an inner
balance that not only gives him the capacity not to get submerged in
earthly pleasures and the world of matter but to rise to the most
sublime peaks in its ascent towards its sacred ideal by elevating itself
to a sphere above the gravity of the mundane.

In Islamic teaching, self-purification is the first stage in man's
ascent towards human merit and excellence. The Noble Qur'an mentions it
as the preparatory stage for instruction in knowledge and science-

***It is He Who raised up from among the unlettered Arabs a Messenger
from among them, to recite His signs to them and to purify them (from
the filth of vices and corrupt morals), and to teach them the Book and
the Wisdom, though before that they were all in manifest error.
(62:2)***

This basic principle is a criterion and measure for gauging man's
reality. Knowledge and material power are not worthy criteria for
measuring man's reality, because they are not comprehensive and take
into consideration only a single aspect of that reality.

Obviously the results of any measurement are erroneous to the extent of
the error in the measuring standard. Of course, knowledge is man's
distinctive characteristic, a genuine human product and achievement, and
the foundations of his life rest upon knowledge. But if man should be
rich in respect of the genuine human aspect that lifts him over the
world of the corporeal to a higher realm, he is easily capable of
compensating what he lacks from the viewpoint of knowledge and learning,
whereas knowledge alone cannot compensate for a lack of humanity.

Whenever man has been able to make an ascent through self-purification
and in respect of the human criterion while also benefiting from the
results of science, he has been truly capable of making an all-round
progress on an extensive level.

'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, may peace be upon him, says
concerning the value of self-purification and acquisition of moral
virtues:

*If, supposedly, we did not have to hope for paradise and fear from hell
and had there been no promise of reward or any threat of punishment, it
would still behove us to seek moral virtues and excellences, because the
acquisition of desirable qualities and the practice of virtue leads to
happiness and felicity in life and is one of the important means of
salvation.*[^6]

He also says:

*Dominate your desires before they become violent and defiant, because
if rebellious urges are allowed to grow in their aggressiveness and
obstinacy, they will come to dominate you and pull you in whatever
direction they like. In that case you will lose the power to resist
them.*[^7]

*One who is a slave of his lust is many times more abject than an actual
slave.*[^8]

*One who dominates his desires preserves his human dignity and
worth.*[^9]

Will Durant says:

Our urges and motives are like the wind that drives a sailing ship.
However, the ship's sails should not be left to themselves, in which
case they will carry us like slaves wherever they wish. Everyone in his
lifetime has come across one of those who are caught in the bondage of
greed, lust, or bellicosity.  
 Unrestrained freedom of each quality is self-destructive. You have
heard the story of the sons of Cyrus left free by their nurses to do
anything they wished and who as a result grew up to be base and corrupt
persons. Hence the domination of reason over desires and urges is the
real essence of wisdom and the instrument of self-restraint.
Self-control is the most significant thing necessary for
self-development.[^10]

The locus and criterion of responsibility throughout the Islamic system
is free will. Man has been given the freedom of thought and the freedom
to translate it into action, which is his distinctive characteristic1 so
that he may direct his effort, which is the real driving force behind
progress, in the way of attaining true humanity.

Although man is not free in respect of the urges and drives that
motivate him, he is completely free in regard to the manner in which
they are satisfied. By the means of the will, which governs his acts and
faculties of perception, he can turn to the higher plane of
psychological and intellectual activity and develop an outstanding and
worthy personality for himself, and with a constancy of effort, advance
further each day towards human felicity and a respectable station in
society. Or, on the contrary, he can corrupt and destroy his personality
by nurturing his personal qualities on the basis of conformity to
destructive urges.

Imam al-Sadiq, may peace be upon him, said:

*If two days of someone's life are equal in respect of the development
of higher human qualities, he is a loser in the bargain of his life. The
person whose today is better spent than his yesterday is one who is
worthy of being envied by others. But the one whose every day passes in
the condition of perpetual retrogression is one who is deprived of God's
mercy and favour. And the one who does not find a progress within
himself in respect of spirituality and moral virtues and merits. Such a
person is prone to loss and retrogression, and death is better that life
for a person who treads the path of retrogression.*[^11]

Paul Clement Jagot writes

In order to avoid mental dispersion and the division of personality,
which easily put out the idea of self-control, one must resort to a
scrupulous division of one's time. On the other hand, the ordering of
life according to a premeditated program diminishes impressionability
and prepares the unconscious mind for balanced thought.  
 For this purpose, it is sufficient to let one's imagination delve for
some moments upon the foreseeable tasks of the next day. This can be
done just before going to bed or at some other appropriate time. This
action leads to the formation of an invaluable habit, which is
orderliness.  
 Those who lack this order but do not imagine that they would achieve it
the very first day in a miraculous manner, when they make some kind of
plans to achieve it, observe from the beginning that their habitual
disorderliness vanishes in certain respects in the course of the very
first sessions. As progress follows, it alternately follows a rising and
falling curve.  
 However, this should not be a cause for surprise, for the leading
thoughts, after alternate variations, lead to realisation of the purpose
and create a background of order, which leads to an increase in the
level of daily activity. This increase, together with greater means of
action, broaden one's possibilities with greater fruitfulness,
continuous acquisition of knowledge and more profitable
opportunities.[^12]

The struggle against one's destructive urges and the carnal self is
without doubt a very difficult task. Victory over such inner
inclinations has been considered in the Islamic school of thought as the
most salient sign of an individual's superiority and capability. It is a
matter of great pride for man to be able to begin the program of his
self-development by subjugating his inner urges in order to raise his
personality to the highest levels of sublimity.

Imam al-Sadiq, may peace be upon him, said:

*Before death approaches you and brings about a separation between your
soul and body, restrain your soul from such desires as are harmful for
it. Strive to liberate your soul in the same way as you toil for your
livelihood, for without doubt your soul is entirely depended for its
welfare on your conduct and character.*[^13]

Dr. Alexis Carrel says:

Spontaneous mental growth is always inadequate. Man does not attain
complete mental growth without the intervention of the will. Everyone
knows that the development of muscles and bodily members depends on
conscious effort and one cannot become a champion without regular
exercises.

Similarly, one must make efforts to develop his mental faculties. If the
pupil has no will to learn, the most capable of teachers cannot teach
him anything. The study of a set of morals does not make anyone
righteous, nor does our spirit yield to compulsion.

Like one's character, the formation of personality, as Bergson says,
depends upon one's own efforts. To this end, one must draw upon all
one's physical and spiritual capacities and order one's inner life in an
ideal manner, developing a powerful spirit within himself.

This marvel occurs every day in the course of human history, and it is
mostly from humble families that great men arise, but everyone, learned
or illiterate, poor or rich, young or old, can, if he will, draw upon
the spiritual energy that lies in the depths of his being.[^14]

'Ali, may peace be upon him, said:

*The worst kind of poverty and inadequacy is the deficiency of one's
psyche and personality.*[^15]

That is because spiritual inadequacies lead man more often to
wretchedness and misery than material shortcomings. When the soul
becomes sick and darkness is cast upon it, a wrong mode of thinking and
an unhealthy state of feelings and emotions lead the person into wrong
conduct and behaviour. When that happens, he loses his sense of reality
as well as his inner spiritual vision and abuses his inner creative
powers as well as the available material means.

The development of personality is subject to the criteria of values in
life. The development of personal qualities and merits is also based on
values. Should man pursue purity and moral excellence in a resolute and
steadfast manner, his mind is prepared to accept the qualities of
spiritual purity, and should he be after impurities and moral
defilement, he will advance towards the precipice of destruction. It is
inconceivable that someone who is in pursuit of vice should turn out to
be clean and pure in the end.

If man does not confine his freedom within certain reasonable limits and
keep the arena of his rebellious urges confined within certain bounds,
he will yield to their slavery and they will carry him off in every
direction. Obviously, that means self-abasement and debasing one's human
dignity. This indignity and humiliation keeps him from attaining the
perfection worthy of him, and his spirit and thought will never be able
to make their ascent towards wider and more expansive horizons. He will,
then, lose even the inclination to rise over the plane of corporeal
matters although he may have the sufficient power to make such an
ascent.

The only way to bring about a balance and equilibrium between the ascent
of the soul and the pressure and heaviness that pulls the soul down
towards decadence and fall is establishment of a steady and enduring
bond between God and man, for the greater the degree of one's separation
from God, the stronger is the inclination towards deviance in his being.

Islam sows the seeds of god-fearing and piety in the heart of every
person. At the same time it does not permit within its realm any
separation between faith and conduct so that he may always keep God in
view, in his thought, perception and conduct-a God aware of all the
secrets of his heart. Moreover, it stirs up the love of God within his
being and the desire to seek His good pleasure.

As long as human virtues lack a firm and stable basis, they can have no
firm foothold. Faith is the natural companion of virtue, into which it
breaths life and gives it sincerity and steadiness. In this way everyone
is made to feel that purity and rectitude are things that must be
established within his inner self, not some abstract ideals relating to
human merit and a positive personality that exists only in the
imagination while one's conduct continues in some other course without
realising any spiritual benefits in actual life.

In order to keep the waves of desires in check, Islam always makes use
of the power of self-restraint. This orderly, aware and purposive
restraint involves the soul's accounting of itself on the basis of
acknowledged principles based on wisdom and design. By this means it
brings about a state of harmony among the divergent urges of the
individual, as an independent personality as well as a member of
society, and imposes such limits upon them as to stabilise the
individual's position vis-à-vis society and the society's in relation to
the individual, whereas man himself has always given precedence to one
of these over the other, sacrificing the individual for social ends or
neglecting society for the sake of individual benefit.

When such a harmony comes to exist in the human being, both the
individual and society are set in order and all people become balanced
in their thoughts and conduct and everyone will carry out his duties in
accordance with his God-given nature.

But when the vision is obstructed and thought stagnates, man is kept
from perceiving realities. Then he can no longer realise the defects of
his personality and his inadequacies, to the extent that if he were to
come to know them he would be struck with amazement or even recoil in
disdain.

'Ali, may peace be upon him, said:

*If one were to realise the defects and shortcomings of his personality,
he would regard them with disdain and aversion.*[^16]

Schopenhauer says:

In the same way as man does not feel the weight of his own body, he does
not notice his own ugly habits, unseemly acts, and unworthy conduct. On
the contrary he is always attentive to the defects and shortcomings of
others. Others, like a mirror, reflect our defects and shortcomings, but
we don't notice them and imagine that the image we observe in the mirror
belongs to someone else.[^17]

Hence one must awaken one's soul from its slumber so that it may open
its eyes and see facts. This awakening makes a most wonderful impact on
the being of man and in this state he feels as if he has found a new
life and his being has undergone a renewal. That is because the opening
of the soul's eyes affects one's entire life with all its great expanse
and sets a decadent personality back on the course of development.

'Ali, may peace be upon him, describes the significant role of thought
and contemplation in these words:

*Accustom yourself to thought and contemplation, because that will
deliver you from misguidance and reform your character and
conduct.*[^18]

*The contemplation of good actions leads man to perform good acts.*[^19]

*The people's immersion in thought concerning something is the
preparatory stage for that thing's coming into existence.*[^20]

Dr. Marden, writing about thought and its beneficial results, says:

In this world thought is the regulator of everything. This fact did not
come to light for a long time and was hidden from common view. When
people realised the significance of thought, they regarded it with
veneration and acclaim.

However, they imagined it to be a fixed and unchanging power exclusively
possessed by exceptional and rare minds. It was only in recent years
that the art of thinking has been subjected to study and research and
attracted the attention of the populace. These studies have shown that
we can modify our moral characteristics with the help of thought, alter
the external factors of our life-or at least the influence of these
factors on ourselves-and, as a result, attain happiness and success. In
any case, the educative possibilities of thought are unlimited and its
results are inexhaustible.

Every thought is a stroke of the chisel that carves out the marble of
life. Hence we must decide to focus our thinking on nobler ends, utilise
it for worthy goals, and muster all our will power to implement this
resolution.

With all your conscious faculties you must be convinced that thought has
absolute sovereignty over your fortunes, and that every thought has its
own share in shaping your destiny. You must believe that if you direct
your thoughts in a worthy direction, good fortune will come to you in a
very natural and easy manner.

The role played by thought in the material and spiritual flow of life is
gradually becoming ever more evident, and those who disagree with one
another on various issues are unanimous on this matter. The results of
practical experience have convinced the most skeptical of persons of the
truth of this matter and technical experiments have further reinforced
the views of thinkers in this regard.[^21]

The Harms of Evil Thoughts
--------------------------

In the same way as positive and sublime thoughts lead man to perform
fruitful actions, so also filthy thoughts drive man towards impurity and
defilement. For man is a thinking creature; he first thinks and then
translates his thoughts into action.

When improper thoughts make way into the depths of man's being and
spread like weeds, positive and good thoughts, which are like beautiful
plants, are gradually eliminated and their place is taken by evil
thoughts. As a result of these satanic thoughts one is prepared to
commit ugly acts that blacken the heart and destroy one's life.

Every tree develops and grows gradually and yields its sweet or bitter
fruits. An evil thought, too, is like a seed that will not yield any
fruit except and evil deed. Man involuntarily entertains and pursues
evil thoughts and with the passage of time they gradually run their
roots in all corners of his soul and grow into a big and strong tree.

The attainment of happiness and felicity, however, requires a soul at
peace and a heart that is pure. If the soul's window is closed on ugly
thoughts, room is created in it for the growth of good thoughts.

Some great man was asked, "Where can happiness be found?" He replied,
"In the beauty of human thought." Hence one must block the stream at its
source and stop improper thoughts from entering one's mind. Further, one
must accustom oneself to thinking about fruitful and worthy matters.

'Ali, may peace be upon him, said:

*Nurture in yourselves a love of contemplation and accustom yourselves
to seeking forgiveness, for that cleanses you of sins and impurities and
increases your reward.*[^22]

*Habituate yourself to purity of intention and sincerity of purpose, so
that you may succeed in your efforts and endeavours.*[^23]

Although the personal qualities that have already been moulded are not
so simple to alter, but if one makes a persisting effort to eradicate
undesirable characteristics that lead the personality into decadence and
destruction, given the significant capacity of the human being to
acquire desirable habits, human merits and virtues gradually take roots
in the mind in a natural manner.

In order to attain to noble qualities one must concentrate his attention
on commendable traits, for through self-suggestion of such virtues and
meritorious qualities and their development one can obtain brilliant
results.

Paul Clement Jagot writes:

Self-suggestion arranges another array of troops in the battle against
habit, instead of itself launching an attack, it introduces certain
ideas into the unconscious which are opposed to those originated by a
particular habit. In this way, it produces a gradual mental sublimation
in the vital faculties.

The first point to be kept in view for achieving this goal is to pay
close attention to the fact that every habit can be abandoned.

"I can liberate myself totally from its evil, and I shall achieve my
goal"; this one should constantly go on repeating to oneself. In
accordance with the law of self-suggestion this conviction gradually
takes on an absolute aspect as a result of repetition. The unconscious
records the above suggestion, and removes the unpleasant feeling of
unavoidable compulsion and futility of resistance that is produced as a
result of enslavement to habit and whose futility can be proved through
sound experience.

If I analyse the apparent satisfaction produced in me when yielding to
an (undesirable) habit, I will be convinced that this mental
satisfaction is insignificant and it would be better instead to enjoy
avoiding the harms that always accompany this kind of erroneous
conduct.[^24]

The Relation between Goals and the Development of Personality
-------------------------------------------------------------

That which leads man towards his sublime station and a well-developed
personality is the possession of worthy goals in life. The higher these
goals are, the more developed his personality will be.

Without doubt, Islam offers goals that are vast and a horizon that is
wide and all-inclusive. The Muslims who grew up under the sublime
teachings of the Noble Prophet of Islam, may God bless him and his
Household, were able to establish a profound relationship with the
Source of existence and to purify their souls. Through this means they
attained to sublime and distinguished personalities. Basically, it were
these worthy and invaluable goals that constantly drove them onwards.

Allport, a well-known American psychologist, writes:

Intentions, as I use the term, are complex peculiar characteristics of
personality. Intentional characteristics represent above all else the
individual's primary modes of addressing himself to the future. As such
they select stimuli, guide inhibitions and choices, and have much to do
with the process of adult becoming...  
 Personality is not what one has, but rather the projected outcome of
his growth. Similarly, Spranger views the character of an individual in
terms of his approximation to an ideal type (an ultimately
self-consistent value system). It is the orientation that is important.
From this point of view we may modify slightly our contention that
complex levels of structure influence becoming. More precisely stated,
it is the unfinished structure that has this dynamic power. A finished
structure is static, but a growing structure, tending toward a given
direction of closure, has the capacity to subsidiate and guide conduct
in conformity with its movement.... To summarise: the most comprehensive
units in personality are broad intentional dispositions future pointed.
These characteristics are unique for each person, and tend to attract,
guide, inhibit the more elementary units to accord with the major
intentions themselves...

To feel oneself meaningfully linked to the whole of Being is not
possible before puberty. This fact helps to explain the one-sided
emphasis we encounter in many psychological discussions of religion.
Becoming has been much more thoroughly studied for the years preceding
puberty than for adolescent and adult years. It is, therefore,
understandable that the factor influencing the religion of childhood
should loom large in our present view: familiarity, dependence,
authority, wishful thinking and magical practice.

Since, however, the process of becoming continues throughout life, we
rightly expect to find the fully developed sentiment only in the adult
reaches of personality. The adult mind, provided that it is still
growing, stretches its rational capacities as far as it can with the
logic of induction, deduction, and a weighing of probabilities. While
the intellect continues to exert itself, the individual finds that he
needs to build aspiring defences against the intellect's almost certain
failure.

He learns that to surmount the difficulties of a truculent world he
needs also faith and love. Thus religion, engaging as it does reason,
faith, and love, becomes for him morally true. Most religious people
claim that it is also metaphysically true because they feel that outer
revelation and mystical experience have brought them supernatural
assurance. Thus the warrant for certitude comes from the total
orientation that the person attains in his quest for a comprehensive
belief system capable of relating him to existence as a whole....

Every man whether he is religiously inclined or not, has his own
ultimate presuppositions. He finds he cannot live his life without them,
and for him they are true. Such suppositions, whether they be called
ideologies, philosophies, notions, or merely hunches about life, exert
creative pressure upon all conduct that is subsidiary to them (which is
to say, upon nearly all of a man's conduct).

The error of the psychoanalytic theory of religion-to state the error in
its own terminology-lies in locating religious belief exclusively in the
defensive functions of the ego rather than in the core and centre and
substance of the developing ego itself. While religion certainly
fortifies the individual against the inroads of anxiety, doubt, and
despair, it also provides the forward intention that enables him at each
state of his becoming to relate himself meaningfully to the totality of
Being.[^25]

The Interrelatedness of Psychological and Physiological Activities
------------------------------------------------------------------

Scientific research and experiments have proved that psychological
diseases affect the body, which also suffers from the sickness. On the
contrary, the psyche is also affected by the body's chemical reactions.
This indicates a reciprocal relation between psychic life and the life
of the body.

Although this scientific theory is ascribed to the last few decades,
both the points it contains have been explicitly mentioned in Islamic
traditions and have a history of fourteen centuries.

The Commander of the Faithful, may peace be upon him, says about the
effects of psychological ailments on the body:

*It is surprising to what extent envious persons are negligent of the
health of their bodies.*[^26]

*Grief and sadness have a wasting effect on the body.*[^27]

*Whoever submits to his anger and does not control it, advances towards
premature death and destruction.*[^28]

The Noble Messenger, may peace and God's benedictions be upon him and
his Progeny, states the relation between the body's physiological
processes and one's spiritual and moral character and disposition in
these words:

*Do not deaden your hearts by the means of excessive eating and
drinking, for man's spiritual condition is like a farm, which is
destroyed when flooded with excessive water.*[^29]

*One who gets accustomed to excessive eating and drinking becomes
hard-hearted and lacking in compassion.*[^30]

The Commander of the Faithful, may peace be upon him, also says:

*The heaviness of food in the stomach has an evil effect on a man's
intelligence.*[^31]

The well-known scholar, Dr. Carrel, says:

Mental activities evidently depend on physiological activities. Organic
modifications are observed to correspond to the succession of the states
of consciousness. Inversely, psychological phenomena are determined by
certain functional states of the organs. The whole consisting of body
and consciousness is modifiable by organic as well as by mental factors.
Mind and organism commune in man, like form and marble in a statue. One
cannot change the form without breaking the marble.

... Everyone knows how human personality is modified by diseases of the
liver, the stomach, and the intestines. Obviously, the cells of the
organs discharge into the bodily fluids certain substances that react
upon our mental and spiritual functions.

... The dependence of mental activities and physiological functions does
not agree with the classical conception that places the soul exclusively
in the brain. In fact, the entire body appears to be the substratum of
mental and spiritual energies. Thought is the offspring of the endocrine
glands as well as of the cerebral cortex.

The integrity of the organism is indispensable to the manifestation of
consciousness. Man thinks, invents, loves, suffers, admires, and prays
with his brain and all his organs.[^32]

Gardner Murphy, a contemporary psychologist, writes:

It is only the last few decades that it has become quite clear to what
extent it is possible for emotions and attitudes, or, in other words,
loves and antipathies, to be a reflection of the chemical reactions
one's body.

Psycho-physiology clearly shows the bilateral and reciprocal relation
between mental and physical life; that is, the functional relationship
between the body's chemical reactions and mental states on the one hand,
and between mental stimuli and physiological states on the other. Today
we can no longer speak of the body and its vital chemical system as the
fundamental factor governing psychological life. Rather, we should
consider psychological factors as regulating the body's chemical system.

Or perhaps it would be better to say, as pointed out by specialists who
have closely examined the problem, that throughout we are confronted
with a psycho-physiological unit, in which sometimes the psychological
aspect and sometimes the psychological and chemical aspect should
receive the primary attention.

The dictum 'know thyself' today does not mean as it did in ancient times
the unilateral dominance of a non-material principle over a matter
devoid of life and consciousness, nor does it consist in a belief
similar to that of the nineteenth-century materialists, who would say
that the brain secretes thought in the same manner as the liver secretes
bile. Today we look forward to an increasing recognition and acceptance
of mutual co-operation between the psychological and chemical approaches
to the study of man.[^33]

[^1]: Munn, Norman Leslie, Psychology: The Fundamentals of Human
Adjustment, pp. 258.

[^2]: Schopenhauer, quoted in Afkar-e Schopenhauer, p. 52.

[^3]: Strecker, E. A., Appel. K. E., Wilkerforce, John, Persian trans.
Rawanshinasi baraye hameh, p. 209.

[^4]: Fromm, Eric, The Fear of Freedom (London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul) pp. 102-103.

[^5]: Planck, Max, 'Ilm beh kuja mi ravad, p. 234.

[^6]: Adab al-nafs, vol. 1, p. 26.

[^7]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar al-hikam, p. 498.

[^8]: Ibid., p.510.

[^9]: Al-Nuri, Mustadrak al-Wasa'il, vol. 2, p. 287.

[^10]: Durant, Will, The Pleasures of Philosophy, Persian trans.
Ladhdhat-e falsafeh, p. 228.

[^11]: Al-Saduq, Ma'ani al-akhbar, p. 342.

[^12]: Jagot, Paul Clement, Theories et procedes de l'hypnotisme course
d 'entainement experimental, Pers. trans. Talqin bi nafs by Mahmud
Nawa'i (Tehran, 1362), p. 96.

[^13]: Al-Nuri, Mustadrak, vol. 2, p. 310.

[^14]: Carrel, Alexis, Reflexions sur la conduite de la vie. Pers.
trans., Rah wa rasm-e zindagi, pp. 61.

[^15]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar, p. 446.

[^16]: Ibid. p. 604.

[^17]: Schopenhauer, op. cit., p. 93.

[^18]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar, p. 481.

[^19]: Ibid. p. 396

[^20]: Ibid. p. 51.

[^21]: Marden, Orison Swett, The Victorious Attitude, Pers. trans.
Piruzi-ye fikr, pp. 7, 8, 10.

[^22]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar, p. 192.

[^23]: Ibid. p. 492.

[^24]: Jagot, Paul Clement, op. cit., p. 102.

[^25]: Allport, Gordon Willard, Becoming: Basic Considerations for a
Psychology of Personality (New Haven & London: Yale University Press
1955), pp. 89-90, 94-96.

[^26]: Nahj al-balaghah, ed. Dr. Subhi al-Salih, p. 508.

[^27]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar, p. 654.

[^28]: Ibid. p. 35.

[^29]: Nahj as-fasahah p. 521.

[^30]: Ibid. p. 573.

[^31]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar, p. 24.

[^32]: Carrel, Alexis, Man the Unknown (Bombay: Wilco Publishing House),
pp. 138, 139, 140.

[^33]: Murphy, Gardner, Human Potentialities (?), Raz-e karishmahha pp.
295, 297, 298.


