Chapter 4: Man in the Midst of Duties
=====================================

Living together with other members of his species is one of man's
natural needs. His innate tendency for collective life is an independent
factor that causes him to establish communities.

Human society, too, revolves around the variety and disparity amongst
individuals and classes, and in it every individual shoulders particular
responsibilities and duties which he must carry out properly. The system
of society runs properly when everyone has faith in the responsibilities
accepted by him in his work environment and his activities do not
trespass the limits of those duties.

The animals do not have to abide by any limits or controls in their
life. But man, on the contrary, is surrounded by various kinds of
regulations and restrictions, to the extent that they may be said to
encompass all the aspects of his life. It is these limits and
regulations that distinguish man's life from that of animals.

Every movement and pause creates a certain duty for man and this system
of duties regulates human life. In a word, duty is something that
extends from the earliest to the latest stages of life and at no point
is it possible to draw a line of separation between a person and his
multifarious duties. As long as there is any capacity, it is accompanied
by duty, and it is only death, when it catches hold of a person, that
can close the file of his duties.

Apart from the precepts and laws of religion, man as a matter of
principle is by his nature also bound by laws. His relation to values
and norms, his characteristic instincts and emotions-all these give rise
to duties. Although there may be scattered motives behind the
performance of duty, it may be said that the universal laws of reason
constitute the axis for the determination of duty. Adherence to the
precepts of religion also depends on compliance with rationally inferred
laws, because, in social matters and issues of life, the rules and
precepts of religion are an elaboration of general rational truths.

That which is difficult is not the identification of duty but rather its
observance in practice, which is harder than is ordinarily imagined. In
this path, only by the means of a firm and steadfast faith, self-denial
and vigilance can one attain the goal.

In the same way as social environment provides the ground for the
development and growth of human merits, it also provides an atmosphere
conductive to the emergence of many vices. The development and growth of
society stagnates and comes to a halt when every individual transgresses
the bounds of his duties and neglects his major responsibilities.

Every plant needs particular conditions in order to have a sustained
growth and grow to its fully developed stage. However, that which is
essential for the growth and development of society is not its
geographic location or material conditions; what it requires are
particular educational and spiritual conditions that may serve as
foundations of a worthy and progressive society.

In a society where the spirit of duty-consciousness rules over the minds
of people, purity and righteousness become visible in their intentions
and conduct, and in their cognition, thought and practice in all walks
of life. Obviously, in such societies aggression, betrayal and violation
of others' rights do not flourish nor are given an opportunity to do so.
Rather, every individual there opposes and resists vice and crime and
prevents them from spreading.

We are not led into trouble except as a result of neglecting our various
duties and failing to carry them out. Many people are parsimonious in
regard to themselves and their energies despite all the various kinds of
means they have at their disposal. For this reason they shun their
responsibilities and avoid the tasks which in their view would deprive
them partly of their joys and comfort. They are not inclined to devote a
part of their time to matters that will be of benefit to others.

This group of people, whose horizon of thought and whose scope of
activities is always narrow and limited and revolves around personal and
petty matters, become accustomed to these spiritual qualities. That is
why they can never undertake great and worthy tasks or exhibit any
ability or personal accomplishment in any matter of consequence.

As against these is the other group of persons who never take lightly
their responsibilities under any condition. They are never shaken or
upset by the vicissitudes, reversals and ups and downs of life. They are
always prepared to welcome responsibility and generously offer their
efforts for the benefit of humanity.

They think that the accomplishment of every beneficial and useful task,
however demanding on one's effort and time it may be, is the most
beneficial thing to do. Accordingly, the wiser a person and the more
profound his insight, the greater is his interest and inclination for
the fulfilment of duty.

Struggle for Realisation of Higher Ideals
-----------------------------------------

That which gives worth to life is struggle for the sake of realisation
of sublime and fruitful ideals. One must resolve to reach a station
worthy of humanity and make every possible effort to develop himself,
fulfil his duty, and offer ungrudging service to society. In the sweet
words of Hafiz:

Though the world's wont, like the bud, is to be close-fisted, yet you,
like the spring breeze, be an opener of knots.

Dr. Schweitzer writes:

Often we hear people say, "I want to do some good in this world but the
obligations of life and work are so exacting that I cannot score any
success in this regard. I am sunk to my ears in the petty chores of life
and there doesn't arise any opportunity for my life to become
meaningful." This is a very common-and dangerous-mistake. Everyone finds
opportunities at his doorstep to help others, so that his spirit may
rise to the occasion and attain peace and joy. In order to attain this
joy it is not at all necessary to neglect one's ordinary duties or to
perform some dazzling feat.

I call this spiritual work your 'second duty'. All that you must do is
to make use of the many opportunities that arise and carry out this
duty. You will get plenty of excellent opportunities in this path and
acquire a perfect ability to make use of them. At this point all the
energies stored up in your being will swing into action.

That which the world needs today, and lacks, are people devoted to
fulfilling others' needs. In this work, done for the sake of others,
both the helper and the helped are blessed.

... We are gradually losing our personality under the strains of modern
society. The urge for creativity and self-assertion is killed in us.
Accordingly, the attainment of genuine civilisation is delayed. The big
mistake of every one of us is that we travel blindfolded through life
and do not notice the good opportunities that arise. Once we open our
eyes and look around we will observe many people who need our help, riot
for big things but for very small things.

In altruism and sacrifice we must invest the best part of ourselves. The
coin that a widow gives, which is all that she owns, has greater worth
than all the donations of the rich. We often hear people say, "Were I
rich I would do many things for people". But one can be rich in respect
of love and charity. If we discover the real needs of those who require
help and take steps to meet them, we would have spent the best part of
ourselves in this path, which is love and compassion for others and
which all the money in the world cannot equal.

You might think that my life in the equatorial forests of Africa is
something wonderful. But you should know that you can live a more
wonderful life by remaining where you are and, by impelling your soul to
effort, engage in a thousand kinds of good and kindly actions. This task
demands a spirit of sacrifice and courage and a strength of will, and
the determination to love, which is the greatest test of a human being.
But you must know that it is in this second and difficult duty that you
can find true happiness.[^1]

Man is free either to obey or disobey the commands of his conscience.
Every man is the master of his soul and his will. He may choose
rectitude and purity, liberate himself from the bondage of lust and
endless desires, make chivalrousness his motto, and abstain from
injustice and cruelty. These qualities and virtues are within his reach
and he may adorn himself with them through persistent effort. He may
also take an opposite path, the path of decadence and vice, and dive
into the ocean of variegated lusts and pleasures.

The power of will is a heavenly gift which must never be left idle or
used for filthy purposes and inhuman goals instead of being employed in
the path of duty. The lack of will and determination is the biggest
obstacle in the way of fulfilment of duties. The employment of will
power under the guidance of conscience and in the struggle against
carnal urges and desires, against egoism and moral vices, is a difficult
task at the beginning and requires self-denying effort. But through
determination, persistence and perseverance, the soul gradually becomes
stronger and its moral characteristics improve. Then, the performance of
duty becomes a quite normal and easy matter.

If one's feeling of duty-consciousness be strong, he would not retreat
in the face of hardship and obstacles. Even when such a person's effort
remains fruitless due to obstacles, his conscience at least would be at
peace and he would be able to hold his head high before himself because
his defeat and failure have been for the sake of duty.

A father gives the following counsel to his son:

My son let it be that you remain poor and penniless while others gather
wealth and get rich in front of your eyes through deceit and treachery.
Lead your life without position and glory and let others get into high
positions through obsequiousness and servility. Put up with misery and
loss and let others satisfy their desires by the means of flattery and
sycophancy.

Refrain from associating with big people, to get near whom others are
killing themselves. It is better for you to put on the garment of virtue
and piety so that when your head turns white there isn't any blot on
your honour and good name. At that time, thank God and surrender to
death with an easy mind and a happy heart.[^2]

In the same way as admonishment, reproof and censure are beneficial in
the struggle against vices, so also appreciation, commendation and
encouragement are undeniably effective in producing better motivation
for work and performance of duty. Evil is the state of a nation in which
traitors are encouraged and worthy and duty-conscious servants are
censured, humiliated and driven away from sensitive positions in
society. Where deceit and imposture bring success and those who are
totally devoid of human values attain their cherished goals, a nation in
which those who wish to fulfil their human mission remain deprived as
long as they continue to live in purity-in such a society there remain
utterly no grounds for the growth of moral excellence.

Obviously, in such an environment the attraction and inclination for
deceit, corruption and hypocrisy make way, on an extensive level, into
the depths of the people's souls, and vice and corruption rapidly take
the place of virtues and decent morals. In such an environment, many
chaste souls may be compelled to turn their backs on piety and purity as
a result of unbearable pressures, for there are few people who can
heroically safeguard their souls in such a corrupt environment and
preserve their piety and purity in the mire of social filth. Yet all
people do not have such extraordinary qualities so as to continue with
their sublime and majestic spirit to live amongst a base and decadent
people.

In the course of his upbringing an ordinary individual stands in dire
need of a society on which he can rely to offer him worthy examples that
may acquaint him with practical patterns of conduct in life.

Faith and Duty-Consciousness
----------------------------

The sense of duty and consciousness of responsibilities, which envelop
all aspects of human life, are the most fundamental factors of
individual and social welfare. Islamic education is also based on
developing the sense of duty and its fulfilment.

In his pursuit of welfare and happiness every Muslim must rely solely on
his faith and actions in life and refrain from putting his reliance in
anything else. Imam al-Sajjad, may peace be upon him, in one of his
precious sayings describes the encompassing character of man's duties in
various spheres:

*You-may God include you in His infinite mercy and blessings-should know
that the Sustainer of the world has assigned certain duties and rights
to you whose number is so great that they cover your entire conduct and
behaviour, your every act and movement, every pause and stop that you
may make and every halt that you may decide upon, and, ultimately, every
bodily member that obeys your will. These rights are evident and clear,
although some of these involve greater responsibility than others.*[^3]

In Islam everyone is responsible for his actions and no one is
answerable for another's duties and responsibilities. The Qur'an
declares:

***Whosoever is guided, is only guided to his own gain, and whosoever
goes astray, it is only to his own loss; no soul laden bears the load of
another. (17:15)***

There is a power present in the depths of man's being that calls upon
him to perform his duties and carry out his responsibilities. That inner
power reassures him when he responds to its call and carries out his
duty, and after its performance infuses his soul with tranquillity and
delight. This invisible power is the same conscience that arises from
the depths of innate nature and impels us to perform good acts and to
shun vice.

It may be imagined that the conscience is solely capable of insuring the
fulfilment of various duties without our needing to follow the teachings
of religion. However, in fact, the moral faculty of the conscience,
notwithstanding its worth in providing the needs of man's well-being, is
not singly capable of saving man from decadence and fall in all
situations and under all conditions.

Before everything, we must pay attention to the range and scope of the
activity of the conscience. The dictates of the conscience concerning a
matter vary in relation to the different national and ethnic customs and
factors of space and time. The persuasive activity of the conscience
relates to matters that have been approved as right and praiseworthy
previously by social custom and habit, although it may in fact be
something abominable or blameworthy from the viewpoint of the customs of
another people. In certain eras of human history some of the most
shameful and filthiest of acts have been considered by people as being
virtuous and praiseworthy and have borne the seal of general approval.

The Holy Qur'an refers to this fact in these words:

> O Prophet, say to the people, "Shall we tell you who will be the
> greatest losers in their works? Those whose striving goes astray in
> the present life, while they think that they were working good deeds."
> (18:103-104)

> But their hearts were hardened, and Satan had decked out fair to them
> what they were doing. (6:43)

Moreover, conscience is not capable of resisting unaided the onslaughts
of many carnal desires and withstanding the fierce hurricane of lust for
wealth and position. In the battlefield against urges and instincts its
resistance is diminished in degrees, and it is possible that it may be
overwhelmed in the very first encounter with them. The tricks of the
carnal self, by turning facts upside down, may deceive the conscience
and extinguish the light of this lamp that illuminates man's inner
being.

The conscience needs a firm foothold and guide as represented by faith,
which stands above the domain of common custom and is not subject to its
mandates. Those in whose inner being the innate spirit of *tawhid*
(monotheism) has been awakened and who have real faith in God, they pay
full attention to the voice of conscience, considering its mandates to
be God's natural guidance. For them not only duty is not a heavy burden
to carry about but gives them strength and joy. They carry out their
duties with burning love, dedication, and zeal.

Where there is no conflict between conscience and instinctive urges, it
is easy to obey the mandates of conscience. But difficulty arises when
obeying conscience entails suppression of one of one's inner desires.
The power of instinct, which has a wide field open in front of it for
its assaults, overwhelms conscience if it is not reinforced by religious
faith, and the field of action will be practically taken over by
instinct.

It is fact that every human call that is not derived from faith in God
is devoid of meaning in the objective world and amounts to no more than
a pretty and exciting fancy. The call of Islam, which was realised in
the objective world and became practical on earth, opened a brilliant
chapter for itself in history. It is a call based on calling the souls
of people to the Source of legislation, to the sublime horizon of human
felicity, on guiding and linking the hearts to the infinite Divine
essence. Otherwise man will not always accept the mandates of insipid
and dry human calls and will not submit to their logic in all situations
and under all conditions. When moral teachings come into conflict with
the carnal desires of people, they violate those teachings in order to
attain to their wishes and demands.

Le Comte du Nouy says:

Some atheists who are morally inclined by temperament say that the basic
problem is obedience to ethical laws. Hence if we can act in accordance
with these laws in practice, we would not stand in need of religion.
This approach indicates ignorance of human psychology, for man is
skeptical of the worth of laws whose source is uncertain to him.

Moreover, such an approach discloses a misunderstanding of the basic
problem, for the objective is that man should grow inwardly so that he
thinks in an ethical manner. The goal is not to induce him to behave in
an ethical way. For so long as one's conduct is not indicative of a deep
inner development, his behaviour will remain a series of artificial,
conventional and temporary restraints which will vanish at the first
excuse. If moral rules are imposed in an arbitrary manner, no matter how
much practical value that may have, they will never be successful in
fighting animalistic urges.[^4]

William James, the famous Western philosopher and psychologist, writes:

The sheer moralist obeys the universal laws that govern the universe on
the basis of his knowledge, but this obedience is accompanied with a
certain sense of burden and regret. He does not feel any warmth and
passion in his heart. The feeling that these laws are like a yoke never
leaves him. In religion, on the contrary, this cold and dismal obedience
is replaced by a warm welcome and enthusiasm that fills everything in
life with grace, joy, sincerity and vigour.

All our moral rules are like bandages that are applied to conceal scars
and wounds, without containing any healing balm...

It is here that religion comes to our help and takes charge of our
destiny. Religion offers a spiritual state and station that cannot be
found anywhere else.[^5]

Luqman's Counsel
----------------

In the verses of the Holy Qur'an we came across the sayings of Luqman
addressed to his son, which are rich in meaning and loaded with profound
advice. While giving educative and beneficial exhortation to his son, he
sets down in outline the principal duties of every human being.

1. Man's Duty to God:

***And when Luqman said to his son, admonishing him, "O my son, do not
associate others with God; to associate others with God is a great in
justice" (31:13)***

2. One's Duty to Parents:

***And We have charged man concerning his parents (to treat with
kindness and gratitude, and to fulfil the rights of) his mother, who
bore him in weakness upon weakness and his weaning was in two years-Be
thankful to Me, and to thy parents; to Me is the homecoming (of all My
creation). (31:14)***

3. Man's Duty towards Others:

***O my son, perform the prayer, and bid people unto virtue and honour,
and forbid them from vice and dishonour. And bear patiently whatever may
befall thee in this path of guiding and educating people at the hands of
ignorant persons, for surely that is a mark of true constancy.
(31:17)***

***Turn not your face from men in scorn and pride, and do not be
indifferent towards them, and walk not in the earth exultantly, for God
loves not any man proud and boastful. (31:18)***

4. Man's Duty to Himself:

***In general be modest and moderate in your conduct in life, and speak
in a low voice, for the coarsest and most hideous of voices is the
ass's. (31:19)***

The Levels of Duty-Consciousness and Worship
--------------------------------------------

As all people do not have a single level of intellectual capacity and
there is a significant difference between them from the point of view of
understanding and perspicacity, the leaders of the Islamic faith have
called the people to fulfil their duties in different ways in conformity
with the different levels of thinking.

Their approach in their religious call is such that learned and
contemplative individuals as well as the common and illiterate people
can benefit from their guidance. For instance, to some people for whom
the only matter of interest is profit and loss, it has called them to a
profitable deal. To others who are mostly interested in pleasures and
joys, it has promised them paradise, overflowing with plenteous
pleasures and everlasting bounties, and warned another group of the
painful punishment of hell.

Obviously most people are incapable of perceiving more refined meanings
or of aspiring to higher goals. The establishment of duties in society
and the general propagation of moral virtues for large numbers of
individuals has not been possible except through this means. That is
because human nature, by the side of its potentialities, is tainted by
various kinds of frailties and vulgarities, and practically few
individuals are capable of taking into view the intrinsic worth of an
action or attending to a higher goal. In most individuals who have
attained to the higher degrees of morality and human excellence, the
idea of reward and punishment has had much effectiveness in the initial
stages.

In general, an important part of the rapid progress of heavenly
religions and their penetration into the hearts of the people has been
due to the fact that, contrary to many man-made laws and ordinances,
they attach a special importance to abstention from sins. In the system
of education of these faiths, abstention from sin is not only the cause
of deliverance from punishment but also that of reception of fair
material and spiritual rewards. As regards his psychic makeup, man
exhibits a keener responsiveness and sensitiveness to reward and is
consequently more attracted to a teaching that offers reward in return
for the fulfilment of duty.

Some of the traditions that refer to people who offer unconditional
obedience to Divine commands and without the hope of reward or the fear
of punishment, relate to a particular group of individuals whose
knowledge of God's infinite essence is of a very high degree. Those
righteous souls attain to the highest degrees of sincerity and perform
their duties for the sake of God's good pleasure, not for any reward.

This group of persons have been called 'free man' in the traditions,
whereas those who do worship and perform duties for the sake of reward
have been called 'hired workers', and those who do their duty for fear
of punishment, 'slaves'.

'Ali, may peace be upon him, said:

*A group of people worship God for the sake of reward. That is the
worship of merchants. A group of people worship God from the fear or
punishment. That is the worship of slaves. But a group of* *God's
servants worship Him solely out of gratitude and thankfulness. And this
kind of worship is special to free men.*[^6]

Aveberry, the well-known British scholar, says something similar in this
context. He writes:

Someone whose soul is full to the brim with the love of God is compelled
to worship and glorify Him. He worships God neither with the hope of
reward nor for the fear of punishment, but solely for the sake of God.
One who performs a virtuous deed or abstains from a sinful act for the
sake of reward or for the fear of punishment, cannot be proud of his
conduct. Such a one cannot be considered a godly person. He is a
businessman who works for his own profit and is a mercenary who toils
for a wage.

Nevertheless, such conduct is also commendable in itself when we take
into view those who destroy themselves through ignorance, blacken their
souls with the smoke of sin, and never worship God. Thus we can reckon
the mercenary persons who are solely concerned with reward and
punishment among the good.

But there is no doubt that that which causes them to act virtuously is
something extremely petty and insignificant, for it would be much better
if they pass beyond this stage and worship God because He is worthy of
being worshipped.

Those who wear out their spirits in the path of beauty and art, do not
expect any profit. They have a higher end in view, which is not tinged
with materialistic ends. They admire beauty and love art, and endeavour
to capture the fair bird of beauty in the cage of their imagination and
to show it to others.

How good it would be if, in the path of religion, we too be like the
lovers of art and liberate our souls from all traces of mundane ends and
cherish no goal except the glorification of Eternal Beauty. This is the
true religion that can elevate our souls to the peaks of perfection.[^7]

The greater the faith of an individual in God, the more visibly are his
acts marked with sincerity, so that the effort to attain God's good
pleasure predominates all his desires and attachments. He performs every
virtuous act without any fear of punishment or hope of reward.

This moral ideal and sublime spirit is of such a great worth that there
is no ideal that can equal it, and there are only a few of such moral
geniuses in every era who can attain it.

'Ali, the Commander of the God-fearing, may peace be upon him, says this
about his own position as a servant vis-à-vis God: My Creator, I do not
glorify or worship Thee in the fear of hell and the hope of paradise.
Rather, I worship Thee because I consider Thee worthy of being
worshipped.

Like a beggar, don't serve your Master for a wage,

For He Himself knows how to take care of His servants.[^8]

The Noble Qur'an quotes the Prophet Solomon's prayer in this verse:

***My Lord, inspire me so that I may be thankful for Thy blessing
wherewith Thou hast blessed me and my father and mother, and that I may
do righteousness well-pleasing to Thee. (27:19)***

It should be noted that 'worship' (*ibadah*) in Islam is not limited
only to those moments when one is performing ritual acts of worship.
Rather, it has a wide and comprehensive meaning that includes all the
aspects of life, and as 'a way of life' covers the entire scope of life.
'Worship' in the ordinary sense, as well as thought, perception and the
daily matters of life-all are included in worship so long as God is
one's goal and end. In other words, worship is the principal basis on
which rest all the norms and regulations of life; for brief moments of
worship and fleeting rites by themselves do not have a very considerable
value in life.

They are of significance only when one's behaviour and conduct and all
the affairs of one's life are clearly and unambiguously based on this
principle, and when man bears witness, not merely verbally, but in
actual practice that no power and entity is worthy of being worshipped
except the sacred Essence of the Creator.

Similarly, 'worship' in the teachings of Islam does not mean that one's
heart should be filled with piety and God-fearing only when one is
performing ritual duties; that once they are over, impiety and vices
should dominate one's soul, divesting him of all goodness and making him
shun justice and righteousness. One's heart does not commune with God in
such a worship, and such a person is like a lost traveller who cannot
advance towards his goal and destination with the help of the light that
illuminates the path in the dark of the night.

The Qur'an declares:

***It is not piety that you turn your faces to the East and to the West.
True piety is this: to have faith in God and the Last Day, the angels,
the Book, and the prophets, to give of one's substance, however
cherished, to kinsmen, and orphans, the needy, the traveller, beggars,
and to ransom the slave, to perform the prayer, to pay the alms. And
they who fulfil their covenant when they have engaged in a covenant, and
endure with fortitude misfortune, hardship and peril, they are they who
are true in their faith; these are the truly God-fearing. (2:1 77)***

The basic principle of Islamic education is that there be a perpetual,
comprehensive and unbreakable bond between man and God. His object of
love and fear, hope and reliance, is God. God is the sole authority to
Whom he must make recourse in every matter and observe His ordinances,
laws and commands in all moments of his life.

It is such a living and thorough link between man's heart and God that
gives to everything its wholeness and consummate perfection and without
which everything becomes hollow and futile. The individual finds
morality, virtue and all positive values by relying on that bond.

Without doubt, the human merits that spring from faith in God and His
eternal and fundamental law are in fact man's genuine virtues and
merits, which cannot be expected from anyone whose education and
upbringing is not based on a real link with God.

[^1]: Kelidha-ye khushbakati, trans. from English into Persian by Ahmad
Aram, Tehran: Shirkat-e Sahami-ye Intishar, Khurdad 1347, pp. 269-277.

[^2]: Samuel Smith, Akhlaq-e Samuel, Persian trans. p. 8.

[^3]: Al-Harrani, Tuhaf al-uqul, p. 255.

[^4]: Pierre Le Comte du Nouy, Sarnevisht-e bashar, p. 216.

[^5]: William James, The Varieties of Religious Experience, Persian
Trans,. Din wa rawan, p. 19.

[^6]: Nahj al-balaghah, trans. by Fayd al-Islam, p. 1182.

[^7]: John Lubbock Aveberry, Dar justeju-ye khushbakhti, p. 228.

[^8]: Fayd al-Kashani, Haqa'iq, p. 202.


