Chapter 5: The Stormy Sea of Life
=================================

Life is like a restless sea, full of wonders and always in a state of
perpetual turmoil caused by the waves of events. No one is secure from
the violent waves on the surface of this deep ocean. Pleasure and pain
in this world, like positive and negative forces in nature, together
perform their function everywhere. Opposed to joy and delight are grief
and sadness and opposed to youth and vitality are old age and weakness.

Everyone who is alive must bear the burden of affliction and suffering.
Everyone who sets out on this sea is bound to be drenched by its waters
and encounter in the course of his life a series of unpleasant and
painful events: failure, privation, the death of dear ones and many
other afflictions of the kind. Who is it that has remained unscathed by
the arrows of time and secure from the tempests of events?

The type of hardships and calamities, it is true, is different in every
age, but the universal principle of hardship and suffering is
intertwined with man's life in all its stages. Certainly, the means of
comfort and welfare have never been so within man's reach in any era of
history to the extent they are accessible today.

Similarly, he has never attain the knowledge of nature's complex
mysteries that he possesses today and been never so successful in
subduing nature's unfriendly elements to the extent of today. In the
shadow of science and with the power of technology, the civilised human
being has overcome many of his difficulties by employing nature's
various forces to his benefit.

However, despite these remarkable advancements in science and its
brilliant achievements, and in spite of possessing all the different
means essential for a better life, man today not only does not possess
the feeling of mental peace and security that are basic for a happy
life, he is drifting further away from the goal of a pleasant and
wholesome life. From the viewpoint of peace and happiness, the future
prospects of this materialistic life of today are not promising.

It cannot be denied that in most advanced societies psychological stress
and anxiety have constantly increased in direct proportion to
scientific, industrial, and economic progress and with the expansion of
civic amenities and affluence. With the increase in psychic problems,
the corresponding increase in the number of psychotherapists and
psychiatrists has not at all helped to meet the situation.

Dr. Schneider writes:

What is it that has a greater share of human misery than anything else?
I can answer this question in my capacity as a physician. It is a
chronic disease. It will frighten you somewhat if you think about it.
For out of a thousand kinds of diseases to which the human constitution
is prone, one of them is as prevalent as the remaining nine hundred and
ninety-nine of them. In the United States of America, fifty percent of
those who go to see a physician suffer from this illness. Some claim
that the figure is even higher than fifty percent.

At the Oxis Clinic in New Orleans a report was prepared about five
hundred patients who had consecutively made a call to that place. It
revealed that seventy-five percent of them suffered from this illness. A
person could be affected by it irrespective of his age and the stage of
his life. Moreover, the diagnosis and treatment of this disease are
terribly expensive.

I will hasten to refrain from mentioning its name, for that may lead you
to a misunderstanding. Its first characteristic is that it is not a real
disease. Traditionally it was referred to as 'mental illness' and now
they call it psychosomatic disorder. It is not an illness in the sense
that the sick person should really consider himself to be ill. But the
suffering that one undergoes as a result of it is as severe as the
spasms of pain due to bilious colic.

Psychosomatic illness is not something produced by bacteria, virus, or
an unnatural growth of bodily tissue, but is something caused by the
conditions of daily life. Whenever someone is enclosed within a thick
and impenetrable shell of anxieties, worries and problems from which he
cannot emerge into the world of joy and peace, we consider him as
suffering from psychosomatic illness.[^1]

Freud says:

The primitive man satisfied his desires in a better way than the
civilised man. His life was free from mental anxieties and cares, and he
did not suffer from psychic ailments. But since the advent of
civilisation, industry and urbanisation, man came to suffer from serious
mental illnesses.[^2]

The Cause of Psychic Afflictions
--------------------------------

One of the factors responsible for anxiety is acquisitiveness. In a
social environment where people's thoughts revolve around the axis of
materialism, where wealth and passing material comforts are considered
the criteria of prosperity and misfortune, and where everyone is
constantly after the satisfaction of this inner urge, life is
undoubtedly full of perpetual stress and anxiety. That is because no
matter however extensive one's efforts may be, he cannot satisfy his
endless greed, fill his mental vacuum, and realise all his desires and
wishes.

Also, often there arise insuperable obstacles in the way of his desires
and goals, which lead him into various kinds of misgivings and torments.
His mind and nerves are greatly disturbed as a result of this mental
vexation. Moreover, since his attachment is to un-enduring things, which
are prone every moment to destruction and extinction, their transitory
charm cannot give tranquillity to his tormented life. Such a person, no
doubt, will not feel happy within himself.

Another important factor that causes spiritual anguish is the thought of
death and absolute extinction. When death is believed to be the last
limit of life and the end of everything, the awesome phantom of
non-existence darkens the soul and pours bitterness into every joy of
life. Psychic strain, despair and despondency, especially in the later
part of life, will put him in a state of painful torture.

Similarly, a haunting fear of encountering some undefined
danger-something one fears without being able to express precisely what
terrifies him-misgivings and apprehensions cripple the soul and shatter
man's debilitated nerves like a sledge hammer.

One becomes constantly listless as a result of financial insecurity or
inadequacy; another is agitated on account of his unmanageable wealth
and is beset with a thousand financial cares, some fret at the
difficulty of meeting their commitments due to unfavourable factors and
justify their always remaining in a state of consternation. Some are so
full of scruples about certain particulars that they tire and exhaust
everyone about themselves.

Such persons, as a matter of principle, are those whose anxiety seeks an
outlet in order to surface, and they are constantly after some fresh
pretext to start lamenting and complaining. The problems of life take a
specially fearsome aspect in the evenings, for the fatigue resulting
from day's work draws a curtain over the intellect and suppresses its
power of rational judgement. At such times it no longer possesses its
usual vigour, whereas the power of imagination is still active; its
figments and fancies, finding the arena empty without a rival, torment
the person severely.

If misgivings and futile apprehensions were to occur to anyone as a
result of some small mistake, he should know that something that
shouldn't have happened has taken place and there is no use in getting
troubled about it. Moreover, he has no right to complain about what he
had to suffer as a result of his own act. Everyone must reap what he has
sown and if he has sowed a bad seed who is to blame? If one becomes
upset by his mistake and sees its consequences to be much graver than
they really are, he would fail to make amends, for that would divide his
attention.

That which is certain is that one cannot succeed in solving one's
problems with agitation and vexation, for agitation does not increase
the capacity of one who has made a mistake, and regret and sorrow cannot
change what is past. The only result that one obtains from his gloomy
thoughts is to make his life gloomy and paralyse his activity. Peace of
mind is necessary for one to disentangle the issues through reflection,
and then try not to repeat the mistake. It is by correct reasoning that
man can bring a discipline in his moral conduct.

Too Much Concern for the Unknown Future
---------------------------------------

The extent of attention that one directs to the future or the present
greatly affects one's spiritual well-being. There are some people who
give an extraordinary importance to the future; as a result they miss
the opportunity to benefit from the present. Even if no danger should
threaten them presently, they are afraid that some unpleasant accident
may befall them. They are overwhelmed by a fear, which is as strong as
they would feel in the face of a real danger.

However, one must remember that the past has no influence on the present
and the future too is unforeseeable. The future events that should make
one worried and concerned are those which are definite. But it goes
without saying that such events are few and rarely do events turn out
according to one's forecasts.

William John Reilly, a researcher belonging to the Carnegie Institute,
writes: If you reflect you will see that amongst your friends, and even
within your own family, those who have a positive way of thinking
fascinate you more than the others. You like to be with them most of the
time. Of course, there are also cynics amongst them who create trouble
and headaches for you. Those who have a positive way of thinking are
happier, livelier and more active.

They get things done and make them work. They might make many mistakes,
but then they have the perspicacity to acknowledge their mistakes and
correct them. They have the determination to start all over again. They
don't waste time worrying or getting upset over something that will
never happen. In every twenty-four hours about more than twenty million
meteorites enter the earth's atmosphere. But there is no reliable record
of any person getting killed anywhere due to the falling of any of these
meteors.

Mark Twain said, "I am an old man and I know many calamities and
misfortunes. But most of them have never happened." Life is a continuous
stream of problems, and these have to be confronted with a
determination. Many of the problems that engage out mind, which we allow
to upset us and spoil several hours of our life, and at times a whole
day, are actually insignificant and of no consequence. The difficulty is
that at the time we are not capable of noticing their
insignificance.[^3]

And then whether these probable dangers really take place or not, the
present anxiety has no result except diminishing one's physical and
spiritual capacities. In different stages of life one may encounter
events that block the way of success.

These events are not exceptional and happen for everyone. We cannot
alter the eternal laws of nature and make things happen according to our
wishes. That was in relation to external dangers. As to the dangers that
threaten man from within, they are no less significant than the external
ones and sometimes are of a more serious character. There is a
destructive force in every individual that threatens his life. This
danger that accumulates within man's being is the same as anxiety and
anguish, and the person who carries it within him may be unconscious of
its presence.

Should the physical and mental energies that are consumed by fear and
anxiety concerning imaginary dangers be spent in fruitful tasks, that
can yield valuable and brilliant results. Everyone can recall the amount
of precious time that he has spent musing about the ways of encountering
possible accidents. Exceptions aside, one may say that the actual
hardships and misfortunes that most persons face are quite insignificant
in comparison to the imaginary calamities that torment them.

Kronin writes: Make a list of the things that you consider the causes of
your worries and anxieties. When these causes are down on the paper you
will see that, in general, most of them are vague, indistinct and
unimportant. Most of the time the balance sheet of our worries and cares
appears as follows. Forty percent of them are such calamities as will
never take place. Thirty percent of them relate to the past or the
future sorrows, which not even the sympathies of the whole world can
alter.

Twelve percent of them consist of unfounded fear of loss of health. An
eight percent may really be causes for worry and anxiety. A realistic
examination will lead us further to drop some of these latter causes.
Then, we will see that that which we usually fear most only happens
rarely in actual reality. Many are the woes that trouble our hearts on
account of melancholic self-pity. There is only one remedy for the
disease of egoism. We should bring about such a change in our world that
we cease regarding ourselves as its centre and axis.

Rather, we should take others into account and realise the fact that our
being is a part of the human society and that our life depends upon and
is subject to the welfare and misfortune of the family, community,
nation and group to which we belong. After these difficulties are
finally analysed and no solution is found, to immerse oneself in sorrow
and grief is a kind of faithlessness; for such a despair signifies the
absence of faith in the need for God's help.

No wisdom or philosophy, however sublime, can be of benefit to a man who
locks himself in the prison of sorrow and grief. If we employ wisdom by
following the lead of reason, we will be able to elevate our lives to a
height beyond the reach of our inner number-one enemy, and attain a real
spiritual peace.[^4]

Mental anxiety visibly affects all the tasks one performs and sometimes
lead one unconsciously into deviant paths and to make irrational
responses. Another harm caused by mental worry is that it deprives one
of self-confidence. Many people make it their habit to constantly
complain regarding their ill fortune and fate and are never satisfied
with their life. They imagine that they cannot prosper in life unless
all their affairs are set in order and unless they possess considerable
wealth and all the means of comfort. They look for happiness in the
distant horizons of the future while they squander the great asset of
life, the precious moments of today, for the sake of the future's dream,
whereas if they really care for their happiness they would discover it
in plain and peaceful lives; because that which is of basic significance
in life is the present, and the future, which appears to be a heaven in
their eyes, would assume the appearance of a frightful hell as soon as
they reach it.

One who is tired and fed up with his present state of life and awaits
better days that lie beyond the dark and uncertain horizon, must wake up
from the slumber of ignorance and seek his lost ideal in these wearisome
days of today, not in an imaginary and unknown future. The obstacles
that he sees in the way of realisation of his goals may be the product
of his own thinking, and his success and triumphs may lie hidden in the
present itself. If the seed of today should remain unsown, tomorrow will
not yield its fruit. Life cannot be lived twice so that one may make
amends for his earlier mistakes.

A wise human being derives the maximum benefit from the passing moments
of life, which pass quietly and soundlessly like rain drops falling into
the dark ocean of extinction and annihilation. He does not let them go
in vain. As a result, with each day his situation improves, the horizon
of his life becomes more radiant, and his soul becomes vaster.

He remains steady and unmoved like the centre in a wheel in the face of
accidents and unpleasant events. Should the wave of a calamity pass over
his head, he is not swept off his feet. He draws benefit from pleasant
events and takes lesson from undesirable incidents. He does not expect
the world to change in order that events happen according to his wishes.
Finally, he spends the hours of his life in such a way that at the end
of the day he does not have any regret or remorse.

There are some others who care neither for the present nor the future.
The today does not interest them and they expect nothing from the
future. Rather, they live in constant agitation due to the regret of
having lost the opportunities offered by the past and which now lie
buried in the graveyard of non-existence. Instead of pursuing their way
with earnestness and composure on the plain of life, they always look
behind themselves like someone lost in a vast desert. They keep
reviewing the errors and inauspicious happenings of the past and waste
their lives. What is surprising is that while they let the present slip,
they regret for the moments of the past.

There is no doubt that ruminating over the mistakes and unhappy episodes
of the past and burning oneself in the flames of sorrow and regret does
not do any good. Moreover, it exhausts and debilitates the soul and lets
one's vital powers go waste so that one remains no longer capable of
choosing the right course in life in conformity with his interests.

What we have said concerning giving attention to the present does not
mean that one should do something today without paying attention to its
evil consequences in the future. What we mean is that one should not let
one's peace of mind be disturbed by regret for the past and fear
regarding the future.

Clinging to Deviant Means
-------------------------

Need and deprivation cause suffering, and for this reason the mass of
people are in perpetual battle against need and de- privation. But the
people all whose material needs are satisfied become subject to a kind
of spiritual malaise and agony. In order to escape this state of
nervousness and agitation they often opt for methods and ways that lead
to destruction of their vital and intellectual powers. For instance,
they take refuge in alcohol or drugs, which appear to them as the only
remedy, and become addicted to these destructive evils so as to escape
their anguish and inner torment for a short time.

They think that they can do nothing else except seek refuge in
alcoholism and drug addiction to obtain relief from their pain and
suffering; but in reality they undermine their own personality, For
everyone knows that addiction to these things for relief from anxiety
and inner distress does not lead to good consequences; for as soon as
the effect of intoxication is gone, his anguish returns to badly torment
him again. Moreover, the effect produced by drugs is gradually
diminished due to continuous use and they themselves give rise to many
diseases and afflictions.

Psychologists explain the causes of taking refuge in alcoholism as
follows:

Those who are used to alcohol are not capable of satisfying their wants
in a complex and complicated world. Therefore, in order to evade
difficulties and delve in unrealistic fancies they take resort in
alcohol. Alcohol makes a drastic effect on the nervous system and, in
addition to that, enfeebles the rational faculty. One who is drunk
behaves in an unnatural manner, and intoxication does an irremediable
harm to him. He not only injures his own health, but achieves nothing by
escaping problems by taking resort in a harmful beverage.

Ultimately, he loses respect in the eyes of his friends, family and
relatives. When he returns to his ordinary state, his capacity to
confront his difficulties is further diminished. The consumption of
alcohol does not afford any progress in the solution of problems, and
one who makes alcohol a means of evading problems only makes his
hardships graver. Then this exacerbation of the difficulty induces him
again to turn to alcohol.

Some kinds of daydreaming and the use of alcohol are similar in regard
to the escape from problems. Of course, the use of alcohol is physically
more harmful. In these two kinds of escape, the person does not attempt
to solve the difficulty by the means of reasoning. Rather, he wants to
evade it, and since the escape cannot be permanent, he is forced to
return to the real world in a state of greater disharmony and
anguish.[^5]

A man's thoughts and ideas exercise a profound influence on his
spiritual well-being. His progress and backwardness and, in a word, his
spiritual qualities depend on his way of thinking. Various factors have
an effect on one's way of thinking and looking at things. One who enjoys
an active intellect is not overwhelmed by total despondency in his
inability to obtain material resources and derive benefit from the
external world.

The world does not appear to him to be dark and frightful. Rather, he
immediately closes shut the windows of the spirit that face external
things and turns to the enjoyment of spiritual pleasures. Thereby he
takes himself into a world free from the bondage of suffering and where
he can satiate himself with the cup of felicity and peace.

However, those who are short-sighted seek refuge in external means in
order to seek freedom from the chains of anguish. Because, on the one
hand, man's wishes and desires are in a state of perpetual change and,
on the other, there is nothing permanent and enduring in this turbulent
world. Should man's happiness depend on external things, it would always
be prone to destruction. Therefore, such a person, like a drowning man,
clings to everything that he can catch hold of but which cannot save
him. Ultimately, nothing that is transitory and impermanent can give him
true peace.

Carlos describes the wretchedness of this group of people in these
words:

One abandons his beautiful mansion in order to escape monotony, and
fruitlessly takes resort in various means. Another speedily runs away
from his wife and children, like a fire engine hastening to extinguish a
fire, but as soon as he reaches his destination he again comes face to
face with his pernicious enemy: spiritual boredom and malaise. Thereat
he goes back with the same haste that he had gone forth, confounded and
lost like a madman.[^6]

The Profound Effect of Suffering
--------------------------------

Basically, man's creation is such that he is compelled to bear a lot of
physical and spiritual hardships in order to satisfy the needs of his
life. Because it is in the course of this toil and endeavour for
obtaining the material means of life that his intellectual and spiritual
faculties acquire their vigour and growth.

Hardship and suffering has a profound and extensive influence in life.
The spiritual powers of great men receive their burnish under the stress
of calamities and shine forth better in the darkness of adversity.

Had not man, since the first days of his existence, not felt wretched on
account ,of his ignorance and ignorance, he would not have made any
effort to obtain relief from this malady and would have languished in
the darkness of ignorance and savageness, and we would not see today any
trace of the manifestations of his intellect, morality and spirituality.
It is the painful feeling of being ignorant that made him make an
unrelenting struggle against ignorance.

The all-round advancement of man and the foundations of all his progress
in civic and social matters are based on this truth. Most of the great
social movements that were a point of departure for human progress and a
leap towards human edification were the consequence of crushing
hardships and difficulties. Although adversities and vicissitudes are
bitter and repugnant in appearance, and pleasures and joys are pleasing
and attractive, the matter is in reality quite the opposite. Because the
pursuit of pleasures and lusts leads to decadence and disaster, whereas
adversities and hardships carry in their bosom felicity and success.

There is a definite interrelation between experience of suffering and
attainment of felicity. There is a cause-and-effect relation between
hardships and adversities on the one hand and felicity and achievement
on the other. Hegel, the German philosopher, says: Life is not made for
happiness, but for achievement. The history of the world is not the
theatre of happiness; periods of happiness are blank pages in it, for
they are periods of harmony; and this dull content is unworthy of a man.
History is made only in those periods in which the contradictions of
reality are being resolved by growth, as the hesitation and awkwardness
of youth pass into the ease and order of maturity.[^7]

Metals, in order to be separated from impurities, are melted in hot
furnaces. Hardships of life have a similar result for the human being.
They purify him and purge him of impurities, and prepare him for
fulfilling his human duties. Ultimately, no individual can attain to
felicity and survival except in the shadow of suffering. The Qur'an
says:

***Indeed We have created man in the cradle of trouble and suffering.
(90:4)***

Imam al-Sadiq, may peace be upon him, said:

*Indeed, of all people the severest of sufferings and afflictions are
faced by the prophets, and after them by others in proportion to their
degree of merit.*[^8]

In order to drive home the same point, Rumi says:

Cast was the wheat grain under the soil, Then, ears of corn were
gathered from its dust, Then, it was ground between the millstones, And
lo, its worth rose and it became life-giving bread! Then the bread was
crushed under the teeth, And lo, it became intellect, soul and gainful
understanding!

A European thinker says:

Hardships and difficulties make up the touchstone of morality. In the
same way as some plants must be squeezed to give out their perfume, so
also some natures have to be subjected to hardship in order that their
essential talents and merits become manifest. There is no ease and
comfort in the world that does not change into pain and adversity. So
also, there is no hardship that does not ultimately lead to happiness
and felicity. In each of these conditions, the results that we derive
depend on our use or misuse of it.

Complete happiness and ease are not to be found in this world. Even if,
supposedly, they were to exist, they would not be fruitful, nor would
they offer any kind of good or benefit. Among the teachings that have
been delivered to man to this day, the most worthless and hollow is the
one that invites him to comfort and ease; for, under all circumstances,
defeat and hardship are wiser teachers than happiness and comfort.

Defeat reforms and strengthens an individual's character; suffering and
hardship bring discipline and awareness to nature. They initiate the
person in the rites of patience and forbearance, developing the most
sublime thoughts and ideas in his mind. Hipper says: "What is it that
leads to the development of man's profoundest thoughts? It is not
knowledge or science. It is not ability and expertise either. Neither it
is emotion or feeling.

Only suffering and hardship can fathom the depths of human thought.
Perhaps, that is why there is so much suffering in the world. The angel
charged with afflicting with suffering and hardship has rendered a
greater service to this world's people than what the angel of well-being
and healing has brought to the world."[^9]

The Definite Role of Faith in Spiritual Peace
---------------------------------------------

A study of the history of human progress proves that the supports of
man's civilisation and culture have always rested on the shoulders of
those for whom the power of faith had made it easy for them to bear the
heavy burden of hardship and pain whose negative effects were
neutralised by the faith present in their strong hearts. Psychologists
generally admit that the power of faith is amazingly effective in the
cure of psychic diseases and creation of confidence and inner peace.

In cases where severe hardships shatter man's personality and divest him
of his hope and will power, trust in God produces a profound and
undeniable effect in a defeated soul. Failure, adversity, and defeat can
never create a storm in the pure hearts of godly men and make them
suffer despair and loss of self-assurance and self-respect. Jung, the
well-known psychoanalyst, writes:

Among all my patients in the second half of life-that is to say, over
thirty five-there has not been one whose problem in the last resort was
not that of finding a religious outlook on life. It is safe to say that
every four of them fell ill because he had lost that which the living
religions of every age have given to their followers, and none of them
has been really healed who did not regain his religious outlook.... Here
then, the clergyman stands before a vast horizon.... It is indeed high
time for the clergyman and the psychotherapist to join forces to meet
this great spiritual task.[^10]

The faith in God, like a relief valve, helps regulate psychic urges
which are themselves the mainspring of man's spiritual afflictions. The
faith in God gives a visage of perfect beauty to life, because when one
has the conviction that everything does not come to an end with this
life it creates an inner peace and makes him traverse the entire course
of life with steadiness and moderation. Acquisitiveness, greed and
avarice, which are one of the factors responsible for anxiety, are
moderated as a result of faith in God and observance of the moral
precepts of religion. The hope of great rewards and the fear of severe
punishments make man refrain from rapacity and avoid unreasonable and
uncontrolled fondness for material things, glitter and ostentation. As a
result, a desirable and serene equilibrium worthy of man's humanity is
brought about within his soul. Similarly, faith in resurrection and
afterlife removes the intolerable strain induced by the idea of absolute
annihilation and extinction from the human spirit, for the person with
such a faith is convinced that at the threshold of death the door to
another world will open in front of him and he will enter an eternal
life and its everlasting bounties that cannot be compared with the joys
of this world. This faith results in eliminating another agent of mental
anxiety which is the anguish of absolute non-existence. Faith not only
removes anguish and anxiety from the human heart, it can protect it from
being overwhelmed by agitation and agony. The Qur'an describes the
preventive role of faith in these words:

***If you have faith, do not yield to fear and sorrow, for you have an u
p per hand over the others on account of this asset of faith. (3:139)***

This verse drives home the point that faith is a firm shield for the
soul in its encounter with the agents of anxiety, producing a certain
immunity in the human being. If one should lack a complete faith, and
should the agents of anxiety penetrate to the core of his soul, it is
again faith by relying on which he can free his mind from the burden of
agony and purge the effects of suffering from the tablet of his heart.
The Qur'an says:

***... In God's remembrance and reliance upon Him are at rest the hearts
of those who have faith and do righteous deeds. (13:28)***

***It is He Who sent down tranquillity into the hearts of the
faithful... (48:4)***

The Qur'an considers steadiness and security to be the characteristics
of those whose hearts are full of faith:

***Mental peace and security are qualities of those who have faith and
who have not drawn a veil of wrongdoing over their faith (6:82)***

***Lo, fear and sorrow do not affect the friend of God. (10:62)***

In a sermon on the benefits of remembrance of God, 'Ali, the Commander
of the Faithful, may peace be upon him, describes the characteristics of
godly human beings:

*God, the Exalted, has made His remembrance the light and burnish of the
hearts. It is by the means of His remembrance that the hearts recover
their hearing after being deaf, regain their sight after being blind,
and become soft and tractable after being savage and rebellious. It has
always been the case that in periods of spiritual torpor, from time to
time, God Almighty has confided His inspiration to the thoughts of His
sublime servants and spoken to them through their intellects.*[^11]

The state of people possessing faith is not at all comparable with the
condition of materialistic and irreligious persons in encounter with
life's vicissitudes and its bitter experiences, for the two are as apart
as the earth and the sky.

During the Prophet's times one of the Muslim women in Madinah received
the news of the loss of three of her close relatives in the Battle of
Uhud. She set out on a camel to the scene of battle to bring the bodies
of the martyrs. Having laid the lifeless and bloody bodies of her dear
ones on the camel, she was returning to Madinah when on the way she met
one of the wives of the Holy Prophet, may peace be upon him and his
Family. The Prophet's wife, who was concerned about the Prophet's
welfare, asked her if she knew anything in this regard. That bereaved
woman, as she held the reins of her camel and blood dripped to the
ground from the bodies that it carried, answered with a peculiar
serenity and calmness that sprung from her firm and steady faith: "I
have a glad news for you: the Prophet hasn't suffered any harm in the
battle, and every lesser grief is tolerable in front of such a great and
precious blessing." The Prophet's wife asked her; "Whose bodies are
these?" She answered: "One of them is my husband's, another is that of
my son, and the third one belongs to my brother, I am taking them to
Madinah to bury them." What agent except faith could give such
indescribable serenity and calm to this bereaved soul? Jean Jacques
Rousseau writes: If we were immortal we would all be miserable; no doubt
it is hard to die, but it is sweet to think that we shall not live
forever, and that a better life will put an end to the sorrows of this
world. If we had the offer of immortality here below, who would accept
the sorrowful gift? What resources, what hopes, what consolation would
be left against the cruelties of fate and man's injustice? The ignorant
man never looks before; he knows little of the value of life and does
not fear to lose it; the wise man sees things of greater worth and
prefers them to it. Half knowledge and sham wisdom set us thinking about
death and what lies beyond it; and they thus create the worst of our
ills. The wise man bears life's ills all the better because he knows he
must die.[^12]

Taslim and Rida
---------------

One who does not possess the asset of faith is quite vulnerable against
the unfavourable forces of nature. He considers himself a victim of its
overwhelming and tyrannical forces. Even if he does not make a retreat
in the first encounter with afflictions and hardships, ultimately, at
some fearsome moment, the violent waves of events will drive him into a
deep whirlpool. But one who relies on the logic of religion and does not
consider anything except the will of God as being effective in the order
of creation, believes that the unavoidable sufferings of life have been
decreed by a beneficent creator for the purification of his heart and
the disciplining of his soul. Therefore he does not allow hardship and
affliction to paralyse his spiritual power. Rather, he maintains his
serenity under all circumstances and in every eventuality steers the
ship of his existence with the help of God's eternal power to the shores
of purity, success, and felicity and even his spiritual joys and
pleasures increase despite the burden of suffering. Jabir ibn 'Abd Allah
was one of the personalities that had been brought up under Islamic
teachings. Once when he fell ill, Imam al-Baqir, the Fifth Imam, may
peace be upon him, came to his house to visit him. When the Imam asked
Jabir about his condition, the latter replied: "My condition is such
that I prefer old age to youth, sickness to health, and death to life."
The Imam, may peace be upon him, said to him: "Yet we, the Prophet's
family, are not such. If God decrees sickness or health, youth or old
age, life or death for one of us, we accept it most willingly. The
principle of rida (satisfaction) vis-à-vis the vicissitudes of life is
our custom."

Bertrand Russell says:

Resignation, however, has also its part to play in the conquest of
happiness, and it is a part no less essential than that played by
effort. The wise man, though he will not sit down under preventable
misfortunes, will not waste time and emotion upon such as are
unavoidable, and when such as are in themselves avoidable he will submit
to it if the time and labour required to avoid them would interfere with
the pursuit of some more important project. Many people get into a fret
or a fury over every little thing that goes wrong, and in this way waste
a great deal of energy that might be more usefully employed. Even in the
pursuit of really important objects it is unwise to become so deeply
involved emotionally that the thought of possible failure becomes a
constant menace to peace of mind. Christianity taught submission to the
will of God, and even for those who cannot accept this phraseology there
should be something of the same kind pervading all their activities.
Efficiency in a practical task is not proportional to the emotion that
we put into it, indeed, emotion is sometimes an obstacle to efficiency.
The attitude required is that of doing one's best while leaving the
issue to fate.[^13]

Of course, in speaking of resignation and forbearance vis-à-vis fate
what is meant are the mishaps and unpredictable events that lie beyond
the range of human power and ingenuity; otherwise those misfortunes and
ills that are products of a corrupt society and pathological social
conditions, their roots must be sought within the social structure. To
alter such a distressing state of affairs is within the scope of man's
will. Hence one must not justify submission to violation of his rights
as resignation and surrender to God-ordained fate. Dale Carnegie, a
brilliant writer on topics relating to psychological subjects of popular
interest, writes:

My father had lost his health due to debt, hardship, poverty and bad
luck. The doctor told my mother that he would not survive for more than
six months. Several times my father attempted to end his life by hanging
himself with a rope or by throwing himself into the river. Years later
he told me that the only thing that kept him from committing suicide at
that time was the firm and unshakeable faith of my mother. She was
convinced that if we love God and obey His commandments everything would
be set right. She was right. Ultimately everything got right. My father
lived for another forty-two years. Throughout those difficult years my
mother never became upset. She placed her hardships and problems before
God and in that little and lonely village cottage she would pray to Him
not to deny us His love and support.  
 In the same way as the benefits of electricity, water and good food
have been effective and important in my life, the benefits and
advantages of religion have been of great significance. Electricity,
water and food help me provide a better, more complete and comfortable
life. But the benefit of religion is many times greater than that of any
of these things.  
 Religion gives me faith and courage. It relieves me from trepidation,
anxiety, fear and alarm. It gives a direction and goal to life. Religion
completes my happiness to a great extent and bestows upon me an abundant
peace. It helps me lead a calm and peaceful existence in the midst of
the tempests of life.[^14]

Einstein, the famous scientist of the twentieth century, after offering
a classification of religions and while explaining the third kind of
religions which he calls 'cosmic religious feeling', describes the kind
of feeling it produces in man. He writes:

The individual feels the futility of human desires and aims and the
sublimity and marvellous order which reveal themselves both in nature
and in the world of thought. Individual existence impresses him as a
sort of prison and he wants to experience the universe as significant
whole.[^15]

The cause of the anxieties and mental anguish of many people must be
sought in their way of thinking and their view of life. They imagine
that they have come into this world to enjoy its pleasures without any
restraints and when they confront a reality that is contrary to their
conceptions they often complain and blame the world, the order of
things, and their own situation. In the same way as water extinguishes
fire, our own misfortunes and hardships are forgotten when we pay
attention to the miseries and misfortunes of others and reflect about
them. But there are some people who imagine that they are the victims of
all the misery and grief that there is and that hard times do not give
them a moment's relief, where they have quite a different opinion about
others and imagine that they are always prosperous and happy and face no
hardship in life.

Unlimited Expectations
----------------------

The great extent of one's expectations leads one to become a constant
victim of sorrow and distress. Those who are realistic in their outlook
consider an immoderate amount of wealth to be an obstacle to happiness
and mental peace. Happiness and wretchedness, peace and anxiety have
their own particular criterion in which wealth, position and prestige do
not play any role. There are narrow-minded rich persons in this world
who go hungry despite all their riches and who do not know any comfort,
and there are many poor people who lament on account of their poverty.
As a subtle poet says:

Alas, that the golden cup of self-contentment, Was turned into a beggars
bowl by our acquisitiveness!

'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, may peace be upon him, said:

*No treasure is as plentiful as contentment and no wealth can overcome
the feeling of being wretched and destitute to the extent of contentment
(rida). The one who is not greedy and is content with the income that
meets the needs of his life has procured the means of his well-being and
mental peace.*[^16]

Also in the opinion of researchers in the field of man's psychic life, a
high level of expectations is a source of anxiety and dissatisfaction,
whereas the observance of moderation and contentment gives mental peace
and security. In the field of mental health there is a principle called
'the principle of contentment' according to which:

The lesser one's expectations are, the greater is one's peace of mind,
and the greater they are, the lesser it is. To the extent that we
minimise our expectations, we will also reduce the probability of defeat
and failure. As a result, fear and hope, anxiety and agitation, and the
oppressive feeling of expectation that besiege us prior to the
achievement of success are automatically reduced. In fact, the principle
of happiness is no other than the principle of contentment. However, one
should remember that the meaning of the principle of happiness and
contentment is not that one should sit idle and refrain from every kind
of activity and effort. What is meant by the principle of happiness is
getting to know of one's own limits, abilities and means and becoming
reconciled with one's capacities and powers. It means that one should
not extend one's expectations beyond the ken of one's capacities and
make unrealistic and extravagant demands upon them.[^17]

Faith in Immortality
--------------------

Islam propels the human heart towards everlasting life. Although faith
in resurrection is a real and living faith that raises man over the
plane of the sensible and vitalises his faculties for the realisation of
sublime human ideals, it does not restrain man from enjoying the world's
bounties. But it restrains the self from pursuing these joys in an
unruly, self-willed manner in the expansive arena of life and counters
wayward greed and acquisitiveness by subjecting it to controls and
restraints. When one is really convinced that the world offers scant and
limited opportunities, that its joys are insignificant and that its
short days are devoid of real delights, then enjoyments of this world
lose their glitter and glamour in his eyes and he does not regret if he
fails to obtain more than what falls to his lot. Thus he does not become
subject to anguish, sorrow and fear. His attitude towards material
benefits is not like that of someone who is in a haste and perpetual
agitation due to the fear lest death should one day put an end to his
pursuit of joys. Rather, he possesses a peacefulness of mind and
tranquillity of conscience. This confidence and serenity no doubt add to
the pleasure that he derives from the bounties of life, which he
utilises rationally and with dignity. Accordingly, a person with faith
knows that these bounties are means for attaining to higher ends, not
the end and goal of life itself in whose pursuit one should spend all
his life and moreover lose his spiritual equilibrium. The painful
stresses produced by anxiety also lead to physical illness and the loss
of physical vigour. In order to safeguard one's physical health and
well-being and save oneself from the influence of self-destructive
forces within one, one must not allow anxiety and sorrow to overwhelm
his soul. 'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, may peace be upon him,

*Grief and anxiety have a destructive effect on the body.*[^18]

*Grief and agony have a wasting effect on the body.*[^19]

*Drink up (i.e. suppress) your sorrow and resentment, because it is the
sweetest and the most pleasant of drinks from the viewpoint of result
and ultimate outcome.*[^20]

Scientific investigations have revealed that some physical ailments are
the effect of psychic anxieties and outbursts of emotion. Munn, the
well-known psychologist, writes:

Some of the physiological concomitants of emotion are evident in
everyday experience. Palpitation of the heart, accelerated breathing, a
sinking feeling in the stomach, sweating, trembling and many other
organic phenomena are commonly-reported aspects of emotion.... Milder
forms and intensities of emotion provide a motivational background to
much that we do. In emergency situations, largely through adrenal
secretions, we have energy in excess of that normally present.... The
emotionally aroused organism is aroused all over. There is an overall
interaction of receptors, muscles, internal organs, and nervous
mechanisms, with resulting changes in blood chemistry, in brain waves
and in the physiological reactions already considered... One frequent
outcome of prolonged stress, emotional or otherwise, is the production
of gastric ulcers. According to Selye, this is due in part to the
overactivity of the adrenal cortex. The first clear evidence that ulcers
can be produced by emotional stress came from observations of a man
whose stomach was exposed and whose gastric activities were thus
observable.... During two weeks of prolonged anxiety, the subject
developed small haemorrhages in the lining of his stomach and also a
heightened gastric acidity. Something resembling a small ulcer finally
developed and the investigators were impressed with the possibility that
"the chain of events which begins with anxiety and conflict and
associated overactivity of the stomach and ends with haemorrhage or
perforation is that which is involved in the natural history of peptic
ulcer in human beings." Since the above observations were made, there
has been additional direct evidence that psychological stress produces
ulcers.[^21] That which distinguishes the world of a realistic person
from the world of an immature one is imagination. A superficial and
shallow person who has seen only the appearances of things is so much
enchanted by his faculty of imagination that his heart is swept every
moment by the waves of endless desire. As soon as he comes to see the
course of events as an obstacle in his way, his spirit becomes submerged
in a fearsome gloom and he is put at a complete loss. If this crisis is
accompanied with a weakness of the soul that may lead him to commit
suicide. By contrast, the realistic person is free from the bondage of
childish and unrealistic notions. He views things in a wide and
extensive perspective. He does not see things partially and does not
allow delusions to influence his practical life. Rather, he strives to
conform himself to his physical and social environment and with the
facts of his inner and external life. One who has a genuinely balanced
personality and a spirit possessing equilibrium is not shaken by every
gust of wind. The reason that some people feel upset and uneasy in times
of leisure is their inadequacy of spiritual strength and the absence of
secure foothold. Therefore, they turn to harmful and unwholesome modes
of entertainment in order to kill time. But the stronger a person is in
respect of his inner powers, the lesser does he stand in need of the
external environment. A country that has lesser need of imports has more
steady economic foundations. One who has adequate inner assets and is
not in constant need of outside assistance can deliver himself from
dangerous activities and destructive conduct. He can bring about a state
of moderation in his ethical qualities and alter the impact of external
factors on his soul. Jean Jacques Rousseau says: Prudence! Prudence
which is ever bidding us to look forward into the future, a future which
in many cases we shall never reach; here is the real source of all our
troubles! How mad it is for so short-lived a creature as man to look
forward into a future to which he rarely attains, while he neglects the
present which is his? This madness is all the more fatal since it
increases with years, and the old, always timid, prudent, and miserly,
prefer to do without necessaries to-day that they may have luxuries at a
hundred. Thus we grasp everything, we cling to everything; we are
anxious about time, place, people, things, all that is and will be; we
ourselves are but the least part of ourselves. We spread ourselves, so
to speak, over the whole world, and all this vast expanse becomes
sensitive. No wonder our woes increase when we may be wounded on every
side. How many princes make themselves miserable for the love of lands
they have never seen, and how many merchants lament in Paris over some
misfortune in the Indies! ...We no longer live in our own place, we live
outside it. What does it profit us to live in such fear of death, when
all that makes life worth living is our own? Oh, man! Live your own life
and you will no longer be wretched. Keep to your appointed place in the
order of nature and nothing can tear you from it. Do not will against
the stern law of necessity, nor waste in vain resistance the strength
bestowed on you by heaven, not to prolong or extend your existence, but
to preserve it so far and so long as heaven pleases. Your freedom and
your power extend as far and no further than your natural strength;
anything more is but slavery, deceit, and trickery.[^22]

Imam al-Sadiq, may peace be upon him, says:

*Actually man's life in the world is like a fleeting hour. Whatever that
has taken place in it up to the present is gone and you do not feel its
pleasure or pain. As to that which is to come, you don't know what it
is. All that remains in your hand of your precious life are your present
moments. Therefore* *use them for the purpose of obtaining control over
yourself and strive therein for your self-improvement and salvation. Be
steadfast in obeying God and observing His commands and refrain from sin
and violation of God's ordinances.*[^23]

If one's involvement with the past or the future is for the sake of
escaping the problems of the present, it is a psychic sickness or
prelude to such sickness in the opinion of psychologists, who say:

If one were to decide to pay no attention to the present and should one
fail to utilise the opportunities that arise, and should one continually
go on saying to oneself and others, "It is true that I am not good at my
studies, but wait and see what I will do upon entering life. All those
who did poorly in their studies nevertheless succeeded in real life. I
have certain ideas and dreams concerning the future"-this kind of
thinking shows that one wishes to escape from real life and from his
present. The psychologist knows well that these fancies do not accord
with reality and are nothing but fallacious reasoning. This kind of
thinking concerning the future is harmful, and that which is almost
certain is that the person with this kind of thinking will fail to
achieve success in the future like the present. If thinking about the
future and the past occupies all one's time and energy and causes one to
neglect the daily problems with which he is faced, such a person is
definitely unhealthy and poorly adjusted. If one cannot face his present
problems and constantly thinks about the future in order to escape them,
this thinking about the future becomes a substitute for attention to the
present. Such a substitute, which does not help in the solution of one's
problems, is worthless and injurious.[^24] The leader of world's free
men, al-Husayn ibn 'Ali, may peace be upon him, said:

*When a wise man is visited by an affliction, he is not enveloped by
grief. Rather, with forbearance and farsightedness he removes the rust
of sorrow from his heart and makes use of his intellect to find a
solution.*

With the power at our disposal we can struggle against the defeats and
adversities that assault us from every direction, and whenever there is
a spell in this battle, one's unused energies, like a heavy burden,
torment him who is forced to use them for futile ends. One of the
effective ways of relief from anxiety is to engage in some profitable
activity. Those who in times of inner turmoil engage in some beneficial
activity obtain relief during the time that they are busy, and they are
delighted and satisfied when they see the fruits of their work. For this
reason, though certainly many of such activities consist of a relative
relief, they constitute a beneficial and satisfying response and the
mind, at the least, obtains temporary relief from an apparently
insoluble personal problem. And particularly if the activity involves a
benefit for others it will be good for him too, for it is impossible
that someone who is beneficial for others should not be such for
himself. Moreover, that will save him from resorting to unwholesome and
injurious ways of keeping himself busy.

The Benefit of Unburdening One's Sorrow
---------------------------------------

Unburdening one's heart with loyal and sincere friends is one of the
means of obtaining relief from grief and mental tension. Persons in a
state of grief must be given the opportunity to relieve their inward
tensions by talking about their hardships to close friends.

Similarly, fellow-feeling for suffering friends, and helping them in
relieving their inner tensions and solving their difficulties to the
extent of one's capacity is one of the crucial as well as valuable
duties of every human being. Someone whose friendship rests on real
affection should not be indifferent to or oblivious of his friends in
times of crisis. This matter has been given complete attention in the
traditions of religious leaders and it has been pointed out that the man
of faith is a source of comfort to others.

The Noble Messenger, may God's blessings be upon him and his Family,
said:

*The best of works near God is to make happy a brother in faith by
relieving him of hunger, distress and sorrow.*[^25]

Imam al-Sadiq, may peace be upon him, said:

*Whenever one of you is affected by distress and sorrow, he must bring
it to the knowledge of his brother so that he may remove the gloom of
grief and agony from your heart.*[^26]

Schachter, the well-known psychologist, says:

If you are unhappy and distressed by your own conduct and condition and
are unable to solve your own problem, confide your difficulty to someone
that you rely upon and who is wise. Keeping a painful thought, fear, or
anxiety to oneself only makes it more persistent and bothersome. Express
your secret thought and seek advice from a wise and experienced person.
Fear and bad thoughts dwindle and disappear on confronting people. Don't
refrain from unburdening yourself before a psychiatrist or a wise
friend; for, troublesome thoughts that are consigned to the unconscious
will always remain an impediment between us and our mental peace and
happiness. It should be known that the suppression of thoughts is of two
kinds. Either it occurs naturally without our knowledge and will; that
is, our ingenious mind suppresses every troublesome thought without even
our noticing it and casts it into the depths of the memory. Or
sometimes, knowingly and voluntarily, we banish painful thoughts and
insist on not recalling them. This action is called 'repression' in the
jargon of psychology. However, that does not in the least diminish the
distress arising from that thought, and the more we try to forget it,
the more it oppresses us, causing us greater pain and mortification. In
any case, a troublesome and distressing thought that we suppress or
repress, knowingly or unknowingly, does not leave us alone. Secretly or
openly, it continues to torment us, and as long as we do not confide it
to some wise person and seek his help and advice, we will not get rid of
the suffering and torment.[^27]

Maintaining Good Spirits
------------------------

One thing that is quite effective in diminishing the impact of anxiety
and grief is making an effort to appear cheerful and happy:

'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, may peace be upon him, says:

*Keep your good spirits in adversities and maintain a lively disposition
in times of affliction.*[^28]

*Always maintain an attitude of satisfaction and conciliation in life in
order to be pleasing.*[^29]

Present-day psychologists also consider sport and maintaining an
appearance of gaiety and cheerfulness as an effective and beneficial way
of alleviating painful crises as well as an edifying factor of
personality. They offer the following advice:

Try to maintain a pleasant expression on your face. Make an effort to
always appear so lively and free of sadness and sombreness that everyone
who meets you thinks that he has met the best of his friends. If you
feel dejected or nervous, try not to manifest this dejection and sadness
in your encounter with others. Try to appear cheerful and satisfied.

When you are in good spirits and you impress upon people as being jolly
and hearty, others too will act in a genial manner towards you. They
will open up in talking to you, and you all will derive pleasure from
one another's company. When you get into in a cheerful state, there
appears an effective behavioural mode in your conduct that attracts
others.

The first step for being happy and lively are the expressions on one's
face. Don't scowl; always keep a smile on your lips. These expression
will undoubtedly produce an effect in you and will lighten your inner
heaviness. Otherwise sullenness will become a habit with you. People try
to avoid morose and gloomy persons. A lively face attracts others, and
there is nothing great about looking stern and grim. Some people imagine
that if they always keep a stern look on their face, others will be
impressed or overawed by them. This is not true. Whenever you feel sad,
bring a smile on your lips and you will see how quickly your sadness
disappears.[^30]

[^1]: Kelidhaye Khushbakhti, trans. from English into Persian by Ahmad
Aram, p. 285.

[^2]: Otto Friedman, Rawanshenasr dar khidmat-e siyasat, 131.

[^3]: William John Reilly, Twelve Rules for Straight Thinking, Persian
trans. Tafakkur-e sahih, p. 108.

[^4]: Danestanihaye jahan-e 'ilm, pp. 48-51.

[^5]: Marguerite Malm and Herbert Sorenson, Psychology for Living, Pers.
trans. Rawanshendsi baray-e zistan, p. 230.

[^6]: Shafiq Hamadani, Afkar-e Schopenhaur, (Tehran: Chapkhaneh-ye
Kayhah, 1326 H. Sh.), p. 64.

[^7]: Will Durant, The Story of Philosophy, (New York, Washington Square
Press, 1968), P. 267.

[^8]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-anwar, vol. 15, part 1, p. 53.

[^9]: Samuel Smith, Akhlaq-e Samuel, vol. 2, pp. 204-205.

[^10]: C. G. Jung, Modern Man in Search of a Soul (London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul, 1966), trans. by W. S. Dell and Cary F. Baynes, p. 264.

[^11]: Nahj al-balaghah, ed. Dr. Subhi al-Salih, p. 342.

[^12]: Rousseau, Emile, trans. by Barbara Foxley, pp. 45-46.

[^13]: Bertrand Russell, The Conquest of Happiness (London: Unwin Books,
1975), pp. 180-181.

[^14]: Dale Carnegie, Ain-e zindagi, trans. into Persian by Jahangir
Afkhami.

[^15]: Albert Einstein, Ideas and Opinions (New Delhi: Rupa & Co.,
1984), p.38.

[^16]: Nahj al-balaghah, ed. Fayd al-Islam, p. 1250.

[^17]: Muhammad Hasan Nasir al-Din Sahib zamani, Ansu-ye Chehrakh
(Tehran: 'Ata' i, 1343 H. Sh.) vol. 3 of Ruh-e bashar, p. 213.

[^18]: Al-Amidi, Ghuraral-hikam, p. 23.

[^19]: Ibid., p. 16.

[^20]: Ibid., p. 351.

[^21]: Munn, Norman. L., Psychology: The Fundamentals of Human
Adjustment, 4th ed., Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1961, pp. 321,
325, 342, 352.

[^22]: Rousseau, Emile, pp. 46-47.

[^23]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 454.

[^24]: Malm & Sorenson, Op. cit., p. 238.

[^25]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, p. 405.

[^26]: Wasail al Shiah, vol. 2, p. 55.

[^27]: Rushd-e shakhsiyyat, pp. 109-110.

[^28]: Ghurar al-hikam p. 565.

[^29]: Ibid., p. 564.

[^30]: Malm & Sorenson, op. cit., pp. 77-78.


