Chapter 6: The basis of Social Co-operation
===========================================

The delicate feelings and emotions that illuminate the panorama of life
in the form of various forms of kindness, help and assistance to one's
fellow beings belong to the most sublime of human motives. It is this
feeling that intensely affects the human heart on witnessing the
sufferings, hardships and afflictions of others and prepares it for all
kinds of self-sacrifice and self-denial.

It is an undeniable fact that pleasure and pain, suffering and joy,
poverty and prosperity are an inalienable part of man's life. But
fortunately many of these sufferings, misfortunes, and afflictions, with
all the bitterness and burden they entail, are remediable, and their
causes, which blacken the horizon of the lives of the afflicted, like
dark and inauspicious clouds, can be cleared with mutual assistance.

Man is not merely a living organism but the bearer of the universal
message of goodness, wisdom, beauty, and human worthiness. The mutual
relations of human beings with one another should be based on sincere
reciprocal sympathy, love and co-cooperativeness, not on the basis of
ostentation, expedience and a businesslike attitude. The solution of
life's problems is impossible without forgiveness, sacrifice, and
kindness to fellowmen in critical moments, for sympathy, self-sacrifice
and mutual forgiveness are among the pillars of the edifice of social
life, which is based on co-operation.

Those, individuals or groups, who have such a spirit in social conduct
attain to their full maturity. Those who have concern for life should,
in the first place, render it service and play a dear and definite role
in the creation of a strong and healthy society. The higher the degree
of emotional maturity of persons and the more developed their social
outlook, the more will they be attentive to one another's interests. A
positive and sympathetic thinking about others, as a mark of developed
humanity, will help create a wholesome environment for a better life for
the individual. The social sciences prove that true self-interest
involves concern for others, co-cooperativeness, and sympathy.

There is a saying which says, "You receive with the same hand that you
give." How can one who does not sow the seeds of benevolence reap the
fruit of kindness? Accordingly, one's social outlook and ethos
constitute the basis of one's human merit and the criterion of the
individual's personality.

On the contrary, the absence of such a spirit in individuals and groups
is a sign of backwardness and lack of social maturity. Their
indifference, unconcern, and lack of the sense of moral responsibility
are symptoms of a psychological disorder and sickness, as much as they
are marks of social immaturity. They do not perceive the relatedness of
their own lives to the happiness and welfare of others. Such a society
resembles a ship sinking in a storm at sea, where everyone tries to save
his own life.

To be sure, the habits of sacrifice, forgiveness, and altruism are not
easily acquired. One thinker says:

Altruism is difficult at first, but the further we advance on this path
the greater becomes our capacity for it, as if benevolent acts were
mothers which in the course of time give birth to numerous offsprings!  
 This is a fact. Serving the people and sacrificing for their sake is
hard for someone who is selfish and self-centred, who greedily wants
everything for himself and is willing to sacrifice everything in order
to attain his own ends. Every effort and endeavour involves discomfort,
even thought and understanding. There are different forms of effort. One
kind of effort gives vision, broadens the horizons of thought, leads man
to truth and the knowledge of the world's realities, helping him obtain
the highest rewards in the Hereafter. The other kind of effort leads man
into deviance and alienates him from reality. An effort that constantly
enlarges the circle of self-interest with no reasonable limits will lead
to the dissolution of the inner faculties that govern man's moral
conduct.  
 There are many persons who consider themselves as being endowed with
feeling and emotion; they are dismayed at witnessing the misfortunes and
afflictions of others. But they are not willing to make any commitment
involving responsibility. They shun any responsibility that may fall
upon them and which involves helping the needy in a monetary or some
other manner, or requires some effort on their part, or involves
foregoing a part of their pleasures. The reason behind such an attitude
is that they have not wanted to get used to even small and simple duties
that could prepare them for more significant tasks.  
 To feel the grief and suffering of others is a good and admirable
thing. But what is the use of it if that does not lead to action and
cannot lighten the burden of those who suffer? What benefit can humanity
derive from dormant feelings that hide in the heart and have no effect
whatsoever on real life? Mere goodwill for human life is not sufficient.
Genuine goodness inevitably involves action.  
 The Sublimity of Spiritual Pleasures  
 Striving to solve the problem of others and relieving them of their
afflictions is not only the duty of every person, it is one of the best
and most sublime pleasures of life. The scope of one's love should be so
wide and inclusive that there should be room in it for everyone. Such a
love can illuminate the soul and purge the heart of all suffering and
bring true happiness to man, making him feel that everything that there
is in the world is beautiful and lovely. A Western scholar writes  
 There is a reward for every virtue and a punishment for every vice, but
this punishment and that reward do not lie beyond virtue and vice
themselves. What can the reward of virtue be except virtue itself? And
what can be a worse punishment for vice than vice itself?  
 In fact, reward and punishment are the natural consequence of our acts.
One who puts his hands in fire gets burnt and one who acts in an evil
manner and violates his duties receives the direct result of his deeds.
You should not ask yourself, 'What is to be gained by goodness?' Be
good, for goodness' sake. In the same way as day follows night and light
follows darkness, true happiness, which consists of inner peace, will
greet us as a result of our virtuous conduct.  
 One who does some good to others within the limits of his duties feels
an unbounded joy within his soul. At such times it is as if he has risen
over his ordinary surroundings to find himself on a brighter horizon
beyond the confines of this life, and, as a result of this sublime
feeling, he attains happiness.  
 Good intentions are fine, but one must make good deeds one's goal. We
have a pleasant feeling when good thoughts cross our mind, but good
acts, like shining stars, brighten the horizons of others' souls. We can
build the foundations of personal merit by the means of our actions, or
can destroy these foundations to build the house of vice and corruption
on their ruins. Yes, we are able to accomplish either of these two
alternatives, and, hence, our responsibility is truly great.  
 There are two kinds of people. Those who undertake painstaking efforts
for the comfort of others and those who cause hardship to others for the
sake of their own comfort. The second kind of people, while they cause
distress to others, are not themselves free from wretchedness. Yet the
first kind obtains happiness in the course of working for others'
welfare. The acts that are performed with the purpose of helping others
have great and remarkable results, no matter how small they might
be.[^1]

There is no limit to benevolence and altruism, for the emotional
resources of man are vast and inexhaustible. In fact, the more they are
tapped the more abundantly do they flow. It is said that "the human
intellect is finite but human passions are boundless: they can take
everything under their angelic wings." Ultimately, benevolent and
altruistic assistance is a virtue that is not attained by everyone.

Indifference to Others' Problems
--------------------------------

Those who view every act of benevolence towards others as a cumbersome
matter and regard people with ill will and resentment, are, in fact,
those who have severed their spiritual links with the world in which
they live, so much so that they are immersed within themselves and are
unconcerned with others and their problems. They imagine that no one
else has an equal right to live, and they themselves are incapable of
perceiving their own stakes in the general good and welfare.

Of course, this group of people is not devoid of human feeling and they
do sense the suffering of others. But they are so imprisoned within the
walls of egocentrism that there is no room in their scheme of things for
altruistic sentiments. In other words, they are incapable of
transcending their individual egos to reach the collective self.

Dr. Alexis Carrel, the well-known scholar, says

Everyone who directs himself wisely through life gradually undergoes
profound changes. When the body and the soul act in accordance with
their nature they become more resourceful. Conformity to the laws of
survival, regeneration, and spiritual edification automatically
reinforces all physical and psychic activities. This progress becomes
especially noteworthy with the development of ethical merits and the
growth of the moral, the aesthetic, and the religious sense, as well as
personal altruism and forbearance. At the same time, the intellect is
also illuminated.  
 When one understands that the goal of life is not mundane profit but
life itself, one no longer devotes his attention exclusively to the
external world, but views more closely his own life and that of those
around him. He comes to know that he is dependent on others and that
others are dependent upon him. This brings to light the artificial
character of the views of Jean Jacques Rousseau, the illogicality of the
social contract, the danger of individualism, and the necessity of
paying attention to others like oneself at all stages of life.  
 There is an open contradiction between individual self-seeking and the
love of one's fellowmen, which is essential to social existence. The
development and growth of the body takes place through the means of
environmental agents and with the help of other individual Throughout
its foetal existence, the human being is a kind of parasite dependent on
the mother, and until the age of maturity is a parasite dependent on the
family and society. Accordingly, he becomes accustomed to regarding the
boons of his environment as a right. The ubiquity of individualism in
all living creatures owes its existence to this instinctive urge to
egoism.  
 On the other hand, extreme self-love makes the formation of a real
society impossible. Hence, the love of one's fellowmen is as necessary
as self-love, and there should be an equilibrium between 'I' and 'we" as
two opposite tendencies. This equilibrium is a necessary condition of
our success in life, in the same way as the precise movements of the
hand depend on the functional opposition of the contracting and
stretching muscles of the fingers. There are various ways in which
individual 'I' become transformed into a collective 'We'.[^2]

Islam and Social Ties
---------------------

The Islamic program of education has been framed with a view to
expanding general social consciousness and broadening the people's
intellectual horizons. That is because the wider their intellectual
perspective and the higher their level of thinking, the easier it is for
them to emerge from the darkness of selfishness and monopolistic
motives. This program has been prepared in such a manner as to develop a
collective ethos while simultaneously strengthening the individual
spirit, so that individualism is reconciled with co-cooperativeness, and
the individuals constituting society neither become hollow and devoid of
personality nor self-centred and indifferent towards one another.

Social cohesion in an Islamic society is related to the bond between the
individual and God. The people encourage one another to benevolence,
piety, and worthy deeds and co-operate with one another in generating
and sustaining an environment in which the young generation cultivates
the love of virtue, benevolence, and goodness in the light of a pure
faith. This helps mobilise all the constructive energies of the people
toward general welfare and good, not toward corruption and vice. In this
way, the goals and activities of the members of society are harmonised,
their sense of co-operation awakened, and their individual and
collective energies set to work for the service of mankind.

Since Islam essentially requires a co-operative and sympathetic society
for the establishment of its prescribed social duties, and as
benevolence and benefaction form the basis of its ethical code and
program, it warns that anyone who is not concerned with the service of
society is not a Muslim. The Holy Prophet (s) declared

*One who wakes up without the feeling of concern for the affairs of
Muslims is not a Muslim.*[^3]

When Islam rose over pagan Arabia, it offered a teaching that
encompassed all the affairs relating to society and the individual. It
undertook the task of moral education and spiritual purification of a
people among whom vindictiveness, mundane ambition, exploitation, and
licentiousness were prevalent. It called them to brotherhood,
benevolence, love, and friendship. It established such a basis for the
positive personality of every individual that no divisive agent, such as
hate and hostility, could separate them from one another. In this way,
it brought into existence a society characterised with strength and
merit.

In that society, in which faith, benevolence, and service were the
criteria of personal worth, every individual felt so much involved in
the destiny of others as if he were solely responsible for it. Intense
attachment, forgiveness, self-denial, and self-sacrifice characterised
their mutual relations. The Holy Qur'an describes this sublime and
luminous relationship in these words:

***And those (Helpers) who offered their dwellings and their hearts for
the hospitality of the Emigrants, they love whomsoever has emigrated to
them not finding in their breasts any need or miserliness for what they
have been given, and preferring others above themselves even though
poverty be their portion. (59:9)***

The Qur'an describes the benevolent in these words

***It is no piety that you turn you faces to the east and to the west.
True piety is this: to believe in God, and the Last Day, the angels, the
Scripture, and the prophets, to give of one's substance however
cherished, to kinsmen and orphans, the needy, the traveller, beggars,
and to ransom the slave ... (2:177)***

On the other hand, at the sensitive moments when the well-to-do person
offers generous help to the needy, a proper and subtle approach should
be adopted in order to preserve the dignity of the needy person and to
avoid undesirable psychological consequences.

Islam asks the wealthy to hold their hand low while giving so that the
needy person's hand is above while he takes, in order that he does not
feel humiliated and crushed. They should also refrain from being proud
and overbearing.

'Ali-may peace be upon him-said

*How nice it is for the rich to behave with humility with the poor for
the sake of that which is with God! Yet nicer is the proud dignity of
the poor in front of the rich due to their trust in and reliance on
God.*[^4]

The Visage of the Benevolent in Islam
-------------------------------------

Of the prominent signs of a Muslim are kindness and benevolence, a
sincere kindness and generosity that are inspired by a special motive.
It is a kindness that is done for the sake of God, even though the
persons to whom it is done be strangers one does not know and with whom
one has no acquaintance or kinship. His heart is full of love and
affection for them and he does not expect any reward or gratitude. This
conduct of his is motivated by a profound love that thrives in the
depths of his heart and is replenished by a boundless, inexhaustible
source: the bountiful and all- generous mainspring of Divine love.

Is it possible for any motive except faith and trust in the fair reward
that God has prepared for the virtuous to induce man to perform acts of
unalloyed and absolute benevolence free of every kind of personal
interest?

Hence true benevolence and kindness is something whose mainspring is an
inner Divine motive and ideal, whose sole end is the attainment of God's
good pleasure. Islam strives to create this sublime ideal and Divine
motivation in the depths of the people's souls, and by this means it
creates a profound and expansive consciousness that is commensurate with
the expanse and depth of the universe and which cannot be contained in
any dry and limited teaching. With this expansive and all-inclusive
consciousness and vision and the genuine bond of feeling between one's
soul and the spirit of creation, the work of a wise Maker, as well as
with the awareness of God's infinite power, the artificial and self-made
blinkers are removed from the eyes of man's soul.

This sublime human consciousness is born as a result of sincere
servitude to God and the eternal bond and relation with Him. The
perpetual worship of the Creator, the effort to seek His favour, and the
wish to live in the shadow of His grace and beneficence bring man to
such a point that he can attain to the station of God's vicegerency. He
can come to possess a love that can remove every suffering and obstacle
from the path of humanity and wage a struggle against every form of evil
and corruption.

With all its guiding precepts Islam nourishes this genuine feeling in
such a fashion that it becomes amalgamated with the individual's nature.
And when love becomes the mainspring of feeling and spreads its roots
deep into the core of man's being, it gives rise to a yearning which,
with voluntary zeal, is prepared to do benevolence and service to
society. When that happens, enmity, malice, hostility and insolence
cannot take roots in individuals but remain unstable, removable with a
little of attention, for nothing else is better capable of eradicating
these vices from the soul than this invaluable cure-all.

The profound concern of the Qur'an in regard to all the human beings in
the world and the close attention paid to them has an extraordinary
purifying effect on the soul. The consciousness of the firm and
inalienable bond between oneself and the world, brings the order of
one's being into harmony with the order of creation and makes man view
all beings, except a group of harmful creatures, with benevolence and
love.

Getting habituated to the feelings of benevolence, which reflect the
greatness and sublime station of man's humanity, and a uniform feeling
of tenderness for all living things, for the entire universe and its
creatures, creates a healthy and balanced motivation in man that is
indispensable for a fruitful life and removes darkness and violence from
his soul and purges it of impurities.

It was the heavenly and refined consciousness of the Noble Prophet of
Islam that made him say concerning his vicious kinsmen who had adopted a
hostile and inhuman conduct towards him:

*"O God, be merciful and forgiving to my people, for they are
ignorant."*

The inexhaustible love and benevolence of the Prophet of Islam (s) not
only extended to all human beings, in practice it taught Muslims the
principles of kindness and benevolence on a very extensive level. One
day the Prophet (s) told this story to a group of his companions. A man
passing through a scorching desert was overwhelmed with thirst. Finding
a well, he descended into it and quenched his thirst with water. On
coming out he saw a dog that had lost all its strength due to thirst and
in agony was rubbing its nose on the ground. The man saw that the poor
animal was suffering as it could not find water. He felt pity and
compassion for it and decided to give it some water. Thereupon, he again
descended into the well and filling his shoes with water placed them in
front of the dog which was about to perish out of thirst. God Almighty
forgave that man as a reward for this act of kindness.

The Companions asked the Prophet (S): "Can we too seek God's reward by
being kind to animals?" The Prophet (S) replied: "Yes. You will be
rewarded for service to every living thing."

Every act must be judged by its motives and the source of any action
should not be divorced from its consequences, exactly like a disease
which is treated by taking into consideration its cause.

The Visage of Benevolence in the West
-------------------------------------

If today's developed nations allocate an amount of their yearly budget
and a fraction of their economic resources for the development of
backward and underdeveloped nations, their action, in the first place,
is not inspired by pure humanitarian motives or by sheer benevolence.
Rather, it is because if the purchasing power of underdeveloped nations
collapses and they are unable to consume the industrial products of the
industrialised countries, their economies will suffer due to a decline
in foreign trade. Hence maintenance of a relative economic equilibrium
between the two sides is the basic motive behind this kind of aid.

Many individual acts of benevolence, too, serve as a means of satisfying
selfish needs and there is no trace of sincerity in them; rather, mostly
they serve as a bridge for attaining personal objectives. However, human
merit as a source of benevolence has its sole place in man's character
and, therefore, while making a judgement concerning the value of an act,
it is not proper to consider solely the consequences. We should not look
for an arithmetical equation for determining the value of a good act by
equating it with its results. Arithmetics alone cannot resolve ethical
issues.

Alexis Carrel paints the visage of benevolence in the West in the
following description:

The motive behind our actions is either personal gain-more than anything
else, financial advantage-or the satisfaction of our exhibitionist
tendencies, the desire for title, recognition, and social status. This
quest for personal gain often conceals itself under the garb of
hypocrisy and hides behind the mask of philanthropy. One can observe
such instances of treachery in military circles, universities, offices
and courts ....  
 The very meaning of honour has been distorted. Those who dedicate
themselves to a great purpose or strive in an unassuming manner appear
to be crazy and contemptible. The signs of self-seeking effort can be
seen everywhere-in the lady who engages in charitable undertakings
without being concerned with helping the destitute in the depth of her
heart, but who wishes either to become the leader of some institution or
earn the Legion of Honour, or to make a profit by opening a lucrative
venture; in the famous physician who recommends a medicine to his pupils
and patients because he has been secretly bribed by its manufacturer; in
the scholar whose efforts are not for the sake of advancement of
knowledge, but for the hope of occupying an academic chair and the
financial advantages associated with it; in the medical scientists who
do not observe any code of morality either in conducting tests on their
patients or in their medical care; in the students who tempt the college
office clerk in order to obtain question papers before the examinations;
in the pupil who sells the vitaminized sweets gifted by some charitable
institution in the black market. Often the ugly and brutal face of
avarice hides under the mask of altruism, scholarship, and philanthropy.
We are fond of money, for money procures everything and gives us power
before everything else. Almost everyone can be bought, either with money
or with things that wealth can provide and the wealthy can offer as a
temptation. Ultimately money helps us satisfy our base lusts.[^5]

The following story represents an example of the conduct and the way of
thinking of those who were brought up under the influence of Islam's
teachings. The story helps us understand the real character of the
Islamic view of benevolence and charity.

One day a man came to the Noble Messenger (s) and declared that he was
hungry and tired. The Prophet immediately sent someone to his house to
fetch food for the man. He was told with regret by the Prophet's wife
that there was nothing except water in the house. Disappointed that he
could not feed the man, the Prophet turned to his Companions and asked
them: "Can anyone of you accept him as a guest?" Thereupon, one of the
men belonging to the Ansar extended his hospitality to the man. When he
reached home he found that there was enough food only for the children.
He told his wife to make arrangements to provide food for the guest. At
the time of dinner, he put the lamp out so that the guest should think
that he too was eating the dinner with him!

The great Prophet of Islam said:

*"It is obligatory on every Muslim to do an act of charity every day"
Someone said to him, "But who can afford to give charity every day?" The
Prophet (S) replied: "If you remove troublesome stones and obstacles
from the public way that is also considered an act of charity.*"[^6]

It should be noted that the Prophet (s) mentioned lifting of stones from
the road used by Muslims as a charitable and godly action because that
is the least that a man without any means can accomplish. That is,
someone whose status does not allow him to lift stones from highways
should accomplish bigger tasks. Those who have plenteous means of all
kinds must perform acts of benevolence and charity in proportion to
their capacity, because there must be a proportionate relationship
between an individual's means and his works.

Once, one of my friends who was an influential social worker said to me:
"My daily program every morning after leaving home and before taking up
my routine work is to consider it my duty to perform some act of
altruism though it may involve guiding someone who has sought my counsel
regarding his work. This is part of my fixed program in life."

Truly, if all Muslims and concerned human beings should decide to put
into action the program suggested by the Holy Prophet of Islam and
should everyone perform an act of charity in proportion to his means and
in accordance with his profession, the wheels of social life would
rotate more smoothly and many of the people's problems and difficulties
would be solved in this way.

The Criterion of Human Worth Before God
---------------------------------------

When the Prophet of Islam (s) was asked as to who was the dearest of
human beings to God, he replied:

*It is someone who is of greatest benefit to the people.'*

The Messenger of God (s) also said

*If someone hears a person calling Muslims for help and does not respond
positively to his call and request for help and does not assist him, he
is not a Muslim.*[^7]

Once, Safwan was present at a gathering with al-'Imam al-Sadiq ('a).
Suddenly a person who was visibly worried entered the room. When he
spoke and described his difficulty, it became evident that it was a
financial problem that he had failed to solve. The Imam ordered Safwan
to go immediately and to do something to solve the difficulty of his
brother in faith. Safwan got up and left and returned into the Imam's
presence after solving that man's problem. The Imam asked him about the
matter and Safwan replied, "God has set right the matter."

The Imam said to him, "You should know that the solution of this
apparently small difficulty for which you spent a little time of yours
is of greater value than your performing circumambulation of the Ka'bah
non- stop for a full week." Then he narrated the following incident.
Once a man came to al-Imam al-Hasan ('a) with some difficulty and asked
him to help him out. Al-Imam al-Hasan ('a) immediately got ready and
went out with him. On the way, they came across al-Husayn ibn 'Ali ('a)
who was engaged in prayer. Al-Imam al-Hasan ('a) asked the man why he
had not approached al-Husayn ibn 'Ali ('a) and asked his assistance. The
man answered that at first he had wanted to approach him but had given
up the idea on hearing that al-Husayn was in the state of i'tikaf.

Al-Imam al-Hasan ('a) said to him: "Had he received the opportunity to
assist you it would have been dearer to him than a month's i'tikaf."[^8]

Boundless Charity and Love
--------------------------

The more expansive and wider the scope of human feeling, the greater the
number of people that it embraces. Such an expansive love and
benevolence cannot find room in the breasts of people who have narrow
and straitened hearts. Their benevolence is not universal so as to
embrace people belonging to every group and class. Such a benevolence
and compassion is not close to Divine mercy.

(A man said in the presence of al-Husayn ibn 'Ali:) "Goodness is wasted
when done to those who are not worthy of it." The Imam said to him:

*"That is not true; for benevolence is like a torrential rain which
comes down everywhere and equally waters orchards as well as
wastelands."*[^9]

Al-Imam al-Sajjad ('a) exhorted al-Imam al-Baqir ('a), his son, not to
hold back his kindness and benevolence from anyone and to carry out this
moral and human duty to the extent of his capacity in respect of all
human beings:

*My son, don't hold back your kindness from anyone who seeks your
charity and benevolence; for even if he were not worthy of that kindness
you would prove to be worthy of it by responding positively to his
request.* [^10]

Al-Husayn ibn 'Ali, the master of world's freemen-may peace be upon
him-in a profound and eloquent sermon, calls men to benevolence. The
following is a free paraphrase of his speech.

*O people, adopt the virtues of benevolence and chivalry and hearken to
solve the difficulties of the destitute, for benevolence is a greatly
profitable quality. O people, seek salvation and felicity by the means
of service to God's creatures. You, who have the capacity to alleviate
the pains of those who suffer, should not let others speak ill of you on
account of your negligence in rendering benign service. If you give a
helping hand to the weak and the disabled and they do not thank you for
your kindness, do not be disappointed and dispirited in your altruism,
because God will give you a great reward and grant you His inexhaustible
favours and bounties. In fact, it is one of His great favours that God
has given you the capacity to satisfy the wants of the needy.*  
*It does not behove you to be greedy and avaricious. For, should you
acquire all the bounties of God and yet be unwilling to help the
deprived and bring relief to the suffering, God shall change the favours
that He has granted you into suffering and pain. He will make you face
humiliation and let you taste the afflictions of the deprived and the
suffering.*  
*How delightful it is to bring solace and consolation to a broken heart
or offer relief to some destitute! Should you be worthy and honourable,
you will achieve a good name amongst the people, and they will look upon
you with gratitude and affection instead of resentment and rancour when
you pass by them. Perhaps many of those who are needy today will be able
to reward you for your kindness in their better days.*  
*Were benevolence to take the form of a human being and were you to
behold his beautiful and luminous visage, you would see him as a most
handsome and charming youth whose sight gladdens your heart. And were it
possible for vice and misconduct to appear before you in a human form,
you would undoubtedly be so repelled by the sight of his ugly and
hateful countenance that you would close your eyes in horror and
revulsion.*  
*O people, be generous and munificent in order to enjoy honour and
dignity, for one who is parsimonious and stingy shall be petty and
contemptible.*  
*The most generous of men is he who gives to someone in need who cannot
return his kindness and the most forgiving of them is one who forgives
despite possessing the power to retaliate. The noblest of kinsmen is he
who does not neglect to be benevolent and caring in regard to his
relatives, though they should not observe the demands of familial ties
with him.*  
*If you were so noble and forbearing, you would be like a tree that
bears plenteous fruits, a tree whose roots are nourished by goodness and
blessing. The branches of felicity and good fortune would spread over
you and others will benefit from their shadow. Its sweet and pleasant
fruits will free you of all bitterness.*  
*Every good man should make haste in performing good works and service
to God's creatures. He will receive such a reward and blessing for it in
the future as he had never expected. Should he, for the sake of God's
good pleasure, offer a helping hand to someone in need the generous and
magnanimous Lord will assist him on the day of his need and save him
from facing hardships.*  
*O people, God shall take away the sorrow and darkness of the world and
the hereafter from the heart of every one of you who brings relief to a
suffering soul.*  
*He will reward the good-doers for their good-doing, for God loves the
good-doers.*[^11]

Good doing and charity are not confined to monetary help, or to
providing relief from physical suffering and hardship. Rather, spiritual
assistance, moral guidance and correction of moral conduct and qualities
have a higher and greater value than material charity.

Hence if one were to assist those who are lost and help them extricate
themselves from the clutches of corruption and misguidance and enter the
luminous environs of the truth, he would be doing the greatest favour to
them. From the viewpoint of Islam, the most sublime and the most
valuable act of charity and benevolence is to help the deviant and
deliver those bogged down in the mire of corruption and wretchedness.

The sublime leader of Islam (s) said to 'Ali ('a):

*If God were to guide a single person through you, that is better for
you than everything under the sun.*[^12]

[^1]: Aveberry, John Lubbock Baron, Dar justojiz-e khushbakhti, pp.
201-203.

[^2]: Carrel, Alexis, Reflexions sur la conduite de la vie, Persian
trans. Rah wa rasm-e zindagi, pp. 145-146.

[^3]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, p. 390.

[^4]: Nahj al-balaghah, Hikam, No. 406.

[^5]: Carrel, op. cit pp. 15-16.

[^6]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-anwar, vol. xv, p. 131.

[^7]: Ibid, vol ii p. 164.

[^8]: Ibid, vol. ii P- 194

[^9]: Al-Harrani, Tuhaf al uqul, p. 245.

[^10]: Al-Kulayni, op. cit, p. 153.

[^11]: Al-Irbili, Kashf al-ghummah, vol. ii, p. 204.

[^12]: Shaykh 'Abbas al-Qummi, Safinat al-Bihar vol. ii, p. 700.


