Chapter 7: Man's Spiritual Needs
================================

In the same way as man has physical needs in life which he strives and
struggles to fulfil, the soul too has needs that must be satisfied.
These spiritual needs and urges have been placed by the hands of
creation in the depths of his soul.

The soul craves for appreciation and recognition, and it is for the sake
of satisfaction of this inner urge that everyone so eagerly seeks social
approval for his acts and conduct and is keen to receive the
appreciation that he deserves. This helps reaffirm his personality and
fulfils his aspirations and expectations.

Since self-love is inherent in man, he is in passionate love with his
own creative achievements and intellectual and artistic accomplishments.
Hence encouragement and appreciation play a most basic role in the
motivation of individuals, and this is one of the most essential facts
of social life. Appreciation, while being the simplest and cheapest kind
of medicine, is so marvellously effective that it can infuse new life
into a torpid and impoverished society and open before it new vistas of
life.

On the contrary, parsimony in showing appreciation and absence of
encouragement are big obstacles in the way of society's progress and
growth. They prevent latent capacities and talents from blossoming by
causing lethargy, apathy and isolationism, which take the place of
creativity and dynamism.

Young people who have mentally and emotionally entered a critical phase
of life and reached the threshold of independent life need, more than
anything else, appreciation and encouragement to actively advance in
life and to apply greater effort.

Bertrand Russell says:

Praise should not be given for anything that should be a matter of
course. I should give it for a new development of courage or skill, and
for an act of unselfishness as regards possessions, if achieved after a
moral effort. All through education any usually good piece of work
should be praised. To be praised for a difficult achievement is one of
the most delightful experiences in youth, and the desire for this
pleasure is quite proper as an added incentive, though it should not be
the main motive. The main motive should always be an interest in the
matter itself, whatever the matter may happen to be ...  
 All moral instruction must be immediate and concrete; it must arise out
of a situation which has grown up naturally, and must not go beyond what
ought to be done in this particular instance. The child himself will
apply the moral in other similar cases. It is much easier to grasp a
concrete instance and apply analogous considerations to an analogous
instance than to apprehend a general rule and proceed deductively. Do
not say, in a general way, 'Be brave, be kind,' but urge him to some
particular piece of daring, and then say, 'Bravo, you were a brave boy;'
get him to let his little sister play with his mechanical engine, and
when he sees her beaming with delight say, 'That's right, you were a
kind boy.' The same principle applies in dealing with cruelty: look out
for its faint beginnings and prevent them from developing.[^1]

It is the biggest blow to the creative capacities of the young to show
indifference to their accomplishments, to deprive them of recognition,
and to set no store by their personality. Because when they feel that
people think nothing of their work and the fruits of their effort are of
no account to them and deemed worthless, they become greatly upset.
Their growing capacities and talents lose their vigour and languish.
Their sense of confidence and future hope die within their hearts. As
their psychological need of security remains unsatisfied they become
prone to psychic illness. That is because when an urge remains
unsatisfied, it is repressed and becomes buried in the unconscious,
giving rise to undesirable complexes that vex the mind.

Aside from this, when persons possessing knowledge and skill discover
that the results of their labour and work cannot help them obtain
recognition, their feelings of disappointment may radically alter the
course of their thought and conduct. As a result, they may take recourse
to improper methods in order to satisfy their psychological need.
Instead of seeking spiritual excellence and human merit, they may resort
to fraud, deceit, and other illegitimate means in order to obtain some
kind of recognition in life. This is a fact which has been established
by psychological findings.

The Profound Effect of Appreciation and Recognition
---------------------------------------------------

A single laudatory remark can produce a profound effect on one's spirit
and bring about a spiritual revolution that could impel one to devote an
entire lifetime to intense effort and endeavour for achievement and
success. There are many who consider their success and achievement as
owing to the appreciation shown by their elders and their generous
compliments. Were it not for their appreciation, they could not have
climbed the ladder of success.

Amongst progressive nations of the world a special importance is given
to recognition of outstanding individuals, and this is done in various
ways. In such environs the light of genius and talent is never
extinguished and suitable conditions are maintained for the development
of talent and the emergence of dormant capacities, because learning and
effort receive the recognition they deserve.

But, regrettably, many of our press media, whose duty is to educate and
guide the people and whose goal should be to enlighten minds and raise
the general level of the people's knowledge and their awareness of real
problems of life, mostly promote matters which lead to the depression of
the general mental level. They divert the people's attention towards
insignificant things and spread moral mediocrity and decadence, whereas
there is no trace in them of any effort to promote real values and to
encourage men of science and merit. A contemporary Iranian writer
criticises this significant failing of our society in these words:

Motivation-real, not one marred by publicity-is one of the biggest of
our psychological and social needs. Nowadays our businessmen and
marketing experts have created diverse and perplexing forms of false
kinds of motivation. If some gentleman or lady taking part in a quiz
competition, for instance, is able to name the fifth mistress of Louis
XVI, they send him or her by air on a month's trip to Europe. Or if one
of the contestants in a certain competition is able to describe better
than others the advantages of using a certain head shampoo, he receives
a big bundle of cosmetics as a gift. But we have not yet instituted an
award to show recognition to our best creative minds of the year.

During youth, which is the most important phase of life in respect of
the foundations of one's moral character, one is capable of showing
appreciation and admiration for outstanding work or some remarkable
service rendered by someone. But the more one advances in life, the
lesser does anything attract one's attention and admiration. That is why
it is essential to reinforce the spirit of appreciation and gratitude in
persons in their formative years and to awaken their feelings of
admiration for outstanding personalities.

This program is quite effective in maintaining psychological balance and
equilibrium in the youth because of their natural propensity for
adopting some kind of model. Of necessity, the young person selects
certain personalities as his models, and if during that stage his
attention is not turned towards men of higher character, and should he
fail to develop an admiration for their accomplishments and deeds, he
may choose perverse characters as his models and try to emulate them. It
is obvious what bad and undesirable effects that would have on the life
of the youth. Those who have a refined temperament, a kind heart, and an
open mind commend and applaud every good deed and positive action that
they come across. The sublime perspicacity and high-mindedness of great
men has an extraordinary radiance that invigorates others and gives them
power and warmth. Contact with higher morals raises one's level of
thinking and relieves one of egoism, which is the greatest obstacle in
the way of moral improvement and development. Those who have come under
the influence of the spirit of great men and have been nourished by
their thoughts, will be advantageously equipped to ascend to the peaks
of human sublimity. But there are some others who staunchly grudge
mentioning even the merits of their closest friends. They are never
willing to say a word concerning their worthy and meritorious qualities
or to pay a compliment appreciating their valuable services and
accomplishments. Most of the time they adopt an indifferent attitude .

There are some base characters that lack the higher human virtues and
are capable of acquiring every undesirable quality. They deprecate and
view with contempt everything that is praiseworthy and admirable, and
express their displeasure and disapproval of everything. The
achievements and successes of others are painful and distressing to
them. Not only they cannot bear hearing any word of praise concerning
their successful colleagues, but are delighted by their problems and
hardships, which are the biggest means of their satisfaction.

When they feel that their colleagues are getting ahead of them, the
flames of anger leap up in the furnace of their hearts. Their
narrow-mindedness and envy may even lead them to resort to unseemly and
hostile conduct against their fellows and induce them to lie in wait for
an opportunity to deliver an unmanly blow to their rivals.

This kind of narrow-mindedness and decadence, which is untouched by
wholesome morals, is well reflected in the following couplet:

Now that Providence has looked with favour upon my rival and granted him
gifts,  
 Haven't I the right to view him with indignation and regard him with
disdain?

The wise take lesson from the conduct of the foolish and refrain from
their mistakes. The foolish, however, are not willing to follow the
conduct of the wise and draw lesson from their morals and human merits.

Cynicism and Principled Criticism
---------------------------------

Finding fault with people and negating their personality are one of the
greatest defects of our society and these characteristics are prevalent
among all its various classes. Anyone who makes an innovative move or
starts something new immediately attracts criticism and disapprobation
from every quarter and group, though the critics should lack all
competence to give an opinion and judgement concerning the matter.
Without anyone making a study of the new venture or inquiring into its
character, the innovator is assailed by a flood of criticism from every
side. Dale Carnegie writes:

The late Johan Wanamaker confessed: I learned thirty years ago that it
is foolish to scold. I have enough trouble overcoming my own limitations
without fretting over the fact that God has not seen fit to distribute
evenly the gift of intelligence.[^2]

Principled and proper criticism is undoubtedly one of the beneficial
methods of reforming society. But what is unfortunate is that most
criticism is made without due consideration and study. This is itself an
injustice and a violation of others' rights which blocks the way of
change and innovation, as this vice of society may discourage even the
strongest of individuals in his efforts and make him feel despondent.

According to psychologists, criticism of others and finding fault with
them often reflect the critic's own shortcomings and inadequacies which
he unconsciously projects on to others. In this regard they say:

In general, criticism and censure of others' actions and lapses mostly
derive from our own shortcomings of which we are not aware. We observe
these inadequacies in others because unconsciously we sense their
presence in ourselves. The wise and positive person does not spend his
time criticising and blaming others, for he is always engaged in doing
something positive and beneficial. The critics rarely belong to the
class of creative and productive individuals. In fact, the art critics
in their criticism of others' art implicitly criticise their own work.
The experts who always show the 'practical way' are mostly theoreticians
who have faced practical defeat.  
 Undeserved and unreasonable criticism mostly results in violation of
rights and destroys the permanent value of everything. A source of
intense dissatisfaction is traceable in persons who make unjust and
unjustified judgements of whose unfairness they are themselves
unconscious. The inner dissatisfaction is transferred from inside such a
person to the outside and spoils the worth of everything. We observe
such a kind of reaction especially in persons whose life has been spent
in despair and defeat and to whom the whole universe appears as futile
and counterfeit. Their criticism of things and other persons derives
from personal dissatisfaction. They dislike today what they used to like
until yesterday, without realising that this hatred is not related to
external reality but springs from their own spirit. Pessimism and
hostility are in fact due to the drying up of the mainsprings of love
within man.[^3]

Even in cases where the good act is part of someone's duty, it must be
appreciated and commended and the dutiful person must be thanked and his
work appreciated. That makes him perform his duty with greater
dedication and carry out his responsibilities with further zeal,
constancy and conviction.

Several years ago I was in one of the famous cities of Iran. One day
there was a failure of electric power due to some technical fault in our
area. I phoned the manager of the electric company and requested him to
take steps for removing the fault. After a relatively long interval,
electricity was restored to the network. I again contacted the manager
to thank him and appreciate his action. At first when he spoke there
were visible signs of annoyance and reticence in his voice, but after
that he heard me thank him he was so affected that his voice suddenly
became animated quite perceptibly. With a great liveliness mixed with
surprise he asked me, "Who are you? This is the first time since I have
been in charge of the company that someone has appreciated my work!" In
reply I told him, "Unfortunately, or fortunately, I do not belong to
this town. I wanted to appreciate you for having done your duty." Then
he expressed his wish to have a closer personal contact.

After that time whenever electricity failed as a result of some fault in
the decrepit network of the area, as soon as I would inform him he would
eagerly and heartily take immediate steps to remove the fault, which
would be done in a short time. On making an inquiry I came to know that
this person had been the company's top man for several years and during
this long period of time not even once had he received any note of
thanks or appreciation for his efforts.

Flattery is Reprehensible
-------------------------

It should be remembered that encouragement and appreciation, with all
their beneficial and revolutionary results, have certain reasonable and
logical limits beyond which they must not go. For, in the same way as
indifference to the positive and constructive actions of individuals is
an obstacle to the growth of talents and capacities, exaggerated praise
and admiration, too, which amount to flattery and sycophancy, are
harmful and reprehensible, for they involve a kind of departure from
reality.

Dale Carnegie writes:

Of course, flattery seldom works with discerning people. It is shallow,
selfish, and insincere. It ought to fail and it usually does ...  
 In the long run, flattery will do you more harm than good. Flattery is
counterfeit, and like counterfeit money, it will eventually get you into
trouble if you try to pass it. The difference between appreciation and
flattery? What is simpler? One is sincere and the other insincere. One
comes from the heart out; the other from the teeth out. One is
unselfish; the other selfish. One is universally admired; the other is
universally condemned. I recently saw a bust of General Obregon in the
Chapultepec Palace in Mexico City. Below the bust are carved these wise
words from General Obregon's philosophy: "Don't be afraid of the enemies
who attack you. Be afraid of the friends who flatter you."  
 No! No! No! I am not suggesting flattery! Far from it. I'm talking
about a new way of life ...  
 When we are not engaged in thinking about some definite problem, we
usually spend about 95 percent of our time thinking about ourselves.
Now, if we stop thinking about ourselves for a while and begin to think
of the other man's good points, we won't have to resort to flattery so
cheap and false that it can be spotted almost before it is out of the
mouth. Emerson said: "Every man I met is my superior In some way. In
that, I learn of him." If that was true of Emerson, isn't it likely to
be a thousand times more true of you and me? Let's cease thinking of our
accomplishments, our wants. Let's try to figure out the other man's good
points. Then forget flattery. Give honest, sincere appreciation.[^4]

When 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz, who in sharp contrast to other Umayyad
caliphs was a man of some human merits, came to power and different
classes of people thronged to welcome him to the throne, a man named
Khalid ibn 'Abd Allah, an eminent Arab figure who was representing a
group, stood up to address the general audience. He said:

O caliph and master of Muslims! For some people their honour relates to
the position to which they rise in life. Their pride and prestige derive
from their kingly and caliphal station. But you are the pride of the
caliphate and the throne. The throne and crown are proud of you and owe
their majesty and glory to your worthy self. In fact, the verse of the
Arab poet befits you when he said:

If the pearl gives charm to the beautiful face and heightens its beauty,
It is thy beautiful face that gives the pearl its charm. It adorns thee
not, but is adorned by thy beauty!

'Abd Allah spoke in this vein eulogising the caliph with glittering
verses and phrases. But the caliph was annoyed by this flattery and
sycophancy. Suddenly he interrupted 'Abd Allah's panegyric and asked him
to take his seat. Then, turning to the audience he remarked: "Your
companion has as much of an eloquent tongue as you may wish instead of
wisdom."

Flattery and sycophancy are other conspicuous defects of our present
society and to a frightening extent they have penetrated many aspects of
our social life. One comes across few people who express appreciation
and gratitude solely for the sake of encouraging others and showing
recognition for their work and with no purpose except to facilitate
their progress.

An Iranian writer and social figure writes:

Little by little it has become an established law for me that everyone
who comes to see me and express his admiration for my writings and works
has some immediate request to make. Either he wants me to make a certain
recommendation for him, or some need has prompted him to seek
information through me, or he expects some other kind of help. Until now
no one has paid me a visit solely for the purpose of encouraging me in
my work.

Then he adds:

Truly, it is a matter of regret that whereas most well-known writers,
poets and public speakers in advanced countries daily receive scores of
letters from people who have no purpose in view except to express their
sincere feelings of genuine appreciation and gratitude arising from
admiration for their works, in Iran rarely does a writer or orator
receive any appreciation that is devoid of some kind of self-interest.

Islam's Plan for the Propagation of Moral Virtues
-------------------------------------------------

One of the precious teachings of Islam is that Muslims should be
grateful for the boundless bounties of God. In reality, the feeling of
gratitude arises from an inner freedom, which is something mysteriously
united with the human essence.

Emotional motivation and encouragement is a useful means for the
propagation of human virtues in society. Should the people reward good-
doers and punish those guilty of misconduct by means of their
appropriate reactions, society would move steadily towards health and
growth. For when the feelings of reprobation for offenders and
admiration and appreciation for the pious and virtuous are alive amongst
the people, society naturally inclines towards piety and human merit and
the ideals of moral rectitude and virtue come to prevail. The moral
worth of everyone becomes distinct and the qualities of the pure and the
polluted become distinguished.

'Ali-may peace be upon him-in his historic directive addressed to Malik
al-Ashtar, says:

*(O Malik:) The good and the wicked must not be equal in your eyes, for
otherwise it would discourage the good from good-doing and encourage the
wicked in their misconduct. Treat them in accordance with the kind of
conduct he has chosen for himself.*[^5]

For the rare kind of persons whose personality has reached the most
sublime heights of development, the very satisfaction and inner peace
that they derive from carrying out their duties and responsibilities is
their reward and motivating agent. But reaching such an ideal level of
morality is possible for only a numbered few. Most people have not
attained such a spiritual development so as not to stand in need of
praise and appreciation. Hence the significance of the effect of
appreciation should not be ignored at any time. Shachter, the well-known
psychologist, says:

If it be necessary to find fault with someone and to criticise his
conduct, it is essential first to mention one of his good points and
commend him for it, so that his need for attention and appreciation is
fulfilled. If you censure him after that it would not be so bitter and
unpleasant; rather, he might accept your advice, and even reproof,
eagerly and gratefully.  
 If the boss is dissatisfied with a letter written by his secretary, it
would be better to tell him, "The one you had written the other day was
quite clear and lucid. But this one is somewhat vague. Please look it
over again and change it if necessary." Certainly the secretary will not
feel dejected by this remark but would feel grateful for the chiefs
attention and appreciation. He will perform his work with greater effort
and attention. When you observe a bearer at a restaurant moving about
swiftly and serving food, do not scold him and create ill feeling if
there is some delay in bringing your food. Show appreciation for his
effort and compliment him for his skill and agility. Rest assured that
he will do his work with greater zeal and, by the way, bring your food
as soon as he can. Irrespective of age and status, everyone likes his
work to be appreciated by people. Even the old school teacher, after
years of giving lessons and receiving recognition for his work, feels
elated on hearing his little pupil say, "Sir, we have benefited greatly
from your lesson today."  
 Respect others' need for appreciation and care so that the give and
take of life goes on smoothly and happily. Don't lose any opportunity of
showing appreciation for others and complimenting them for their good
work so that others too may honour your need for appreciation and
attention.[^6]

We should realise that in the same way as persons possess certain
positive and outstanding qualities, they may also have some shortcomings
and defects. We ourselves are no exception to this rule. Therefore,
instead of always pointing out others' weak points, we must keep in view
their merits and positive qualities. 'Ali, the Commander of the
Faithful, may peace by upon him, draws our attention to this point with
an interesting metaphor. He says

Be like the honeybee, which always drinks the purest of things (i.e. the
nectar) and yields the purest of things and does not break any bough
that it alights upon.[^7]

When one receives the affection and benevolence of one's friends and
observes them making effort to fulfil one's wishes with utmost sincerity
and eagerness and striving lovingly to solve one's difficulties, then
morality and humanity dictate that one should thank them for their
generosity and kindness, win their pure hearts, and give them one's pure
love in order to be worthy of their unmingled affection.

Gratitude may express itself in an act of kindness free from any kind of
ostentation. Kronin writes:

My son, who was studying medicine, narrated that once a patient was
admitted into the hospital. A blood transfusion was necessary for his
treatment and recovery. On recovering from his illness, he began to
inquire about the identity of the person who had given blood for his
treatment. He was told that the names of the blood donors were not
disclosed. After several weeks, the same person turned up at the
hospital to donate his blood. He did that repeatedly without any
ostensible motive. When one of the surgeons asked him about it, he
answered in a very simple manner: Some unknown person donated his blood
for me. This way I want to thank him for it.[^8]

It would be far from manliness not to give benevolence and kindness even
the most elementary kind of recognition, which is verbal appreciation
and thanks. It is also a kind of injustice.

The Great Harms of Ingratitude
------------------------------

There are some people who not only do not express any
gratefulness-either in words or in deed-no matter how much help or
kindness they may receive, but remain dissatisfied, as if it were the
responsibility of others to do them service and to show kindness,
whereas their own duty were to be ungratefully indifferent to the rights
of others! The reader may have observed this type of persons around him.
Their conduct does not conform to any rational, human, or logical norm.
'Ali-may peace be upon him-puts this group of ungrateful persons in the
ranks of animals. He says:

One who does not appreciate a favour and kindness is no more than an
animal.[^9]

Even when someone does not succeed in getting one's work done, one must
appreciate his sincerity and disinterested motives when one feels that
he has sincerely sought to help one.

'Ali-may peace be upon him-said

*One who does not appreciate the good, unmingled, and sincere intentions
of his friend will also not appreciate his services and acts of
kindness.*

The Eleventh Imam said:

*The best of your friends are those who forget your inadequacies but
never forget your kindness.*

The spirit of ungratefulness brings irremediable harm, for when one
denies gratitude and appreciation to others for their service and
kindness despite being aware of their significance and the trouble and
effort undertaken by them, they would not be disposed to help him out in
a hardship next time.

'Ali-may peace be upon him-refers to this kind of loss and deprivation
in the following saying

*One who does not thank for a favour will not find anything except
deprivation and disappointment.*[^10]

In the directive to Malik al-Ashtar he points out the significance and
benefits of appreciation:

*(O Malik) Attention to major matters should not make you neglect minor
and less important ones, for the people benefit from your trivial
services and acts of kindness in their own right, while they cannot do
without your major services...*  
*Hence pay thorough attention to the demands and needs of the people.
Pay compliments to those who take pains and do worthy work. For the
tribute paid to them for their work gives enthusiasm to the brave and
serves as a constant source of their motivation. This practice also
helps motivate conservative and timid persons and draws them to the
field of battle.*[^11]

We may also pay attention to the experiences that have been acquired in
this field:

If parents and children show greater appreciation and regard for each
other, you will see that the crowds at psychiatric clinics of patients
suffering from various complexes would be very much diminished. Every
now and then one needs to be animated by the warmth of others' approval
and compliments. Otherwise one's mental health and self-respect would be
endangered. If one does not hear a word of thanks in life for one's
efforts, life would be very difficult. At times I myself feel like the
old woman who had served the cowboys for twenty years waiting for a word
of appreciation. One day they told her that she was mad. In reply she
told them, Until now I haven't heard anything from you that might show
that you can distinguish between one who is mad and one who isn't.

Dr. Whyle , who had a long experience in the treatment of problematic
children, one day told me about the case of a child who suffered from an
interesting illness. From this case he had come to the conclusion that
at times praise and appreciation had to be ministered like a physician's
prescription. The matter related to male twins, one of whom was quite
brilliant in respect of intelligence while the other appeared to be
retarded. Their father had approached me to find out the cause behind
it," he said. When I had won the confidence of the retarded child, he
told me something that children usually say in such cases. He asked me
why others did not like him as much as they did his brother. They would
smile whenever his brother did something whereas they frowned when he
himself did something exactly similar. 'I can do nothing as well as my
brother,' he said."

Dr. Whyle continued: "I kept the two brothers as apart as I could and
put them in different classes at the school. I asked his parents not to
attempt to motivate the retarded child by drawing comparisons between
the two sons, telling them to make a conscious effort to compliment this
child for his performance even if it were something trifling. Soon the
child became such as to stand on his own feet."

One of my wealthy acquaintances who prided himself on not having tipped
a single penny for any service was faced with a tragedy on the first day
of the new year. His chief accountant committed suicide. The books and
the accounts were in perfect order. The man who had killed himself, a
meek and respectable fellow, had remained a bachelor. All that he had
left for a clue was a note addressed to his rich employer. "Never during
all these thirty years did I hear a word of encouragement. Exhausted and
broken-hearted, I am fed up with my life," it read.[^12]

The spirit of encouragement and appreciation arises from personal
maturity, self-reliance and a healthy spiritual state, whereas flattery
is a sign of low self-respect, baseness, fear, and a decadent
personality. Undeserved praise of others is the practice of those who
want to compensate for their inadequacies by this means, or are
cunningly after their own interests. The compliments paid by
self-seeking persons are devoid of any kind of worth, because they are
not based on good faith or conviction but are aimed with a particular
motive. These self-seeking sycophants are like skilled hunters who set
traps of flattery to catch the passing prey.

Voltaire says: "Those who exercise their rhetorical skills have often
impious intentions in their hearts."

'Ali-may peace be upon him-said:

*A compliment that exceeds a person's merit is flattery; if lesser than
the merit, it is either due to incapacity or envy.*[^13]

The Noble Messenger-may peace and God's blessings be upon him and his
Household-said:

*Sycophancy is not in a believer's character.*[^14]

Undue praise and compliments give rise to pride, and if the proud person
be a man of influence and power, he will not find it easy to listen to
sincere advice and exhortations or heed truth and reality.

In the aforementioned directive, 'Ali-may peace be upon him-writes to
Malik al-Ashtar:

*Make the people get accustomed to refraining from flattering you and
from praising you unduly for something you haven't done, for excessive
flattery brings about self-conceit and leads to pride and
haughtiness.*[^15]

Hence if you pay someone a tribute exceeding what he merits and extol
him beyond his real worth, you will not only add nothing to his
personality but will harm your own personal dignity by your flattery and
sycophancy. And if you commend someone with a compliment that falls
short of his merit, that is an indication of your weak and unbalanced
spirit or envy. But if you honour and praise someone according to his
real worth, that preserves both your own personality and his, and, as a
result, neither he would fall into the trap of vanity, nor would you
compromise your respect and worth.

Moreover, as exaggerated compliments are not based on fact and do not
arise from within the heart, one cannot depend on someone's hypocritical
praise and compliments, for if he praises one in one's presence with a
certain purpose he might also indulge, behind one's back, in any kind of
backbiting or defamation for some other end of his.

'Ali-may peace be upon him-describes this repulsive characteristic of
sycophants in these words:

*One who compliments you for some merit that you do not possess will
have no qualms blaming you and accusing you of some vice that is not in
you.*[^16]

In the same way as appreciation and encouragement are one of man's
psychological needs whose fulfilment leads to progress and development,
constant and undue blame and censure produce a detrimental effect on
one's psyche and lead into vice and deviance. The Commander of the
Faithful-may peace be upon him-said:

*Abstain from frequent reproach for such a practice has vicious
consequences and makes censure ineffective.*[^17]

Bringing joy to one's children is an effective way of winning their love
and is beneficial for strengthening their emotional ties with other
people. The Noble Messenger (s) said:

*Whenever a father looks lovingly at his child and makes him joyous, he
receives a reward from God that is equal to that of setting free a
slave.*[^18]

Bertrand Russell writes:

Blame should be given much more sparingly than praise. It should be a
definite punishment, administered for some unexpected lapse from good
behaviour, and it should never be continued after it has produced its
effect ... To win the genuine affection of children is a joy as great as
any that life has to offer. Our grandfathers did not know of this joy,
and therefore they did not know that they were missing it. They taught
children that it was their 'duty' to love their parents, and proceeded
to make this duty almost impossible of performance. Caroline, in the
verse quoted at the beginning of this chapter, can hardly have been
pleased when her father went to her, 'to whip her, there's no doubt.' So
long as people persisted in the notion that love could be commanded as a
duty they did nothing to win it as genuine emotion. Consequently human
relations remained stark and harsh and cruel. Punishment was part of
this whole conception. It is strange that men who would not have dreamed
of raising their hand against a woman were quite willing to inflict
physical torture upon a defenceless child. Mercifully, a better
conception of the relations of parents and children has gradually won
its way during the last hundred years, and with it the whole theory of
punishment has been transformed. I hope that the enlightened ideas which
begin to prevail in education will gradually spread to other human
relations as well: for they are needed there just as much as in our
dealings with our children.[^19]

This approach to the upbringing of children which this British
philosopher ascribes to the last hundred years was part of the
educational program of the Prophet of Islam thirteen centuries ago. His
affection and kindness were not confined to his own children but
extended, in the most unaffected and natural manner, to other children
as well, whom he treated with loving care and attention. His biographers
write about him:

It was the habit of the Messenger to show love to children.

The Campaign Against Vices
--------------------------

An effective way of encouraging good people and discouraging those
guilty of misconduct is to implement the rule of 'enjoining good conduct
and forbidding misconduct' (*al-amr bi al-ma'ruf wa al-nahy 'an
al-munkar*) in society. The spread of immorality and vicious conduct
obliterates the worth of moral values which are the foundations of
society's welfare and glory, and drive people off the path of piety and
godfearing towards sinfulness. Sin, by nature, spreads rapidly, and like
an epidemic spreads from one point to another affecting entire society.

If a serious and consistent effort is not made against vice at the point
of its origin, its circle of influence increases continually,
contaminating the surrounding areas and spreading to other healthy
regions. The evil consequences of vice not only affect those who
perpetrate it, but ruin even those who by their connivance and
indifference permit it to grow and spread. That is because they abstain
from any kind of corrective action and despite their power to prevent
sin take a passive attitude towards it. Such persons share the guilt of
polluting and ruining the social environment and get punished for their
offence.

Hence, instead of remaining silent and indifferent, one should realise
his own duty to counter immoral conduct. Because in the same way as one
who leads others into deviance is an agent of corruption, so also one
who is indifferent to the sinner's conduct and who fails to assist him
despite possessing the means to do so is also an agent of immorality of
another kind.

The teachers of morality and human excellence and the guides of
nations-each in accordance with his level and situation-have brought the
vices of various kinds and their harmful consequences to the notice of
the people. They have called attention to the fact that any misfeasance
and negligence in regard to any of these matters and immorality in the
Vice results in destroying and undermining the spirit of freedom. In a
society whose members have lost the capacity to perceive realities, vice
is seen as virtue, waywardness as freedom, and retrogression as
progress.

The precepts of religion emphasise that anyone who sees an immoral act
being committed should stop it with the means at his disposal. They
prescribe various levels and degrees of opposition to vice, so that
whatever one's situation might be he should be able to use these means
for its prevention. Those who have the influence and power to prevent
unlawful conduct have the duty, assigned by God, to use their power to
discipline the offenders and draw them toward the path of purity. If one
does not possess the needed power to prevent moral misconduct in
society, his duty is to guide by the word of mouth and to point out in
an effective manner the evils of misconduct and its undesirable effects
on life. Obviously, the speaker himself should be one who practices
these moral virtues and values and is committed to them, so that his
exhortations are earnestly accepted by others. Otherwise his admonitions
would not go to their hearts and his insipid and lifeless preaching
would be barren and fruitless.

The duty of someone who does not possess even this capacity is to
condemn immoral conduct by disapproving of it and resenting it in his
heart. Of course, in such circumstances when one cannot influence others
one must not be content with merely taking a negative and passive
attitude; rather, it is necessary that his inner indignation should lead
to positive results. That is, he must break his ties of friendship with
the offender so that the latter is made to feel like an outcast who
cannot expect friendship and co-operation from others.

Opposition to immoral conduct has a special importance in Islam, which
is very earnest in its struggle against vice and in its commitment to
guide humanity towards ethical merits in all phases of moral
development. The Qur'an has well described the meaning of salvation by
stating that it exclusively belongs to those who call people to virtue
and prevent them from vice:

***Let there be one nation of you, calling to good, and bidding to
honour, and forbidding dishonour; those are the finders of salvation.
(3:104)***

The Role of Appreciation in Social Progress
-------------------------------------------

Accordingly, salvation and prosperity belong to those whose conduct is
based on this principle. Commanding others to righteous conduct and
forbidding misconduct is an inalienable part of their life's program. In
another verse of the same surah, the highest stations of human nobility
and merit are ascribed to people who always practice this principle
throughout the various stages of life:

***You are the best nation ever brought forth to men, bidding to honour
and forbidding dishonour, and believing in God. (3:110)***

'Ali-may peace be upon him-said:

*Always bid the members of society to virtues and practise them
yourself. Beware lest you be one of those who bid others to do good but
themselves refrain from it, otherwise the sinfulness of such conduct
will overtake you and God's wrath shall seize you.*[^20]

The Prophet of Islam-may peace and God's benedictions be upon him and
his Household-said:

*My followers shall live in welfare as long as they do not abandon the
duty of bidding to good conduct and forbidding misconduct and co-operate
with one another in good works. But when they abandon this program in
life, the blessings will be withdrawn from them and some of them (i.e.
tyrants) shall be imposed on the rest. As a result they will suffer, but
they will neither find any refuge on the earth, nor any helper will come
to their aid from anywhere.*[^21]

In the civilised world of today some countries have framed and
implemented laws resembling the principle of *al-amr bi al-ma'ruf wa al-
nahy 'an al-munkar* with the objective of strengthening the moral
foundations of their societies and promoting justice and right conduct.
An informed writer says:

It is an undeniable truth that if justice is to be established in
society everyone must be committed to its preservation, like the Swiss
people in whose constitution these words-which sound like a verse out of
some scripture-have been written: "On observing the slightest violation
of justice it is the duty and obligation of all individuals not to rest
until justice has been restored."[^22]

This maxim is exactly like the duty that was legislated fourteen
centuries ago by Islam for every individual Muslim.

[^1]: Bertrand Russell, On Education (London: Unwin Books, 1966), pp.
95-96.

[^2]: Dale Carnegie, How to Win Friends (New York: Simon and Schuster
Inc., 1937), p.27

[^3]: Strecker, Wilkerforce & Appel, Rawanshenasi baraye hameh, trans.
Mushfiq Hamadani, pp. 259-257.

[^4]: Carnegie, How to Win Friends, Persian trans. p. 42.

[^5]: Nahj al-balaghah, "Kutub," no. 53 addressed to Malik al-Ashtar.

[^6]: Shachter, Rushd-e shakhsiyyat, pp. 45-46.

[^7]: Al-Amidi, Ghurar al-hikam wa durar al-kalim, p. 569.

[^8]: Danistaniha-ye jahan-e 'ilm, p. 159.

[^9]: Al-Amidi, op. cit., p. 672.

[^10]: Ibid., p. 702.

[^11]: Nahj al-balaghah, trans. Fayd, al-Islam, p. 997, "Kutub," no. 53
addressed to Malik al-Ashtar.

[^12]: Albert Schweitzer, Kelidha-ye khushbakhti, trans. Ahmad Aram,
Tehran: Shirkat-e Sahami-ye Intishar, Khurdad 1347 H. Sh., pp. 335, 336,
337.

[^13]: Al-Qummi, Safinat al-Bihar, vol. 2, p. 528.

[^14]: Nahj al-balaghah p. 509.

[^15]: Nahj al-balaghah, trans. Fayd al-Islam, p. 990, "Kutub," no. 53
addressed to Malik al-Ashtar.

[^16]: Al-Amidi, op. cit., p. 671.

[^17]: Al-Amidi, op. cit., p. 359.

[^18]: Al-Nuri, Mustadrak al-Wasa'il, vol. ii, p. 626.

[^19]: Russell, op. cit., pp. 95, 97-98.

[^20]: Al-Amidi, op. cit., p. 569.

[^21]: Al-Shaykh al-Tusi, Tahdhib al-ahkam, vol. ii, p. 58.

[^22]: The Persian daily Ittila'at, Adhar Mah, 1342 H. Sh.


