A problem called marriage
=========================

Barriers to spouse selection
----------------------------

In the name of God

Every youth faces these barriers
--------------------------------

Statistics indicate that marriage (particularly in recent years) has
considerably decreased, and in contrary, marriage age (especially in big
cities and places nearer to civilization) has increased so that youth
marry at ages when “enthusiasm” and “vivacity” has nearly faded, and the
prime time of marriage has ended.

Of course, this is caused by various factors, the most important of
which are:

1- Extended period of education

2- Possibility of illegal relations

3- Unavailability of needs of life (as desired) and heavy expenditures
for marriage

4- Distrust between young boys and girls.

Here, we will study in details the first two parts which enjoy more
significance:

Some social planners have proposed the plan of “Compulsory marriage”
without making any effort and endeavour to study about the causes of
this danger and the way to encounter it. That is, for instance to impose
a kind of special tax on “singleness” to force the youth to accept
family life; or to deny single youths employment in different
institutions; or to consider other severe punishments for these youths!

Some youths ask us: What is your idea about this plan? Do you think it
is an effective and proper solution?

We believe that if “compulsory marriage” implies application of some
ways, like denying to single youths employment in different
institutions, it may be slightly and temporarily effective in the
current situation, but it would never be a final solution for the
“dangerous event of decrease in matrimony”. Rather, it may even create
undesirable reactions.

Basically, “marriage” and “compulsion” are two contrary terms that are
never compatible with each other. Compulsory marriage is like
“compulsory friendship and affection”!

Is it possible to inspire affection and amity between two individuals
compulsorily and forced by law?!

Marriage, in its proper concept, is a kind of spiritual and corporeal
relationship for a peaceful common life in prosperity and sincerity. On
this account, it shall be established in a free and optional condition,
void of any imposition. Therefore, any marriage contract concluded
without full satisfaction of both parties is repudiated by Islam.

Marriage is not like “military service” to dispatch one to the garrison
and force one to learn military techniques under particular control.

It is strange that “planners” try to reform the present condition, which
is the result of a series of social abnormalities without paying least
attention to the causes of its occurrence.

We believe that even if such plans are practical, they are only
considered as a sedative medicine, while “the main causes” of this event
and “the causes of its causes” shall be found and eradicated.

Then, the present abnormal, illogical and undesirable situation of
marriage would be automatically corrected.

Therefore, we have better to study each of the above four factors as the
main causes of decrease in marriage independently.

Extended duration of education, the first great barrier to marriage of the youth
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Although, we know that not all of those who escape the critical issue of
marriage have the excuse of being engaged in education, but there are
many who remain single even for several years after their graduation.

However, it is undeniable that the extended duration of education is a
“big and important barrier” to marriage of many of the youth.

The educational period for most majors is more or less 18 years. So,
when a youth graduates, he or she is about 25 years and is still “a
youth seeking a job” (if we can apply the term “youth” in its real
sense, because he/she has passed the major part of his/her youth, and
just a margin remains!).

It seems that in the future world, which is the world of expertise, this
age may prolong and may even increase to 35 years!

Now, the question is whether “marriage” should certainly depend on
“graduation” even if it is prolonged and extended more? Or this
dependency, which is believed by some to be indispensable, shall be
eliminated, and the youth shall be relieved from this very troublesome
requisite?

On the other hand, how could a young student (who is a “consumption
system” spending money and not a “productive system” having income)
think of marriage with such heavy and excessive expenses? How can we
deny the relationship of marriage to graduation?

We believe that if we think openly and avoid wrong imitations, solving
this problem is not too difficult, and there is a clear plan for it,
that is:

What is the problem if youths select their partners through consultation
with parents and considerate friends during their education period (when
they are at ages appropriate for marriage)? Then, a sort of legal
engagement (conclusion of marriage contract as well as religious and
legal formalities, exclusive of wedding ceremonies), not requiring
luxuries and expensive costs could be arranged between them, so that the
boy and girl know that they belong to each other and will be partners to
each other in the future life.

Later, after preparation of facilities, they may accomplish the
remaining marriage and wedding ceremonies in a simple and reputable
form. The first advantage of this plan is that the youth may find a
spiritual tranquillity and hope, and are saved from the dreadful monster
of a vague future bothering many single youths.

On the other hand, it insures them against many moral aberrations and
relieves them from wasting too much time in finding a suitable spouse
when facilities for starting a joint life are provided.

It is possible for most youths to act according to this plan. If the
parents are observant, the youth think properly and this plan is
followed, a considerable part of their problems in this respect will be
solved.

In summary, the legal engagement (conclusion of marriage contract) and
nomination of a boy and girl to each other, enables the youth to satisfy
a considerable part of their sexual needs in this way. The engagement
period involves many advantages of marriage, and compensates a major
part of sexual deprivation of the youth.

Thereby, the youth are secured from indecency and sexual perversions,
without imposition of extra expenses on the girl’s or boy’s family, and
free from the issue of pregnancy or any other problem for continuation
of their education.

The other alternative is official marriage up to the last stage, that
is, wedding ceremonies, but preventing conception through numerous
available ways (most of which are lawful). The major problem of marriage
for young spouses is conception, which is very troublesome for the youth
when they are educating. However, all these plans are only practicable
if marriage ceremony is celebrated in a simple form, without extra
formalities, but not the present rituals and expensive marriage
ceremonies for which there is not any logical justification.

This is the solution if parents and youth are really seeking prosperity.
Waiting for graduation, then finding a suitable, honourable and
profitable job, and provision of house, car and other equipment, and
affording the high costs of luxurious marriage ceremonies results in the
youth being tainted with thousands of perversions, as well as marriage
at the age of 35 to 40, when one is nearer to the retirement period!
This sort of marriage is exactly abnormal, lacking spirit and nobility,
and it is not in harmony with the systems of man’s existence and the
times determined by natural instincts for marriage.

Decrease in matrimony, A great social tragedy
---------------------------------------------

Decrease in matrimony, reluctance of the youth to marry and preferring
the abnormal life of singleness, and more accurately what could not be
called life at all, is a great tragedy for humanity, which has involved
man of our age along with other negative impacts of automation life.

Decrease in matrimony is not tragic just for resulting in extinction or
low generation, and we cannot reason that it is not a problem at present
and perhaps within the next years, and on the contrary, increase in
population is now a cause of concern (of course in the non-industrial
countries, but not the industrial ones where population is extremely
controlled)!

Its major disadvantage is that unmarried individuals lag behind others
in view of feeling social responsibility. They do not belong to any
society, and resemble those suspending and wandering in the immense
space among the spheres in weightlessness!

They may forget their homeland for a little purpose, and immediately fly
to another part, or even commit suicide when facing problems.

According to statistics, suicide occurs much more among the single than
married people.

Brain drain is seen much more among singles that have not made any
marriage contract with the society of their home country.

Most criminals are either single or live alone. In fact, matrimony
prevents man from thinking that he belongs to himself and making
improper decision about himself and his future, because he feels
responsibility against the small society called “family”.

“Lack of feeling responsibility” and “lack of social relation” have
other evil consequences, the most important of which is non-utilization
and non-mobilization of all powers and forces for improvement and
development in life. Not too much power is required for earning
livelihood of one for whom there is no problem how to spend his life,!

This is the reason why the life of single individuals is mixed with
depression, laziness, indifference towards obtaining and preserving life
facilities, and activation of their genius.

Many weak-kneed and infirm who are unable to earn their own livelihood
and live as burdens for the society when they are single, change to
decisive, serious, firm, agile and observant persons after marriage. All
these are miracles of feeling responsibility!

Emphasis made in “Islamic resources” indicating that “Wife is
accompanied with sustenance” may refer to the same concept.

In this respect, we can compare the single to the “wandering nomads” who
have never tried to improve the lands where they live temporarily and
easily immigrate to another place.

From the moral point of view, the single will never be “Perfect Men”,
because many moral aspects, such as loyalty, forgiveness, manliness,
affection, kindness, dedication and gratitude are realized in the family
and joint life of the spouses and children. Those who have not
experienced this situation are less familiar with these concepts.

It is true that undertaking the responsibility of joint life after
marriage is accompanied with many problems and obligations for man, but
is it possible for one to find perfection without facing problems and
discharging responsibilities?!

The issue of responding to the natural needs of body and spirit, and the
unfavourable mental and corporeal reactions caused by saying no to this
need, is definite and certain.

Taking into account these undeniable realities, we have not exaggerated
if we call tendency to “singleness” and continuous decrease in marriage
a social tragedy.

On the other hand, the question is how we shall deal with the stalemates
and strenuous problems that youths may have for fulfilment of this
“natural and social obligation”? Is it still possible to fulfil this
great and sacred obligation on time even in the present conditions of
machine life, undue expectations, disagreement between parents and
youth, educational conditions, unemployment and distrust of youths on
each other?

These points shall be carefully examined, and the final resolution of
this social dilemma is impossible without solving them.

The point that shall be necessarily taken into consideration here is
that the current messy situation of marriage and its concerned problems
are in fact what we and our society have created and imposed on
ourselves.

It has not rained from the sky or sprouted from the earth. We have
established it as a result of competition, ignorance, improper
pre-judgments, wrong calculations and involvement in a series of harmful
habits, customs and blindly imitations.

Therefore, if we decide, we can change this situation, and establish a
new plan based on realities and noble concepts of life, not based on
imaginations, conjecture and wrong imitations.

There is no stalemate, no miracle is required, and correction of the
current situation is not impossible.

Possibility of illegal relations is an important factor for decrease in marriage
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Today, social life is not in a normal and proper form in most parts of
the world, one example of which is decrease in marriage and preference
of abnormal life of “singleness” by the youth.

As we have already explained, in addition to decrease in matrimony and
expansion of singleness in the human generation, it is deemed a great
disaster for human society in view of creation of a sort of life system
without feeling responsibility, cut off from social relations,
indifference to social events which are definite results of a single
life.

If we add the moral aberrations in which many singles are engaged, the
significance of this social problem will become more evident.

Now, let us study the main causes of this dangerous social event:

Undoubtedly, this abnormal situation is not the effect of one or two
causes. However, some main causes attract more attention, one of which
is the issue of “proliferation of illegal relations”.

On one side, due to the facility of these relations for many youths, “a
woman” has been changed to a mean, cheap and even “free of charge”!
being who is easily accessible.

In this way, she has lost the value, significance and prestige
previously rendered to her in the society, and she is not a precious and
dreamy being attracting the youth to her anymore.

Women’s increasing nudity in the modern world has contributed to her
raunchiness. Although it may be a transient cause for attraction of the
capricious men at the beginning, but it finally results in the
raunchiness and cheapness, while this is in contrary to what these women
expect!

On this account, in the current societies there is no trace of those
pure, sincere and passionate loves which existed in the past, because
man always finds fervent love to what is not easily accessible, and it
is nonsense to love a mean, cheap and free of charge being, what to say
about fervent and fiery love!

On the other hand, many licentious men may ask why they should undertake
so many “terms” and “responsibilities” of marriage to gain access to a
woman, while many of them are accessible without acceptance of any term
or responsibility?!

Hence, since they are not familiar with the ominous consequences of
sexual and moral licentiousness and see woman merely as a means of
satiation of sexual desire, basically they consider acceptance of
marriage and so many terms and responsibilities, a silly decision! and
spend all or a major part of their life being single.

Taking into account these facts, the effect of “possibility and facility
of illegal relations” on decrease in marriage is exactly clarified. In
western societies, where this freedom and laxity is more, matrimony has
decreased further. They marry when they are aged, and even these
marriages are so weak and short-lived that it often dissolves for small
and sometimes ridiculous reasons!

Victims of these shameful relations
-----------------------------------

In addition to what was explained above, there are always filthy and
dirty elements in such societies, who prefer being single to a life of
matrimony, called “centres of prostitution” that are an important factor
for decrease in marriage as well as dissolution of families.

These filthy centres which are necessarily besides present unhealthy
societies are a clear proof for abnormal temper and condition of these
societies.

Prostitution and its centres shall not be discussed only in view of
being a centre for expansion of immorality and spread of various types
of corporeal and mental microbes.

Neither shall it be discussed in view of its effect on the marriage and
tendency to singleness, although these aspects require precise
discussion and study.

Rather, it shall be also discussed in view of the floozies who gather
and prostitute in these centres.

Those who have had precise studies in this regard and have written books
after extensive researches, confess that the situation of this group of
prostitutes represents the most painful and grievous types of slavery in
the middles ages.

They are excluded, forlorn and really helpless women, who are always
indebted and burn day and night like a candle to illuminate parties of
lust and sensualism, and finally die forsaken in the worst condition,
and there is no one even for their burial.

Which conscience authorizes existence of such helpless slaves in the
society when it claims to have abolished slavery?!

We shall not forget this pitiful slavery that has been regretfully
recognized and affirmed by many modern societies, is the result of
facility of illegal relations.

Women bogged down in these fetid swamps of society are often the same
victims of illegal relations, who are gradually led to these centres.
The story of these women mentioned in some books is undoubtedly one of
the most grievous tragedies and a blemish for modern societies, but
unfortunately, it is less studied and discussed.

Therefore, for prevention of dissolution of families, fall and decrease
in matrimony, and delivering these helpless slaves, this sort of
freedom, licentiousness and possibility of illegal relations shall be
prohibited. This is not possible save with provision of a proper
program.

Considering the above facts, the dear youths shall care more for
themselves and their friends, and pay no heed to the well-worn deceptive
phrases uttered by unclean individuals for drawing them to these types
of licentiousness.

Those who introduce this situation and these centres as a social
necessity, and are going to reduce the obscenity and ugliness of
prostitution, and rather call this illegitimate action a means of
guarding the chastity of families!! and health of youths!!, are really
wrong.

Is existence of a fetid swamp resulting in expansion of immorality and
even corporeal diseases which are separated from the societies to
prevent transmission of taint to the families, a social necessity?

Shackles for the youth
----------------------

• It is true that ages have passed from the normal time of our marriage,
but how can we marry while:

    • We do not yet have a car!

    • We do not yet have a job!

    • We have not yet saved enough money to cover the heavy costs of
marriage, gifts for bride!

    • We have not provided a good place for our marriage ceremonies yet,
and … yet, and … yet!

• How we can agree to the marriage of our daughter while:

    • An ideal husband with sufficient income, honourable job, good
position, house, …, has not proposed marriage with her, and those who
have proposed lacked one or two of these conditions!?

    • Moreover, we have not provided required home appliances for her
yet, and two or three of them, such as carpet, furniture, refrigerator,
washing machine, iron, vacuum cleaner, sewing machine, are not provided
yet!

    • Of course, in this situation, marriage of a girl is nothing save
disgrace! God may not forgive our society that has chained us so …! What
we can do when the troublesome and disturbing conditions in the society
do not let us to act in a proper way?!

These are the confab or more proper to say that unreasonable pretexts
and excuses of a number of youths (girls and boys) and parents for
avoiding the critical issue of marriage. A scientist says: Life has two
parts: First part is spent with hope for the second part, and the second
part with sigh for the first!

It is better to apply the term “dream” instead of “hope”, and say: The
first part of life is spent dreaming about the second part, and the
second part sighing for the first!

The clear example is the issue of marriage of many of our youths. They
waste half their life finding an ideal spouse, and the other half
sighing at the mistakes they committed in the first part. However, these
youths and those parents that these shackles and false hindrances are
established by no one save you!

You have established a vain and entirely illusory concept for conjugal
life, and lost the “real” happiness and felicity for achieving an
“illusory” one.

Be sure that as all experiments and experiences have proved, the
boundaries and lines which you have drawn for felicity will never make
you happy.

These competitions, blindly imitations, rendering authenticity to
inauthentic affairs, glasses deviating proper vision to life, endless
expectations, false dreams and deceptive mirages, all have shackled you
and hinder you from accomplishment of the most essential task for a
youth.

Should the youth and parents be decisive and brave enough to cut the
chains of captivity in the claws of delusion, fancy, and dream, and
break these idols, then they would find that they have achieved freedom
of spirit and easiness, and how prosperous and happy they have become.

Can you find someone owning house, car and everything at his youth?
Then, why do you expect yourself or your spouse to be so? That is right;
there are some whose forefathers have been rich and they have inherited
from them. However, since they have not taken efforts for gaining their
wealth, fortunately or unfortunately, they will not be able to keep it.

Take it easy, and when the simple and reasonable requisites are
provided, take action for marriage.  
 We believe that marriage with simple ceremonies is easy and do not be
surprised, even compatible with education, provided both parties
understand the proper concept of marriage. They shall also understand
that everything in the world of creation is gradual, and better
conditions for life are provided little by little. Expectations shall
always be in the frame of facilities.

It seems that the youth wandering in the byways of these dreams have
forgotten that what is essential in marriage is existence of “two
persons” understanding each other and the proper concept of life, and
loving it.

Existence of the two basic factors, that is, two persons with proper
understanding is essential. Otherwise, the other requisites and
facilities would not bring happiness.

On this basis, our high religious instructions have not defined any
condition for accomplishment of a proper marriage save existence of two
sane persons (the spouses) willing to have a joint conjugal life, while
you can see this simple task has been changed into such a complicated
problem!

The other remarkable point is that the simple life of seminary students
could be an evident practical example for the other youths. (Pay
attention)

Around 99 percent of seminary students marry while undergoing studies,
and although their courses at the seminary are very heavy and difficult
and they are engaged in it full time, they can live in utmost purity and
simplicity with the meagre allowance paid by seminary treasuries, or
through agriculture or a simple job during summer, without facing with
fateful consequences of loneliness, while they feel tranquillity and
happiness in this respect.

Seven adventures of matrimony
-----------------------------

• Many issues known to us as “unpleasant but meantime inevitable
necessities” of life are the products of our illogical deeds and are
often avoidable!

• Many snares which we suppose destiny has imposed for us are the same
chains that we have made by our own hands.

• A major part of problems in our life is indeed obstructions, excuses,
obstinacies, and even inflexibilities exhibited by us when facing
events, but not real problems!

It is said that once Rostam, the Iranian epical hero, decided to conquer
some parts of Iran that no preceding gallant conquerors had succeeded
in.

During his journey towards the heart of this region, he faced “seven
great obstacles” each of which was more terrible than the other. Once he
faced the white demon, and once the giant dragon, and once the dangerous
magicians. Finally, he passed them one by one with his strength and
skills. He passed the seven stages (seven adventures) and overcame them.
Ferdowsi, the Iranian epic poet has described and versified the story in
*Shahnameh* with attractive delicacies.

The legend is a romantic representation of the mass of problems in a
man’s life, their abundance and intensity, and a plan for showing ways
of overcoming these problems.

Nowadays, the issue of marriage and passing its obstacles is not easier
than what Rostam did when passing the “seven legendary adventures”. The
only difference is that neither all youths possess the bravery and power
which Rostam had for passing the seven adventures, nor basically they
are so decisive and determined!

As mentioned, no other social issue has so deviated from its original
and normal form (with such harmful and disturbing embellishments) like
marriage.

The groans, complaints and clamours of the youth and parents for the
huge costs of marriage are mostly for these additional formalities.
Otherwise, the basis of marriage is too simple, pure and sacred to cause
so many problems and troubles.

At present, for many people, marriage is like mining “gold” from the
mines which is mixed with impurity that it is not economical and does
not worth such a trouble!

Impurities of marriage are the very competitions, wrong customs,
transient humours and fancies, achieving unreal honour, prestige and
personality.

Marriage has lost its main visage among the mass of problems. It is
transformed to a “horrible monster” that not all individuals could bear.

Worse is that a few people dare to challenge these embellishments and
impurities. In this respect, the educated are worse than the illiterate.
Now, people are weaker and more disabled in this challenge as compared
to the past.

Many people satisfy themselves with a wrong reasoning that “a man
marries once during his or her lifetime, and could not celebrate it
simply”, or “let us realize our last desires, whims and internal
tendencies”!

They ignore that when this wrong reasoning becomes popular, it changes
into the greatest hindrance for felicity and happiness of the youth.

The youth shall pass the seven adventures of this long way just with
their heroism, like Rostam, and break these magic spells. This involves
seven adventures, including:

1- Unlimited and dreamy expectations; the expectations of girls from
boys, and boys from girls, and parents from both of them

2- Raising undue embarrassments; by many of the parents, families,
relatives and friends

3- Heavy dower sum

4- Extra formalities; for wedding ceremonies and the dangerous
competitions

5- Petulance for being in the same and equal position and rank by two
families

6- Fiery loves; which are uncontrollable and at the same time
unconsidered

7- Excessive obsession; and lack of confidence and trust on each other
in the future

When we reflect on these seven problems, we see that most of them are
not concerned with the issue of marriage, but to its embellishments.

For instance, consider the issue of “matching and being equal in rank”,
which is a great hindrance for marriage of many youths, while it is only
a mirage.

A 30 years old man who introduced himself as an “Oil Engineer”, and
agreed that he has a good salary, complained and groaned for failing to
marry yet.

He said: I cannot select a wife from any family, because I shall find an
honourable and prestigious family in the equal rank with me.

However, when I find such a family, they propose such terms, conditions
and expenses for marriage that just an “electronic brain” can calculate
it! …

I asked: If you mean sufficient education and knowledge by “prestige,
honour, …”, I can introduce you to many families having educated and
able girls, ready to marry with those like you. If you mean having high
human attributes, moral values and or interesting in physical and
corporeal privileges, still there are many of such girls among the
middle class but noble and honest families.

But I do not think you mean any of them. By an honourable and esteemed
family, you may mean that her uncle shall be a general director or
general manager, and her parents shall be rich, and have an expensive
house and car! Is it true? … I found that he meant the same.

I said: Then, making such a big mistake for evaluating prestige based on
these affairs, and not human’s actual privileges, it is not a surprise
if you are in such a trouble!

It is interesting that in our Islamic traditions, “being equal in rank”
with the wrong concept prevailed at that time among tribes and social
societies, has been strongly condemned, and Islam has introduced
faithful women and men, girls and boys in the same and equal rank.  
 We read in Islamic traditions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المؤمن کفو المؤمن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A believer from any family, race and social class is in the same rank
and position as the other believer.*

Therefore, if the delusive ideas about class life and social ranking are
eliminated, and both parties like each other for what has a human,
logical and rational value, not for the positions of uncles and
families, wealth, car and property of aunts, the problem will be surely
solved. This applies to many other hindrances for marriage as well.

Strict Parents
--------------

These parents endanger the future of their darling children seriously!

Many parents who have spent their own youth with all its problems and
troubles and are unaware of the storm existing in hearts of the youth
(both girls and boys) for proper satiation of their sexual instincts,
are very ‘cool’ and or ‘strict’ for the marriage of their sons and
daughters.

Their ‘coolness’ and ‘strictness’, both branching from a single mental
origin, are sometimes so that they call one year and five years delay ‘a
simple event and short term’.

They ignore that even a month or several days of delay in critical
situations may change the fate of a youth.

It is not clear why these parents do not remember their youth?

Why they have forgotten so soon the storms and passion of youth before
their own marriage? Why they do not suppose themselves instead of their
young children?!

However, their self-comparison (assuming the youth as cool as
themselves) is very dangerous and even costs too much and sometimes
leads to insanity.

One of the major causes of escape of the youth from family, suicides,
perversions and diseases is lack of attention to this reality. It is
particularly true for the virtuous, chaste and faithful youth.  
 Parents’ negligence of such youth is unfair and far from realism and
farsightedness.

Indeed, the problems of marriage and its concerned responsibilities
often cause parents to unknowingly ignore their understanding about the
situation of youth and the crisis of their sexual instinct, or persuade
themselves that its time has not come yet.

Sometimes, the painful consequences of this negligence will entangle
them for the whole of their life, when there is no way for compensation
and remedy.

The strictness of parents in selection of spouse for their children,
their baseless and sometimes ridiculous terms and conditions for their
marriage, originate from lack of recognition of necessity.

When one recognizes the necessity of something, he imposes lesser terms
and conditions for it, and chooses principle of forbearance and
connivance as the basis of all discussions and decisions. On the
contrary, lack of recognition of necessity makes one inflexible and
choosy.

I read in an article that some of the strict and fussy individuals even
smell a car like meat or vegetables when buying! When they smell a car
for buying, what would they do in selecting spouse for their daughter
and son?

It is surprising that most often such parents are trapped in such
problems they never expect.

The psychological reason is that only dishonest and ostentatious
individuals can attract their attention through show off and boasting.
Otherwise, healthy and normal people can never be so, and they can never
win their hearts.

It is true that one should select his or her spouse carefully, and
selection of a life partner is not like buying a cloth. However, there
is a big difference between carefulness and strictness and obsession.
When it seems that the other party is qualified for marriage, and
investigation of the informed individuals confirms this reality, one
should take action without any doubt, and just seek assistance from God.
Then, the result will certainly be good.

According to the emphatic Islamic instructions for early marriage, as
well as the command of intellect and extensive experiments of the
informed, all parents are advised to avoid coolness and undue
strictness, not to neglect the dangers caused by their strictness and
coolness, and not to endanger the future of their dear children.

It should be remembered that the sexual instinct of youth is so powerful
that negligence and carelessness about it may result in any sort of
explosion.

Man’s history and the daily life of men indicate that dangers caused by
explosion of this instinct are unique and the most important and
deep-rooted.

Who should select: The youth or parents?
----------------------------------------

This was my selection and that was my parents’ selection!  
 This strange story was published in newspapers, while there are so many
similar cases:

An 18-year-old bride who took off her bridal dress a few minutes before
conclusion of marriage contract and after wearing a man’s dress, she
jumped from the window to the yard and escaped. Then, she went to a
bathhouse in Narmak area, and cut her vein, but soon she was transferred
to a clinic and was saved from death.

Later, she explained her story to police as follows:

I was studying in the high school last year, and was engaged to a young
man whom I had selected. Last year, while reading the newspaper, I saw
his photo and learnt that he was arrested for stealing jewels. I called
his home, and after investigation, I found it to be true!

A month ago, one of my father’s friends proposed marriage to me. He was
a rich man of forty whose wife had recently died.

I had no interest in him, and expressed my view several times, but no
one listened to me and my father still insisted. Once I found that
invitation cards for the wedding have been distributed I had no other
alternative other than ‘escape’ and committing suicide.

There are two contradictory attitudes if marriage shall be approved by
parents and the elders of family or this critical issue shall be left
only to the tendencies of the youth, without any intervention  
 Let us first become familiar with both groups, and then find a proper
way through inspection and study:

One group of youths says: Do our parents want to select a spouse for
themselves that they should approve it? Everyone should select his or
her own partner in life. Supposing that a girl is a heavenly angel in
view of our parents, but she is worse than a monster if we do not like
her!

Studies conducted by many social scientists and judicial authorities
indicate that most marriages that end in divorce are those made in young
ages, when choice of parents had been the only criterion.

Basically, an adult does not need any ‘custodian’ or ‘administrator’.
Suicide and running away of many girls and boys from the family is the
result of this big mistake of parents, the example of which could be
always found in newspapers.

If the youths were unable to distinguish right and wrong in the past and
could not recognize what is expedient for them, today it is not so, and
all of them know everything before maturity!

The mentality of parents is often out-dated, and not compatible with the
spirit of time, and thereby, they cannot understand the preferences of a
young girl or boy.

In brief, the parents should not intervene in this critical issue, and
they should leave it to the taste, creativity and idea of their
children.

On the other hand, parents say:  
 Even Plato and Avicenna were not perfect in their youth. That is to
say, the youths are so optimist and simple-minded that they are easily
deceived by elegant and self-righteous faces due to their innocence and
sincerity. They do not know what devils are hidden behind these
deceitful faces.

There are many perverted individuals who memorize the most beautiful
phrases and the most enchanting and literary clichés, and repeat them
with extremely masterful way to allure young boys and girls, and
so-called ‘spouse hunters’, but when everything is over, they show their
real faces.

Even the clever youths need a guide for marriage, because it is the
first time they are experiencing it. They shall seek help of those who
have traversed this path as it is dark and one should fear the risk of
aberration.

Furthermore, parents are never enemies of their children. They consider
their real expediencies, because they love them even more than
themselves.

Even illiterate and uninformed parents are experienced and familiar with
advantages affecting the future of matrimony, and are able to
distinguish ‘realities’ from ‘imaginations and delusions’.

Moreover, it is very shameful from the moral point of view if a youth
totally disregards one who has devoted his or her power, alacrity and
strength to him (and to whom he is indebted for his life) in such
critical issue and pay no heed to their pure feelings at all. He should
not just think of satisfying of his desires and select his spouse
without parents’ consent, and forget all his debts to them. This is not
compatible with any ‘human principle’.

However, we believe that none of these two views are fully realistic.

Neither the parents have any right to impose their idea on the youth in
spouse selection, nor is it advisable for the youth to make this
critical selection alone.

Rather, the proper way is to arrange and accomplish this critical issue
through assistance consultation and exchange of views.

The parents shall consider the reality that selection of spouse is not
just based on logic and reasoning. Rather, the main factor for this
selection is a matter of taste, and certainly the tastes of two
individuals, even two brothers, are very different.

An imposed marriage is unlikely to last long. Sooner or later, it ends
in divorce. The worst and most dangerous case is when parents consider
their personal interests in selecting the spouse of their children. Such
people are absolutely wrong.

On the other hand, the youth should know that the fervour of youth casts
blinds his vision, and he sees nothing except ‘goodness’ in that
situation and ignores all ‘faults’. The sympathetic parents and
well-informed friends would help them with their intellectual
contributions in this critical selection.

Even the powerful youths are not needless of the assistance of their
friends, relatives and parents in the crises and events of life.

If they disregard this vital issue, they cannot enjoy their support and
backing in future problems. So, it is necessary for them to earn their
trust and confidence.

From ethical point of view also, they should obtain the consent of their
sympathetic and kind parents. Islamic laws instruct (particularly the
virgin girls), to first obtain their parents’ satisfaction (father as an
obligation). Of course, there are exceptional cases when the father
wants to arrange a marriage against interests of his child for his
personal interests, or when the marriage is in accordance with the
child’s interests, but the father intentionally obstructs it. In none of
these cases, his opinion is valid, and it is not obligatory to obey him.

Fiery Loves
-----------

A danger in the youth’s life
----------------------------

Many words have been expressed for love, magnificence and splendour of
love, or insanity and disease of love, describing it with different and
contradictory phrases.  
 Some great writers have eulogized it saying:

“Love” is the officer of life and eternal felicity. (German Goethe)

“Love” is the architect of the world. (Hezieh)

Toman Man speaks about the miraculous effect of love, and believes:
“Love strengthens spirit and keeps man cheerful”.

A number of great eastern philosophers have transcended others and
believe: Any movement and motion, even the motion of cosmos and spheres
in the transcendental world is caused by a sort of love!

If we interpret this term, in its extensive and general sense, that is,
any sort of extra affinity and attraction, we shall approve their
sayings!

Contrary to so many interesting interpretations and explanations,
another group of writers and philosophers have applied the most
offensive attacks and accusations for “love”, and have reviled it at the
level of a hateful disease.

One of the well-known eastern writers says: Love is a chronic disease
like tuberculosis, cancer and gout, which a wise man should avoid!

Others, like the famous astronomer, Copernicus has said: If we do not
call love a sort of insanity, at least we can say that it is an extract
of disabled brains!

Finally, some like Carlyle have rushed on love heedlessly, and believe:
Love is not only a sort of insanity, but also a combination of several
sorts of insanity!

These contradictory descriptions for the term, which is one of the most
popular in literature and poetry, and even ordinary utterances, should
not be accounted for contradiction in judgment about a particular
reality. Rather, the dissidence actually originates from the difference
in the point of view of the judges.

In other words, each of these writers and scientists has discussed one
of the facets of love which they have encountered more in their life.
Therefore, we shall confess that:

If by love, we mean a powerful and extraordinary attraction between two
individuals or in general between two creatures (such as human, animal,
plant and lifeless thing) in the direction of a superior objective, is
it possible to imagine something higher than it’?!

Its power of creativity is so wonderful that it can leap over any
hindrance, and pass any obstacle in the path of perfection and
development.

They have admired love for such creativity and its great and unique
power, as we know that many of the best literary, architecture and
aesthetic masterstrokes were created under the influence of this
emotion.

On the other hand, if by love we mean the powerful attraction leading
two individuals to sin, stain, and fall into the marsh of vice and
prostitution, it is really shameful and blameworthy, because removing
its stains is not an easy task!

If by love, we mean the crazy attraction which completely destroys
intellect and wisdom, it is really worthy of scorn.

Finally, love has different facets from various points of view. So, both
its admiration and scorn could be appropriate and applicable.

Under the romantic covering of “love”
-------------------------------------

It is noteworthy for all sincere youths to know that nowadays, so many
crimes and evils are committed under the pretty and romantic mask of
“love”!

Any capricious, lustful and impure person may pretend to be a truthful
lover. Any deceitful and two-faced monster having no purpose except
satiation of his wild animal lusts may realize his satanic and evil
purposes under this “veil” by applying romantic descriptions of this
“term”.

On this account, after realization of his dirty purposes, his real face
is unveiled. He forgets what all he had said. There doesn’t even remains
any drop of those pure sentiments and fiery loves, just like a big
vessel full of water which is overturned at once. There remains no trace
of the heart full of affection, sick eyes with love, and thousands other
claims. There remains only a deceived and regretful beloved with a world
of sigh, grief and sorrow!

The youth should watch carefully for “false pretenders of love”, who
have no capital except lies, deception and tricks. They must note that
there are many such people in the society, who copy a single letter full
of lies and send it to several girls at the same time.

Not only girls, but the boys should also watch for various traps, where
there is no way of deliverance, and it is possible to regret all life
for one moment of negligence, undue optimism and submission to vain and
false phrases. Those who are deprived of affection, submit themselves to
such expressions of love very soon, and are thereby deceived and
entrapped easily. They should watch out more than others.  
    
 In the next chapter, titled “Pitfalls of love”, we will discuss
additiona1 issues complementary to our present discussion.

Pitfalls of love
----------------

As we have already said, “love” means “a powerful extraordinary
attraction” between two individuals, or generally between two creatures
to achieve a pure objective. It is one of the glorious appearances of
human spirit, and the most excellent masterstrokes of creation.

When marriage of two individuals is based on such fondness and
affection; but a real and deep one and not a false and surface one, it
will certainly remain steady. Such foundation is full of affection and
pure love, and such marriages are fruitful, useful, reliable and
comforting.

However, it differs with false and artificial love (which is apparently
fiery) and the transient caprices, the final aim of which is
illegitimate satiation of desires, and then forgetting everything.  
 Even in real love and pure fondness, there are great pitfalls, which
should never be overlooked!

First pitfall
-------------

Ordinary affections have a powerful “whitewash” and cover-up effect,
what to say about extreme and extraordinary interests!

That is, if we assume that man has two eyes of “satisfaction” and
“hate”, the latter is totally closed for one in love so that he (she)
may explain the worst “faults” as the best “merits” through strange
justifications and interpretations.

One who gives the least advice to these “restless lovers”, will face a
harsh reaction, because the lover thinks and believes that he has no
purpose other than enmity, envy, meanness, …, and so he opposes the
other party.

The lovers usually think that they have found such perception under the
grace of love, that the others do not have, and therefore, judgments and
advices of others are the result of their unawareness and improper
understanding as well as their wrong evaluation of the realities of
life. Here, giving advice to such a lover is not fruitful and sometimes
it is very dangerous.

When these ‘fiery but baseless loves” are extinguished through sexual
intercourse, the veils are drawn aside, and the eye of realism opens. It
seems that the restless lover has awaked from a long deep and delightful
dream.

The merits have been changed and everything has lost its previous
pleasant and faultless appearance!

Then, an ineffable penitence and depression casts its heavy and
disastrous shade on him/her. A choking darkness and obscurity covers
his/her spirit. Sometimes, the distance between these two states is so
much that his/her whole life is buried therein, and one is so fearful
that may commit suicide.

It is not easy to prevent this state and its side effects, and the
restless lovers do not accept any advice. Intellectual reasoning is of
no use to them, because their logic differs with that of the others, and
the distance of their world with the others is so much that basically,
no common language is found between them to understand others!

They only deal with the language of love, and others with the language
of logic and intellect, while there is a big distance between the two.

However, their friends shall penetrate into their mind carefully and
elegantly, without bruising their feelings, which is very dangerous.
They shall discuss the issues with them indirectly, and mention the
realities, problems and their mistakes in form of questions. We shall
let the restless lover (engaged in his love wrongly) to return step by
step from the path he/she has already trodden and let them think that
they themselves have perceived the reality, and has come to know their
mistakes, and return with their own will, not through the advice of
others.

The youths too shall suggest to themselves the possibility of this great
danger in the normal states to be settled in their unconscious
decisively. Since the powerful waves of the unconscious mind do not stop
in such critical states, when logic and conscious system fail to
operate, it can help such people greatly, and deliver them from the
danger of love. The youths shall suggest to themselves that they always
respect the utterances of others (the sane and informed people), and
rely on them in such cases.

Implicit agreements with such restless lovers and counting the positive
points of their beloved, and confessing that they are not totally
mistaken in their recognition, are very effective in attraction their
confidence, so that they may respect the thoughts of their advisor and
pay attention to his advices.

It must be kept in mind that humiliation and blame of such individuals
has a very undesirable effect, and it should be strictly avoided.
Moreover, it is ungenerous and unfair to blame and rebuke those involved
in such a dangerous situation.

Wild love!
----------

“Love” was wild and bloody from the beginning …

Writers and poets have always called Love ‘wild’.

Love, particularly a fiery one (it may not be called love if not fiery)
does not recognize any limit or boundary. It transgresses social
obligations, disregards moral concerns and is never compatible with
prudence and advice.

That is why it is said: When love enters from one door, wisdom escapes
from the other!

We have often found the story of “love” and “wisdom” and their conflicts
in literary works.

That is why Carlyle, the famous British philosopher, rushes on love
carelessly and calls it a sort of insanity or a combination of several
types of insanity.

Otherwise, the magnificence and splendour of love, when it is applied as
a powerful and creative factor, in the proper and legitimate way, is
undeniable.

“Love” is known to be accompanied with “infamy” from the past, and there
are popular stories about infamy of the “lovelorn lovers” among the past
and present people.

Here, it would be better to have a short discussion about the mental
causes of this issue, and find the source of this particular mental
state, which is one of the requisites of love.

Love is like a fire which kindles the entire being of the lover, and
changes all to its tint, that is the colour of fire. As if all faculties
of the lover’s being are transformed into a single power, that is, the
power of love.

In fact, the power of love is indebted to general mobilization of all
powers and their focus on one point. Man’s various intellectual,
emotional and instinctive powers originating from his being are like
tributaries of a big river flowing in courses by virtue of the
requirements of different lands. Obviously, if all the streams joined in
one single course, the other lands dry up, and the single course floods!

On this account, the “restless lover” has no feeling and thought except
the hot and fiery emotion of love. He always talks about the beloved. He
seeks the beloved with all particles of his being, and any event with
the least relation links him with the beloved in the form of a powerful
association.

The dangerous stage starts from here when love does not accept any
control, and the lover’s being surrenders quickly and entirely to a
powerful and plunderer host like a vulnerable and defenceless city.

At this time, if sympathetic individuals do not help and support him,
and do not guide him to the proper and legitimate way, he may take any
action, because he is indifferent to everything (infamy and fame, sin
and purity) except the attainment of the beloved.

He neither thinks of the morrow nor his reputation, or friends,
relatives, or the social and moral obligations and customs.

Of course, he is attracted to everything unaware and without any
“ill-will”. Even though he may lose the result of his past life or the
entire future product in this transaction!

When he wakens (for impulsive loves, it happens shortly after sexual
intercourse), he feels a rush of grief and sorrow for what he has lost
and what he has done.

The dreadful regret for the past weighs on his mind and heart, but
unfortunately, it is often too late and of no use.

The regret and awareness may be felt in the prison after committing a
crime, or cutting off social relations and escape from home, parents and
friends, living in solitude and or resorting to the centres of
corruption and addiction, ….

The youths should beware of this big danger, which can begin with a
glance. They should control themselves in the primary stages when it is
controllable, and avoid the risky area.

They may forget the beloved through choosing healthy entertainments and
hobbies, full time engagements in various educational, sports and
similar activities, and should avoid associating with the ignorant and
aberrant friends who kindle this fire, and think upon the evil
consequences of this process.

They should keep the vacuum existing in their heart for a pure and
sacred love to their future spouse, and absolutely avoid impulsive love
affairs posing as sacred ones.

At this stage, their friends have an important responsibility to awaken
them through friendly, endearing and empathetic ways before losing the
opportunity of acceptance of advice and admonition.

“Love and fancy”
----------------

Many cases of running away from home, divorce and suicide are caused by
inconformity of the lovely fancies with the future real life.

Any youth is subject to the danger of being involved in an unholy and
indecisive fiery love, and may lose some of his distant and near
relatives unknowingly because of it.

Therefore, all youths and parents should be warned against this danger
to prevent it when it is possible.

Contrary to other seedlings, “love” grows and yields very soon. As we
already mentioned, sometimes for those susceptible to it, a seed is
changed to a strong tree only in an instant and just with a glance.

The particular quality of this spiritual event necessitates more
investigation and watching carefully its dangers. Hereunder, we will
study additional pitfalls of love.

Love and dream!
---------------

Nothing is as dreamy as love. Relationship between the two has been
recognized from times immemorial.

Those involved in this trap are always living in a dreamy world, where
everything differs from what exists in this world.

Its criteria differ with those of ordinary world, and its events and
appearances shall be seen, not heard. However, the terms applied for
normal life are not capable of describing the lovers’ life.  
 So many dreams of the “poets” and striking delicacies of their poems
are indebted to the fancies of their real or unreal loves.

On the other hand, when they attain the beloved and see no trace of
those sweet dreams, they understand that everything is at the real level
or a little higher. They find remarkable realities, but nothing
comparable with their dreams!

Then, they are overcome by fear.

A sorrowful coolness replaces the ardent fire of past love and squeezes
their heart. They find themselves bankrupt in this transaction.
Sometimes they think that they are deceived or mysterious spirits are
fighting them directly or with the help of competitors and the envious.

At this time, they display drastic reactions, the severity of which is
proportionate to the distance of that dream with this reality: running
away from home, divorce, suicide or other acute reactions.

Love and expectation
--------------------

Usually, the restless lovers spare no effort for their beloveds or at
least are ready for it.

That is why when the fire of love is quenched, it is replaced by strange
expectations, and since these expectations are never satiated, the lover
complains and this changes their future life to a hell.

Love and revenge
----------------

One of the other great dangers of love is inflammation of severe and
dangerous sense of revenge for desperation of attainment of the beloved.

There are many cases in the contemporary and past history in which
lovers have committed slaughters, and the slain was none except the
ex-beloved.

Turbulent love makes one worship the beloved as far as there is even a
thin hope of obtaining the sweetheart. When he feels despair, and
considering that it is not possible to extinguish this great power
immediately, it is transformed to a severe stroke power (like a ball
striking an obstacle and rebounding).

As he saw everything little and tolerable with the hope of attainment of
his sweetheart, he does not fear anything in taking revenge from her in
despair. Mostly, he does not rest without reacting. When he does not
feel such power in himself, he may react through suicide. Thereby, he
seeks revenge on either his beloved or himself.

These are some of the pitfalls of fiery, impulsive and indecisive love
affairs.

Mercantile marriages
--------------------

We were talking about marriage, the most difficult and tortuous stage in
the life of youth, following by a discussion about love and its
pitfalls. Now we continue the previous important subject.

It should not surprise you that there are several types of marriages:
Mercantile marriages, impulsive marriages and paper marriages, etc.

Each of these has particular features based on which it could be easily
and exactly recognized.

Symptoms of mercantile marriages are heavy marriage portions, rich
dowry, water, property, house, real estate, other huge sums of money
received as bride price (while from the Islamic point of view, bride
price is basically senseless), or other things. Usually, two types of
wealth and capital are exchanged in mercantile marriages.

1- Visible wealth

2- Invisible wealth

Visible wealth refers to the precise calculation of wealth of man or
woman, and the near relatives like father, mother, brother, and in brief
all of those from whom the bride and groom inherit!

In mercantile marriages, the wealth of these people are studied and
calculated, and of course, after this transaction, the bride and groom
wait for the properties of others like parents and brothers, and
actually await their death.

On the other hand, invisible wealth refers to the social capabilities
and various positions of the near and distant relatives of both parties
which could be used as a means of progress in the society!

The value of invisible wealth is sometimes much more than the visible,
but in this type of transaction, the bride and groom shall always pray
for their relatives so that they can enjoy their support and
recommendation when required.

It goes without saying that in this sort of marriage, humanistic
attributes of both parties, their knowledge, and other things are not
taken into account. Rather, all discussions are based on the assets and
visible and invisible capital of both parties (particularly woman).

In mercantile marriages, the woman’s personality falls to the level of a
usual merchandise, and is transacted just like a commodity.
Unfortunately, this sort of marriage is very common in our society, and
many parents and some youths believe in it.

The other big problem with such marriages is that the reason for their
survival is the same as that of their occurrence, and when the man or
woman finds himself or herself needless of the other, or takes
possession of the desired wealth, the situation is immediately changed.
Many cases are seen where men suck the spouse like a juicy fruit, and
throw away the residue.

Sacred affinity and love that guarantees survival of matrimony is never
meaningful to them, and both parties look upon each other as an
expensive car or a luxurious apartment!

Such women have expectations proportionate  to their wealth, position,
and facilities of their relatives, and dowry. This is a great blight for
survival of matrimony.

High frequency of such marriage has caused many youths to introduce
themselves falsely as owners of expensive cars, houses, flats, etc.
When, after marriage, it is revealed that he doesn’t even own a star in
the seven heavens, challenges and arguments begin.

This issue has been particularly taken into account in our religious
teachings, and Moslems are strictly forbidden such marriages.

Our great leaders have denounced those marrying for wealth and property
of the other party, and have called a heavy marriage portion as an
ominous sign of marriage. They were satisfied with marriage of their
daughters with materially poor but spiritually rich individuals and by
setting little marriage portions they set an example for all of us.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.) says:  
 “One who marries a woman only for her beauty, he does not achieve his
purpose, and one who marries a woman only for her wealth, God leaves him
alone. Try to marry faithful and pure women.” (Wasa’il ash-Shi’a, 3:6)

Whimsical marriages
-------------------

Whim is one of the most important and at the same time most dangerous
bases of marriage.

Whim should not be confused with legitimate sexual pleasure as the
instinctive motive of marriage.

There is no doubt that most youths seek “sexual pleasure” in marriage,
and based on the nature that has created such a powerful instinct in
them, they are authorized to look for it.

However whim is something else. It refers to a series of wishful fancies
and wrong and unwise calculations mixed with irregular fluctuations or
abnormal and animal enjoyments.  
 Whim is based on the transient, unstable and even childish or foolish
values.

The whimsical marriages often end up in divorce, because the guarantee
for its survival is sometimes as unstable as a bubble!

There are many symptoms for impulsive marriages:  
 Whimsical magazines are full of this sort of marriages. Their pattern
is sometimes cinema and  films and sometimes marriages and divorces of
singers and actors, while we know that cinema scenes and characters are
nothing except unreal and made up and reality is something else.

But the capricious individuals take all of them seriously and base their
life on these mirages and bubbles, and cause sufferings, discomforts and
teasing others as atonement for these transient caprices.

Marriage with football!
-----------------------

Recently, there was an interesting and at the same time regrettable news
in the dailies. A woman had filed a case against her husband. She
complained that her husband loved football, and he attended all soccer
matches. If unable to get  a ticket he shall definitely watch it on TV
or listen to the radio. When watching football on TV, he forgets
everything; even his dinner, sleep, wife and child.

All the time he likes to talk about football, and nothing else: “He
should have married football, instead me! I am tired of my life.”

However, this lady who is the mother of one, does not know that her
husband has married her for football! As she confesses, when she had
gone to watch a soccer match, she saw him cheering the same team as her.
Later they got to know each other more and then finally married. It
seems that their spiritual common point was just cheering the same team!

Do you know what was the reply of her husband against this complaint?  
 He said: “I am thus. You can stay and tolerate it, or take divorce and
leave me!”

Paper marriages!
----------------

Another sample of whimsical marriages is that which begins from
magazines and dailies.  
 For instance, one may read in a daily: I am a 29-year-old lady. I am
...cm tall, …cm at the waist, … dollars of monthly income, interested in
music, dancing, sport, picnic? I am willing to marry a black man with …
cm tall, handsome, ….

This advertisement may attract his attention and since he finds himself
and the lady eligible, he contacts her through the magazine, and they
marry.

Soon they would begin to think why they contented just with physical
specifications, and neglected the humanistic attributes which are the
main guarantees for fidelity and continuation of marriage.

Some marriages are a mixture of “impulsion” and “trade”, and naturally
include the problems and faults of both kinds. There is also a sort of
political marriage, but we would be better to leave it unexplained.

Our great leaders have stressed on the spiritual, mental and moral
privileges of the spouses, and thereby called family training, nobility,
spirit of dedication, kindness, sincerity, chastity, virtue, and faith,
as the most important factors.

Once our holy Prophet told his companions: “Avoid the beautiful plants
growing in the contaminated and foul lands!”

The companions asked: “What do you mean by these plants?”

He answered: “I mean those beautiful women trained in impure
environments and tainted families (and lacking moral privileges and
merits).”


