Introduction
============

There is nothing entertaining about this book. It is not a book to sit
down with and enjoy, but to be used. It can be handled by individuals,
pairs, or small groups, but to do so will require hard work and
concentration. It will demand commitment. The material is somewhat
easier to follow in a seminar context.

This is a series of studies providing material designed to make Muslim
contacts with non-Muslim people more productive. Its purpose is to help
Muslims avoid being influenced by subtle attacks on Islamic behaviour.
It also points out pitfalls in religious discussions. Finally, it
provides material for attaining a goal-oriented, effective means of
actively doing da’wa, or inviting people to Islam.

These studies are not for the one who wallows in love and tolerance,
maintaining that all religious traditions are equally valid and that all
ways lead to God. It may well be that all ways lead to God, but then all
will stand before Him to be rewarded or punished according to what they
have done with the revelation of truth given to them. The philosophy
behind this book is that there is a faith that is right and true, and
all other faiths are deviations to a greater or lesser degree.
Furthermore, all people have the obligation to find and follow that
faith. Finally, all people have the obligation, once having found faith,
to propagate it in appropriate ways.

Three sources make up the basis of these contemplations. The first is
the theoretical framework of academic Comparative Religion, and
Missiology. The second is the context of missions targeting Muslim
populations. The third is the Qur’anic advice on how to meet the people
of the Book.

The most important question of the reader will be how to use this
material. First of all, this book presents a theory and philosophy. This
means that the careless reader, looking for quick and brief advice, may
be disappointed. In the long run, this will save time and energy. It is
also more effective to gain a deeper understanding of what one wants to
do, than merely to pick up a few tips without actually changing one’s
approach.

This study is based on the philosophy that the Bible can be used
effectively in dealing with the people of the Book, for the very good
reason that the Bible more consistently teaches Islam than it does
Christianity. Working with Jews is another matter, since Judaism, both
in teaching and practice, is very close to Islam. It is of little use to
point out to Jews that the Bible does not support the doctrine of the
Trinity, for example. They do not believe in it anyway. Although there
is a focus on Christian-Muslim relations, much of the material in this
study can be applied especially to secularized people, who unconsciously
maintain many Christian misconceptions, and even to people of other
religious traditions.

The chapters of this study will describe the true faith to some extent,
and point out ways in which other traditions have deviated from the
right path. Finally, they will give several models of ways of
propagating the faith, ways that are based on experience and research,
on a realization of the contemporary challenges met by Muslims,
especially as targets of Christian evangelization, and on some Qur’anic
passages giving guidance in how to deal with the people of the Book.
This study presents the theory and practice, but not all of the
essentials. It is meant to be used in conjunction with the Qur’an, other
Islamic literature, and insofar as people of the Book are concerned, the
Bible and Islamic studies of the Bible.

This material is designed to be used by individuals, partners in doing
da’wa (invitation to Islam), and small, informal groups established with
the purpose of inviting people to Islam. The expertise can be best
acquired through participation in seminars focusing on the material in a
systematic way, and dealing with the questions of the participants as
they come up. The greater focus is on what an ordinary person can do
with very limited means. This is not to neglect the importance of the
grand message or mass movements. Rather, it hopefully prepares the
ground for things more effective. Great movements start with a few
people with dedication and who grasp the opportunities.

A number of methods of da’wa are dealt with and evaluated. Some of them
are simple, and require little preparation. Among these is distributing
literature in various ways. Some, though important and needing great
preparation, are barely mentioned, because they require great resources.
Among these are medical, social, and educational work. So the main
emphasis here is on what one or several dedicated individuals can do.
This does not mean that the matters presented here are not of interest
to those doing a more extended work. The matters discussed are actually
vital for all Muslims.

The first chapter points out that different beliefs require different
approaches, so that the style of presentation must change according to
the content of the information. Examples are drawn from the three
primary beliefs in which Christians and Muslims differ: the oneness of
God, the prophethood of Muhammad, and the Imamate. Each doctrine because
of its content requires its own kind of presentation.

It cannot be overemphasized that work should be done systematically. A
written file should be maintained for each individual for whom da’wa is
being made. The second chapter notes various spiritual types and ways of
approach, changing the focus from differences in the content of
information to differences in the kinds of people who receive it. A
written evaluation of each individual’s spiritual typology should be
made. This means that one must find opportunities to ask the individual
what his beliefs and practices are. A second sheet should be taken to
evaluate the ways of approach and plan specifically in what situations
they can be implemented.

The third chapter argues for setting goals of spiritual change. This
should also be evaluated for each individual, based on the spiritual
profile that has already been made. It is no use to spend time
convincing people of what they already believe. On the other hand,
unless a systematic plan is made, important goals will be forgotten.

The fourth chapter points out the differences between Islamic and
Christian beliefs, while the fifth chapter points out the differences in
practice. These chapters are valuable for refining the spiritual profile
and the goals already made in chapters two and three. Chapter six
provides similar material from the point of view of the secular
challenges of the modern world as well as from non-Christian traditions.

Chapter seven gives a survey of the missionizing practices of
Christians. It evaluates them, showing why most of them are
inappropriate in Islam. However, some tips on da’wa can be gleaned from
them. But for the most part, they are useful to know in order to avoid
them. Chapter seven also proposes an Islamically based model for doing
da’wa. It is not meant to be followed literally, but as a point of
departure for developing a working and effective program that takes
little time and money. It can be adapted to the needs of individuals,
partners or couples, or small, informal groups.

Chapter eight is a study of the passages in the holy Qur’an that contain
the expression “people of the Book” and give guidance on how to relate
to them. This guidance is in sum an excellent rule of da’wa outlined in
sixteen points. Anyone attempting da’wa should memorize this
sixteen-point da’wa plan and keep it constantly in mind while dealing
with the people of the Book.

Chapter nine is an appendix, giving general guidance to the use of the
Bible and at the same time forming a bridge to the following parts,
where the Biblical support for Islamic belief and practice is
overwhelmingly copious. It points out some of the pitfalls in using the
Bible.

These missiological essays were written not only to inspire commitment
to inviting people to the right path, but to make people realize how
important doing so actually is. It is a matter of survival.

**Thomas McElwain**


