Theological Differences Between Christianity and Islam
======================================================

The first need in presenting Islam to people of a Christian background
is to understand what beliefs Christians have. The purpose of this essay
is to present the beliefs of the major sects of Christianity in terms of
what they are and how they differ from Islamic beliefs. An analysis of
Christian and Islamic sources will form the basis of the study.

On the face of it, few notice how much Christianity and Islam are alike
in basic beliefs. On the five pillars of Islamic belief: the belief in
God, angels, the prophets, the sacred books, and the Day of Judgement,
there is no basic disagreement. Christians also believe in all of these,
although they would define the one God in three persons and take one
prophet and one sacred book fewer than in Islam. But all agree on the
principles. Unfortunately, the reality is not that simple. That extra
book and prophet are most essential to Islam, to say nothing of the
absolute unity of God, whereas the five pillars, to the Christian, miss
some of the basic issues.

One of the fundamental differences between Islam and Christianity is
that while Islam has a basic set of beliefs in common to nearly all who
claim to be Muslims, there is hardly anything that is common to all of
Christianity. There are important exceptions to all major Christian
beliefs, and although most Christians are members of the top ten, there
are about twenty thousand Christian sects, some of which are more
visible in propagation than their number of adherents would suggest.
That is why it is necessary from the beginning to find out what the
individual in question believes. One cannot make assumptions.

In the following study Christian belief is presented as a logical,
historical development that diversified in the face of precise
historical challenges. This is the context that explains the great
diversity in Christian belief, and provides a coherent way of perceiving
it as a whole.

Although Christianity should be seen historically as the product of a
certain trend among syncretic religious movements in the Roman Empire
during the first three centuries of the common era, the history of its
beliefs can be studied as beginning with Biblical roots. Almost all
Christian groups still claim some kind of adherence to the Bible.
Furthermore, most groups also provide creeds, statements of faith made
at particular times ostensibly to proclaim absolute truth, but in fact
to defend faith from contemporary attacks upon it. The variations in the
creeds thus reflect the history of the crises in Christian belief, as
well as the differences between sects.

The purpose of this study is not to provide a comprehensive, objective
view of the development of Christian belief. Rather, it is to provide a
factual but selective view of Christian doctrine as it can be related to
Islamic belief, for the purpose of helping Muslims to situate and
understand Christian beliefs as a whole, as they relate to Islamic
beliefs, with minimal effort.

1. The Torah (Tawrat) Sources
-----------------------------

The first text in many Christian catechisms, or manuals for teaching
Christian doctrine, is the Decalogue from Exodus 20:1-17. This is the
text upon which all of the Christian Creeds have been founded, each
modifying the original for the specific purpose of defending the
Christian faith in times of doctrinal disagreement. A majority of
Christian catechisms suggest a development of religion through three
documents: the Decalogue, some portion of Matthew six or the Sermon on
the Mount, and the creed.

The text of the Decalogue can be divided into two sections. In fact, the
Decalogue is described in the Exodus story as having been written on two
stone tablets. There are slight differences in the way the Decalogue is
divided into two by the various sects, but nearly all agree that the
first part refers to how we should relate to God, and the second part
refers to how we should relate to other people.

The first part of the Decalogue in the Authorised Version is as follows.

*3 Thou shalt have no other gods before me.*

*4 Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of
any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or
that is in the water under the earth:*

*5 Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the
LORD thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon
the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me;*

*6 And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
commandments.*

*7 Thou shalt not take the name of the LORD thy God in vain; for the
LORD will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.*

The text is couched in negatives, but the first article is clearly the
establishment of the unicity of God. There is only one God. There is no
god but God. This is followed by logical corollaries, that is, that no
images of God may be made and worshiped, and that the name of God must
be held in special esteem. Finally, the implication is drawn that since
there is only one God, He is sovereign and must be loved and obeyed.

The basic structure of positing God first and then several logical
corollaries afterward continues to be the format for nearly all
Christian creeds and statements of faith. A comparison of some of these
with the Decalogue will reveal not only the spread of Christian belief,
but how it has developed from this beginning.

The rest of the Decalogue is a logical development from the sovereignty
of God as it implies a certain kind of behaviour towards other people.
The second part of the Decalogue is as follows in the Authorised
Version.

*8 Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.*

*9 Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work:*

*10 But the seventh day is the sabbath of the LORD thy God: in it thou
shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy
manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that
is within thy gates:*

*11 For in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, the sea, and all
that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the LORD blessed
the sabbath day, and hallowed it.*

*12 Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the
land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.*

*13 Thou shalt not kill.*

*14 Thou shalt not commit adultery.*

*15 Thou shalt not steal.*

*16 Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.*

*17 Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet thy
neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox,
nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's.*

The first article, that on the Sabbath, establishes the authority of God
based on creatorship and limits human authority over subordinates,
showing that children, workers, and even animals have non-negotiable
rights that must not be infringed upon. The second positive command is
to honour parents. Then there are the final prohibitions of killing,
adultery, stealing, giving false testimony, and coveting.

About half of the Decalogue deals with the unity of God and human
responsibility towards God. The other half deals with duties relating to
other people in consideration of the sovereignty of God as Creator of
all things. The Christian Scriptures consistently maintain the Decalogue
as normative. It is the only extensive text in the Bible which is
portrayed as being revealed directly by God, without the means of a
prophet.

We shall see in the sections to follow how Christian belief has departed
from the principles of the Decalogue and come into conflict with it.
Islam does not conflict with it, but has focused on new issues that have
arisen over time. The former is disastrous, while the latter is merely
dangerous. The three popular traditions can be caricaturised as follows.
Jews have circumvented the obligations of the Decalogue by focusing on
the importance of belonging to the chosen people. Christians have
circumvented the obligations of the Decalogue by claiming that belief in
the death of Jesus (as) as a substitutionary sacrifice for sin makes
everything all right. In practice, Muslims often think that doing ones
prayers faithfully or going on pilgrimage atones for anything and
everything they have done, so why not live an unjust life, and at the
end of it go to Mecca and set it all right? All three traditions start
out with the obligation of obedience and an ethical imperative. All
three provide a way to escape doing what God says, but of the three,
Islam at least is salvageable.

2. The Christian Creeds as an Expression of Christian Belief
------------------------------------------------------------

Two things will become apparent as we examine the Christian Creeds.
Firstly, they follow the structure of the Decalogue, beginning with the
doctrine of God and following with its logical consequences. Secondly,
the Christian Creeds, unlike Islamic confessions of faith, conflict with
the Decalogue, and thus put Christianity in the position of having to
explain why it has departed from a basic revelation which it ostensibly
accepts.

It is popular among Christians to consider that there are three early
creeds which are accepted by many Christian establishments. These appear
in modern times in a number of versions, and an academic study of them
would have to depend on the most ancient manuscripts in the original
language. Any of the popular versions of today, however, will serve our
purpose, and the three below are the versions as published by Anglican
sources.

### 2.1 The Apostles’ Creed

The briefest creed is called The Apostles’ Creed. I have divided it into
the two basic parts corresponding to the division of the Decalogue, the
first dealing with the belief in God, and the second with the logical
additions to that.

*1. I believe in God, the Father almighty, creator of heaven and earth.
I believe in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord. He was conceived by
the power of the Holy Spirit and born of the Virgin Mary. He suffered
under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, died, and was buried. He descended
to the dead. On the third day he rose again. He ascended into heaven,
and is seated at the right hand of the Father. He will come again to
judge the living and the dead. I believe in the Holy Spirit,*

*2. the holy catholic Church, the communion of saints, the forgiveness
of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting. Amen.*

The Apostles’ Creed contrasts with the Decalogue in being a proclamation
of what “I believe,” Latin credo, from which comes the English word
creed. The Decalogue is a divine declaration rather than a human one,
the I who is speaking claims to be God Himself rather than a human
being. This is the first great departure from true faith, the rejection
of what God says and its replacement with what I believe. The results in
Christianity are far-reaching and will be constantly met in any given
contact.

The second contrast is the way in which the figure of God is dealt with.
Instead of an absolute unicity, there is the Father, Son, and the Holy
Spirit. These are not overtly defined as one God in three persons, but
the implication is there. The emphasis is rather on the narrative of
Jesus from a cosmic point of view.

The importance of not worshiping images and the centrality of the name
of God in life and worship are neglected in the Apostles’ Creed, and
this neglect is generally reflected in the major historical
manifestations of Christianity.

In the second section, there is a complete ignoring of the Decalogue
principles, which are replaced with new values. The Decalogue makes the
family, parents with limited authority under God, the basic unit of
society. In The Apostles’ Creed, the authority of the Church is the
primary doctrine, the point of departure, here called catholic or
universal. In the light of that, the communion of the saints, that is,
the members of the Church, takes the place of the Sabbath proclamation
of non-negotiable rights for man and beast and the command to honour
parents. That is, basic human rights and the centrality of the family as
the basic unit of society are replaced by Church authority and
community. This explains the weakness of the family in Christian
societies, as compared to Jewish and Islamic ones. The commandments in
the rest of the Decalogue are accepted by Christianity, but in the creed
they become the sins which God forgives through the mediation of Church
authority. Furthermore, those who submit to the Church have the promise
of the resurrection of the body and everlasting life.

The resurrection of the body and everlasting life are clear additions to
the Decalogue. These are not made by the early Christian Church,
however. They are the result of a post-exilic conflict in Judaism, where
the sect of Pharisees adhered to the belief in angels, judgment, and
resurrection, while the sect of Saduccees did not. The Pharisaical
interpretation has been transmitted to Christianity, and further, to
Islam.

Although the history of Christendom is more complex, and the Apostles’
Creed does not actually reflect with accuracy Christianity in its first
centuries, the Apostles’ Creed can be used as a simple point of
departure. The other Creeds expand upon its various features and
especially in the later ones even disagree with it, little by little
producing the various distinct sectarian doctrines.

### 2.2 The Nicene Creed

*1. We believe in one God, the Father, the Almighty, maker of heaven and
earth, of all that is, seen and unseen. We believe in one Lord, Jesus
Christ, the only Son of God, eternally begotten of the Father, God from
God, Light from Light, true God from true God, begotten, not made, of
one Being with the Father. Through him all things were made. For us and
for our salvation he came down from heaven: by the power of the Holy
Spirit he became incarnate from the Virgin Mary, and was made man. For
our sake he was crucified under Pontius Pilate; he suffered death and
was buried. On the third day he rose again in accordance with the
Scriptures; he ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of
the Father. He will come again in glory to judge the living and the
dead, and his kingdom will have no end. We believe in the Holy Spirit,
the Lord, the giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son.
With the Father and the Son he is worshiped and glorified. He has spoken
through the Prophets.*

*2. We believe in one holy catholic and apostolic Church. We acknowledge
one baptism for the forgiveness of sins. We look for the resurrection of
the dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen.*

The Nicene Creed is probably the first truly historical document, that
is, there was probably a real Creed produced at the Council of Nicea,
and it is not a later fiction as is The Apostles’ Creed. However, the
Nicene Creed as presented above is a Western, Protestant view of it with
a number of additions, including the replacement of “I” with “we.” The
original manuscripts have not survived, and there is good reason to
think that the doctrine of the Trinity had not yet taken so clear a form
by the time of the Council of Nicea in the fourth century. Nevertheless,
this version gives us some notable expansions over The Apostles’ Creed.

The Apostles’ Creed is inadequate to impose the Trinity, the belief in
one God eternally existing in three distinct persons. Therefore, the
Nicene Creed goes to some length to define the three persons of the
Trinity. Jesus is declared outright to be God. In this version the Holy
Ghost is said to proceed from the Father and the Son, a point which was
never accepted in the Orthodox Church. The Latin filioque, and from the
Son, remains a major point of doctrinal contention between Western
Christianity (Rome and Protestantism) and Orthodoxy. This argument had
not yet arisen at the time of Nicea, and its inclusion here is an
obvious anachronism.

The addition of one baptism reflects a very complex history of the
Christian institution. The early historical practice of a purity system
with ablutions is only partially the origin of Christian baptism, which
has antecedents in the oriental mysteries which were so popular in the
Roman Empire in the first centuries of the common era. The expression
“one baptism” effectively represses the remnants of ablutions and the
concept of purity in Christianity. Baptism takes on a heavy load of
meaning as an initiatory rite of entrance into the Church, the role it
had in the mystery cults.

The catholic or universal Church, which was adequate in the Apostles’
Creed, needs bolstering here. Now the claim is put forward that the
Church is Apostolic, that is, it has the seal of approval of the direct
disciples of Christ. The concept of an authoritative Church was not easy
to get across, and was not actually even fully established when
Constantine made it the religion of the empire. The original concept of
the ekklesia or “church” was a calling out of institutions, as the
etymology of the Greek word implies, and not a calling into an
authoritative establishment.

### 2.3 The Athanasian Creed

*1. Whosoever will be saved, before all things it is necessary that he
hold the Catholic Faith. Which Faith except everyone do keep whole and
undefiled, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly. And the Catholic
Faith is this: That we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity,
neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the Substance. For there
is one Person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the Holy
Ghost. But the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
is all one, the Glory equal, the Majesty co-eternal. Such as the Father
is, such is the Son, and such is the Holy Ghost. The Father uncreate,
the Son uncreate, and the Holy Ghost uncreate. The Father
incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible, and the Holy Ghost
incomprehensible. The Father eternal, the Son eternal, and the Holy
Ghost eternal. And yet they are not three eternals, but one eternal.*

*As also there are not three incomprehensibles, nor three uncreated, but
one uncreated, and one incomprehensible. So likewise the Father is
Almighty, the Son Almighty, and the Holy Ghost Almighty. And yet they
are not three Almighties, but one Almighty. So the Father is God, the
Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God. And yet they are not three Gods,
but one God. So likewise the Father is Lord, the Son Lord, and the Holy
Ghost Lord. And yet not three Lords, but one Lord. For like as we are
compelled by the Christian verity to acknowledge every Person by himself
to be both God and Lord, So are we forbidden by the Catholic Religion,
to say, There be three Gods, or three Lords. The Father is made of none,
neither created, nor begotten. The Son is of the Father alone, not made,
nor created, but begotten.*

*The Holy Ghost is of the Father and of the Son, neither made, nor
created, nor begotten, but proceeding. So there is one Father, not three
Fathers; one Son, not three Sons; one Holy Ghost, not three Holy Ghosts.
And in this Trinity none is afore, or after other; none is greater, or
less than another; But the whole three Persons are co-eternal together
and co-equal. So that in all things, as is aforesaid, the Unity in
Trinity and the Trinity in Unity is to be worshipped. He therefore that
will be saved is must think thus of the Trinity. Furthermore, it is
necessary to everlasting salvation that he also believe rightly the
Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ.*

*For the right Faith is, that we believe and confess, that our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is God and Man; God, of the substance of
the Father, begotten before the worlds; and Man of the Substance of his
Mother, born in the world; Perfect God and perfect Man, of a reasonable
soul and human flesh subsisting. Equal to the Father, as touching his
Godhead; and inferior to the Father, as touching his Manhood; Who,
although he be God and Man, yet he is not two, but one Christ; One, not
by conversion of the Godhead into flesh but by taking of the Manhood
into God; One altogether; not by confusion of Substance, but by unity of
Person. For as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man, so God and Man
is one Christ; Who suffered for our salvation, descended into hell, rose
again the third day from the dead. He ascended into heaven, he sitteth
at the right hand of the Father, God Almighty, from whence he will come*

*2. to judge the quick and the dead. At whose coming all men will rise
again with their bodies and shall give account for their own works. And
they that have done good shall go into life everlasting; and they that
have done evil into everlasting fire. This is the Catholic Faith, which
except a man believe faithfully, he cannot be saved.*

The first point that appears in contrast with the Nicene Creed is the
emphasis on the eternity of the Son, which was overlooked in the briefer
Creed. Any loophole in the theological definition of God produced its
followers in the early centuries of Christianity. The attempt to define
God theologically inexorably led to such a situation.

At this point it is clear that the Creed is the result of heated
controversy. It was not easy to impose the doctrine of the Trinity on
early Christians. The Arian controversy was long and bloody. Yet this
version of the Athanasian Creed is a corrupted Western, Protestant view.
It contains the Roman filioque which is again an interpolation never
accepted by Orthodoxy. But besides that, it contains a hint of the
separate natures of Christ, the unmixed human and divine natures, which
is also the result of a later controversy, which divided the Eastern
Orthodox Churches (Syrian, Coptic, et al.) from Greek and Roman
Christianity. The Monophysite Churches in the Middle East accept only
one nature in the Son, a nature that is both human and divine in the
incarnation.

The controversy over the Trinity resulted in a strong expression of
anathema. Those who did not accept the Creed were stated to be lost,
cast into Hell. Thus, the emphasis of Christianity came to be adherence
to a belief system set in creedal formula, rather than a personal
acceptance of God’s sovereignty and consequent obedience, as in Islam.
The development of sectarianism in Christianity reflects this emphasis
on what you believe rather than what you do. Some Christians criticize
Islam as being a religion of works rather than faith or belief.

The Athanasian Creed is of such complexity that the ordinary person, at
least one not caught up in the intricacies of Christian theology, may
have difficulty seeing the importance of its statements, and even their
meaning. Once the Trinity is a full-blown doctrine, it by-passes some of
the basic reasoning processes, to a ponderous and authoritarian
pronouncement of “truth” rather than an illumination of it. This has a
ramification in the theology of the Church. The Church in Roman
understanding holds the *magisterium*, or authority to teach without
submitting its arguments to the judgement of the individual mind. This
attitude is prevalent even among others that Roman Catholics, one might
say especially among Protestants. The authority of the Church in
maintaining the doctrine of the Trinity is generally of far greater
weight with the Christian than are the conclusions of his own reason and
logic.

The polemic tone of the Athanasian Creed above is removed from it as it
appears in the actual liturgy of the Coptic Orthodox Church. As
published in English, the reference to the Monophysite doctrine is
missing, as well as the Latin filioque, which would be entirely
unacceptable in any Orthodox setting. Although taken from a Coptic
source, the following is essentially the same as that found among the
Greek Orthodox and its sister rites.

*1. We believe in one God, God the Father, the Pantocrator, who created
heaven and earth, and all things seen and unseen. We believe in one Lord
Jesus Christ, the Only‑Begotten Son of God, begotten of the Father
before all ages; Light of light, true God of true God, begotten not
created, of one essence with the Father, by whom all things were made;
Who for us men and our salvation came down from heaven, and was
incarnate of the Holy Spirit and of the Virgin Mary, and became Man. And
he was crucified for us under Pontius Pilate, suffered and was buried.
And the third day He rose from the dead, according to the scriptures,
ascended into the heavens; he sits at the right hand of his Father, and
He is coming again in his glory to judge the living and the dead, whose
kingdom shall have no end. Yes, we believe in the Holy Spirit, the Lord,
the Life‑Giver, who proceeds from the Father, who with the Father and
the Son is worshipped and glorified, who spoke by the prophets.*

*2. And in one holy, catholic and apostolic church. We confess one
baptism for the remission of sins. We look for the resurrection of the
dead, and the life of the coming age. Amen.*

Put very succinctly, the variations on Christian belief turn on a very
few points. The whole of Western Christianity has come from the Roman
Church and shares its basic creed, which is distinct in its addition of
the filioque, that is, that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father
*and the Son.* The Greek Orthodox agree with the Western Church on all
creedal points except this one, and believe that the Holy Spirit
proceeds from the Father alone. The Eastern Orthodox form a position
over and against that of both Roman and Greek Catholics. They hold the
Monophysite doctrine that the incarnate Son has only one nature, which
is wholly divine and wholly human at one and the same time. Roman and
Greek Catholics maintain that the Son in incarnation has two natures
unmixed, one human and one divine.

From a creedal standpoint, Protestantism agrees with Roman Catholicism
in the issues of the Trinity. Its point of creedal independence from
Rome lies mainly in its concept of the Church. Furthermore,
Protestantism is broken into many sects based on differing concepts of
the Church on one hand, and additional points of doctrine on the other.

Some of the major Protestant concepts of the Church seem to be as
follows. First of all, there is a broad understanding that the Church is
a spiritual rather than visible institution, and that the universal
Church of Christ is his mystical body, made up of all true believers.
This rather spiritualized concept was developed apparently to facilitate
Protestant rejection of Roman authority. However, within that rarified
concept, Protestants have developed particular visible forms. Some of
these maintain the system of bishops within a national framework, as
found among Anglicans and Lutherans. The Reformed or Calvinistic concept
retains the national Church under a system of presiding elders instead
of bishops. The congregational concept is often seen to be a body of
believers covenanted together, whose clergy draw their authority from
the congregation, which works in a democratic way. This visible church
of believers rejects the principle of a national Church. It should be
noted that Protestantism is a logical continuation of the replacing of
the family with the Church. The loss of family authority resulted in the
elevation of the individual. The individual in society became the basic
unit of the theory of national government. The concept of the Church
thus evolved naturally in the direction it did. It must be remembered
that the breakdown of Roman structures in the Reformation did not change
the basic mind-set, even with the rejection of the *magisterium.*
Although Protestantism emphasizes the role of the mind in belief, the
Church still retains its hegemony over individual reason. The
splintering into a plethora of sects, each with its particular
configuration of beliefs, was inevitable.

It is remarkable, however, that the doctrine of atonement is not overtly
explained in the creeds. The death and resurrection of Jesus, as well as
the forgiveness of sins, are mentioned. But the connection between that
vicarious sacrifice on the cross and forgiveness is not made. The
atonement is nevertheless central to Christian belief. The creeds assume
the belief that humankind is totally helpless and lost in sinfulness,
and completely dependent on the death and resurrection of Jesus in order
to escape condemnation on the Day of Judgement and punishment in hell
fire. But they do not express that belief clearly. It is probable that
the lack of controversy on the atonement as compared to the Trinity
accounts for this omission. The simplest creeds lack a complete
exposition of the Trinity as well.

**It is in the three great central doctrines of Christianity that it is
most clearly distinguished from Islamic teaching: the doctrine of the
Trinity, the doctrine of the Atonement, and the doctrine of the Church.
These are issues that separate the two faiths. Islam postulates one God,
who is sovereign and creedally undefined.**

**Islam relies solely on divine grace in the judgement, without any
reference to atoning sacrifice. Finally, the relationship between
humankind and God is direct, without any institution mediating that
grace. From this point of view Islam is remarkably simple in theology,
whereas Christianity is convoluted and complex, with manifold variations
on the themes of Trinity, atonement, and authority.**

**The Creedal doctrines which are similar to Islamic doctrine are belief
in the return of Jesus (AS), and the Day of Judgement.**

3. Extra-Creedal Developments
-----------------------------

Many Christian sects make a big issue of being non-creedal. In
actuality, however, they have belief systems which are just as binding
as the creeds. To be non-creedal does not mean that a sect has a
different basis for its existence or its beliefs. It merely means that
the formal recitation of its beliefs do not form a part of the liturgy.
In fact, most of the sects actually conform to the belief systems of the
creeds. They depart from them in two ways: either by additional beliefs,
or by modification of one or more of the creedal doctrines. The
rejection of the creeds is therefore almost never total. It merely paves
the way for modification or addition. The basic, Roman Catholic doctrine
is generally the continuing foundation. For example, Baptists claim to
be non-creedal, but almost invariably accept the filioque theology,
which is Roman as opposed to Greek and Eastern. That is, to the extent
which they have a clear idea of what they believe, they believe that the
Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son, and not from the
Father alone.

### 3.1 European Antecedents

In the history of the Reformation in Europe, and in addition to the
national churches, there are two major tendencies of continuing
consequence. These are the Unitarian movement, and the Radical
Reformation. The early Unitarians, following such figures as Servetus,
Socinius, Blandrata, and Francis David, attacked the doctrine of the
Trinity in favor of some form of One God. At the same time, they tended
to retain the other creedal issues, such as that of the Church. The
Radical Reformation, with such figures as Von Carlstadt, Jan de Leyden,
Andreas Fischer, and Hubmeier to mention only a few, attacked the
doctrine of the Church above all, but contained elements which
questioned other doctrines, although few of them went so far as to
question all of the creedal doctrines.

These are the sources of the older Christian sects, such as Unitarians,
Baptists, Mennonites, and Congregationalists of various types. Unless
they have been influenced by liberalism, they retain a belief much
influenced by the creeds, with modifications on the Trinity and the
Church. Again, the doctrine of the Atonement was not an issue from which
a strong movement of dissent arose. The belief that Jesus died for our
sins, and without faith in that death salvation is impossible, remains
central to the traditional forms of these sects. There have been trends
approaching Islam in the rejection of the Christian doctrine that all
people are born sinful, but questioning the atonement itself is rare.
Only liberalism has been able to make inroad upon it, not contrasting
religious faith.

There are two trends which acted upon the national churches of
Protestantism, and are logical reactions to the emphasis on intellectual
belief as the basis of religion. These are spirituality or mysticism on
one hand, and holiness or piety on the other. Dry intellectualism is
rarely satisfying to the human psyche, and many people are attracted to
matters with a more emotional appeal. Furthermore, belief which does not
have an effect on action is easily perceived as hypocrisy. No wonder
many Protestants began to consider actions important. These two
influences cut across all barriers in Protestantism, colouring all of
the Protestant churches well as giving birth to new ones. Spirituality
gave rise to ecstatic behaviour, such as speaking in tongues and popular
singing, and sometimes even falling into trances and healing exercises.

This is the root of the diverse Pentecostal movement. The Pietistic
Movement had a similar effect, breaking Lutheranism, for example, into
sects advocating strict behaviour and strong conformity to customs
perceived as being devout. Having been so cut off from the Decalogue,
however, by creedalism, such movements have tended to descend into
trivial customs of piety, such as hairstyles and dress. The Methodist
Church developed from a combination of both factors in Anglicanism. It
has been able to incorporate both holiness and spirituality within the
episcopal system and continue to use the creed in its liturgy.

This is the doctrinal backdrop from which sprout the thousands of
Protestant and ultra-protestant sects. It is now necessary to focus on
some of these, since they are vocal and fairly numerous in adherents
throughout the world.

### 3.2 American Movements

The new sects of Christianity which appeared in America in the 19th
century and continue to be of extreme importance can be divided into the
restoration sects and the chiliastic sects. The former took the
Protestant reevaluation of the Church to new logical heights, claiming
to restore the Church of Christ to its primitive purity. This of course
was a prime aspect of the Reformation as a whole. The chiliastic sects
saw themselves as the logical historical development of Christianity for
the end of the world, and they preached various systems of beliefs
concerning the second coming of Christ. The three most visible of such
American sects today are the Mormons or The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter Day Saints among the most popular of the restorationists, the
Seventh-day Adventists and the Jehovah’s Witnesses among the chiliasts.

These sects all appeared and developed about the time of Darwinism and
the Industrial Revolution. They have a common foundation in literalism,
pragmatism, and materialism. Their organization is basically corporate,
like the organizations of the industrial and business world. These two
factors have contributed to their dynamic success in the 20th century as
compared to older, more traditional sects.

#### 3.2.1 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints

In the beginning, Mormonism did not strongly question the creedal
doctrines other than the Church and its restoration. It accepted the
main Christian doctrines. But over time, especially after the death of
the founder Joseph Smith, the particular situation of the 19th century
contributed to a growing departure from the creedal doctrines of
Christianity, so that many Christians today would not consider Mormons
Christians at all.

Despite its foundation on Christian doctrine, with only a restoration
concept of the Church and a new Scripture containing little or nothing
doctrinally new, the Mormons have departed from the Creedal faiths to a
surprising extent. The doctrine of the Trinity is completely replaced by
an evolutionary scheme. Much of the experience relates either to baptism
for the dead or the necessary rites which will ensure the peculiar
Mormon eschatology, which is divine evolution for all of those who
participate in the necessary rites. Besides this there is an emphasis on
clean living and family values, and the community of church activities.

Contact with Islam is facilitated by the prohibition of alcohol as well
as an inclination at least formerly to avoid flesh foods including pork,
at least except in winter and in times of distress. A point of
commonality is also in the former Mormon practice of polygamy, which has
long been discontinued by the main body.

#### 3.2.2 The Seventh-day Adventists

Seventh-day Adventists represent precisely the opposite tendency as
Mormonism. Although it began as a movement proclaiming the imminent and
visible return of Christ, from the beginning it contained strong attacks
on all three major creedal doctrines: the Trinity, the Atonement, and
the Church. Many of the early Adventist leaders were unitarian,
believing in one God, and that Jesus is subordinate. The sanctuary
doctrine, the distinctive doctrine of Adventism and a very complex
configuration of beliefs, in essence attacks the final atonement for sin
made on the cross, which is the generally accepted evangelical
Protestant belief. In the beginning, there was a strong
anti-ecclesiastical tendency in Adventism.

By the beginning of the 1900s Adventism had essentially forsaken its
anti-ecclesiasticalism. It became a Christian Church. Anti-trinitarian
beliefs died harder, and there was even a widespread debate about the
nature of Christ in the 1970s, after which the Trinitarian doctrine was
fully ratified, making official a situation which had already been
practically true for a long time. Only in the matter of Atonement does
Adventism still represent a mild criticism of what is generally accepted
among Christians. Adventism today can be said to represent Western
Christianity with some additional peculiarities.

Adventist belief is set forth in an official document containing 27
articles. The first maintains the Bible as the only source of doctrine,
an addition which identifies it as being a part of the Protestant
Reformation. Catholic formulations would accept tradition as well as
Scripture. Section 2 is entitled the Trinity, and sections 3-5 define
the three persons. The Son is called the eternal Son of God, identifying
Adventism as a branch of Calvinism, but this is not the whole story. The
section on the Holy Spirit is clearly Roman Catholic, based on the
filioque doctrine and opposed to Greek Orthodoxy. The Atonement is
described with its ramifications up to section 10. This exposition
accepts original sin, but denies the radical Calvinist total depravity.
Sections 11-13 give a Protestant concept of the Church, accepting the
spiritual universal Church. This has so far followed the creedal format.

The rest of the Adventist statement goes beyond the creedal format.
However, it follows the typical format of Protestant confessions of
faith. The two Protestant ordinances come next, baptism and the Lord’s
supper, going outside the matter of belief to that of practice. Sections
16 and 17 justify the Adventist distinctive of having their own prophet,
Ellen White. Sections 18-22 show a pietistic trend, referring to the
Decalogue as a model of behaviour. Section 23 inserts the Adventist
distinctive, the sanctuary service which is seen as a necessary adjunct
to Christ’s death on the cross. Sections 24-27 present the second coming
of Christ. Adventism maintains conditional immortality, which is a
special and minority position on the creedal doctrine of resurrection of
the body.

There are hundreds of Protestant sects that have similar statements in
similar format. First of all come the creedal doctrines, sometimes mixed
with and followed by the typically Protestant doctrines, followed by the
specific, distinctive doctrines of the sect. This structure is a very
logical response to the feeling that the creeds are top-heavy as
compared to the Decalogue in emphasizing the definition of God to the
detriment of the second section. The additions to the statements of
belief that go beyond the creeds are halting attempts to redress the
imbalance which the creedal departures from the Decalogue represent.
Rather than going back to the original, however, they are continued
developments in the creedal tradition, tendencies toward solving the
problem by additional definitions.

#### 3.2.3 The Jehovah’s Witnesses

The Jehovah’s Witnesses are a slippery breed. They produce a vast amount
of literature, but not a brief summary of doctrine. Furthermore, their
doctrine continues to change over time, so that old literature may not
be an accurate expression of their faith.

Jehovah’s Witnesses, as is typical of the radical reformation, question
the doctrine of the Trinity and the doctrine of the Church. They have
replaced these with a doctrine which gives God a higher position than
Jesus and denies the personality of the Holy Spirit. This is definitely
a step towards Islam, although their concept of Jesus as divine of a
lower order is still unacceptable, a fact they have been taught to
conceal from their Muslim contacts. As for the Church, they have
replaced this with the concept of a literal, physical kingdom of God,
which is identical to the Jehovah’s Witness organization.

There are several doctrines that seem to be fairly stable among
Jehovah’s Witnesses. The first is the importance of the name Jehovah or
any variant of it from the tetragram or YHWH used in the Bible.
Apparently God only responds to prayer addressed using this particular
word as a specific name, the only valid one. In its radical
manifestation, this doctrine considers prayer under any other formula to
be idolatry. They also make an issue of Jesus not dying on a cross but
on a stake. However, they do not deny the Atonement. They believe in a
particular eschatology that includes the state of death to be an
unconscious one, and the establishment of the earthly kingdom of Jesus
(AS) upon his return.

Jehovah’s Witnesses, like Mormons and Adventists, emphasize clean living
and family values, but are surprising to Muslims in their openness to
the use of alcohol. The character of the religion is intransigent, and
the degree of conformity is high. Their liturgy consists to a great
extent in reading books of questions and answers. There is no
discussion, and their missionary activities use discussion only to the
extent that they find necessary for contact. It is difficult to have a
discussion with them in which both sides accept the criterion of reason.
They tend to remain authoritarian even in the most open situations.

### 3.3 British Movements

Among many British movements one might single out the Plymouth Brethren
as the source of several groups with which Muslims are likely to come
into contact. Darbyism as it may be called has since split into many
groups. In the beginning there was some similarity with the new American
religions, but in the end British conservatism determined the nature of
the movement. The main attack on the creedal doctrines was in the
doctrine of the Church. Darbyism is extremely disestablishmentarian. It
rejects forms and formula, but in the end has produced a proliferation
of is own forms and dogmas, which tend to be conservative. A statement
of beliefs cannot be obtained, but the beliefs presented by adherents
are not complex or difficult to grasp, nor do they depart from
traditional Christianity to the extent of the new American movements.

They retain a strongly critical attitude towards other groups, and it is
precisely this stand against the Christian establishment that forms the
largest common ground with Islam. Contact is usually not fruitful,
however, as they too are generally more interested in getting their own
teaching across than in an exchange in dialogue. People associated with
the movement sometimes do street witnessing in British cities, and this
is the primary means of contact with Muslims.

**The extra-creedal doctrines are areas of opportunity for Islam. In
that some of them question and reverse the three central Christian
doctrines of the Trinity, Atonement, and the Church, parallels can be
made which approach Islam. This is especially true for the unity of God
(which many Christians will accept) and the reduction of ecclesiastical
authority. The crucifixion generally remains problematic. Furthermore,
various sects add doctrines that are similar to Islam, even when they
retain the Creedal errors. Thus one finds here and there prohibitions of
alcohol or unclean flesh, for example, as among Adventists and Mormons.
All of these provide common areas of belief upon which to build a
relationship of trustful communication.**

**On the other hand, some of the extra-creedal doctrines, such as the
Mormon doctrine of the evolution of God, raise even higher barriers than
the creeds themselves. Such issues can be best met if one is provided
with a statement of beliefs that can be evaluated. This is not always
possible, in which case it is necessary to get the Christian to express
his beliefs clearly and accurately.**

4. The Decalogue and Islamic Belief
-----------------------------------

Islamic doctrine is also a response to the development of the Christian
creeds. The history of the Christian creeds shows them to be very
practical in origin. They often say what people feel needs to be said at
a particular time, and are only afterward perceived as absolute
expressions of truth. The two versions of the Athanasian Creed above
show that very well, where the first is particular and polemic and the
second universal and liturgical.

The structure of Matthew six reflects the local preoccupations of the
time by giving alms, prayer, fasting, and probably pilgrimage as the
basics of the religion of Jesus. Although this does not replace or
conflict with the Decalogue, it does reveal a shift in issues. This
shift in issues is valid for a vital faith, because it addresses the
practical life of the people. When this shift in issues begins to
conflict with the Decalogue, however, then we are faced with a new and
different faith, which is the case with the Christian creeds.

In the beginning the Christian creeds reflected the burning issue of
what to do with Jesus. As this shift in interest away from the Decalogue
continued, the Decalogue as a source of doctrine was forgotten and the
creeds began to define Jesus in terms that were in literal conflict with
the Decalogue, while preserving the essential structure of that
document. The structure of the Decalogue which is the proclamation of
God followed by a list of logically implied commands, beliefs, and
values, is evident from the Mosaic document down through Islam, the
Christian creeds, and finally to the latest versions of sectarian
Christian statements of beliefs.

The Decalogue, as the name implies, has traditionally been seen to exist
in ten sections, although there is some variation in how these sections
are divided. Interestingly enough, the Islamic statement of the
essentials of faith and practice preserves this structure of ten. The
Islamic presentation is in two sections also, the roots and the
branches. The roots or fundamentals of faith are five: the Unity of God,
Divine Justice, Apostleship, Divine Guidance, and the Day of Judgement.
The branches are ten: prayer in prostration, the month of fasting,
pilgrimage, zakat and khums (the two forms of charity), holy endeavour,
enjoining good, preventing evil, love of the godly, and avoidance of the
wicked.

It is quite clear that these two groups correspond to the two sections
of the Decalogue, and that the latter group, the branches of faith,
corresponds rather precisely to the exposition of issues in Jesus’ (AS)
presentation in Matthew six. Islamic belief, like Christian, is the
product of taking the Decalogue as a point of departure and defining
faith in terms of contemporary issues. The difference is that Islam does
not conflict with the document of origin, but rather adds to it in ways
both consistent with the original and relevant to new problems.

This is seen in the way the roots are expressed. The first principle is
divine unity, corresponding to the first commandment of the Decalogue.
There are four principles that are logically drawn from divine unity. If
God is One, He is thereby impartial and if impartial, then intrinsically
just. Since He is just, he reveals the basis for His judgement of
humans, firstly in verbal revelation through the prophets, and secondly
through the practical application of divine guidance. This implies
finally human responsibility before God in a judgement. All of these are
logically implicit in the unity of God.

The consistent development of Islamic doctrine is also seen in the way
the branches are portrayed. The second commandment prohibits prostration
to false gods. The implication is prostration to the One True God alone.
It is at this point where the defining of the branches of faith begins.
The other nine branches of faith are similarly logical sequences from
the practice of prayer in prostration. There is thus nothing
inconsistent with the Decalogue. Islam is shown to be a consistent
transmission of the most ancient revelation, applied to new situations
with the shift in issues.

5. Theology Christian and Islamic: an evaluation.
-------------------------------------------------

Among the more important divisions of theology from a Christian
standpoint of belief are theology proper or the doctrine of God,
soteriology or the doctrine of salvation, ecclesiology or the doctrine
of the Church, and eschatology or the doctrine of last things. We have
noted that in terms of eschatology, the differences between Christianity
and Islam are small. We have also seen that throughout its history,
Christianity has been able to discuss and re-evaluate its thought in
regard to the Church and in regard to God, producing a number of
mutually exclusive and conflicting alternatives, some of which approach
Islam. It is the doctrine of salvation where the lines are drawn most
clearly and abruptly between the two faiths. Christianity does not budge
an inch on the belief that Jesus died on the cross and that this death
was necessary in order for God to forgive sin. Thus a doctrinal path of
dialogue can be envisioned, beginning with what is common and ending
with what is most divisive.

A discussion with Christians on the matter of end time events, signs of
the return of Christ, and the importance of the Day of Judgement is a
good opening. If some amount of agreement can be found in those areas,
it establishes a point of contact and readiness to discuss more
difficult issues.

The second most fruitful area of discussion is that of the Church.
Especially evangelical Christians will respond favourably to the Islamic
idea of direct responsibility before God, without the vehicle of a
priestly, ecclesiastical function. In this matter Islam and evangelical
Christianity have similar beliefs, in contrast to the more authoritarian
forms of Christianity. In contact with Catholics, the point of
commonality is the similarity between the authority of the Pope and that
of the Imam in Shi’ite practice.

In the matter of the Trinity, Christians are historically accustomed to
making this issue complex and mysterious on one hand, and absolutely
essential to faith on the other. The prevailing Christian attitude,
historically speaking, is that one’s destiny depends on having God
defined properly. Muslims have traditionally clung to the unity of God,
which essentially implies refusal to define God and recognition that
God, being sovereign, is not definable in human terms. In some cases it
is possible to cut out the interminable discussions with Christians on
the Trinity by referring to the unity of God as an absolute, as the
recognition of the ineffable character of God.

If discussion of the Trinity occurs, several things will become soon
apparent. Firstly, the Muslim has the upper hand in terms of both logic
and in terms of Scripture. The Christian Scriptures fail to provide a
secure basis for the doctrine of the Trinity, whereas a good foundation
for the unity of God can be made on the basis of the Bible. Secondly, in
the face of reason and Scripture, the Christian will fall back on
tradition, the creed, or ecclesiastical authority, covered by desperate
quibbling on Scriptural interpretation. Either a Christian will be easy
or nearly impossible to convince on the matter of the unity of God.
There is no middle ground.

Nevertheless, theological formulation on the doctrine of God has a
common foundation in Islam and Christianity, one largely based on Greek
philosophy. The Western formulation is still greatly dependent on Thomas
Aquinas, whose theology owes much to Al-Ghazali and others. There is a
clear correspondence between the divine attributes taught in Christian
theology, and those taught in Islam. All agree on the acceptance of
negative and positive attributes. The positive attributes in Shi’ite
thought are 1) Eternity, 2) Omnipotence, 3) Omniscience, 4)
All-Perception, 5) Self-existence, 6) Absolute Independence of will and
action, 7) Creation of Speech, 8) Absolute Truthfulness. The negative
attributes are rejection of 1) compounding, 2) accommodation, 3)
incarnation, 4) visibility, 5) need, 6) association, 7) change, and 8)
addition of qualities. Sunnism seems to reject only the last of these.

Classical Western theology appeals to many of the same attributes on the
same basis. Only the seventh positive attribute is generally unknown to
Christians. All of the others are not only acceptable, but more or less
normative, especially the first three. Among the negative attributes the
fourth and seventh, visibility and change, are most commonly admitted.
This situation is logically inconsistent with the Trinity. The influence
of Al-Ghazali and other Islamic scholars on Christian theology has been
so extensive, that Christian theological formulation nearly always
includes vast areas of mixing incompatible motifs, Islamic and
Trinitarian, without achieving a rational synthesis. One need only ask
how is it possible to maintain the negative attributes of visibility and
change, and yet admit incarnation, which effects not only change in the
deity, but makes the deity visible, at least in first century Palestine.
Christian doctrine is at its most vulnerable precisely in its most
sophisticated formulations. Unfortunately, most Christians do not have
the resources for discussing matters on that level. On the other hand,
if the Muslim makes an issue of the unity of God to be a refusal to
engage in theological definition of God, the Christian may turn the
argument against Islam by noting that Greek-based theological
formulation also exists in Islam, in its acceptance of positive and
negative attributes of God.

The matter of soteriology, the doctrine of salvation, is even more
difficult. Although there is a variety of thought on why Jesus had to
die, and on how his death makes forgiveness for sin possible, there is
little desire among Christians to question the Atonement as such. Among
the classical ideas are that the death of Christ was redemptive, that
is, it bought the sinful human being from Satan, who was the lawful
master because of sin, and that sin requires the death sentence in order
to satisfy the justice of God, and that Christ’s death is the substitute
for everyone who claims it before God. A more modern thought is that
human beings are incapable of accepting forgiveness until they realize
the love of God in providing His Son as a sacrifice for them. Needless
to say, many Christians find these justifications lacking, without
thereby rejecting the doctrine of Atonement.

It is therefore of little use for the Muslim to point out the weakness
of these classical justifications for the doctrine. The real difference
between Islam and Christianity on this matter is a difference in the
understanding of what sin is. For the Christian generally, sin is a
cosmic evil in the world into which every human is born, and which can
be overcome only through a cosmic event which does battle with that evil
and overcomes it. The death of Christ is the highpoint of that battle.
For the Muslim, sin is failure to obey a divine command. It needs only
to be reversed and put right insofar as possible, to be atoned by
repentance and good faith shown in good deeds, and finally forgiven
simply by divine grace.

The general Islamic approach to Atonement is just as intransigent as the
Christian doctrine itself. It generally consists in the outright denial
of the dead of Jesus. This of course puts an end to the discussion.
However, what must be maintained in Islam is that the death of Jesus (or
anyone else) can have no objective influence on God’s ability or will to
forgive sins. For Shi’ites, to admit the possibility of the death of
Jesus merely opens the possibility of seeing it in much the same light
as the death of Imam Husseyn (AS). There is no possibility of discussion
between Muslims and Christians on this issue without compromise on one
side or the other. Evangelical Christians, however, are left speechless
when confronted with the Islamic statement that God forgives by His
infinite grace alone, to which no human sacrifice can add anything.

6. Tying the Knot
-----------------

The areas of contrast between Christian and Islamic belief can be
charted simply as follows.

|-------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| **Christianity**                    | **Islam**                               |
| One God in Three Persons            | One God alone                           |
| Forgiveness through human sacrifice | Forgiveness by infinite divine grace    |
| The Church the only way to God      | Direct access to God for every believer |

Although Christians will balk at the thought that the death of Jesus on
the cross in Christian teaching is essentially a human sacrifice, and
some will deny the authority of the Church, this simple caricature of
the differences between Christianity and Islam should make the Christian
stop and think. It may well be that worship of one God alone, and the
realization that he has direct access to God without recourse to any
institutions, and free forgiveness of sin through the infinite grace of
God, is what he really always thought was true and right. After all, all
are born Muslim.


