Christian and Islamic Practice Compared
=======================================

***Truly those who believe in what is revealed to you, and those who are
Jews, and the Christians, and the Sabeans: whoever (of them) believe in
God, and the Last Day, and do good works, for them there is their reward
with their Lord, and there shall be no fear for them nor shall they
grieve.*** **Qur’an (Suratul-Baqara) 2:62.**

The purpose of this essay is to describe the similarities and
differences between Christian and Islamic practice. This is useful in
understanding what others consider of importance in religious life, and
thus how to achieve fruitful dialogue. From an Islamic point of view
praxis is in fact of more critical interest than from the Christian
point of view in general. Christians, especially Protestants, are more
likely to focus on belief than practice. In sharing Islam, this is one
of the vital areas. To put it concretely, difficult as it may be to
convince a Christian of the unity of God, it is even more difficult to
influence a Christian to pray in prostration with regularity.

1. Christian Practice
---------------------

Christian practice may be divided into two categories: 1) those
practices requiring the intervention of a priest and 2) individual
practices, or those not requiring the intervention of a priest. The
former are called sacraments in Western Christianity and mysteries in
Eastern Christianity. This is the fundamental difference between Islamic
and Christian practice. The Muslim does not need the Church as a channel
of grace but may approach God directly in all matters. Historically
speaking, medieval Islam had a strong influence on Christianity, notably
in the radical reform which produced the freer forms of Christianity
such as Baptists and Pentecostals, who also minimize the sacramental
character of baptism and the Lord’s supper.

The sacraments or mysteries number seven: these are baptism,
confirmation, the Eucharist, confession, marriage, ordination, and
unction. These are all matters which convey a divine blessing through
the medium of an ordained priest. One cannot perform them for oneself.
Only two sacraments are retained in the reformed churches: baptism and
the Eucharist. Islam knows no sacramental principle at all, but does
consider certain of its practices central, much as the sacraments are
central to Christianity. These are termed the branches of the faith, and
include prayer in prostration, fasting, pilgrimage, alms (zakat and
khums), jihad, fostering good, avoiding evil, love of the righteous, and
avoidance of the wicked.

In baptism the priest sprinkles or pours water on the infant, or
immerses the infant in water, one or three times. Baptism is necessary
for salvation according to most Christian belief. In exceptional
circumstances, such as imminent death, a child may be baptized by an
unordained person. Baptism is done in the name of the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Spirit. It is done once and for all, and is often
considered valid, even if the child eventually apostatizes. Thus
Christian parents of young people who revert to Islam often comfort
themselves with the thought that at least they have baptized their
children.

In the radical reformation the sacramental character of baptism was
challenged in several ways. Baptism was considered a sign of obedience
and a witness of faith, rather than an objective channel of grace. Thus
adults only, who were of an age to bear witness to faith, were baptized.
Although ordination continued and baptism was still performed by an
ordained person, the idea of priestly authority was dismissed. The form
of baptism attempted to conform to earlier Judeo-Christian practices,
specifically in requiring immersion. Finally, the formula was sometimes
doubted, and the name of Jesus substituted for the trinitarian phrase.
One or more of these variants are still dominant in the modern
denominations coming out of the radical reformation, such as Baptists,
Mennonites, Pentecostals, Adventists, Jehovah’s Witnesses, and Mormons.

The Eucharist consists of the blessing of the wine and bread and the
dispensing of it to the congregants. The traditional belief is that the
action of the priest turns the bread and wine into the real body and
blood of Christ, and by eating and drinking these, the communicant
receives grace objectively into him or herself. The Reformation has
caused some doubt and disturbance around this issue. The real presence
has been doubted to some extent by the Lutherans and Anglicans, but more
radically by the Calvinists, who consider the bread and wine to be
symbols or signs of the real spiritual presence of Christ in the event.

There has been controversy on the issue of giving both elements or only
one to the congregant. Again under the indirect influence of Islam on
the radical reformation, some of the modern denominations issuing from
it today reject the use of alcoholic wine, and replace it with
non-alcoholic grape juice or even water. An ordinance or footwashing to
precede the supper is an issue of controversy in the radical reform.
This however seems to be the result of a literal interpretation of John
14 rather than an influence of Islam. Finally, in the same quarters
there are controversies over the use of a single cup or individual cups
in the Lord’s supper.

Although the Reformation Churches traditionally accept only the first
two sacraments, something of the sacramental character has remained with
the others as well. In those churches having an episcopal system, a
bishop is needed for ordination. In nearly all churches it is the
practice for an ordained clergyman to perform marriages, and marriage by
individual contract is not recognized as marriage in Christianity. Even
the Quakers, who reject all traditional forms and sacraments, perform
marriages in public meeting. Baptism and the blessing of the bread and
wine are performed by an ordained clergyman, even when the sacramental
character of the rites is denied and the ordination of the clergyman is
based merely upon the democratic election and blessing given by the
congregation. Confirmation is still practiced by the churches which
perform infant baptism. Even confession and the last rites of unction
are becoming popular in Reformation Churches that used to consider them
uniquely Catholic.

There is nothing in Islam which compares with the sacraments or the
practices in free Christianity derived from them. From an Islamic point
of view, the sacraments function primarily to establish the authority of
the Church and its power over the fate of the people. Sacraments are
essentially non-Islamic in form, function, meaning, and antecedents. The
only point of contact is the tenuous Jewish root for baptism. The New
Testament describes the transfer of Jewish proselyte baptism by
immersion into a Christian rite expressing acceptance of Jesus as the
Messiah. There is thus an historical connection with the Jewish purity
rites.

However, non-Jewish and non-Scriptural sources for baptism are much more
visible, and baptism is a poor vehicle to try to get Christians to
understand ablutions and the purity code of Islam. The Eucharist has a
New Testament foundation as well, in the last supper of Jesus with his
disciples as described in the Gospels. But it too in Christianity has
taken on a good deal from pagan sacrificial rites which are thinly
disguised ritual cannibalism. Such compromises were the necessary price
in order to make Christianity the religion of the Roman state in the
fourth century.

Although the Christian sacraments offer few openings for dialogue, the
non-clerical Christian practices are that much better. The major
traditional, non-clerical Christian practices are prayer, hymnsinging,
fasting, and the giving of alms in charity. Three of these correspond to
Islamic practice. Unfortunately, the one contrasting practice,
hymn-singing, is the most popular. Christian pilgrimage to sacred sites
used to be much more prevalent than it is today, although it continues
to be important in some Catholic and oriental areas.

2. Prayer
---------

As in Islam, in traditional Christianity prayer appears both at set
times and in voluntary individual events. The canonical hours, like the
times of prayer in Islam, have their roots in Biblical and Near Eastern
tradition. It is not difficult for Catholics and Orthodox people to
understand this. The tradition has remained among Anglicans as well.
Other Protestants divide prayer into public and private, with no daily
set times of prayer.

This of course makes it difficult to reach them. Their immediate
response to Islamic prayer in prostration is that it is a mere form. The
source of this criticism is that its lack of spontaneity indicates a
lack of spirituality. This criticism may be met by pointing out that
Protestant prayer is also performed at a specific time in public worship
and that includes traditional forms. If the lack of spontaneity condemns
Islamic prayer, then public Protestant prayer is condemned by the same
argument. Furthermore, the times and forms of public Protestant prayer
have only the weakest possible Biblical justification, as there is no
Biblical reference to Sunday prayer, the folding of hands in prayer, or
even the kneeling gesture commonly used. On the other hand, both the
times and gestures of Islamic prayer are abundantly attested in the
Christian Scriptures.

As for the voluntary prayers, again Catholics and Orthodox people will
be able to relate to the Islamic use of set supplications. Even in
public prayer, some Protestants reject composed prayers, requiring that
the one who prays invent the phrases of the prayer at the moment of
praying, thus preserving the spontaneity and thereby the spirituality of
the prayer. Criticism of Islamic prayer on this basis can be met as
follows. Firstly, all Islamic prayer traditions provide the possibility
for personal, spontaneous expression of one’s personal needs, desires,
petitions, confessions, and words of praise.

The structure of Islamic prayer, its formalism, does not exclude
personal choice of expression. Secondly, there are so many set prayers,
that it is easy to find in the repertoire of Islamic supplications
prayers which fit one’s specific condition and situation. Thirdly,
formalism is not necessarily a negative matter, but can form the
structure for an act of obedience. Fourthly, a systematic observance of
public Protestant prayers will show that, despite the demand that they
be spontaneous, in point of fact, they are invariably composed of a set
of traditional formula common to an individual, a congregation, or a
denominational tradition. There is even a traditional intonation of
voice, which may not be verbally described, but which is considered
necessary.

There is a Protestant type of intoning. Presently there is a trend away
from this, which is supposed to be more spiritual, but which in reality
is a mimicry of emotional language, even the language of physical love.
The use of the microphone has made it possible for the one praying in
public to use a voice which is similar to the voice he or she might use
when crooning in the ear of a lover. The level of spontaneity in any
case in Protestant prayer is far lower than is generally perceived.
Furthermore, the spontaneity which does exist does not always lend
itself to increased spirituality.

3. Fasting
----------

Fasting is another practice common to both Islam and Christianity which
can be better appreciated by Catholics, Orthodox and even Anglicans than
by the nonconformist traditions. The former are aware of set times for
fasting, whereas the latter fast only as personal vows. Some
non-conformist churches have a set time for fasting, such as a
particular day of the month, but this is a matter of order rather than
rule. Fasting and prayer are understood in Christianity as going
together and are especially appropriate for petition, prayer for
specific things, such as healing. Although the set fasting among
Christians, most notably Lent and formerly Wednesdays and Fridays,
generally merely limits the kinds of foods which may be eaten,
Christians often have the habit of accusing Islam of hypocrisy in
fasting because the fast does not apply to the night. It is a fact of
human existence that a total fast, as in Islam, cannot be carried out
for thirty consecutive days.

Either the content of the fast or the timing must be adjusted for the
very practical reason of preserving life and well-being. The Christian
criticism of Islamic fasting is thus entirely irrational, and sometimes
it is necessary to point that out. The actual discomfort involved in
fasting is probably generally greater in Islam than in Christianity,
since it pertains to drinking water as well as abstaining from food. If
Islam contended for a total thirty-day fast, the hue and cry of
Christians would certainly be greater than it is, since it would cost
the life of many engaged in it. Does the Christian criticism imply that
Muslims then should not fast at all? In that case Christians would be
denying Muslims a practice which is also a part of their own tradition.
If the Christian criticism implies that Muslims should fast in the way
the Christians do, one may ask for the Scriptural justification for the
Lenten fast. The Bible recognizes only the total fast, the fast which
Muslims perform.

4. Alms and Purity
------------------

Muslims and Christians share the tradition of giving alms in charity.
The Christian concept probably relates mostly to the need to support the
poor and the need to curb greed. The Islamic concept of alms relates to
the broader issue of purity on one hand, and to the desire to empathize
with the hungry on the other. It would be logical to approach Christians
in dialogue about the purity code through the practice of alms in
charity.

This is difficult, however, because Christians fail to see the
connection between the two. For the Christian, the giving of alms is a
practical matter relating to economics, whereas the concept of purity is
completely incomprehensible to them. The reason for this is the fact
that purity rites are of far less occurrence in European pre-Christian
traditions than they are in the Middle East. Christianity is the
European institution which carries most conservatively the pre-Christian
values of European spirituality. To a great extent it is old European
paganism which lives on in Christianity rather than a faith derived from
Middle Eastern sources. This is true even of many aspects of Ashkenazi
Judaism as well.

Among the Islamic purity practices are circumcision of male children,
ablutions, alms in charity, and avoidance of impure food. Of these
Christians are most likely to understand the food issue. There are in
fact some sects of Christianity which follow a Biblical pattern of
eating, at least to some extent. The one most likely to come into
contact with Muslims is the Seventh-day Adventist. These people eat
essentially the same meats as Ja’feri Muslims, but fail to take into
account the Scriptural slaughter practices by which the blood is drained
from the animal. The reason for this is obviously the fact that the
purity code in general is misapprehended. Many Adventists consider their
food laws to be a part of health practice rather than purity.

Needless to say, the Torah or Tawrat supports Islamic food practices.
Despite the fact that the New Testament, in the only recorded verdict
given by the early church in Acts 15, states that the laws of proper
slaughter apply to non-Jewish converts to Christ, Christianity has
failed to follow its own Scriptures. The reason for this is the fact
that all peoples are most conservative in their food practices, and the
non-Jewish character of the Christian movement seemed to necessitate
relinquishing food practices at the time.

The failure of Christians to circumcise their male children is based on
two factors. The first is that circumcision is not traditional in
pre-Christian Europe. The second is the Christian misapprehension of a
first century split in Judaism. At the time some Hellenistic Jews
favored the conversion of adult males to Judaism without circumcision,
whereas the Palestinian establishment strongly urged circumcision on all
male proselytes. The debate entered early Christianity as well, and the
New Testament contains a great deal of matter on the quarrel in the
writing of Paul, whose position was that for an adult male proselyte to
become circumcised was incompatible with faith in the Messiah.
Christians rely on his rejection of adult circumcision to justify their
neglect of circumcising their children.

As for ablutions, there remain in Christianity only what ancient Middle
Eastern practices of ablutions may have contributed to baptism and the
very limited practice of foot-washing. The former is usually seen as a
rite of entrance into the church and symbolic of participation in the
death and resurrection of Christ. The latter is seen as an expression of
humility. Both have thus lost their character as rites of purity and
taken on the focus of submission to the authority of the church. The
discussion of ablutions in the New Testament is limited to an argument
between Jesus (AS) and some interpreters of the law on the question of
ablutions of the hands before eating. Since this Jewish custom is not
mentioned in the Torah at all, Jesus (AS) is perfectly consistent in
rejecting it. The implication is that he accepts ablutions mentioned in
the Torah. Although this argument is eminently rational, the Christian
aversion to ablutions cannot generally be overcome merely by an appeal
to their own Scriptures.

5. Hymn-singing
---------------

Perhaps the favorite Christian spiritual practice is hymnsinging. This
is completely unacceptable in Islam, and even the tradition in some
countries of using the ilaahi does not compare with it. The only point
of contact is to be found in some exaggerated forms of Sufism, where
music is used as a vehicle for producing ecstatic behaviour. Music has
had several functions in Christianity. The earliest was in the
propagation of dogmas about which various Christian groups disagreed.
Music was thus a major vehicle in the struggle between Christian heresy
and orthodoxy.

One might expect that debate and reason would be preferable tools, but
historically speaking this is not so. The second great function of music
in Christianity was historically the expression of the Trinity, and this
found its way not only into the words of the songs, but in the very
musical structures themselves, which repeated tri-part patterns. The
third great function of music in Christianity was the support of
authoritarian institutions through emotionally overwhelming pageantry.
Western music thus supported the European monarchies on one hand, and a
religion with a monarchical character on the other. Both Calvinist and
Lutheran reform utilized music for their own purposes against Rome.

Anglican music has been of such a character to emphasize both the
monarchical character of the church as well as its Englishness in
contrast to Rome. Part of the break with Rome was bolstered by the
incorporation of folk styles into Lutheran and Calvinistic worship, and
this corresponded with the rejection of the pontifical authority. The
intrusion of folk styles of music into Christian worship gave rise to an
increasing play on the individual emotions and the individual spiritual
experience. This has resulted in the varieties of religious music we
find today.

These are traditional styles in the more conservative churches,
reflecting their role in the Reformation, and new styles in the more
radical movements. Since the introduction of the Protestant hymn in
England in the early 1700s, Anglo-Saxon Christianity has gone on a
deeper and deeper progression toward utilizing the sensual emotions of
the individual as a vehicle for spiritual experience. That is why there
is little or no difference between the music styles found in
non-conformist churches and those found in discos and nightclubs. Both
appeal to the same emotions.

The justification for using such music is generally that the young
people like it, and it attracts them to the church. This is the old
argument used for the inclusion of Greek theatre music in Byzantine
worship as early as the fifth century. That concession has resulted in
the development of the Byzantine liturgical tradition. It is doubtful
that the rock mass will produce anything as esthetically appealing as
that, however, to say nothing of Baptist and Pentecostal crooning.

Music which appeals to the emotions of awe, although it may well have
originally served to support an authoritarian church, may well have the
same esthetic value as music intended to support the royal courts of
Europe. An interest in such classical music may not be harmful. Research
indicates that for the most part it fosters balanced physical functions
in the body. The same research clearly suggests, however, that not only
rock but other lighter styles which were developed and became popular in
the twentieth century actually cause physical imbalances in bodily
functions, such as increasing heart rate and galvanic skin responses,
and correspondingly causing indigestion and even weakening the immune
system.

Despite the plethora of such research over the last twenty years, music
of this type continues to be not only an expression of Western culture,
but a foremost and effective means of propagating it. Put briefly, music
which appeals to sensual emotions is a medium of control. Christians do
not use such music out of obedience to God, or because they think it
fosters strong morals or spiritual development. They use it because they
like it. They use it because it has a drug-like effect on mind and body.

The Islamic rejection of such dangerous types of music may be the most
important distinction between Christian and Islamic practice.
Considering the proven harmful effects of rock and popular music, it may
well be that the benefits of prayer in prostration, fasting, pilgrimage,
and alms are largely outweighed by the deleterious effects of such
music. Western music, with the exception of parts of the classical
tradition, is among the greatest threats to Islam. There can be no
compromise nor any path of approach between the two faiths on this
matter.

6. Modesty
----------

Although following fashions in dress has an aspect which seems inimical
to Islam, it is worth considering that Islamic dress is the practice
which is most visible to non-Muslims. Islam cannot make any concessions
to Western criticism or desires in the matter of bodily modesty. Muslims
ought, however, to foster concession in this matter in terms of style.
It is perfectly appropriate for immigrant Muslims to continue to use the
dress styles of their home country. It is not appropriate to give the
impression that Europeans reverting to Islam ought to follow the same
styles. They ought to follow the same standards of modesty, but in
styles appropriate to their own country and culture.

The truth is that Islam, Christianity, and Judaism share traditional
standards of modesty. There are still areas of the world where
Christians dress with the same modesty as traditional Muslims, although
they have greatly decreased in the last century. It is a misapprehension
that modesty is a trait unique to Islam. It is scandalous that a
political conflict has been made of this issue in many areas, especially
in Europe, considering that Christians in theory have the same duties,
according to their own faith, as do Muslims.

European Muslims have sometimes failed in the matter of style. Perhaps
some propagators of Islam have put too much emphasis on the principles
of modesty and too little on how they ought to be adapted to new
situations. There has been a tendency, especially among women, to copy
foreign styles. This is one of the foremost barriers to embracing Islam
by Westerners. They get the impression that one must dress in black and
cover the face, because that is the way women dress in one or another
country. There should be a movement among European Muslim women towards
designing and acquiring styles of clothing which preserve Islamic
modesty while at the same time recognizing features of Western dress
styles. Unless this is done, Islam has a future in Europe only among
those who marry immigrant Muslims or are attracted by exotic, foreign
dress.

7. Social Contracts
-------------------

Islam and Christianity differ greatly in the matter of social contracts.
In Islam, a free individual has the right and indeed obligation to make
certain contracts with others which are binding under religious law and
consequently even under secular law in such countries which recognize
Islam. The right of individual contract is greatly diminished under
other religious and legal systems, such as those dominant in the West.
Marriage, for example, has already been seen to have a sacramental
character in Christianity, and even where this is minimal, to be
established only through the intervention of an authoritarian
establishment. Two individuals do not have the right in Christian
contexts to contract a legally binding marriage.

The attempt of Christians to do so is generally considered fornication.
The same generally holds true for other types of individual contracts,
such as buying and selling, renting, or other matters. The law
intervenes to determine the forms of individual contract, which are
rights essentially granted by law rather than recognized by law. Thus
the marriage of church and state in Western societies continues, even
when ostensibly weakened, to govern individual freedom of contract in
ways which contrast with Islamic practice, whether or not actual
conflict is present.

In dialogue with Christians, therefore, the issue of personal contract
is one difficult to get across. The Christian has a tendency to consider
contracts not having legal or ecclesiastical control to be less than
serious. In such cases they depend solely on the word of honor. For
Muslims, personal contracts are made within the Islamic experience, and
imply binding responsibility before God and consequently legal binding
as well. Perhaps the best way to get this across to a Christian in
dialogue is to make a comparison to Christian sacraments. An Islamic
contract has for the Muslim the same sacredness as a Church sacrament
for a Christian. Some Christians may be positively surprised that Islam
recognizes an individual freedom in such matters which is lacking in
Christian society.

8. “Holy War”
-------------

The practice of jihad or “holy War” as it is so often called in English
is one of the areas in which Islam is much criticized. Much of the
problem arises from a misapprehension of Islam and a desire to find
fault with the religious tradition perceived to be behind “acts of
terrorism.” Much of this can be dispelled immediately with the
realization that struggle in the way of God is primarily a struggle with
oneself rather than with others. Furthermore, the struggle of the pen is
of much greater importance than the struggle of the sword.

In addition, historically speaking, it is Christianity which is the
faith of the sword and not Islam. With few exceptions, Islam has been
spread by peaceful means, mostly through commercial ties. With no
exceptions the whole of Europe was Christianized through military
conquest. If there are any criticisms to be made about the historical
spread of Islam, they should certainly not be tendered by a Christian,
who on the issue of forced conversions has no honorable recourse but
embarrassed silence, or the dishonorable recourse of ignorance.

Muslims have rarely lost sight of the Qur’anic principle of no
compulsion in Islam. Christians have nearly always lost sight of the
fact that the greatest single massacre in the history of the world was
the conquest of Mexico, in which millions of Indians were baptized by
force, only to join the millions more who lost their lives in the first
three years of Catholic power. Before that catastrophe all people should
be struck dumb with the determination that it should never happen again.

Nevertheless, struggle in the way of God is an Islamic imperative. It
implies active participation in the defence of good before the onslaught
of evil. Beyond that, it implies offensive measures whereby good might
overcome evil. The range of action is not only individual, but within
the family, the neighbourhood, and in all society. In this there may be
both contrasts and similarities between Islam and Christianity. The
practical ideal, at least since the Reformation, has been to make
Christianity the handmaiden of the State. Although in practice Islam has
been the handmaiden of empires, a more fundamental perception would be
to see the State as the handmaiden of Islam. Whatever the case, there is
a tendency in both religions to see a religious duty in fostering good
and opposing evil. To what extent this is seen to be the duty of the
individual or the State depends on the time and situation more than on
religious considerations.

In dialogue with Christians, the subject of struggle in the way of God,
when carefully and rightly perceived, can be a major area of common
ground. There are many matters of social and moral importance in which
Muslims and at least some segment of Christianity agree. The abuse of
alcohol is among the most obvious, and there exist entire sects of
Christianity, not to mention the temperance movements, which join Islam
in its rejection of alcoholic drink.

A newer area of possible common interest is the popular one of animal
rights. It is strange that Islam is often perceived as the aggressor in
this matter, when the well-being and welfare of animals intended for
slaughter is so fundamental an issue in Islamic law and practice, that
an animal which has been mistreated in any way just prior to being
slaughtered is considered unfit for consumption. Animal rights activists
have generally chosen to ignore Islam or to include it in their camp of
enemies, and this comes from both a misapprehension of Islamic practice
and the desire to tap into prejudices against Islam in order to bolster
their own cause in the eyes of the public.

The former factor is one of ignorance, and the latter simply immoral.
Animal rights activists would do well to show integrity by recognizing
the real contribution of Islam to their area of interest. Although Islam
supports the use of violence in defence, its rejection of violence goes
far beyond that of Christianity in both practice and principle, so that
the violence perpetrated on animals in the Western meat industry would
be inconceivable in an Islamic context.

In the matter of jihad, the dialogue with Christians can well be made
through participating in areas of social, economic, and even political
reform which in principle attract both parties. Participation in such
movements can open contacts of trust and good-will between Muslims and
Christian so that further dialogue can take place.

9. Breast-beating, Weeping, and Reverential Prostration
-------------------------------------------------------

There are Islamic practices which seem exotic and foreign to Western
Christians, but which when examined carefully provide opportunity for
dialogue. Among these are the practices of breast-beating and weeping to
express sorrow as a religious value, and reverential prostration as
distinct from prostration in worship. These practices in Islam are
useful openers to dialogue for two reasons. First of all, their exotic
foreignness can awaken curiosity in some people. Such interest can be
stimulated as well by inviting non-Muslim friends to observe Ashura
practices and events.

The second way such practices are an opportunity for opening dialogue is
their Biblical antecedents. These practices do not conflict with
Christianity and are not intrinsically polemic. The fact that they are
supported by Biblical texts will come as a surprise to Christians. By
establishing that the Bible supports Islamic practices that Christians
will generally consider innocuous and perhaps even interesting, the
Muslim prepares the way for Christians to consider that their own
Scriptures perhaps support Islam in other areas as well. It is better to
start finding common Biblical ground in non-polemic matters, before
presenting Biblical arguments for such issues as the unity of God.

10. Summary
-----------

Islam and Christianity are sister faiths. They have more in common, both
in belief and practice, than they have which separates them. This fact
is clouded by a history of conflicts and the tradition of focusing on
differences often to the exclusion of common ground. In terms of
practice, Islam and Christianity share prayer, fasting, alms,
pilgrimage, and in reality even the famous “holy war.” There are
definite differences in detail, but the principle practices remain
similar.

It is both a psychological imperative and a recognition of reality to
approach dialogue from the point of view of common ground. This approach
often ends in merely ignoring differences and agreeing to an uneasy and
unrealistic truce. Rather, it can be the point of departure for an
aggressive mission, one which is realistically tempered by the
realization that the common ground may also provide an area in which
each can learn from each. There is nothing more futile than one-sided,
bigoted missionizing.

The differences between Christian and Islamic practices go beyond mere
details, however. There are certain practices, such as the Christian use
of music, which are completely unacceptable to Islam, and have to be
recognized as such. More subtly, even the practices in common have
fundamental differences, some of which go to the very foundational
differences between the faiths. When such Christian practices function
to foster ecclesiastical authority and even sacramentalism, they depart
essentially from Islam. In dialogue with Christians, it is essential
eventually to get across not only the details of Islamic practice, but
what they mean psychologically, functionally, and spiritually. There is
always the danger that in reverting to Islam, a Christian will bring
along spiritual baggage which is inconsistent with Islamic faith and
practice. But even dialogue which does not result in people embracing
Islam is most useful when it increases real understanding of why people
practice what they do and how they experience the practice of their
faith.


