Western Barriers to Islam and How to Meet Them
==============================================

***Those who devour usury will not stand except as stands one whom the
Evil One by his touch has driven to madness. That is because they say:
"Trade is like usury," but Allah has permitted trade and forbidden
usury. Those who after receiving direction from their Lord, desist,
shall be*** ***pardoned for the past; their case is for Allah (to
judge); but those who repeat (the offence) are Companions of the Fire:
They will abide therein (forever).*** **Qur’an 2:275**

1. A Profile of Secularism
--------------------------

It is often rather a simple matter to get Westerners to admit the
unicity of God. But this rarely leads to their embracing Islam as a way
of life. This study will focus on the trouble spots which prevent people
from moving consistently from belief to practice. Among these will be
the status of women, interest, dress, the use of alcohol, music, art,
the confusing of culture and religion, traditional and historical fear
of Islam, and prejudice. Each of these present different challenges and
require different ways of confronting them, although they have their
roots in the same problem.

The preponderance of difficulties we are now approaching have their
source in Western secularism. If one is able to convince a believing
Christian that the Bible is actually more supportive of Islam than it is
of Christianity, there is every likelihood that the other barriers to
embracing Islam will be negligible. The secular person may well be
willing to admit the unicity of God in defiance of Christian belief, but
such defiance is still a far cry from embracing Islamic practice.
Although the specific barrier touched upon by the individual may require
a specific response, it is well to keep in mind that the basic problem
is identical in every case, and that is the problem of secularism. It is
not specifically the “freedom” for women to dress skimpily in public,
the fear that the financial establishment will fail without interest, or
addiction to alcohol which truly prevents a commitment to an Islamic
life-style. The true barrier is secularism.

Secularism is basically a social psychology that has probably been
intentionally developed in the West. Its roots are in the
dissatisfaction of the ruling elite in Europe in their failure to
increase wealth and of the religious elite in their failure to control
the belief and practice of the populace. Contrary to the folklore,
medieval kings in Europe were not fabulously wealthy nor was the church
successful in eradicating heresy. The process of change includes many
factors, such as the rise of the modern state and financial
establishment as well as the Protestant Reformation. Protestantism still
remains a crucial factor in fostering secularism, despite the overt
conflict in aims. The function of secularism is and will continue to be
the enhancement of a financial and religious elite.

In the long run, it would seem that secularism could best be overcome by
engaging it in a dialectical relationship, whereby Islamic financial
interests would become so overwhelming as to determine the character of
international finance on one hand, and on the other, Islamic beliefs and
practices might penetrate the religious establishment over a period of
time to the extent of changing its character as well. Aside from the
fact that the Muslim world has not pushed its advantage in either
sector, such an approach would be self-defeating. Muslim history has
clearly shown to what extent Islam is corruptible, and there is every
likelihood that should Islam gain control of Rome Muslims in Rome would
do as the Romans do. This is not to say that such strategies should be
neglected. Rather the opposite is the case.

The financial and religious sectors in the West have manipulated the
minds of the masses in their own interests, creating a secular society
with a common and unified religion, a society that through marketing
consumerism maintains the highest possible increase of wealth for the
elite. Any strategy for gaining control of the financial and religious
dictatorship of the West must take the brain-washing of the masses into
account. Victory over secularism requires the reversal of that
brain-washing process.

The secular mind has been formed on a hierarchical democracy, in which
there is competition to rise in the hierarchy without any change in the
mind-set itself. The mind-set of secularism is quite simply that freedom
and happiness are the most desirable things to be pursued in life, and
they are attainable only by increasing the amount of leisure time at
one’s disposal and one’s buying power. The failure to experience either
freedom or happiness is explained on the premise that one has not yet
achieved enough of either leisure or buying power. Justice is seen as a
by-product, which arises when there is a sufficiently high level of
freedom and happiness.

The Islamic approach seems to be very much the opposite. Justice is the
most desirable thing to be pursued in life, and it is attainable to the
degree that shari’ah or divine law is carried out in society. The
failure to experience justice is explained on the premise that there has
been at some point a failure in carrying out shari’ah. Freedom and
happiness are seen to be by-products, which appear when there is a
sufficiently high level of justice.

There are three areas in which an individual can make a difference. The
first is to act in favour of Islamic finances by encouraging Islamic
banking and speaking out for the use of Muslim wealth to foster Islamic
ideals. The second is to insinuate wherever possible Islamic beliefs and
practices into Western institutions. The third is to meet secularized
individuals with the invitation to Islam.

Some of the modes of secularism are mentioned below, but it must be
remembered that others exist as well, and that all of them are basically
the same thing, the product of mind manipulation which needs to be
reversed. The reversal process entails the realization of the
corresponding Islamic value and a strategy of activity to bridge over
from the secular mentality to the Islamic one. The process thus uses the
secular mode itself as an opportunity for presenting Islamic values.
They are not listed in a logical order below, nor are they categorized.
The reality is that most of them will have to be met in every individual
in the order in which they naturally arise.

### Modes of Secularism

|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Secular Mode**                              | **Bridging activity**                                                                                                                   | **Corresponding**                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                           **Islamic Value**                                                      |
| Loss of distinction between the sexes         | Right information on biology and Islamic law.                                                                                           | Equality between the sexes                                            |
| Interest                                      | Fostering of Islamic banking. Development of new strategies.                                                                            | Islamic banking                                                       |
| Commercial dress fashions                     | Discussion of principles of modesty and economy. Positive strategies such as self- or hand-production of clothing.                      | Islamic dress                                                         |
| Alcoholic beverages                           | Information on the evils of alcohol. Development of a taste for alternative drinks.                                                     | Non-fermented beverages                                               |
| Non-Islamic Music                             | Information on the harmful effects of rock and popular music. Development of a taste for Qur’anic recitation and other aural arts.      | Islamic principles in regard to music                                 |
| Non-Islamic art                               | Information on the connection between visual arts and criminal behaviour. Development of a taste for calligraphy and other visual arts. | Islamic principles in regard to art                                   |
| Prejudices based on marketing consumerism     | Challenging advertisement thinking with rationality.                                                                                    | Independent thinking and personal choice                              |
| Traditional fear of Islam                     | Right historical information on the influence of Islam. Direct contact with Muslims and Muslim productions.                             | Recognition of Islam as the primary civilizing influence in the world |
| Religious relativism as a cultural phenomenon | Discussion of the principle of differences in values. Fostering the development of faith.                                               | Islam as the final and true revealed faith                            |

In the matter of relations between the sexes, feelings run high against
Islam. The general understanding is that Islam is backward, patriarchal,
and suppresses women. The truth is that the conditions in some
ostensibly Muslim countries to some extent confirm this prejudice. The
first way of meeting this issue is to note that such conditions are the
result of the ignorance and poor economy caused by colonial and
neo-colonial policy. It is no use to cause trouble somewhere else in the
world and then lay all the blame on those who suffer from the trouble.

The second thing to point out is that historically-speaking, Islam as a
social movement began as a movement to improve the condition of women,
who were oppressed by Judaism and Christianity, religions that are still
far inferior to Islam in their laws relating to women. If the status of
women has improved in some sectors in the West in the last century or
so, in areas such as inheritance and rights of ownership, this is
largely the result of new ideas coming into Europe from Islamic
civilization and fomenting through the Renascence and Enlightenment. So
the second thing is to get the history clear.

The third point to get across is what Islamic law actually is, a system
which recognizes the real biological differences between men and women
on one hand, and attempts to equalize the unbalance in the best possible
ways. This only works, however, when people adhere to Islamic law,
rather than admiring Western ways of exploiting the weaker.

In the matter of interest or riba, Muslims have generally failed. They
merely give in to Western banking malpractice. The matter of interest at
this point can only serve as an area of discussion demonstrating the
social and economic justice inherent in Islamic law. Little can be done
by the individual but lament the fact that even where it is ostensibly
put into practice, Islamic banking tends to conform to Western
pressures. The fact that Islamic law does foster such social and
economic justice, however, may be attractive to some secular people.

In the matter of dress, the secular person can be approached through the
fact that fashion and design are important means of economic
exploitation. This can be an opening bridge for the introduction of
Islamic principles of modesty.

The evils of alcohol are so well known that a repetition of them is
generally not very effective in reaching secular people who drink.
Islamic principles of abstinence can form a point of contact with
secular people who happen to oppose the use of alcoholic beverages. A
point which is more rarely noted is that alcohol is one of the means of
social control, and refusing to use it is a means of attaining
individual independence. Secular people interested in personal freedom
sometimes respond favourably to this argument.

Rock and popular music are also important means of thought control.
Dissent in the West is generally disbursed and rendered innocuous
through the use of rock or folk-rock music. The drug-like effect of rock
and popular music is well-documented by Western scientists, and used
quite knowledgeably by music producers. The consumer tends to deny it,
however, and pretends to listen to music solely because of personal
likes and tastes. This attitude is exactly the same as that of a heroine
addict who claims to use heroine because he likes it. Music addiction is
one of the greatest deterrents to the propagation of Islam. The only
effective way of dealing with it is the repetition of the idea that
music is an addiction. The secular person can break free of it only
after having accepted that realization, one which is amply supported by
a great deal of scientific research readily available.

As with music, Islamic principles vary. All Muslims reject rock and
popular music, since these so obviously arouse excitement. Some Muslims
reject music altogether. The argument is many centuries old, and can
hardly be settled here. In the same way, some Muslims reject all art
except calligraphy and geometric design. Others accept inanimate
portrayal, others animate portrayal of all except the human figure or
the human face. Finally, at the liberal extreme there are those who
basically reject only the portrayal of God and His prophets (as) and art
with tendencies to arouse excitement through pornographic themes. This
final stance is of course the easiest to get across to a secular person,
and appeal can be made to logic in this matter.

The three final slots in the table refer to stages of prejudice in
general, rather than to specifics. The first point that can make a
secular person susceptible to Islam is to get across the realization
that people in the world have become more and more dependent on
prejudices created by advertizing than on their own thinking and
personal choice. People tend to think they are making a personal choice
in one or another matter, but are in fact acting in function of
marketing influence.

A discussion of this phenomenon, when successful, opens the way for the
secular person to think about Islam as a rational alternative, a choice
which may affirm independent thinking. Secular people, although most
generally the slaves of marketing, recognize the irrationality of
Christianity. They project this on Islam. When they can be brought to
understand that Islam differs essentially from Christianity precisely in
the area of rationality, interest can be awakened. One way of
emphasizing this is by saying that Islam is not a religion, but a way of
life. In rejecting Christianity, the secular person has rejected
religion. They are open, however, to a way of life.

Secular people are generally plagued by irrational fears of Islam
generated by the Crusades at the earliest point and transmitted through
folklore, and confirmed by contemporary media. Between the two lie the
so-called Reconquista, the Renascence, and the Ottoman invasion of
eastern Europe. These historical factors still have ramifications in the
modern psyche, and serve to complicate the attitude towards Islam. These
irrational fears can be met in several ways. The first is correct
information about history. The second is balancing information about
Muslims today. The first can be attained by providing books and articles
by Muslims authors. The second is best attained through peaceful,
friendly, and direct contact with Muslims.

Religious relativism is generally seen as a tolerant trend. In fact, it
is really a way in which secular people categorize all religious
traditions as outmoded. They are cultural remnants that should only
serve the purpose of museum objects and events interesting to tourists.
This can be met by pointing out that religious traditions differ in the
effectiveness of their principles of economic and social justice. Most
secular people have an ostensible interest in these matters. Hedonism
usually has a veneer or cloak, and by plucking at the sleeve of that
cloak one may sometimes elicit a response. However, once one has made
the point that Islam has better answers to contemporary issues than
other religions, including secular trends, there is still the gap of
faith to be met. Islam is a revealed faith and requires belief in the
revelation as revelation. We can do much to foster a receptive attitude
in those around us, but only God can create faith. Da’wa is an
invitation, and we are responsible for extending it in as attractive
manner as possible, but it is not, like missionizing, a form of
compulsion.

2. Post-secularism: New Age Spirituality
----------------------------------------

Just as in Christianity, not everything in New Age spirituality is bad
from an Islamic point of view. A number of practices and bits of
information fostered in the New Age movement are consonant with not only
Islam, but with just being a human being. However, the central doctrines
of the movement are inimical with Islam.

The effect of religious relativism has been the proliferation of other
types of spirituality than the Christian ones. Of course, bankrupt
Christianity has left a spiritual void, and this has been filled by an
interest in oriental religions, primitive religions, and
pseudo-spiritualities based on them. All of the Western interests in
these other spiritualities are based on secularism, that is, on the idea
that personal well-being is the core of any spirituality. There has been
a shift away from the traditional Christian concern with salvation or
future well-being toward spirituality or present well-being. Given the
morbidity of Christian soteriology or the doctrine of salvation, the
trend was predictable. It has already been noted that the proliferation
of sects in Christianity almost never questioned Christian soteriology.
It remained for the New Age spirituality to do so.

It should be clearly understood that New Age spirituality, or the morbid
concern for health and well-being as a spiritual exercise and function,
is the direct result of this misplaced concern in Christianity, namely
the focus on salvation. As a reactionary trend in dialectical
relationship with Christianity it is susceptible to all of the criticism
that might be directed towards the original Christian doctrine. It is
first of all morbid and self-centred. It is furthermore selfish and
raises the individual out of his or her proper place in the family into
a competitive position vis-a-vis society as a whole. New Age
spirituality is merely the old Christianity couched in a more immediate
form and more susceptible to marketing consumerism. All of the many
sectarian movements of New Age thought, whether based on traditional
Oriental religions, traditional primitive religions, or on something
developed in the West, can be reduced to this one bare reality. They
speak of individual health and well-being to a populace which, through
secularism, has grown tired of thinking about future salvation.

The second common feature of New Age thought is the belief in
reincarnation. It is clear that the doctrine of emanations, so often
presented by the great names in Islamic philosophy, is susceptible to
interpretations reminiscent of reincarnation, or the rebirth of the same
soul in a new body. The New Age concept of reincarnation is rather
developed on the basis of Hindu karma. The word karma has come to have a
somewhat fluid meaning, and the whole configuration of belief differs
greatly from that of India. First of all, karma is taken as the law of
cause and effect, which gives it a rational coating. Without any
rational justification, however, and without any proof, karma is taken
to imply reincarnation.

New Age thought specifically uses karma and reincarnation for several
experiences. The first of these is in social relations. When people meet
who either like each other or desire further contact for some motive,
they use reincarnation as a justification, saying that they were
associated in a former life. The second most common use of reincarnation
is the attempt to explain behaviour and events in such a way as to
relieve the individual of immediate responsibility. The event or
behaviour is seen as the result of an action or a choice in a past life.
The implication is that nothing can be done to change matters. The third
most common use of reincarnation is the enhancement of a dull life with
a colourful past. Those who believe in reincarnation in the West have
always and invariably been more interesting, or at least more famous,
people ages ago than they are now.

Reincarnation and karma are also reactions to the Christian doctrine of
salvation. There is a reversal from future salvation to past salvation.
The past salvation is precisely what might be expected from the secular
mentality: salvation by being rich and famous, and thus happy, in the
past. The configuration is again susceptible to the same criticism as
the original Christian doctrine, that is, an attempt to escape the
responsibility of obeying divine law in the present. The West is
curiously willing to believe that God has a desire to enslave them by
giving advice on how to behave. Rarely does a Westerner come to the
conclusion that God’s law might have as its purpose the best possible
way of living together as families in society, that is, the greatest
possible freedom and happiness for everyone.

3. The Sources of Secularism and New Age Spirituality
-----------------------------------------------------

An understanding of the underlying development of secularism and new age
spirituality can be helpful in meeting these phenomena. The historical
development of Western mentality shows a clear progression with elements
of stability and change. Once these elements have been identified,
strategies for triggering change on the foundation of the stable aspects
of Western mentality can be envisioned.

Western mentality has a basis of heathen polytheism. All of the European
religious systems before the conquest by Christianity were founded on
the concept of a pantheon of various gods and goddesses with different
functions. These were seen to control the fate of humankind, but
demanded worship and various types of sacrifice for propitiation and in
order to induce them to act favourably towards human beings. The Nordic
gods are still reflected in the names of the days of the week in all of
the Nordic languages. The Romance languages preserve the names of the
planets, also perceived as gods and goddesses, in the names of the days
of the week in the Romance languages. In Western languages people refer
daily to the ancient European gods. This is more than a mere linguistic
remnant. It is a single piece of evidence for a whole configuration of
pagan thought that forms the underlying layer of European mentality.

Christianity was a small sect among many cults competing with each other
in the Roman empire in the first centuries of the Christian era. But for
a particular historical event, Christianity would have disappeared with
hardly a trace. Christianity became the vehicle for the emperor
Constantine’s attempts to consolidate his power. He made Christianity
the State religion, the purpose of which was to enhance imperial power.
In so doing he changed the face and character of Christianity beyond
recognition, so that today it has practically nothing to do with the
actual teaching of Jesus (AS) and his original followers. There were two
matters that needed to be reconciled: these were the stubborn religious
traditions of the pagan population and the agenda of the imperial court.
These two factors are the seedbeds of modern secularism and new age
spirituality.

In the fourth and fifth centuries Christianity laid aside its original
teachings and incorporated enough pagan tradition to satisfy the
populace and enough imperial aspects to make it useful to the emperor.
Polytheism entered Christianity in the form of the Trinity and in the
form of saints, who were camouflaged lower deities. The popular Roman
cults of personal salvation contributed the idea of a blood sacrifice
for sin. The monarchical concept of the church was a stroke of genius,
as this above all provided a power hierarchy for imperial use. Thus the
primitive Christian doctrines of the unique “fatherhood” of the one true
God, forgiveness of sins by free divine grace to all who forgave those
who sinned against them, and the total disestablishment of religion,
were replaced by teachings serving a completely different agenda.

The doctrine of the Trinity and salvation by a human, blood sacrifice
provided a means for the affirming of Church power and thus of imperial
power. The Trinity satisfied the polytheistic demands of the populace.
But its theological formulation was ingenious from the imperial point of
view. Quite simply, anyone who can be led to believe that three and one
are essentially the same thing, can be led to believe anything. Anyone
who can be led to believe anything, can be controlled. As for the matter
of salvation by blood sacrifice, the church became the sole vehicle of
personal salvation, without which the soul was eternally damned in hell.

The “bloodless” sacrifice of the Eucharist was doled out by the priests
to those who submitted to church and thus imperial authority. To the
minds of the people, this bloodless sacrifice actually became the blood
and body of the crucified Christ, through the magical machinations of
the priestly liturgy. Upon taking part in this “cannibalistic” feast,
the individual received the grace of salvation. This essentially remains
the Christian doctrine and practice today. Upon a foundation of pagan
polytheism we find a layer of superstitious magic and imperial control.

Western civilization is replete with many other aspects with a similar
origin and development. Baptism is a good example. It has multiple pagan
origins. Being “washed in the blood of the lamb” refers to the Roman
cult into which one was initiated by being placed under a grating over
which an animal was slaughtered, allowing the blood to flow over the
body of the person below. Similarly, the practice of sprinkling water on
the heads of babies comes from the pagan practice of placing the child
under a bull and having the bull’s sperm fall on the head, supposedly
giving the child the strength of the bull. In order for the populace to
accept Christianity as the State religion, it was necessary to
incorporate functional equivalents of such practices. Mothers insisted
on them, and had the church not provided them, they would have been
carried on outside the church. By accepting them, the church
consolidated its power over the populace. Western Christianity contains
the seeds of secularism and pagan-based spirituality. They are
inevitable.

4. Specific Strategies for Meeting Western Mentality
----------------------------------------------------

We have uncovered the underlying, basic features which have produced
secularism and New Age mentality. These are a lower, primitive layer of
polytheism, a second layer of Christianized superstition, and an upper
layer of imperial control. Whatever the pretence of rationality and
individual freedom, basically, the Westerner has a magical concept of
the world and believes the must be controlled.

The Muslim missionaries in the Balkans built on this foundation and the
result was the only stable and permanent Muslim communities in Europe.
Their strategy worked on the basis of superstition and military control.
The Sufi practitioners used sleight of hand tricks to awe the
superstitious Christian population and thus convinced them of the
superiority of Islam by miracle-working. They reinforced this by
military control. These were the two things that Europeans could
understand and they worked.

On the other side of Europe Islam failed to preserve the flower of
European civilization, Andalusia, because of its dependence on other
means of presenting Islam. In Muslim Spain the emphasis was on reason
and culture. There was no European Dark Age, merely because Paris and
London were agricultural market villages. There were centres of
civilization at the time, but all of them were in Muslim Spain. Reason
and culture were ploughed under and the Christianization of Andalusia
five hundred years ago turned the cultural and intellectual centre of
Europe into a ghetto from which it has never recovered.

The conclusion is that the most effective way to reach Westerners
remains trickery and miracle-working along with a show of power. These
are the very methods presently used in the West. Marketing advertisement
is an appeal to trickery that by-passes the reasoning processes. The
threat of military power continues to be the only way of controlling the
Balkans even today.

Obviously there is a self-defeating element in such an approach. There
is another aspect of history, and that is the fact that Medieval Islam
contributed culture, science and philosophy to the West. These continue
to have an influence, and if constantly applied have the potential of
spreading Islamic values. The challenge is to maintain these elements of
Islamic influence in one’s contact with secular individuals and, insofar
as one can, to influence matters more broadly.

These influences have continued for over a thousand years. Muslims may
and can retrieve the pre-colonial values of Islamic civilization through
education, the arts, and sciences. Globalized civilization is of such a
low and superficial character that it is unable to compete with the
vitality of what has been proven through centuries of success to be
better. A bold penetration of the academic world on one hand, and the
world of entertainment on the other, with Islamic education, science,
and arts would be irresistible. The best strategy in dealing with
secularized Westerners is to develop these areas in one’s personal life
and aggressively share them.


