Da’wa according to the Holy Qur’an
==================================

Every Muslim has a policy, either conscious or unconscious, for dealing
with non-Muslims, and specifically with those called people of the Book.
But that behaviour usually takes the injunctions of the holy Qur’an into
consideration in only a haphazard way. There are people who call
themselves Muslims who feel that they are called upon merely to be
polite in their dealings with Christians. They feel no burden to inform
others about Islam. Others consider that they have no responsibility
since Allah leads everyone according to His will. There are even those
who think that all religions are equally valid, and no one should make a
change in his faith. Perhaps more sadly, even the well-intentioned and
well-guided sometimes fall back on the notion that there is nothing to
be done but try to promote Islam as a beautiful faith in a positive
light.

Much contemplation of the invitation to Islam in this book focuses on
types of spiritual profiles, the various ways of approaching other
people, establishing goals, identifying the areas of false belief, and
examining ways and means of making changes in those beliefs. But in the
final analysis, it is not what has been proven effective that is
important, but what the holy Qur’an has revealed and commanded that we
should do in relation to non-Muslims.

The holy Qur’an deals with this issue in many passages using many
different expressions. This means that the issue must be an important
one. Otherwise the holy Qur’an would not approach it so often in so many
ways. It is not the purpose here to examine all of them, although that
should certainly be done. It is rather the purpose of this chapter
merely to examine those few passages that refer to the people of the
Book by that name, pointing out how such people should be dealt with in
terms of their acceptance or rejection of the message of Allah.

If we fail to do this, we are likely to fail in all of the investigation
done so far. To ignore the council of the holy Qur’an in this matter
cannot fail to lead us astray in the matter of meeting people with the
message of Islam. What follows in this chapter is merely a beginning
towards developing a Qur’anic philosophy of presenting Islam. It is high
time this is done.

In the following study all of the passages of the Qur’an containing the
expression “people of the Book” that seem to refer to da’wa are
examined. A number of passages are neglected that support the arguments,
but seem to give no particular new information relevant to the
particular issue at hand. Finally, those passages containing the
expression “people of the Book” but focus on issues other than da’wa are
obviously neglected as well.

1. The Roots of Da’wa
---------------------

The first five points made by the holy Qur’an in relation to meeting
people of the Book are fundamental and must be taken into consideration
in every da’wa situation. We might want to call them the roots of da’wa.
The ones that follow them are also basic, but more often relate to the
specific problems of particular situations. These can be called the
branches of da’wa, as they are generally speaking particular
applications. All sixteen points should be memorized, practiced, and
taken constantly into account while dealing with people of the Book.

### 1.1 Forgive and Overlook

***Quite a number of the People of the Book wish they could turn you
(people) back to infidelity after you have believed, from selfish envy,
after the Truth has become manifest unto them: But forgive and overlook,
till Allah accomplish his purpose; for Allah has power over all things.
Qur’an 2:109***

I once patiently explained the Biblical evidence for the oneness of
Allah to a young Christian. He failed to accept it. Rather, he tried to
make me believe in the Trinity. I met him on a later occasion, went
through even more detailed arguments, with the same result. On a third
occasion I met the same young man. He again rejected my arguments, and
put heavy emotional pressure on me to accept Jesus (as) as God Almighty.

At that point I made a mistake. I asked him if Jesus (as) had been
circumcised. At first he did not want to answer, so I asked him to open
his Bible to Luke 2 and find out. He reluctantly admitted that Jesus
(as) had been circumcised. I then asked him whether the piece that had
been cut away had also been God or not. He looked at me reproachfully. I
suppose I should be happy that he did not hit me. Much as I felt he had
tried my patience, and much as my argument appeared reasonable and valid
to me, still it was not productive.

The holy Qur’an, in its first passage telling us how to deal with the
people of the Book, advises us to avoid problems of this sort. The ayat
does not tell us to avoid proclaiming the truth. Before we are to
exercise forgiveness and overlook the Christian attempt to turn us from
the right way, we must be sure that the truth has become evident to
them. This is the heart of the ayat. The truth must become evident to
the Christian. My presentation of the truth, even from the Christian
Scriptures, may well be evident to me.

But it may not immediately be evident to the Christian to whom I am
speaking. Therefore, I must wait “until Allah accomplish his purpose.”
During that waiting time I must continue to find ways of making truth
evident to the Christian, while at the same time forgiving and
overlooking his attempts to take me off the right path.

The attempt of the person of Christian background to take me off the
right path may well be other than doctrinal. It may be something less
obvious than the Trinity. The “selfish envy” that motivates such
behaviour may well focus on behaviour. The argument may be implicit
that, living in a non-Muslim country, I have the duty to conform for the
sake of peace. Perhaps I should dress in a different way, or eat in a
different way in order to avoid trouble.

I once came into conflict with the officials of a certain Western
country where I was living because of the Islamic behaviour of my
daughter in school. One of them informed me that if I wished to live in
the country, I had to conform to the conditions ruling there. My appeal
to the fact that the country had laws granting religious freedom was
actually met with the argument that such freedom referred to the
religious majority. The Qur’anic injunction in such cases is 1) to make
the Islamic position as clear as possible, and 2) to be forgiving and
overlook in insult until such time as “Allah accomplishes his purpose.

### 1.2 Expect Resistance

***Even if you were to bring to the people of the Book all the Signs
(together), they would not follow your Qibla; nor are you going to
follow their Qibla; nor indeed will they follow each other's Qibla. If
you after the knowledge has reached you, were you to follow their (vain)
desires, --then indeed you would be (clearly) in the wrong. Qur’an
2:145***

The second Qur’anic principle is to expect resistance of the truth. The
passage states first that all the evidence should be presented. But it
goes on to stress that even after all of the evidence is presented, the
Christian is likely to reject it. The wording of the Qur’an does not
suggest that we are not to present the evidence. It does imply, however,
that presenting the evidence is enough. It discharges us of our duty. We
are not to use compulsion to getting the evidence across, whether that
compulsion be physical or more insidious, such as the use of immoral
means the likes of which are increasingly popular in marketing and
missionizing. A dignified and clear presentation of the facts and
reasons is enough.

An interesting psychological principle is developed here. It is popular
in Western thought to emphasize the power of positive thinking. The
Qur’an, on the contrary, notes the importance of negative thinking. We
should expect a rejection of the message. Why is this? The Qur’an gives
a good reason. If we expect the Christian to accept the message, and we
repeatedly meet disappointment, we stand to become discouraged and in
time actually be tempted to give up our own hold on truth and right
guidance. If we expect rejection, we are completely protected from that
danger.

There is an interesting implication here, one not stated in the sacred
text. That is the danger that we might feel that we are doing the
guiding, through our implementation of positive thinking. The
expectation of rejection lays the full burden of guidance on Allah,
where it belongs, and thence the credit and responsibility. Being
relieved of expectations, we are freed to focus on our own part, which
is the clear and dignified expression of the message, unsullied by any
ulterior motives on our part. In this way we see that the Qur’an is far
superior to modern psychology. The Qur’an is not merely a reflection of
the latest scientific discoveries, it is rather a correction of them.

The very next passage in the Qur’an gives an explanation of this
behaviour. Why do people reject the clear evidence? The reason is that
they know it already, but have taken on the habit of concealing the
truth. When you present material in support of Islam from the Christian
Scriptures, you will generally meet denial because they are accustomed
to concealing the true meaning of the text.

***The people of the Book know this as they know their own sons; but
some of them conceal the truth which they themselves know.*** ***Qur’an
2:146***

The process by which this is done is quite complex. The first means of
concealing the truth is through biased establishing of the Biblical
text. The second means is the biased translation of the Biblical text.
The third means is the publication of the text in translation without
the original parallel. The fourth means is through biased interpretation
of the text, the biased selection of passages, and the purposeful
neglect of scriptural witnesses to truth. All four of these means are in
common use by both Christian scholars and clergy as well as lay people.

### 1.3 Rely on Divine Guidance.

***Mankind was one single nation, and Allah sent Messengers with glad
tidings and warnings; and with them He sent the Book in truth, to judge
between people in matters wherein they differed; but the People of the
Book after the clear Signs came to them, did not differ among
themselves, except through selfish contumacy. Allah by His Grace guided
the Believers to the Truth, concerning that wherein they differed. For
Allah guides whom He will to a path that is straight. Qur’an 2:213***

This Qur’anic passage gives an enormous amount of information. First of
all, it maintains the unity of the original revelation. That is, the
Qur’an supports the diffusionist theory of W. Schmidt and Andrew Lang,
the early 20th-century anthropologists who maintained that humankind was
originally monotheist, and that all religious traditions are deviations
from that original faith.

Secondly, the Qur’anic passage maintains that messengers or prophets
came with both good news and warnings in order to maintain that original
faith. In that context God sent the Book (that is, the pre-qur’anic
revelation), which had the role of judging between people when they came
into disagreement. That is, the revelation was to prevent the deviations
from original monotheism.

Thirdly, despite the witness of the Book or revelation, the people of
the Book deviated, not because the Book was unclear, but through
“selfish contumacy.”

The fourth clause gives God’s response to human deviation from original
monotheism. The Qur’an calls this guidance. It is not certain whether
this refers to the pre-qur’anic Scriptures, since Scripture is also
guidance, or whether this refers to the final revelation, the holy
Qur’an, or to the Imamate, which is also guidance, or even to two or all
of these factors. In any case, the Qur’an emphasizes that those who have
deviated have access to guidance.

Finally, the last clause points out that God guides whom He will. Since
the ayat has already stated that such guidance has already come to
deviators, “whom He will” does not imply that God guides some people,
that is, those few or many that He chooses to guide, but that the
general grace of guidance granted to all, even to the deviators, is
willed by God.

The implication for da’wa is the realization that guidance is divinely
willed and granted even to deviators. We do not therefore have the right
to deprive deviators of divine guidance, whether it be the truth
revealed in their own Scriptures, the Qur’an, or through the Imamate.
Guidance is the will of God and is open to all. It becomes inaccessible
to deviators only by their own choice to ignore it.

This implication has two aspects in reference to the Muslim engaged in
da’wa. The first is the realization that his hearer has the right, by
divine decree, to access to the guidance contained in revelation. The
person engaged in da’wa must not deprive him of it by concession,
conciliation, apathy, or any other means. The second aspect is that the
content of da’wa must be precisely that of revelation. The one doing
da’wa does not have the right to give other than divine guidance. He
does not have to right to give information that is not true, that is
innovative or merely cultural in content.

### 1.4 Deal with Dispute by Submission to God.

***The Religion before Allah is Islam (submission to His Will): Nor did
the People of the Book dissent therefrom except through envy of each
other, after knowledge had come to them. But if any deny the Signs of
Allah, Allah is swift in calling to account.*** **(20)** ***So if they
dispute with thee, Say: "I have submitted my whole self to Allah and so
have those who follow me." And say to the People of the Book and to
those who are unlearned: "Do ye (also) submit yourselves?" If they do,
they are in right guidance, but if they turn back, thy duty is to convey
the Message; and in Allah's sight are (all) His servants.*** ***Qur’an
3:19, 20***

This passage is addressed to the holy Prophet (as). But its message
refers to the person engaged in da’wa as well. The best form of da’wa is
to follow the sunnah of the Prophet (as), and the sunnah of the Prophet
(as) is contained in the instructions God has given him in the holy
Qur’an.

The Qur’an points out that Christian deviation is not based on reason
but “envy,” that is, on an emotional response. Disputation may sound
reasoned, but it is best to bear in mind that the Christian argument is
always based on an emotional response, and is therefore itself
susceptible to manipulation and political misuse. Therefore, it is best
not to take the bait. If the discussion turns on a point of reason, the
role of reason in Islam will lead the Muslim to focus on that issue in a
reasoned way. The Christian will appeal to reason only in support of an
already established emotional response. This is why disputation between
Muslim and Christian is so often fruitless. It is not, as many Muslims
so charitably think, because direct and reasoned discussion of
principles goes against the grain when one is challenged to change one’s
position.

The Qur’an gives here the proper road to take when brought to an impasse
through Christian appeal to emotions camouflaged by logical disputation.
It also gives the reason why this is important. In discussion with
Christians, the Muslim challenge generally inspires the Christian to
make blasphemous statement, statements that actually call for
punishment. In doing da’wa, one has to be careful not to cause more harm
than good. In such a case, the Muslim should express his or her desire
to submit to the will and teaching of God. That submission should be
whole-hearted and so sincere that the Christian is impressed to follow
suite. Before allowing the Christian to get to the place in his argument
that becomes blasphemous and calls down punishment upon him, he should
be led if possible to submit to God.

This means that the person doing da’wa should think first about both
submitting to Allah him or herself, and about encouraging the Christian
to do the same. There is basically nothing in the Christian psychology
to prevent this. If the Christian hesitates, one can ask “Is there
anything in your religion that prevents you from submitting to God?” The
answer should be no. Then it is possible to open common ground by saying
“Let us both agree then that we will wholly submit ourselves to God.” It
is difficult for the Christian to refuse, and this has not only created
common ground, but has brought the Christian a long step towards Islam,
which is merely submission to God. In further contact, if there is an
area of dispute, a reminder of this common commitment can restore
understanding.

There is another important factor in consciously going through this
process. Muslims often approach those interested in Islam with a teacher
mentality. Although it is true that if one’s native language is Arabic,
one will always have an advantage over others in that matter, it does
not follow that one is thereby the definitive teacher of all others
through time and infinity. One needs to relinquish arrogance if one
expects to have a good reception, and the only way of relinquishing
arrogance effectively is through personal submission to God.

The fourth rule is to say to Christians or others “Let us agree to
submit ourselves entirely to God Almighty and to Him alone.”

### 1.5 Define Submission to God.

***Say: "O People of the Book! Come to common terms as between us and
you: That we worship but Allah; that we associate no partners with Him;
that we erect not, from among ourselves, lords and patrons other than
Allah." If then they turn back, say ye: "Bear witness that we (at least)
are Muslims (bowing to Allah's Will)."*** ***Qur’an 3:64***

After establishing common ground by starting with the attitude of
submission to God on the part of both sides, the next step can be taken.
It is important to notice that this is the proper psychological order.
First establish that we both submit ourselves wholly to God. Then, and
only then, define submission.

The definition of submission in this passage includes three points. The
first is the oneness of Allah. The realization of the oneness of Allah
is predicated on the attitude of submission rather than on a rational,
deductive demonstration of divine unity or even on a revealed
proclamation. This is the import of the phrase “La ilaha illallaah”
which implies that there is none who deserves our worship or submission
but the one Allah. The Christian should be led to understand that the
submission to God, which he has already expressed, implies that there is
only one God to whom he is submitting. But in many cases if will not be
possible to present evidence other than an explanation of what Islam
teaches. Pressure to cede the point is not effective. Proclamation of
the truth with its evidence is all we can do.

The Qur’anic idea is very logical. It basically means that since we
submit wholly to God, that God cannot exist in parts. Otherwise, our
submission must also exist in parts. We should have to submit to one
part of God with one aspect of our being or experience, and to another
with another aspect of our being or experience. But this is clearly not
our experience as we submit ourselves wholly to God. God is therefore
one and indivisible.

The second point in the definition of submission to the one true God is
that we do not associate partners with Him. It is one’s personal
submission that forms the basic argument for the oneness of God, rather
that recourse to reason or revelation. Again, pressure is ineffective.
Rather, we should concentrate on making it absolutely clear that we are
so concerned about submitting to God alone, that we dare not concede the
status of deity to anything or anyone appearing in created form. The
distinction between Creator and created is absolute, and our submission
to the Creator alone is an act of recognition of His sovereignty.

Insofar as Christians go, the point in that Jesus (as) is not God
Almighty. With other people, it might be Krishna whom we cannot admit to
be the deity. For both, the argument will arise that Jesus or Krishna
are not associated to God, but are manifestations, incarnations,
hypostases of the one God. The rational argument must concede that a
manifestation, incarnation or hypostasis, being in the form of a
creation, is in itself an association. It cannot but mitigate both the
unicity of God and His uniqueness as Creator.

The third aspect of defining submission is the rejection of human
religious authorities that have been set up by human means. The only
acceptable authority is that set up by God Himself. People have direct
access to God without the intermediary of ecclesiastical authority,
church or priest. It should not be difficult to see that full submission
to God conflicts with recognition of such authorities. It is quite clear
and logical. That does not mean that it will be acceptable to all to
whom it is presented.

The Qur’anic advice is a logical and psychological chain. It begins with
submission to God. That submission implies that the God to whom we are
wholly submitted is one and not many, one and not existing in parts. It
further implies that no other being can be conceived as God, but the one
God to whom we are wholly submitted. Finally, the third implication is
that submission to that one God excludes submission to humanly
established religious authorities. Thus, once we have innocently led the
Christian to submit himself wholly to God, something he will generally
be ready to do so as not to be less than the Muslim, we have in one fell
swoop undercut the doctrine of the Trinity, the doctrine of the
atonement (the sacrifice of the god-man associated with God), and the
doctrine of the Church. In other words, we have weakened all three major
Christian heresies.

This approach is workable with Christians and secular people as well. At
this point a decision may be made, either for or against Islam. However,
in making a decision against Islam, the individual will fall back on his
traditions, whether secular or religious. The following Qur’anic advice
touches on those traditions.

The fifth rule is to define our submission by saying “We worship God
alone, we associate no one or nothing with Him, and we set up no human
authorities from among ourselves.”

2. The Branches of Da’wa
------------------------

The basic principles of da’wa are given above. All five of them are
essential to every da’wa situation. But they may be, in fact must be,
applied in practice in ways appropriate to the particular situation. The
“branches of da’wa” described below give directions in how to deal with
the specific and varied kinds of situations that commonly arise.
Amazingly, the situations described in terms of the people of the Book
in the Qur’an over fourteen centuries ago are very much the same today.

### 2.1 Look to Abrahamic Revelation.

***Ye People of the Book! Why dispute ye about Abraham, when the Law and
the Gospel were not revealed till after him? Have ye no
understanding?*** ***Qur’an 3:65***

Rather than accept Islam on the basis of the five-point plan noted
above, many individuals will raise arguments for not doing so. This
passage in the Qur’an describes a particular situation. The message of
Islam specifically attacks the deviations of Christians and Jews with
the appeal to return to the purity of the Abrahamic faith. This is a
very psychological approach, since it appeals to what is common, or
claimed to be common, in both faiths. The goal of the Islamic
proclamation was to unite Jews and Christians in such a way that neither
should exist any longer as such, but should go forward united in the
original monotheism, the faith of Abraham.

In answer to this, Jews appealed to the Law (the books of Moses a.s.)
and the Christians to the Gospel, in their attempt to validate their
deviation. Both attack the Qur’an in various ways, but the most
insidious way they do so is to consider the Qur’an the book of Islam, as
the Tawrat or Torah is the book of Jews and the Gospel or New Testament
is the book of Christians. In that way the three faiths are set up as
opposing but having in some sense equal validity. Muslims often buy into
this by accepting Judaism and Christianity as divinely revealed faiths
which are merely superceded by the later revelation of Islam. This is
not correct nor is it Qur’anic.

The real situation is that there is only one valid faith, original
monotheism. At the time of their revelation, the messages of Moses and
Jesus (a.s.) were expressions of that one, true, original faith. They
later became Judaism and Christianity through deviation, at which point
they ceased to be valid faiths. The Qur’an does not accept appeal to
divine revelation on the part of deviators as a valid justification for
their deviation. We are not to accept their claims that the Torah or the
New Testament validates deviant traditions.

The message of Islam remains an appeal to jive up deviation and to
return to the faith of Abraham. It is not a message to accept the Qur’an
as the book of Islam and out of courtesy allow that the Torah teaches
Judaism and the New Testament Christianity. It is a logical implication
that a single God without parts and without associates will reveal a
single true faith. Alternatives are just not acceptable, politically
correct as such an attitude may be in present society. To the extent
that the Torah and the Gospel have been transmitted to us faithfully,
they teach Islam.

The surface import of the Qur’anic passage is that the basics of true
faith are to be found already in the revelation to Abraham, and appeal
to later revelation in an attempt to overturn that faith in support of
deviation from it is unacceptable. The Qur’an essentially rejects the
two alternative religious philosophies. The first is that God has given
revelation in stages, so that there are basic truths that were unknown
at one time, and became known through revelation at later periods. The
second is that faith has gone through a process of evolution, developing
from a primitive form to a higher form.

So this passage in the Qur’an warns us to avoid two issues that
opponents will raise. The first is the battle of the books, and the
second is development in faith from primitive to higher. Both of these
are diffused by maintaining the principle of universal original
revelation of monotheism and the understanding that the proliferation of
faiths is degeneration or deviation from it.

When we are faced with these issues, appeal to the Bible to support
deviation, the correct answer is to say “Let us return to the faith of
Abraham.”

### 2.2 Watch out for Deceit.

***It is the wish of a section of the People of the Book to lead you
astray. But they shall lead astray (not you), but themselves, and they
do not perceive! 70 You People of the Book! Why do you reject the Signs
of Allah, of which you are (yourselves) witnesses? 71 You People of the
Book! Why do you clothe Truth with falsehood, and conceal the Truth,
while you have knowledge? 72 Section 8.A section of the People of the
Book say: "Believe in the morning what is revealed to the Believers, but
reject it at the end of the day; perchance they may (themselves) turn
back;"… 75 Among the People of the Book are some who, if entrusted with
a hoard of gold, will (readily) pay it back; others, who, if entrusted
with a single silver coin, will not repay it unless you constantly stand
demanding, because they say, "There is no call on us (to keep faith)
with these ignorant (Pagans)." But they tell a lie against Allah, and
(well) they know it. Qur’an 3:69-75***

This passage gives a different excuse that people use for their
rejection of Islam. The passage begins by noting the tendency of people
who reject the faith to try to lead others astray. This is basically the
appearance of deceit or dishonesty. The first point of dishonesty noted
in ayat 70 is that of claiming to submit to God, and then refusing to
accept the implications. The second mode of deceit is concealing the
Truth, especially the fact that the Law and the Gospel, whatever they
claim to be following, actually teach Islam.

The third mode of deceit is pretending to accept the message of Islam in
the hope of being able thereby to influence Muslims. It is very common,
especially in some quarters, to go along with what a person is saying,
pretending to accept it, and later denying it. Many times Muslims think
a person is close to Islam when he is merely being friendly. The final
form of deceit is the idea that one need be honest only with someone who
shares one’s faith. The Qur’an does not accept such behaviour.

The Qur’an thus sets up these basic principles of honesty when dealing
with the people of the Book. 1) The need to recognize and follow through
consistently on the implications of what one has proposed. 2) The need
to relate to Scriptures as an expression of divine truth rather than as
a source of material to select what seems to support already accepted
beliefs. 3) The need for sincerity in one’s expressions of belief. 4)
The need for treating all people with the same honesty, whether or not
they share one’s faith.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><strong>The principles of honesty needed in da’wa activity</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left">1. Apply one’s beliefs consistently in behaviour
<p>2. Use Scripture to find truth rather than to support what one already believes</p>
<p>3. Express one’s true beliefs honestly and accurately</p>
<p>4. Treat all people honestly without regard to differences in faith</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### 2.3 Remember that God Sees and Knows.

***Say: "O People of the Book! Why do you reject the Signs of Allah,
when Allah is Himself witness to all you do?" Say: "O you People of the
Book! Why do you obstruct those who believe, from the Path of Allah,
seeking to make it crooked, while you were yourselves witnesses (to
Allah's Covenant)? But Allah is not unmindful of all that you do."
Qur’an 3:98-99***

The Qur’an gives us here the proper response when people reject Islam.
The context of their rejection is that they have agreed with us to
submit themselves wholly to God. Yet they have failed to follow through
on the implications of submission to God, that is, that for reasons of
consistency they must relinquish belief in the Trinity, the Atonement,
and the Church.

Although we might feel some sympathy for the inability to make changes
in belief, knowing how difficult this may be, still rejection of Islam
demands a firm response. This passage gives one. We are to remind them
that God is a witness to what they do. If they have made a covenant with
us that we will both submit ourselves wholly to God alone, then God is a
witness to that. He sees and knows how we follow through on that
promise. If we balk at obedience the first time it runs against our
preconceived ideas, it ought to make us stop and think about our
sincerity in making the promise in the first place. The Qur’an gives us
the proper words for this response.

### 2.4 Remember that God Judges.

***O ye People of the Book! Believe in what We have (now) revealed,
confirming what was (already) with you, before We change the face and
fame of some (of you) beyond all recognition, and turn them hindwards,
or curse them as We cursed the Sabbath breakers, for the decision of
Allah must be carried out.*** ***Qur’an 4:47***

This passage notes that the Qur’an confirms the Bible, what has already
been sent. This does not mean that the Qur’an endorses everything in the
Bible or that it confirms it to be without error. Many scholars have
shown that the Bible has not been transmitted perfectly. But this
passage notes that the Qur’an confirms the message of the earlier
revelation.

This is a reference to the fact that there is one original and true
revealed faith, that universal monotheism from which all religious
traditions but the true one have deviated. The Qur’an is not an
additional message, but a perfect expression of the original one that is
still to be found, however imperfectly, in the earlier revelations even
as they are transmitted to us. The Qur’an thus makes two points:
firstly, people should believe the Qur’an; and secondly, that the Qur’an
expresses the same unchanging original faith that was revealed earlier.

There is a reference here to the event described in Qur’an 2:65,66.
Those who exceeded in the Sabbath were turned into despised apes.
Tradition notes that this took place in Aqaba or Biblical Elath on the
sea. The people tried to find ways of circumventing the command to
observe the Sabbath by not catching and eating fish on that day.
Ingenious ways of circumventing divine law resulted in them becoming
apes, without spiritual discernment. So people who make excuses for not
carrying out God’s commandment by the very process of doing so dull
their minds and their capacity to understand truth. So there is an
inevitable result of such action, besides the punishment of God for it.

If the reminder that God sees and knows does not work, then we may make
the appeal stronger by reminding them that judgment inevitably falls on
those who make excuses for not following the truth that God has been
graciously pleased to grant them. There is no compulsion in Islam, and
one must be careful in dealing with such issues. Advertising and
marketing can be forms of compulsion. This we are given specific limits
in the Qur’an as to what and how much pressure can be put on people. We
are allowed to remind people that God sees and knows everything. If that
has no effect, then we are allowed to remind them of judgment. It goes
without saying that each person should first examine him or herself in
these matters. Hypocrisy is a strong detriment to da’wa.

It is certain that all must one day acknowledge the Truth.

***And there is none of the People of the Book but must believe in him
before his death; and on the Day of Judgement he will be a witness
against them; --*** ***Qur’an 4:159***

### 2.5 Warn against the Trinity.

***O People of the Book! Commit no excesses in your religion: Nor say of
Allah aught but the truth. Christ Jesus the son of Mary was (no more
than) an apostle of Allah, and His Word, which He bestowed on Mary, and
a Spirit proceeding from Him: So believe in Allah and His apostles. Say
not "Trinity": desist: It will be better for you: For Allah is One God:
Glory be to Him: (Far Exalted is He) above having a son. To Him belong
all things in the heavens and on earth. And enough is Allah as a
Disposer of affairs.*** ***Qur’an 4:171***

There is a temptation to begin discussion with a non-Muslim on the
matter of tawheed or the oneness of Allah. That is because this
principle is the foundational doctrine of Islam on one hand, and one of
the areas of most glaring error in other faiths on the other hand.
Nevertheless, in this Qur’anic ordering of subjects to deal with as one
meets the people of the Book, it comes only tenth. Experience shows that
truly immediate approaches to this problem are not generally effective.
Again, the Qur’an is most psychologically astute in its ordering of
subjects.

This passage gives the basic points that need to be brought forward in
discussion with people of the Book on this matter. Four basic issues are
stated, two negative ones and two positive ones.

The first issue is to ask the people of the Book not to commit excesses,
but to say only the truth about Allah. Committing excess refers not
merely to the belief itself in the Trinity, but the pretension that such
a doctrine is taught by the Christian Scriptures. The situation is not
that there are two alternative beliefs that may be chosen equally one
over the other. The Trinity is an unwarranted attempt to define God,
which is to break the command in the Decalogue against making images of
God.

The attitude of defining God is to set the human capacity for
theological cogitation above God. It is the attitude of the idolater,
who considers that he has the right to make an image through which to
worship God. Intellectual and physical images have their sources in this
excessive attitude. The oneness of God is not the product of a
theological formulation, but the submission to the divine proclamation
of oneness. It is based on the attitude of submission and the
realization that the human mind is incapable of grasping God. The
implication is that nothing should be said about God in excess, that is,
no expression should be maintained as categorically true in reference to
God except those actually found in the sources of revelation. For
example, since the Christian sources of revelation do not contain the
term Trinity, it is excess to call God a Trinity.

The second issue is the right understanding of Jesus (a.s.). Christians
commit an excess in calling Jesus (a.s.) God the Son, the second person
of the Trinity. The Qur’an corrects this by pointing out exactly what
and who he is. The important points are 1) that he is the Messiah (a
matter denied by the Jews at the time of Muhammad and later), 2) that he
is the son of Mary (with the implication of the virgin birth, otherwise
he would be called by the name of his father), 3) that he was a prophet
or messenger sent from Allah, 4) that he is the word of God, that is,
the divinely appointed expression of God’s will, or the divine proof, on
earth, 5) and that he was a spirit proceeding from God. Thus the role of
Jesus being a special representative of God on earth is emphasized,
although this is not to deny that role to others sent from God as well.

It is important to emphasize all of these Qur’anic points, rather than
just the fact that he was a prophet and born of a virgin. Believers in
the Trinity are already sensitive to the fact that Islam teaches that
Jesus (a.s.) was a man and not God. Therefore every possible opportunity
to note the true greatness that the Qur’an accords to Jesus (a.s.)
should be taken.

The third issue is to ask Christians to stop referring to God as the
Trinity. Again the Qur’an mentions a very simple and obvious thing, but
one that is easily overlooked. In the light of the fact that the
Christian Scriptures do not mention the Trinity and to do so is
therefore excess, and in the light of the fact that Jesus (a.s.) is the
Messiah, son of Mary, a prophet, the Word of God, and a Spirit
proceeding from Him, people should therefore stop calling God a Trinity.
It is appropriate to remind them to do so.

The final point to be made is to emphasize the foregoing by proclaiming
the important points in reference to Allah. Again, this is a very
effective psychological way of dealing with the issue. The first three
points prepare the way for this one, making it clear and unequivocal.
The first point to say about Allah is that He is one. The second thing
is to break the intensity of the rationality through praise. This is
absolutely necessary in order to reach the minds of the people of the
Book. Thus, after saying that God is one, we should say subhan Allah,
praise be to Allah.

This is in fact an acknowledgement of our status as creatures and His
status as Creator. We need to put ourselves, both Muslims and Christians
in our places as in the same category, creatures standing before our
Creator. This prepares us for the third point, that the Creator is
exalted above creation in essence. Creatures reproduce. By contrast, the
Creator does not. The realization of the oneness of God, and His status
as deserving of praise because He is Creator of all things, prepares one
for the realization that He does not reproduce. The realization that He
does not reproduce can and should produce the awareness that to ascribe
a son to Him is an excess. The fourth point reinforces the uniqueness of
God, who has neither son nor daughter, by giving the explanation that He
is sovereign over all things in heaven and earth. Therefore He can have
no need to reproduce, and by extension can have neither need nor
possibility to be described in terms of being or having a son.

|---------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| **1 Ask to avoid excess**                         | **1 Not to believe in the Trinity**                
                                                                                                         
                                                     **2 Not to pretend Scripture teaches the Trinity**  |
| **2 Describe the true nature of Jesus (a.s.)**    | **1 The Messiah**                                  
                                                                                                         
                                                     **2 The son of Mary**                               
                                                                                                         
                                                     **3 A Prophet**                                     
                                                                                                         
                                                     **4 The Word of Allah**                             
                                                                                                         
                                                     **5 A Spirit proceeding from Allah**                |
| **3 Ask to desist from calling God a Trinity**    | **Do not say Trinity!**                            |
| **4 Give the major points on the oneness of God** | **1 Allah is one God**                             
                                                                                                         
                                                     **2 Acknowledge God as Creator through praise**     
                                                                                                         
                                                     **3 God has no son**                                
                                                                                                         
                                                     **4 God is sovereign over all things**              |

The matter of excess in religion is often reiterated in the holy Qur’an,
and could form the basis of a study in its own right. Qur’an 5:80 *Say:
"O People of the Book! Exceed not in your religion the bounds (of what
is proper), trespassing beyond the truth, nor follow the vain desires of
people who went wrong in times gone by, --who misled many, and strayed
(themselves) from the even way.*

### 2.6 Take Advantage of What is Common Heritage.

***This day are (all) things good and pure made lawful unto you. The
food of the People of the Book is lawful unto you and yours is lawful
unto them. (Lawful unto you in marriage) are (not only) chaste women who
are believers, but chaste women among the People of the Book, revealed
before your time, --when ye give them their due dowers, and desire
chastity, not lewdness, nor secret intrigues. If any one rejects faith,
fruitless is his work, and in the Hereafter he will be in the ranks of
those who have lost (all spiritual good.*** ***Qur’an 5:6***

This passage of the Qur’an relating to the people of the Book emphasizes
that there are common issues between them and Muslims. There is a
popular interpretation of this passage that says to eat with a Jew and
sleep with a Christian. This is a false understanding of the revelation.
In reality, neither Jews nor Christians eat in the proper way. Jews go
beyond their Scriptures in prohibiting the eating of milk and meat
together. Christians fail to follow the restrictions on diet altogether.
What is of value here is to realize that the Scriptures of the Jews and
Christians actually support Islamic diet as shown in Leviticus 11 and
Deuteronomy 14, where the same species are prohibited and allowed as in
Islamic law, with the exception of the camel, which is clearly given as
a grace to the desert-dweller in the Qur’an.

The usefulness of this is to show to the Jew and Christian that Islam is
teaching something that they lack in practice, but which they have in
common with Islam through their Scriptures. Many will be surprised to
see that their own Scriptures actually teach Islam, and this surprise
will result in a favorable attitude towards Islam. This is only an
illustration of the principle, since much of Islam, even in the smallest
detail, is to be found expressed in the Scriptures of the people of the
Book.

The second matter, that of marriage to people of the Book, is of a
different character. Here the emphasis on what is common heritage is not
in terms of revelation, but social contact. Many religious communities
become enclosed upon themselves. Muslims also have the concept of the
Ummah or the community of faith. However, it is a community that is open
to social contact. It is crucial that Muslims be willing to be in close
social contact with those of other faiths, in order to present Islam to
them in the best possible light. This extends even to the point of
marriage. Suspicion is often attached to people who revert to Islam to
marry a Muslim, but this is a Qur’anic practice. Da’wa by marriage is a
laudable act. It often results in new Muslims who are more attached to
the faith than the original Muslim spouse. Of course, it also happens
that true faith does not materialize. For this reason care should be
taken to provide a good grounding in Islam before engaging in such
marriage.

### 2.7 Show how the Qur’an Explains the Bible Correctly.

***O People of the Book! There hath come to you our Apostle, revealing
to you much that ye used to hide in the Book, and passing over much
(that is now unnecessary):… Qur’an 5:16***

***O People of the Book! Now hath come unto you, making (things) clear
unto you, our Apostle, after the break in (the series of) our apostles,
lest ye should say: "There came unto us no bringer of glad tidings and
no warner (from evil)": But now hath come unto you a bringer of glad
tidings and a warner (from evil). And Allah hath power over all things.
Qur’an 5:21***

Christianity is divided into about twenty thousand sects, all of which
maintain that their teachings are based on the Book. Most of them have
many things in common, and many differ from others in their emphasis of
some particular, often seemingly insignificant, point of doctrine or
practice. This is due to many things, not least of which is the fact
that so much of Christianity is based on heathen sources rather than the
Book.

But this passage in the Qur’an points out two relevant things about
Christian use of the Bible. The first of these is that the prophet
Muhammad (a.s.) has come to reveal many things that Christians have
tended to overlook in the Bible message. The second of these is that the
prophet Muhammad (a.s.) has come to point out that some of the matters
in the Bible to which certain sects are attached are local or temporary
measures relevant to the application of the true faith to a particular
time and place. They are therefore not to be taken and practiced today.

Everyone who uses the Bible agrees on these two things in principle.
Everyone agrees that the Bible contains the basics of faith, and
everyone agrees that it contains practices that are not to be applied
today. What they disagree on is what these principles and practices are.
Muhammad (a.s.) provides an authoritative, prophetic solution to this
dilemma. Islam, not an ecumenical movement or interfaith dialogue, is
the answer to Christian sectarianism.

When practicing Christians point to the Bible in defense of heresy, the
proper answer is that Christians disagree in their interpretation and
understanding of the Bible on that point, therefore the Qur’an was given
to clarify matters. When secular Christians point out that Biblical
faith cannot be determined, because Christians themselves disagree on
the interpretation of the Bible, this is an opportunity for the Muslim
to point out that the Qur’an clarifies the issues of disagreement.

### 2.8 Use Islamophobia to Good Advantage.

***Say: "O People of the Book! Do you disapprove of us for no other
reason than that we believe in Allah, and the revelation that hath come
to us and that which came before (us), and (perhaps) that most of you
are rebellious and disobedient?"*** ***Qur’an 5:62***

One of the most important issues in the meeting between Islam and the
people of the Book is Islamophobia, or the accusations of non-Muslims
that Islam is backward, fostering ignorance, injustice, economic chaos,
oppression of women and other evils. Generally Muslims try to meet such
accusations in one or both of two ways. The first is defensiveness. They
try to give evidence that the accusations are untrue. The other method
is programmes presenting Islam as peaceful, conciliatory, and rational.

Of course both methods rely on accurate material, but they have two
weaknesses. One is that they are selective, and this undermines their
effectiveness. The second is that they accept the parameters of the
accusers. Finally, these ways of working are distracting, taking the
attention away from the real basic issues.

The Qur’an provides another way. That way is to counter accusation with
accusation. It is to note the hypocrisy of the accusation. Of course
that hypocrisy is evident in the fact that the Christian world is
largely responsible for much of the violence and injustice that takes
place and has taken place in recent centuries. Without claiming that
Islamic societies are perfect, one can take note that neither Christian
societies nor the secular societies based on them have ever maintained
anything approaching justice.

Yet this is not the Qur’anic answer to accusation either. The real
reason for Islamophobia lies in four factors. The first is that Muslims
believe in one God. The second is that they believe in the Qur’an. The
third is that they believe in the former revelation, a fact that remains
a threat to the people of the Book. The fourth is that the people of the
Book, in their deviation from the Book, are rebellious and disobedient.
If the people of the Book were obedient to their own Scriptures, they
would have little reason to fear Islam.

The best way to deal with anti-Islamic expressions is to focus on these
four factors. The first two are the frightening aspects of Islam.
Submission to Allah implies that Muslims cannot be manipulated or
controlled by other powers. Adherence to the Qur’an implies that Islamic
law limits their loyalty to humanly devised laws that favour the
oppression of the weak by the powerful. The latter two factors relate to
Christian failure on these two points. They neither adhere to the legal
prescriptions of their own Book, nor do they submit to God, but rather
are rebellious and disobedient. The simple proof of that is the fact
that insofar as is possible to discern, not a single Christian sect
maintains even the literal obligations of the Decalogue, to say nothing
of the rest of the Book.

These four issues have to be dealt with before Muslims are obligated to
examine the accusations of Islamophobic people. Only when they recognize
the Muslim’s right and obligation towards Allah and the Qur’an, and
conversely the obligation of the people of the Book towards God and the
Bible, is it possible to deal with any accusations fruitfully. When the
matter is brought up, one can politely say that one is ready to deal
with those issues as soon as these matters are clarified.

### 2.9 Maintain the Consistency between the Books of Revelation.

***Say: "O People of the Book! You have no ground to stand upon unless
you stand fast by the Law, the Gospel, and all the revelation that has
come to you from your Lord." It is the revelation that comes to you from
your Lord that increases in most of them their obstinate rebellion and
blasphemy. But sorrow not over (these) people without Faith.***
***Qur’an 5:71***

***And do not dispute with the people of the Book except with means
better (than mere disputation), unless it be with those of them who
inflict wrong (and injury): But say, "We believe in the Revelation which
has come down to us and in that which came down to you; our Allah and
your Allah is One; and it is to Him we bow (in Islam)."*** ***Qur’an
29:46***

The Qur’anic advice here is most interesting. Qur’an 5:71 makes three
points. The first point is to challenge the people of the Book to stand
on the consistent revelation of the Bible and the Qur’an. Whenever an
argument is brought forward, merely insist that it is invalid unless the
whole body of Scripture is brought to bear on it consistently. Accept no
arguments that are not based on the Qur’an as well as the Bible. This
will force the people of the Book to take the Qur’an into consideration,
or break off dialogue. Their desire to lead people away from Islam will
generally force them to continue.

The second point is that their investigation of the Qur’an in this
context will generally increase their obstinate rebellion against God
and their blasphemy. One must expect this to be the result in most
cases. The third point is that we should not let this state of affairs
cause us sorrow or mental stress. We should merely accept it as reality.

The passage in Qur’an 29:46 reiterates the usefulness of emphasizing the
consistency between the Bible and the Qur’an. We should not let
Christians convince us that they have a different God than we, nor a
different revelation. That would only grant them some grounds of
validity. All difference is based on distortion, and it is unacceptable.
Rather, one must emphasize that the God of the Christians is the same as
the God of all humankind, who is one and unique, the Creator and
therefore the sovereign of all. Adherence to the false doctrine of the
Trinity does not relieve them of their responsibility to their Creator.
We are all under one God.

### 2.10 Engage in Jihad.

***Fight those who believe not in Allah nor the Last Day, nor hold that
forbidden which hath been forbidden by Allah and His Apostle, nor
acknowledge the Religion of Truth, (even if they are) of the People of
the Book, until they pay the Jizya with willing submission, and feel
themselves subdued.*** ***Qur’an 9:29***

What is the valid way of fighting in any given situation is open to
discussion. Nevertheless, all should understand clearly that the goal of
Islam is to oppose injustice throughout the world and establish a
society in which the highest possible level of justice for all people
can be maintained. It is the teaching of Islam that the implementation
of Islamic law is the only way to achieve that. Therefore, the goal of
Muslims must be the establishment of a society in which Islamic law is
recognized.

There are three internal impediments to this. The first is ignorant and
violent reactionary movements caused by colonialism and post-colonial
policy. This type of supposed Islam fans the flames of fear, hatred, and
opposition. It forms the other side of the vice that anti-Islamic powers
use to oppress the peoples of the world. The second internal impediment
is modernism. This is the attempt to adapt Islam to the colonial
situation. At the present time it affects many Muslims, but has begun to
appear passé. The third impediment is the adaptation of Muslims to the
requirements of globalization. The type of government, economy, society,
and culture that is becoming increasingly common to the whole world
contains some aspects that are in conflict with Islamic principles. One
of the most glaring of these is interest-based economy. Another can be
called exploitative democracy, a system ostensibly for the whole
population, but in reality the rule of the most powerful lobbies.

Islamic jihad must overcome both internal and external impediments, and
when it fails to do so, it eventually merely supports the continuance of
anti-Islamic tendencies. The goal of jihad must be the implementation of
Islamic law in such a way that there is real justice for all people, not
just for people who somehow tie into a lobby. Jihad is the struggle
firstly to establish a purely Islamic state, that is, a society in which
Islamic law is fully implemented in public policy, social policy, and
economy. Secondly jihad is to extend that state globally. The point is
not to foster the rule of Muslims over non-Muslims, but to foster
justice for all.

It is not the goal of Islamic jihad to create a pluralistic society in
which all ways of life are considered equally valid. Such a philosophy
is in practice merely a cover for exploitation. The concept of freedom
has become in practice a vehicle for freedom to exploit. Those who do
not accept justice as expressed in Islamic law, which is essentially the
same as Biblical law, must eventually submit to a situation in which
their exploitative activities are limited. The system of jizya was
instituted for that purpose. Muslims must work respectfully, peacefully,
single-mindedly and effectively towards that goal, but never going
beyond the behaviour sanctioned by the Imamate.

2.11 Maintain the Grace of Allah Instead of Sacrificial Atonement for Sin.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

***That the People of the Book may know that they have no power whatever
over the Grace of Allah, that (His) Grace is (entirely) in His hand, to
bestow it on whomsoever He Wills. For Allah is the Lord of Grace
abounding.*** ***Qur’an 57:29***

There is a misconception among Christians about the grace of God. In its
traditional form, grace in Christianity is seen through two vehicles:
the sacrifice of Jesus (a.s.) on the cross and the dispensing of grace
through the Church. Some evangelical forms of Christianity have largely
dispensed with the latter, because of the post-medieval influence of
Islam on Europe and Christianity.

Whatever the depths of meaning there may be in this Qur’anic passage, it
does deny the Christian monopole on divine grace. Evangelical Christians
will emphasize that God forgives by grace alone to those who believe in
the sacrifice of Christ. The Islamic answer to that is that Muslims
believe in forgiveness by divine grace alone. No sacrifice, human or
otherwise, can add to the infinite grace of God. To maintain such a
doctrine is to imply that divine grace is insufficient, a thought that
is completely unacceptable.

This factor is presented last in the Qur’an. It is the factor among all
Christian heresies that is least often questioned by Christians. The
question of ecclesiastical authority is the major reason behind
sectarian splitting, although some detail of practice is often taken as
an excuse. The doctrine of the Trinity is completely rejected by some
sects, and highly questioned by others. But the doctrine of the
atonement finds strong support. This strong adherence to a basically
heathen idea, the myth of the dying and resurrecting god, is
inexplicable except with the understanding that Christianity is
basically a heathen faith.

The Qur’anic answer to this problem is to proclaim that Allah has the
right to forgive. The Christian doctrine is based on the presupposition
that God is powerless to forgive without an atoning death. The most
direct way of combating this is to note the sovereignty of God and His
intrinsic right to forgive. As human beings we do not have the right to
question the divine right of forgiveness.

The disarming Christian argument is that justice demands a sacrifice. As
reasonable as this may appear to Christians, the argument is false. The
demands of justice, no matter how reasonable they may seem to the human
mind or emotions, do not override the divine prerogative.

It is a matter of survival. We do not live in a world where all
religious traditions are equally valid, all of which foster love and
tolerance of one another. Such rubbish is a camouflage for exploitation.
We live in a world where ideas support policies, and policies affect
lives and livelihoods. The idea the one can make wrongs right by
crucifying an innocent man in the Middle East leads to the committing of
atrocities. It contributes to the death of thousands. The Christian
doctrine of atonement, no matter how it is covered with emotional
appeal, hides within its core the very human desire for revenge. It is
no use to call this the demands of justice. It is raw revenge, and
nothing more. Its heathen, pagan character does not change.

This is why Christians have to be told outright that they have no power
over the grace of God. They live in a world of illusion, created by a
false, heathen faith. The Christian belief in their monopole on grace
will not end with the death of so many thousands of Muslims in the
Middle East. It will eventually result in calling down upon themselves
and the secular society they have created the response of God Himself.
Then all will know that God has grace for whomsoever He will.


