Part 3: Further Questions
=========================

The following morning, Warqa visited Dr. Miyad and saw that she was
feeling better. The doctor appreciated Warqa's visits. When Warqa
expressed concern about her friend’s health, Dr. Miyad said that she
seemed upset.

"Oh that's to be expected."

"You are right. A lot of processes take place in the body when it is in
such a state."

"What processes?"

"There is a network of nerves in the body. It carries impulses between
the brain and all of the different parts of the body. Hence, sensations
like cold, heat and pain are received through the nerves. There are
millions of nerve cells carrying out this job."

"How do they function?" asked Warqa. "The brain is the centre of the
nervous system. It controls all of the muscles and organs. Thus, when we
touch something hot, the hand is withdrawn very quickly. We may not
think much about such actions, but what the Creator has planned is
really a source of wonder."

Dr. Miyad continued to speak. Warqa enjoyed listening to her simple
explanations and wished she could stay longer, but she didn't want to
tire the doctor.

Warqa said, "Your words are so interesting and I am in need of religious
knowledge, especially about the Great Creator, since I lack such
information. I can't answer the questions of skeptical people. At first,
I planned to attend medical college, but my exam results weren't good
enough."

"My religious knowledge has nothing to do with college," Dr. Miyad told
her. "In fact, I knew many things before I went to the university."

"That's wonderful! You knew about your religion early on."

"Yes, from early childhood my brother encouraged me to read. He helped
me to understand many difficult matters."

"Which of your brothers helped you?"

"I only have one brother. He always took care of me when I was sick.
He's everything to me."

"May Allah protect you both," Warqa said.

Dr. Miyad added, "He has not gone to his clinic because of me. He stays
near me when I'm sick."

"I thought he worked here."

"No, he has his own clinic."

Warqa looked at her watch. She felt that she had stayed long enough and
that her grandmother might be in need of her. She got up, saying, "I 'm
sorry to leave you again. I must take care of my grandmother.”

"Don't worry, my dear; my brother will soon come."

"Then I'll see you tomorrow, " said Warqa.

"Please do come."

"I may trouble you with my questions."

"Not at all. I 'll be happy to see you whenever you come."

When Warqa visited her friend the next day, she asked about her health
and when she would begin work again.

"I feel fine, except for some pain near my spleen. I'm waiting for my
laboratory results."

Warqa said, "I hope nothing is wrong with your spleen, although I think
this organ is not very important."

Dr. Miyad smiled and said, "On the contrary, it is very important. Every
organ God has created has its own importance.

"The spleen is similar to a movable graveyard, rea1ly. It receives the
dead red blood cells, which usually die after two months. It is
interesting to see the iron particles carry the dead cells for burial
and return to produce new ones."

"Do the iron particles produce red cells?"

"No," said Dr. Miyad, "but it is helpful in their manufacture. The main
process involved in making the red and even the white blood cells takes
place in the bone marrow. So you can see what a wonderful factory there
is inside the human body. Each organ has its own special function."

"Please continue," urged Warqa.

"The cardiac system exchanges the gases through the circulation of
blood. Oxygen is carried to the tissues by the blood and, on the way
back to the heart, remnants of burnt out tissues are transported in
place of the oxygen."

"You mean that the blood's circulation helps the digestive system?"

"Yes, that's what I mean," replied Dr. Miyad.

"The respiratory system helps as well. We breathe as long as we are
alive, yet we never think about the Creator's design of our breathing
apparatus. The necessary gas, oxygen, is provided and carbon dioxide is
removed. Hence, our blood is purified and whatever substance is useless
is discarded. It is the delicate design of Allah. Consider the digestive
system. We eat and drink whatever we like, but we forget that Merciful
Allah has given us the organs, which make use of starches, proteins,
fats, minerals, water and vitamins. These organs remove the unwanted
waste products from the body."

Warqa then asked, "What about the liver?"

"The liver is a large reddish-brown organ which secretes bile and
purifies the blood. It is similar to a defence front." Dr. Miyad
hesitated, giving Warqa time to think. Then she asked how her
grandmother was. Warqa replied that she was much better and that that
was why she was able to leave her for a while. Her grandmother wanted
Warqa to go back and attend her college lectures from the coming week,
but Warqa had not yet made up her mind about it.

Dr. Miyad said, "You have been absent from your studies for a long time.
You should return to them. I'll be near her while you are away.”

"Poor grandma," said Warqa. "She has tried hard to give me a comfortable
life. She loves me very much, but I feel so lonely, since I am her only
grand daughter.

Her son, my father died when I was one year old, and my mother died
shortly after my birth."

"Neither of us has a sister, let's be sisters to each other."

Warqa's face brightened as she asked, "Will you have me as your sister?"

"With great pleasure," the doctor replied.

"That's settled then. I wanted you to read this book." She held out a
book entitled ‘**Perfection in Islam’** towards Warqa, who took it and
said good-bye.

Two days later, Dr. Miyad had recovered and was once again on duty, and
she made a point to visit Warqa's grandmother every day while Warqa was
at college. Warqa read the religious book and asked her friend for
another volume.

She really wanted to understand what she had read, and spent many hours
at the hospital, reading and discussing various questions with Dr.
Miyad. Warqa was greatly influenced by the doctor and longed to be with
her always. One day she asked the doctor, "Is it true that the body's
cells change?"

"Yes. Everything: the cells, the blood, the fat, the proteins, even the
nerve cells are changed. Basically, the complete body structure is
renewed and replaced every ten years.”

Warqa commented, "Even the nerve cells. Does that mean a person could
forget his previous knowledge and memories? "

"This is one of the mysteries of creation, and because of this we can
understand that memory is not matter, and that it cannot be explained.
It is a spiritual phenomenon with no physical characteristics. If it was
matter attached to the nerve cell, then one would forget everything with
the passage of time. One would have to re-learn everything again and
again, even one's name and one's father's name. The average human being
gathers nearly half a million pictures in his memory each day. Thus,
tens of billions of images are stored in his memory during his lifetime,
in addition to the other information received through the other senses."

Warqa was listening attentively and said: "What an enormous number! It's
difficult to believe."

"It is an enormous amount. Some scientists say the memory can hold
enough information to fill nine million volumes. Consider how great is
the wisdom of the Creator."

Then Warqa asked, "With such facts, can't we prove the existence of
Almighty Allah to unbelievers?”

"It can be," said Dr. Miyad. "But some may even deny the existence of
the universe. They deny such a reality and think that everything is an
illusion."

"Who are these people?"

"They are those who deny the Creator, the universe and themselves. They
doubt the existence of everything and try to persuade others to consider
everything as merely a dream or as their imagination. In any case, we
can refute their claims by ascertaining whether or not they are sure of
such claims."

"Of course, they are sure," Warqa, commented.

"If they are sure, then they profess certainty in some matters, which is
in contrast to their claims of doubt. This then devalues their doctrine
of belief."

"That's quite true," said Warqa. "Please continue."

Dr. Miyad said, "We can ask them whether they consider our profession of
faith to be in opposition to theirs or not. If they agree that there is
a contradiction, then they must also agree that these opposites cannot
meet. This is a fact, which cannot be doubted, and, therefore, it
follows that certain statements cannot be denied. If they say that there
is no such impossibility, the two parties may both be right. Then those
who believe in the Creator can also be right."

"That's logical," said Warqa.

"There are other proofs which we can discuss later, when we meet again,
God willing."

Warqa said, "I know you are very busy but I am really looking forward to
our next chat."

"Which will be on the day after tomorrow," said the doctor. "Meanwhile
you can read this book."

Warqa took the book and left. She read the book carefully and thought
seriously about it. At their next meeting, Warqa was ready to listen to
her friend. She welcomed her warmly and they sat close together to
continue their discussion.

Dr. Miyad began, "Those who doubt the existence of everything should be
asked to prove their doubt. If they cannot, then their claims are
groundless."

"But suppose they can," said Warqa.

"If they say they can, then they should be asked if there is a
relationship between the proof and its outcome. If there is no
relationship, then it is of no value. But if they claim there is, then
they must believe in a cause that brought about such a result. Thus,
there is a law of cause and effect."

Warqa noted, "They may reject such a law."

"They must have evidence to do so," said Dr. Miyad.

"Otherwise, their claim is groundless. If they can produce, evidence,
then they are confessing to the law of cause and effect. "

"I should take notes, " said Warqa.

"That's a good idea, " agreed Dr. Miyad. "You won't forget various
points"


