Part 4: A Proposal
==================

Warqa stopped writing and looked at her friend, waiting for more
information. However, Dr. Miyad said,

"Now it is your turn to help me."

"I am ready. How?" asked Warqa.

"It is about my brother, Sinad. I am thinking about a wife for him."

"How can I assist you in this matter?"

"Well," said Dr. Miyad, "you know that my brother is very dear to me. He
is a good believer and is well mannered. He is loving, compassionate and
calm. I want to help him find a good wife, and I have recently found
someone."

"Thank God for that," said Warqa.

Dr. Miyad continued, "However, I would like to know whether both sides
would be happy with such an agreement. I want to persuade the girl; can
you help?"

"How?"

Dr. Miyad explained, "You persuade her to marry him. She can trust me
with regard to his righteousness."

"But who is she?" asked Warqa. "Where can I find her?"

"Can't you guess?" asked the doctor with a smile.

"She is very close to you."

Warqa blushed, cast her glance down and remained silent.

Dr. Miyad continued, "You have guessed. Why don't you answer? Haven't we
already agreed to be as sisters? Don't you trust me? Believe me, I care
a lot about your future, just as I care for my brother's. I have thought
carefully about the matter and I am sure that it is right for both of
you. You can ask whoever you like about his character."

Warqa said shyly, "I am sure of your good intentions; I am just taken by
surprise, as I never thought about this before. I must speak with my
grandmother."

"The important thing is that you are convinced," Dr. Miyad stressed.

Warqa wanted to say, "Yes!", but she thought it would be better to think
the matter over. "Please give me some time to think about this," she
said.

"Of course, you have the right to think and then decide. But when can I
have the answer?"

"Within a few days," said Warqa.

"All right, my dear. I hope your decision is for your own good."

Warqa smiled and said, "1 have never thought about my own affairs. My
grandmother has made me depend on her for everything."

Dr. Miyad told her, "You should think for yourself with regard to your
future."

"Yes, I will make my own decision. In any case, knowledge is gained
through experience."

"That is not always the right criteria," said Dr. Miyad.

"Why not?"

"This is what the experimentalists claim. They don't believe in any fact
without experimenting, even though they ignore the fact that their
doctrine indicates the possibility of believing in matters without the
least experiment."

Surprised, Warqa said, "Please explain more. We have a female lecturer
at our school who always insists on this subject."

"I will tell you tomorrow, " Dr. Miyad replied.

"Now it is time for me to check on my patients, so I will see you
later."


