Part 9: The Truth Revealed
==========================

Warqa's grandmother sat near her and Dr. Miyad left the room. She was
very happy to see Warqa improving. Warqa's grandmother was at a loss as
to how she should feel about Dr. Miyad. She explained to Warqa how she
had called Dr. Miyad for help after Mahir had shown no concern. She told
her how the brother and sister had worked to save her. Warqa then said,
"Now you can see the difference between their behaviour and Mr.
Mahir's."

Her grandmother began to say, "In fact, they are good examples of
unselfish, kind people. Mahir has shown his true face, but..."

Warqa guessed what she had been about to say, but turned to Almighty
Allah for help.

The next morning Dr. Miyad came and was pleased to see Warqa was quite
well. The doctor told Warqa's grandmother, "You can take a rest. I will
sit by Warqa in the meantime." She agreed, and lay down on the sofa with
her face to the wall.

Warqa thanked Dr. Miyad for all she had done and told her, "Twice you
have done me a great favour. You helped me with my belief as well as
with my health. I don't know how to thank you."

"This is the duty of every sister. Actually I am grateful to your
grandmother for calling me."

"Oh sister, she is very happy with you," Warqa stand, so she closed her
eyes and said nothing. said. .

"You call me sister, but you don't know the details of my life," said
Dr. Miyad.

â€œIs it a special life story then?"

"Yes. It begins years before my brother and I were born."

"Are you twins?"

"Yes, we are, but he was ahead of me in his studies because I was very
ill for three years during my childhood. Did you notice the resemblance
between him and me?"

"Well, I never thought much about it," said Warqa.

"I thought so," said Dr. Miyad. She continued, "The story is also about
my real father, who died in a car accident a month before I was born. My
brother and I were born orphans. But our father died two years ago."

Warqa's grandmother turned in order to listen better.

The doctor resumed her story, "My father, Abdul Razzaq, was a poor man,
but a virtuous one. My mother married him after having refused to marry
a wealthy cousin of hers who was a loose, deviated man. My mother was
rich and beautiful. When my father died, she suffered a lot. The rich
cousin and his mother were nearby to help, and a few months later his
mother persuaded my mother to marry her son. At first she refused, but
the young cousin promised to behave well and take care of her small
family.

"He expressed his love and compassion until my mother finally married
him. Then, when she discovered that he had attached our birth to his
name, she became angry and went back to her father's old house. Her
husband still did not leave her alone and he eventually took her back to
his house. We grew up thinking he was our real father. We were always
surprised by his cruelty towards us."

"He was unkind to you?" asked Warqa.

"Yes, he was. He never kept his word to my mother. He squandered all of
his wealth and she suffered much She died a few years ago. When we were
old enough, she told us about our father, and even gave us proof of it."

"What kind of proof?"

"Some letters which he had written to her in which he wrote the reason
why he gave us his name. She also told us of certain persons who knew
the facts. We suffered from his bad reputation until he died two years
ago. Then we found, in a private box, an official letter in which he
confessed that we were not his own children. He had written the name of
our real father. Perhaps he did not want us to inherit the wealth he had
made by cheating and stealing. Anyway, his will helped us to regain our
true father's name. Now you know, dear Warqa, who our real father is."

"Oh yes! How happy I am to find you! " Warqa exclaimed joyfully.

"Almighty Allah has returned you to me", added Miyad and recited the
Qur'anic verse:

***Most surely He Who has made the Qur'an binding to you will bring you
back to destination... (Al-Qasas, 28: 85)***


