Taqlid
======

Following a Mujtahid
--------------------

**1.** It is necessary for a Muslim to believe in the fundamentals of
faith on the basis of proof and he cannot follow anyone in this respect
i.e. he cannot accept he word of another with regard to the fundamentals
without demanding proof. However, in order to act on Islamic code
(except in those matters which are considered by all to be indisputable
e.g. the obligatory nature of the five daily prayers, fasting during the
holy month of Ramadan etc.) a person must adopt one of the following
methods:

    i) The man concerned should be a *Mujtahid* (jurist)[^1] himself and
should know the Articles of Acts on the basis of *Ijtihad*[^2] and
reason (i.e. he should be a man of such high learning and scholarship
that he can solve problems from his study of the Qur’an and Hadith).

    ii) If he is not a jurist himself, he should follow a jurist i.e. he
should act according to the judgment (*fatwa*) of the jurist without
demanding proof.

    iii) If he is neither a jurist nor a follower (*muqallid*) he should
act after taking such precaution that he should become sure of his
having performed his religious duty. For example, if some jurists
consider an act to be unlawful and some others say that it is not
unlawful, he should not perform that act and in case some jurists
consider an act to be obligatory (*wajib*) and others consider it to be
recommended (*mustahab*) he should perform it. Hence it is obligatory
for those persons who are not jurists and cannot also take precautionary
measures (*ihtiyat*) to follow a jurist.[^3]

**2.** Following (*taqlid*) means acting according to the judgment of a
jurist. It is necessary that the jurist who is followed is male, Shi’ah
Ithna ‘Asha’ari,[^4] adult, sane, legitimate, alive and just (‘*adil*).
A person is said to be just when he performs all those acts which are
obligatory for him and refrains from all those things which are
prohibited for him. And the sign of a man’s being just is that he is
apparently a good man so that if enquiries are made about him from the
people of his locality or from his neighbours or from those persons with
whom he associates, they should confirm his goodness. And if it is known
that the judgments of the jurists differ with regard to the problems
which we face in everyday life, it is necessary that the jurist who is
followed should be *a’lam* (the most learned jurist) who possesses
better capacity to understand religious matters as compared with his
contemporary jurists.

**3.** There are three ways of identifying a jurist or the most learned
jurist:

i) When a person personally believes that such and such person is a
jurist or the most learned jurist. For confirming this he should be a
learned person himself and should possess the capacity to identify a
jurist or the most learned jurist.

ii) When two persons, who are learned and just and possess the capacity
to identify a jurist or the most learned jurist, should certify to a
person’s being a jurist or the most learned jurist, provided that two
other learned and just persons do not contradict them. And apparently
the fact of a person’s being a jurist or the most learned jurist is also
proved by the statement of only one person who is reliable.

iii) When many learned persons who possess the capacity to identify a
jurist or the most learned jurist should certify to a person’s being
jurist or the most learned jurist and when one is satisfied by their
statement.

**4.** If it is not possible to identify the most learned jurist on
account of some difference of opinions among the jurists, a person
should take precautionary measures and if it is not possible to do so,
he should follow that jurist whom he himself considers to be the most
learned jurist. In fact even if there is a weak possibility of a person
being the most learned jurist and one knows that as compared with him
there is no other most learned jurist, one should follow that jurist.

**5.** There are four ways of obtaining the judgment of a jurist:

i) When a man hears the judgment direct from the jurist himself.

ii) When the judgment of the jurist is quoted by two just persons.

iii) When a man hears the judgment of a jurist from a person whose
statement satisfies him.

iv) By reading the judgment of a jurist in a book written by him on
various problems (*masa’il*) provided the reader is satisfied about the
authenticity of the book.

**6.** So long as a person is not satisfied that the judgment of the
jurist has been changed, he can act according to what is written in his
book. And if there is a possibility that the judgment has been changed,
investigation in the matter is not necessary.

**7.** If the most learned jurist gives a judgment about some matter his
follower cannot act in that matter on the judgment of another jurist.
However if he does not give a judgment and says that according to
precaution (*ihtiyat*) a man should act in such and such a manner, for
example if he says that as a precautionary measure in the first and
second *Rak’at* (unit) of the prayers he should read a complete Chapter
(*Surah*) after the Chapter of ‘*Hamd’*, the follower may either act on
this precaution which is called obligatory precaution *(ihtiyat wajib*)
or he may act on the judgment of another jurist whom it is permissible
to follow. Hence if he (the second jurist) considers only Surah *Hamd*
to be enough, he (the person offering the prayers) may drop the second
Surah. The position will also be the same if the most learned jurist
says that the matter needs deliberation (*ta’ammul*) or is objectionable
(*ishkal*).

**8.** If the most learned jurist observes precaution after or before
giving a judgment about a matter – for example if he says that if an
impure vessel is washed once with *Kurr* water (about 388 litres) it
becomes pure, although as a precautionary measure it should be washed
thrice, his follower can abandon acting according to the precaution.
This precaution is called recommended precaution (*ihtiyat mustahab*).

**9.** If a jurist, who is followed by a person, dies and the follower
has committed his judgments to memory, he can act on them as he acted
during his lifetime. However, if he had not committed his judgments to
memory or has forgotten them, he must refer to a jurist who is alive.

**10.** If a person commits to memory the judgments of a jurist about
some problems and after the death of that jurist he follows a living
jurist in that matter according to his duty he cannot act again upon the
judgments of the jurist who has passed away.

**11.** It is obligatory for a follower to learn the judgments about the
problems which are usually faced by him.

**12.** If a person faces a problem about which the orders are not known
to him, it is necessary for him to observe precaution or to follow a
jurist according to the conditions mentioned above. However, if he is
aware of the difference of opinions between the most learned jurist and
the jurist, and it is not possible to postpone the matter or to act
according to precaution, and it is also not possible to approach the
most learned jurist, it is permissible to follow a jurist who is not the
most learned jurist.

**13.** If a person informs another person about the judgment of a
jurist and then that judgment is changed, it is not necessary for him to
inform that person that the judgment of that jurist has been changed.
However, if after informing that person about the judgment he comes to
know that he has made some mistake in reporting the judgment, he should
rectify that mistake, if possible.

**14.** If a person performs various acts for some time without
following a jurist and later follows a jurist, his former actions will
be valid if that jurist declares them to be valid, otherwise they will
have to be treated as ‘invalid’.

[^1]: A Mujtahid is a jurist competent enough to deduce precise
inferences regarding the commandments from the holy Qur’an and the
Sunnah of the holy Prophet by the process of Ijtihad.

[^2]: Ijtihad literally means striving and exerting. Technically as a
term of jurisprudence it signifies the application by a jurist of all
his faculties to the consideration of the authorities of law with a view
to find out what in all probability is the law. In other words, Ijtihad
means making deductions in matters of law in the cases to which no
express text is applicable. (See Baqir Sadr, A Short History of ‘Ilm
al-Usul, ISP, 1984)

[^3]: The minimum age limit for mukallaf (adults) bound to perform
religious precepts is 15 lunar years for boys and 9 lunar years for
girls.

[^4]: A Muslim who believes and follows the twelve successors (Imams)
explicitly expressed by the Holy Prophet of Islam through Divine Will.


