Orders Regarding Shrouding Of The Dead Body
===========================================

**576.** A Muslim should be shrouded with 3 pieces of cloth: loincloth,
tunic and sheet.

**577.** The loincloth should be such that it should cover the body from
the navel up to the knees and it is better that it should cover the body
from the chest up to the feet. As regards the tunic it should be such
that it should cover the entire body from the top of the shoulders up to
the middle of the calf of the legs and it is better that it should reach
the feet. As regards the sheet its length should be such that it may be
tied at the head as well as at the feet and its breadth should be such
that its one edge should extend up to the other.

**578.** It is obligatory that the loincloth should cover the body from
navel up to the knees and the tunic should cover it from the shoulders
up to the middle of the calf of the legs. Whatever has been mentioned
over and above this is the recommended quantity of the shroud.

**579.** If the heirs of the dead body are adult and they permit that
the portion of the shroud in excess of that which is obligatory (as
mentioned in the foregoing article) may be taken from their share there
is no harm in doing so. And the obligatory precaution is that the
quantity in excess of the obligatory shroud is not taken from the share
of an heir who has not reached the age of puberty.

**580.** If a person has made a will that the recommended quantity of
the shroud (as mentioned in the two foregoing articles) should be
arranged for out of the 1/3 of his property or has made a will that 1/3
of his property should be spent on himself but has not specified the
mode of its expenditure or has specified it for only a part of it the
recommended quantity of shroud can be taken from 1/3 of his property.

**581.** If the dead person has not made a will that a shroud may be
taken out of the 1/3 of his property and the persons concerned wish to
take it from the real property the obligatory precaution is that the
obligatory quantity of the shroud be procured, keeping in view the
status of the dead person, at the cheapest possible price. However, if
the heirs who are adult permit that the shroud may be taken from their
share the same may be taken from their share to the extent agreed to by
them.

**582.** The shroud of a woman is the responsibility of her husband
although the woman may be possessing some property of her own as well.
Similarly if a woman is given revocable divorce in the manner which will
be explained in the articles relating to divorce and she dies before the
expiry of her iddah her husband should provide her shroud. And if her
husband is not adult or is insane, the guardian of the husband should
provide shroud for the wife out of his property.

**583.** It is not obligatory for the relatives of a dead person to
provide his shroud although he may be one of those persons whose
maintenance was obligatory for them during his lifetime.

**584.** According to the obligatory precaution the 3 pieces of cloth
meant for the shroud should not be so thin as to make the body of the
deceased visible.

**585.** Shrouding a dead person with the hide of a corpse or a usurped
thing is not permissible even though nothing else is available, and if
the shroud consists of a usurped thing and its owner is not agreeable
(to its being used), it should be removed from the body of the dead
person even though be may have been buried.

**586.** Shrouding a dead body with an impure thing, or with a cloth
made of pure silk, and on the basis of precaution with a cloth, which
has been woven with gold, is not permissible. In case, however, there is
no other alternative there is no harm in using these things as shroud.

**587.** On the basis of precaution shrouding with a cloth, which is
made of wool or hair of an animal whose meat is unlawful to eat or with
the hide of an animal, whose meat is lawful to eat is not permissible
unless one is constrained to do it. However, there is no harm in using a
shroud made of the hair and wool of an animal whose meat is lawful,
although the recommended precaution is that a dead body should not be
shrouded even with these two things.

**588.** If the shroud of a dead body becomes impure owing to its own
impurity, or owing to some other impure thing, and if the shroud is not
wasted its impure portion should be washed or cut off, even alter the
dead body has been placed in the grave. And if it is not possible to
wash it, or to cut it oft, but it is possible to change it, it should be
changed.

**589.** If a person, who is wearing ehram for Hajj or Umra. dies, he
should be shrouded like others and there is no harm in covering his head
and face.

**590.** It is recommended that one should keep one's shroud and "Sidr"
leaves and camphor ready during one's lifetime.

Orders Regarding Hunut (Embalment)
----------------------------------

**591.** It is obligatory after bathing a dead body to embalm it viz. to
apply camphor on its forehead, both the palms, both the knees and both
the great toes of its feet. Furthermore, applying camphor on the nose of
the dead body is recommended. The camphor should be powdered and fresh.
If its essence is lost because of its being old it will not serve the
purpose.

**592.** The obligatory precaution is that camphor should first be
applied on the forehead of the dead body. As regards to other parts of
the body mentioned above, it is not necessary to observe sequence .

**593.** It is better that the dead body is embalmed before it has been
shrouded, although there is no harm in embalming it while it is being
shrouded or even after it has been shrouded.

**594.** It is not permissible to embalm a person who dies putting on
ehram for Umra and Hajj, except when he is wearing ehram for Hajj and
dies after having completed saâ€™i.

**595.** It is unlawful for a woman to perfume herself if her husband
has died and her iddah has not been completed but if she dies it is
obligatory to embalm her.

**596.** The obligatory precaution is that, perfumes like musk,
ambergris and aloes-wood ('Ud) are not applied to the dead body and
these things should not also be mixed with camphor.

**597.** It is recommended that some quantity of Turbatul Husayn (soil
of the land around the shrine of imam Husayn) be mixed with camphor, but
it should not be applied to those parts of the body, where its use
amounts to disrespect. It is also necessary that the quantity of
Turbatul Husayn is not such that when it is mixed with camphor the
mixture may not be called camphor.

**598.** If camphor is not available or the quantity available is
sufficient for bathing purposes only, it is not necessary to embalm the
dead body. And in case it is in excess of the requirement for bathing
but is not sufficient for embalming all the seven limbs, it should, on
the basis of precaution, be applied on the forehead of the dead body
first and the remainder, if any, should be applied to other parts.

**599.** It is also recommended that 2 pieces of fresh and green twigs
are placed with the dead body.


