Orders Regarding Burial Of The Dead Body
========================================

**620.** It is obligatory to bury a dead body in the earth in such a way
that its smell does not come out and the beasts of prey also do not take
it out, and, in case there is a danger of such beasts taking it out, the
grave should be made solid with bricks.

**621.** If it is not possible to bury a dead body in the earth, it may
be kept in a room or a coffin, instead of burying it.

**622.** The dead body should be placed in the grave resting on its
right side so that its face should be towards the Qibla

**623.** If a person dies in a boat and there is no possibility of the
decay of the dead body and there is also no hindrance in the way of its
being kept in the boat, it should be kept in it and buried in the earth
after reaching the land. Otherwise it should be bathed, embalmed,
shrouded and prayers should be offered for it, and thereafter, on the
basis of precaution, if it be possible, it should be covered with a mat
and after tying the ends of the mat lowered into water. Furthermore, so
far as possible, it should not be lowered into water at a place where
the animals may eat it up at once.

**624.** If it is feared that the enemy may dig the grave and exhume the
dead body and amputate its ears or nose or other limbs, it should be
lowered into water, if possible, as stated in the foregoing article.

**625.** The expenses of lowering the dead body into water and of making
its grave solid, if necessary, should be met from the real property of
the dead body.

**626.** If a woman who is an unbeliever dies and has a dead child in
her womb, or soul has not yet entered the body of the child, and if
child's father is a Muslim, the woman should be made to lie in the grave
on her left side with her back towards Qibla, so that the face of the
child is towards Qibla.

**627.** It is not lawful to bury a Muslim in the graveyard of
unbelievers or to bury an unbeliever in the graveyard of Muslims.

**628.** It is also not permissible to bury the dead body of a Muslim at
a place which is disrespectful (e.g. dunghill).

**629.** It is not permissible to bury a dead body in a usurped place or
in a place which is dedicated to purposes other than burial (e.g. in a
Masjid).

**630.** It is not permissible to bury a dead body in the grave of
another person except when the grave has become very old and the former
dead body has been consumed.

**631.** Anything which is separated from the dead body (even though it
may be its hair, nail or tooth) should, on the basis of precaution, be
buried along with it and it is recommended that the nails and teeth
which are separated from one's body during one's lifetime should also be
buried.

**632.** If a person dies in a well and it is not possible to take him
out, the mouth of the well should be closed and the well should be
treated to be his grave.

**633.** If a child dies in its mother's womb and its remaining in the
womb is dangerous for the woman it should be taken out in the easiest
possible way. In case, therefore, it becomes necessary to cut it into
pieces there is no harm in doing so. It is, however, better that if the
husband of the woman is skilled in surgery the dead body of the child
should be taken out by him and failing that, the job should be performed
by a skilled woman.

And if it is not possible, a skilled surgeon who is the mahram (one with
whom marriage cannot be contracted) of the woman should do it. And if
even this is not possible a skilled man who is not her mahram (one with
whom marriage can be contracted) should take out the dead body of the
child. And if even such a person is not available the dead body can be
taken out by any unskilled person.

**634.** If a woman dies and there is a living child in her womb, it is
necessary that even if there is no hope of the child's survival, it
should be taken out of the body of the mother by the persons mentioned
above. The child should be taken out by operating the left side of the
dead body which should be sewn up after the operation.

Recommended Acts of Burial
--------------------------

**635.** It is recommended that the grave should be approximately equal
to the size of an average person and the dead body should be buried in
the nearest graveyard, except when the graveyard which is situated at a
longer distance is better on some account e.g. when pious persons are
buried there or people go there in large number to pay homage and recite
supplications (Fatiha).

It is also recommended that before burying the dead body it should be
placed a few yards away from the grave and moved to the grave halting
slowly thrice. It should be placed on the ground every time and lowered
into the grave at the 4th time. And in case the dead body is of a man it
should be placed on the ground at the 3rd time in such a manner that its
head should be towards the lower side of the grave and at the 4th time
it should be lowered into the grave from the side of its head.

And in case the dead body is of a woman it should be placed on the
ground at the 3rd time towards the Qibla and should be lowered into the
grave breadthwise and a cloth should be spread over the grave while
lowering it. It is also recommended that the dead body should be taken
out of the coffin and lowered into the grave very gently and the
prescribed supplications should be recited before and after burying the
dead body; and after the dead body has been lowered into the grave the
ties of its shroud should be unfastened and its cheek should be placed
on the earth and an earthen pillow should be placed under its head and
some unbaked bricks or lumps of clay should be placed behind its back so
that the dead body may not lie flat on its back.

Before closing the grave the person reciting the talqin (prescribed
recitals) to the dead should catch hold with his right hand the right
shoulder of the dead body and should place his left hand tightly on its
left shoulder and take his mouth near its ear and shaking its shoulders
should say thrice: Isma'ifham ya. . . . . . here the name of the dead
person and his father should be called. For example, if the name of the
dead person is Muhammad and his father's name is Ali it should be said
thrice: Isma'ifham ya Muhammad bin Ali.

And then he should say: Hal anta 'alal 'ahdil lazi farqtana 'alayhi min
shahadati an la ilaha illal lahu wahdahu la sharika lah wa anna
Muhammadan sallal lahu'alayhi wa Alihi'abduhu wa Rasuluhu wa sayyidun
nabiyyina wa khatamul mursalina wa anna'Aliyyan Amirul muminina wa
sayyidul wasiyyina wa imamu nif tarazallahu ta'tahu alal alamina wa
annal Hasana wal Husayna wa 'Aliyyabnal Husayni wa Muhammadabna 'Aliyyin
wa Jafarabna Muhammadin wa Musabna Ja'farin wa'Aliyyabna Musa wa
Muhammadabna'Aliyyin wa'Aliyyabna Muhammadin wal Hasanabna'Aliyyin wal
Qa'imal hujjatal Mahdi salawalullahi alayhim a'immatul mu minina wa
hujajullahi alal khalqi ajma'ina wa a'immalaka a'immatu hudan bika abrar
ya. . . . . . (here the name of the dead person and his father should be
called).

Then the following words should be said:Iza atakal malakanil muqarrabani
Rasulayni min indillahi tabaraka wa ta'ala wa saalaka'an Rabbika wa an
Nabiyyika wa'an dinika wa an Kitabika wa an Qiblatika wa'an A i'mmatika
fala takhaf wa la tahzan wa,qul fi jawabi hima, Allahu Rabbi wa
Muhammadun sallal lahu alayhi wa Alihi nabiyyi wal Islamu dini wal
Quranu kitabi wal Ka'batu Qiblati wa Amirul mu'minina 'Aliyyubnu Abi
Talib Imami wal Hasanubnu'Aliyyi nil Mujtaba Imami wal Husaynubnu
'Aliyyi nuh-shahidu bi-Karbala imami wa'Aliyyun zaynul'Abidina imami wa
Muhammadu nil Baqiru Imami wa Ja'faru nis Sadiqu imami wa Musal Kazimu
imami wa 'Aliyyu-nir Riza imami wa Muhammadu nil Jawadu imami wa aliyyu
nil Hadi imami wal Hasanul askari imami wal Hujjatul muntazar imami ha
ulai' salawatullahi 'alayhim ajma'in A'immati wa sadati wa qadati wa
shufa-a'i bihim atawalla wa min a'dai'him atabarra'u fid dunya wal
akhirati thumma i'lam ya . . . . .

Here the name of the dead person and his father should be called and
thereafter it should be said. Annal laha tabaraka wa ta'ala nimar-Rabb
wa anna Muhammadan sallal lahu 'alayhi wa Alihi nimar Rasul wa anna
'Aliyyabna Abl Talib wa awladahul ma suminal A'i'mmatal ithna asharah
nimal A'immah wa anna ma ja'a bihi Muhammadun sallal lahu 'alayhi wa
Alihi haqqun wa annal mawta haqqun wa suwala munkarin wa nakirin fil
qabri haqqun wal ba'tha haqqun wan nushura haqqun wassirata haqqun wal
mizana haqqun wa tatayiral kutubi haqqun'wa annal jnnnnta haqqun
wan-nara haqqun wa annas sa'ata a'tiyata la rayba fiha wa annallaha
yab'athu man fil qubur. Then the following words should be said:
Afahimta ya. .. (here the name of the dead person should be called)

And there- after the following should be said: Thabbatakallahu bil
qawlith thabit wa hadakallahu ila siratim mustaqim'arrafallahu baynaka
wa bayna awliyal'ka fi mustaqarrim min rahmatihi. Then the following
words should be uttered: Alla humma jafil arza an jambayhi vas'ad
biruhihi ilayaka wa laqqihi minka burhaha Alla humma'afwaka'afwaka.

**636.** It is recommended that the person who lowers the dead body in
the grave should be clean, bare-headed and bare-footed and he should
come out of the grave from the side of the feet of the dead body.
Furthermore, persons, other than the near relatives of the dead person,
should put the dust into the grave with the back side of their hands and
recite the following: Inna lillahi wa innailayhi raji'un. If the dead
person is a woman, her mahram and in the absence of a mahram one of her
kinsmen should lower her in the grave.

**637.** It Is recommended that the grave should be square or
rectangular in shape and should be higher than the ground to the extent
of about four fingers' breadth, and a sign should be fixed on it for
purposes of identification and water should also be sprinkled on it, and
then those present should place their hands on the grave and part their
fingers and thrust them into earth and recite Surah al-Qadr 7 times and
pray for the salvation of the departed soul and say: Alla humma jafil
arza an jambayhi vas'ad ilayka ruhahu wa laqqihi minka rizwana wa askin
qabrahu min rahmatika ma tughnihi bihi an rahmati min siwaka.

**638.** It is recommended that when the persons who escorted the
funeral have departed, the guardian of the dead person or the person
whom the guardian grants permission should recite the above prescribed
supplications for the dead person.

**639.** It Is recommended that after the dead person has been buried
the people should condole with the near ones upon death of that person.
In case, however, so much time has passed since his death that
condolence is likely to refresh their bereavement it is better not to
condole with them.

It is also recommended that food should be sent for the members of the
family of the deceased for 3 days. It is, however, abominable for one to
take meal in their presence or in their house.

**640.** It is also recommended that a person should observe patience on
the death of his near ones and especially on the death of his son and,
whenever the memory of the departed soul crosses his mind, he should
say: Inna lillahi wa inna ilayhi raji'un and should recite the holy
Qur'an for the sake of the dead person. A man should visit the graves of
his parents and pray there for the blessings of Allah for himself and
should make the grave solid so that it may not be demolished soon.

**641.** It is not permissible to scratch one's face or body or slap or
torture oneself on the death of anyone.

**642.** It is not permissible to tear one's collar on the death of
anyone except one's father and brother and the obligatory precaution is
that one should not tear one's collar on their death.

**643.** If a woman who is mourning the death of a person scratches her
face and makes blood come out of it or pulls her hair, she should, on
the basis of recommended precaution, set a slave free, or feed ten
indigent persons, or provide them dress. And the same orders apply when
a man tears his collar or dress on the death of his wife or child.

**644.** The obligatory precaution is that while weeping over the death
of any person one's voice should not be too loud.

Wahshat Prayers (Prayers to be offered in connection with fear caused by loneliness in the grave of the dead person)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**645.** It is better that on the first night after the burial of a dead
body wahshat prayers be offered for it. The method of offering this
prayers is as follows: After reciting Surah al-Hamd, Ayatul Kursi should
be recited once in the first unit (rakat) and Surah al-Qadr should be
recited 10 times in the second unit; and after saying the salaam the
following supplication should be recited: Alla humma salli 'ala
Muhammadin wa Ali Muhammad wab'ath thawabaha ila qabri. . . . . . (here
the name of the dead person and his father's be should be called).

**646.** Wahshat prayers can be offered in the night following the
burial of the dead body at any time, but it is better to offer it in the
early hours of the night after Isha prayers.

**647.** If it is proposed to the dead body to some other town or its
burial is delayed owing to some reason the wahshat prayers should be
postponed till the night following its burial.

Exhumation
----------

**648.** It is unlawful to open the grave of a Muslim even though he may
have been a child or an insane person. However, there is no harm in
doing so if the dead body has been fully consumed by earth.

**649.** Opening the grave is unlawful in the case of the descendants of
Imams, martyrs, scholars and pious persons even though they may have
been buried long ago.

**650.** Opening the grave of a dead body is not unlawful in the
following cases:

(i) When the dead body has been buried in an usurped land and the owner
of the land is not willing to let it remain there.

(ii) When the shroud of the dead body or anything buried with it had
been usurped and the owner of the thing in question is not willing to
let it remain in the grave. Similarly if anything belonging to the dead
person which was inherited by his heirs has been buried along with him
and the heirs are not willing to let it remain in the grave. However, if
the dead person had made a will that a certain supplication or the holy
Qur'an or a ring should be buried along with his dead body the grave
cannot be opened to take out these things.

(iii) When opening the grave does not amount to disrespect of the dead
person, and it transpires that he was buried without bathing or
shrouding, or the bathing performed was void, or he was not shrouded
according to religious orders, or was not made to lie in the grave
facing the Qibla.

(iv) When it is necessary to inspect the body of the dead person to
prove some rights.

(v) When the dead body of a Muslim has been buried at a place which is
against his status. For example when it has been buried in the graveyard
of unbelievers or at a dunghill.

(vi) When the grave is opened for a legal purpose which is more
important. For example, when it is proposed to take out a living child
from the womb of a woman who has been buried.

(vii) When it is feared that a wild beast would tear up the corpse or it
will be carried away by flood or exhumed by the enemy.

(viii) When it is proposed to bury a part of the body of the corpse
which was not buried with it previously. However, the obligatory
precaution is that, the part should be placed in the grave in such a way
that the body of the buried person is not seen.

(ix) When the dead body is proposed to be buried at sacred places like
Najaf, Karbala al-Mu'alla or Mashhad al-Muqaddas and especially if the
dead person had made a will in this regard.


