Tayammum
========

Tayammum (ablutions with earth, sand etc.) should be performed instead
of ablutions or the ceremonial bath in the following seven conditions:

First condition: When it is not possible to procure sufficient water for
performing ablutions or taking bath.

**655.** If a person happens to be in a populated area he should, on the
basis of precaution, make his best efforts to procure water for
ablutions or bath till such time that he loses all hope. And if he
happens to be in a densely wooded forest, where the land is uneven and
it becomes difficult for him to walk, he should make a search for water
on all sides covering a distance equal to that covered by an arrow in
olden times when thrown from a bow, otherwise (i.e. it walking through
the forest is not so difficult) he should make a search by covering a
distance which is double the distance covered by an arrow.

In his commentary on the book entitled Man la Yahzunrhul Faqih the
Allama has prescribed the distance covered by an arrow to be equal to
200 foorsteps.

**656.** If out of the four sides some are even and others are uneven
one should make search for water in the side which is even to the extent
of the night of two arrows and in the side which is uneven to the extent
of the flight of one arrow.

**657.** It is not necessary for a person to make search for water in
the side about which he is sure that water is not available there.

**658.** If the time during which a person can offer prayers is not
short and he has time at his disposal to procure water and if he is sure
that water is available at a place beyond that upto which he should make
search he should go there to get water. And if he suspects that water is
available there it is not necessary for him to go to that place.
However, if his suspicion is strong and he is almost sure he should go
to that place to fetch water.

**659.** It is not necessary that a person should go himself in search
of water. On the other hand he can send for this purpose some other
reliable person. And in such a case it is sufficient if one person goes
on behalf of some of them.

**660.** If availability of water in the provisions for journey of a
traveller or in the encampment or in the caravan is probable the person
concerned should, on the basis of precaution, make so much search that
he may become sure of the non-availability of water or may lose hope of
finding it.

**661.** If a person makes search for water before the time for prayers
sets in, and does not find it, and stays there till the time for prayers
commences, and there is a possibility of getting water, the recommended
precaution is that he should go in search of water again.

**662.** If a person makes search for water after the time for prayers
has set in, and does not find it, and stays at that place till the time
for next prayers, and if there is a possibility of finding water, the
recommended precaution is that he should go in search of water again.

**663.** If the time left for prayers is short or the person concerned
fears a thief or a wild beast or the search for water is so hard that he
cannot bear it, it is not necessary for him to make search for water.

**664.** Notwithstanding the fact that a person, who has not gone in
search of water till time left for prayers has become short, has sinned,
the prayers offered by him with tayammum is in order.

**665.** If a person is sure that he cannot get water and does not,
therefore, go in search of water and offers his prayers with tayammum,
but realizes after prayers that if he had made search he would have
procured water, and if he has sufficient time at his disposal it is
necessary for him to perform ablutions and offer the prayers again.

**666.** If a person cannot get water after search and offers his
prayers with tayammum and understands after offering prayers that water
was available at the place where he had made search and the requisite
time is still there, he should perform ablutions and offer the prayers
again.

**667.** If a person believes that the time left for prayers is short
and offers his prayers with tayammum without making a search for water,
but understands after offering prayers and before the expiry of time
that he had time for making a search for water the obligatory precaution
is that he should offer that prayers again.

**668.** If a person is with ablutions when the time for prayers has set
in, and knows that if he nullifies his ablutions it will not be possible
for him to procure water or he will not be able to perform ablutions, he
should preserve his ablutions if possible, and should not nullify it.
However, he can have sexual intercourse with his wife even though he may
be knowing that it will not be possible for him to take bath.

**669.** If a person is with ablutions before the time for prayers sets
in, and knows that if he nullifies his ablutions, it will not be
possible for him to procure water, the recommended precaution is that if
he can preserve his ablutions, he should not nullify it.

**670.** If a person has water which is sufficient only for ablutions or
only for bath, and if he knows that if he throws it away he will not be
able to get more water it is unlawful for him to throw that water away
if the time for prayers has set in and the recommended precaution is
that he should not throw it away even before the time for prayers sets
in.

**671.** If a person, who knows that he cannot get water nullifies his
ablutions or throws away the water that he has with him after the time
for prayers sets in, he commits a sin but his prayers with tayammum is
in order although the recommended precaution is that he should also
offer the qaza (lapsed) of that prayers.

**672.** Second Condition: If a person is unable to procure water on
account of old age or weakness, or fear of a thief or a beast, or
because he does not possess means to draw water from a well, he should
perform tayammum. The same order would apply in case the trouble to
acquire water is usually considered to be unbearable. In the latter
case, however, if a person does not perform tayammum and performs
ablutions, his ablutions will be in order.

**673.** If bucket, string and other similar things are needed for
pulling water out of a well, and the person concerned is obliged to
purchase or hire them, he should procure them though their price may be
many times the usual rate. And the position is the same if water is sold
at many times its usual price. However, if the procurement of these
things entails so much expenditure that it is harmful for his condition
it is not obligatory for him to procure them.

**674.** If a person is obliged to take loan for procuring water he
should take loan. However, if he knows or thinks that it will not be
possible for him to repay the loan it is not obligatory for him to take
loan.

**675.** If digging a well does not involve much hardship the person
concerned should dig a well to procure water.

**676.** If a person gives water to another person without holding him
under obligation the latter should accept it.

**677.** Third Condition: If a person fears that if he uses water his
life will be in danger or he will suffer from some ailment or defect in
his body, or the ailment from which he is already suffering will become
acute or some complications will arise in its treatment, he should
perform tayammum. However, if warm water is not injurious to him, he
should perform ablutions with it, and also take bath in case in which
bathing is obligatory.

**678.** It is not necessary for resorting to tayammum that a person
should be certain that water is injurious to him. It is sufficient for
resorting to tayammum if there is a probability of the water being
injurious to him and this probability is justified in the eyes of the
people and he entertains fear on account of this probability.

**679.** If a person has sore eye and water is injurious,to him he
should perform tayammum.

**680.** If a person performs tayammum on account of certainty or fear
about water being injurious to him but realizes before offering prayers
that it is not injurious to him, his tayammum is void. And if he
realizes this after having offered the prayers again with ablutions or
bath if time for it is available. However,if the time for the prayers
has passed its qaza need not be performed.

**681.** If a person, who knows that water is injurious to him, takes
bath or performs ablutions, but understands later that water is harmful
to him, his ablutions and bath are in order if the harm is not to such
an extent that it may be unlawful to bear it.

**682.** Fourth Condition: If a person fears that if he uses water to
take bath, or to perform ablutions, he will be involved in hardship, he
should perform tayammum. Tayammum is permissible on this account in the
following three case: (i) In case he fears that if he uses the water for
bathing himself or performing ablutions he will be involved in an acute
thirst, which may result in his illness or death, or it will be very
hard for him to bear. (ii) In case he fears that in the event of his
bathing or performing ablutions the people whose care is obligatory for
him may become ill or die on account of thirst. (iii) In case he fears,
on account of lack of water, for others (whether human beings or
animals) besides himself, and their death, illness or restlessness is
hard for him to bear. In the absence of anyone or more of the three
conditions mentioned above it is not permissible to perform tayammum
when water is available.

**683.** If besides the pure water which a person has for ablutions or
bath he has also as much impure water as is required by him and his
people for drinking, he should preserve the pure water for drinking and
offer prayers after performing tayammum. However, if water is required
for an animal or a minor child he should give the impure water to them
and should use the pure water for ablutions or bath.

**684.** Fifth Condition: If the body or dress of a person is impure and
he possesses only as much water as is likely to be exhausted, if he
takes a bath or washes his dress, he should, take a bath or wash his
dress, and offer his prayers after performing tayammum. However, if he
does not possess anything with which to perform tayammum he should use
the water for bathing or for ablutions and offer his prayers with impure
body or dress.

**685.** Sixth Condition: If a person possesses unlawful water or
container (for example if these things have been usurped) he should
perform tayammum instead of bathing or ablutions.

**686.** Seventh Condition: When the time left for offering prayers is
so short that it a person bathes or performs ablutions he would be
obliged to offer the entire prayers or a part of it after the prescribed
time, he should perform tayammum.

**687.** If a person intentionally delays offering the prayers so much
that no time is left for bathing or performing ablutions he commits a
sin no doubt, but the prayers offered by him after performing tayammum
will be in order, although recommended precaution is that he should also
reoffer the prayers.

**688.** In case a person is doubtful whether time will be left for
prayers, in case he takes a bath or performs ablutions, he should
perform tayammum (and then offer prayers).

**689.** If a person performs tayammum owing to shortage of time and
does not perform ablutions after prayers in spite of his being able to
perform it, and in the meantime the water which he has goes out of his
hands, and in case his religious obligation be tayammum, he should
perform tayammum for the later prayers although his first tayammum may
not have been nullified.

**690.** If a person has water but because of shortage of time he begins
offering prayers with tayammum and while he is offering prayers the
water possessed by him goes out of his hands and if his religious
obligation a tayammum the obligatory precaution is that for the later
prayers he should perform tayammum again.

**691.** If a person has only so much time that he may perform ablutions
or take bath and offer prayers without its recommended acts. Rather, if
he does not have time even to recite the Surah (second Surah after Surah
al-Hamd in prayers) he should take bath or perform ablutions and should
offer the prayers without reciting the Surah.

Things On Which Tayammum May Be Performed
-----------------------------------------

**692.** Performance of tayammum on earth, sand, a lump of clay or a
stone is in order, but the recommended precaution is that if earth is
available tayammum should not be performed on anything else. In case
earth is not available it should be performed on sand or a lump of clay
and in the absence of that on a stone.

**693.** It is in order to perform tayammum on gypsum or limestone. On
the basis of obligatory precaution, however, tayammum should not be
performed, without proper excuse, on baked gypsum or lime or baked
bricks or mineral stones like agatestone ('Aqiq).

**694.** If it is not possible for a person to procure earth, sand, lump
or clay or stone, he should perform tayammum on the dust which may have
settled on a carpet or dress. And in case even dust is not available he
should perform tayommum on wet earth. And in both the cases the
obligatory precaution is that, if possible, he should also perform
tayammum on the things mentioned above (gypsum, lime, brick and mineral
stone). And if even dust and earth are not available he should perform
tayammum on anyone of the said things. And if none of these things is
available he should, on the basis of recommended precaution, offer
prayers without performing tayommum, and it is obligatory that he should
also reoffer the prayers.

**695.** If a person can procure clay by shaking carpet etc. performance
of tayammum by him on dust is void. And similarly if he can make mud dry
and procure clay from it performance of tayammum by him on wet mud is
void.

**696.** If a person, who does not have water, possesses snow or ice he
should, if possible, melt it into water and should perform. ablutions
and take bath with it. And if it is not possible to do so and he does
not also have anything on which performance of tayammum may be valid it
is necessary that he should offer (Qaza) prayers after its prescribed
time. And it is better that he should make the limbs of ablutions or
bath wet with the snow or ice. And if even this is not possible he
should perform tayammum on the snow or ice and should also offer prayers
in time.

**697.** If a thing like straw, on which tayammum is void, is mixed with
clay and sand tayammum cannot be performed on it. However, if that thing
is so meager that it may be reckoned to have become extinct in the fine
clay. tayammum on that clay and sand is valid.

**698.** If a person does not have anything on which to perform tayammum
he should, if possible, procure it by means of purchase etc.

**699.** Performing tayammum on an earthen wall is valid and the
recommended precaution is that if dry earth or clay is available
tayammum should not be performed on wet earth or clay.

**700.** The thing on which a person performs tayammum should be pure
and if he has no pure thing on which tayammum is in order, it is not
obligatory for him to offer prayers. He should, however, offer the
lapsed prayers and it is better that he should offer the same within the
prescribed time also.

**701.** If a person is certain that performing tayammum on a particular
thing is valid and performs tayammum on it but knows later that tayammum
performed on it was void he should reoffer the prayers.

**702.** The thing on which a person performs tayammum and the place on
which that thing is located should not have been usurped. Hence if he
performs tayammum on usurped clay or places a clay which is his own
property on the property of another person without obtaining his
permission and performs tayammum on it his tayammum will be void.

**703.** Tayammum performed in usurped space is void. Hence, if a person
strikes his hands on the earth in his own property and then enters the
property of another person without obtaining his permission and draws
his hands on his forehead his tayammum is void.

**704.** Tayammum on a usurped thing, or in usurped space, or on
something which is possessed by one, who has usurped it, if performed in
a state of forgetfulness or negligence, is in order. However, if a
person usurps something himself and forgets that he has usurped it and
performs tayammum on it or if he usurps a property and forgets that he
has usurped it, and places the thing on which he is performing tayammum
on that property, or performs tayammum in the space of that property,
the same orders apply to him which apply to a person who performs an act
intentionally.

**705.** If a person is imprisoned in a usurped place and both the water
and earth of that place are usurped he should offer prayers with
tayommum.

**706.** The thing on which a person is performing tayammum should if
possible, have, on the basis of precaution dust which should stick to
the hands, and after striking hands on it, he should shake them so that
the dust may fall off.

**707.** It is abominable to perform tayammum on the earth of a pit, or
a path or the saline earth on which a layer of salt has not settled. In
case, however, a layer of salt has settled on the earth, performance of
tayammum on it is void.

Method of Performing Tayammum In Lieu Of Bath Or Ablutions
----------------------------------------------------------

**708.** The following 4 things are obligatory regarding tayammum which
is performed in lieu of taking ceremonial bath or performing
ablutions:  
 (i) Intention

(ii) Striking both the palms on the object on which tayammum is valid.

(iii) Wiping or stroking with the palms of both the hands the entire
forehead and its two sides commencing from the spot where the hair of
one's head grow up to the eyebrows and above the nose and as a
precautionary measure the hands should also stroke the eyebrows.

(iv) The palm of the left hand should be wiped on the entire back of the
right hand and thereafter the palm of the right hand should wipe the
entire back of the left hand.

**709.** The recommended precaution is that tayammum whether it is in
lieu of bath or ablutions should be performed in the following order:
First, we should strike the hands on the earth and wipe the forehead and
the back of the hands and then we should strike the hands on earth once
again and wipe the back of the hands.

Orders Regarding Tayammum
-------------------------

**710.** If a person does not wipe even a small part of his forehead or
the back of his hands his tayammum is void notwithstanding the fact that
he does not wipe intentionally or does not know the rule or has
forgotten the rule. However, scrutiny is also not necessary and it is
sufficient if it can be said that the forehead and the back of the hands
have been wiped.

**711.** In order to be sure that the prescribed part has been wiped,
wiping should be done from slightly above the wrist, but wiping in
between the fingers is not necessary.

**712.** On the basis of precaution the forehead and the back of the
hands should be wiped downwards from above and their acts should be
performed consecutively. And if a person allows so much gap between them
that it may not be said that he is performed tayammum, his tayammum is
void.

**713.** At the time of making intention the person concerned should
specify whether his tayammum is instead of ablutions or instead of bath.
And if it is obligatory for him to perform one tayammum and he intends
to discharge his actual religious obligation his tayammum is in order,
even though he may have erred in determining it.

**714.** On the basis of recommended precaution the forehead, the palm
of the hands and the back of the hands of the person concerned should,
as far as possible, be pure.

**715.** While performing tayammum one should remove the ring one is
wearing and also remove any obstruction which may be present on his
forehead or on the palms or back of his hands (for example, if anything
is stuck on them).

**716.** In case a person has a wound on his forehead or on the back of
his hands and it is bandaged with a cloth or something else which cannot
be removed, he should wipe his hands on it. And in case the palm of his
hand is wounded and, therefore, bandaged with a cloth or something else
which cannot be removed, he should strike his hand along with the
bandage on a thing with which it is permissible to perform tayammum and
then wipe his forehead and the back of his hands.

**717.** There is no harm if there is hair on the forehead or on the
back of hands of a man. However, if the hair of his head fall on his
face the same should be pushed back.

**718.** If it is probable that a person has some hindrance on his
forehead or on the palm or back of his hands and this probability is
valid in the eyes of the people, he should verify the position so as to
become sure and be satisfied that there is no such hindrance.

**719.** If the obligation of a person is tayammum and he cannot perform
tayammum himself he should engage a deputy. And the one we becomes his
deputy should make him perform tayammum with his own hands. However, if
this is not possible the deputy should strike his hands on a thing on
which it is lawful to perform tayammum and then draw it on that person's
forehead and hands.

**720.** If a man doubts while performing tayammum whether or not he has
forgotten a part of it, and if he has passed that stage, he should not
pay attention to his doubt, and if that stage has not yet passed, he
should perform that part.

**721.** If after wiping the left hand a man doubts whether or not he
has performed his tayammum correctly when it is probable that at the
time of performing tayammum he was mindful (to perform tayammum
properly) his tayammum is valid, and his doubt is about the wiping of
the left hand, it is necessary for him to wipe it except when he has
done something which needs purity, or when continuity has been broken.

**722.** A person whose obligation is tayammum cannot perform it for
prayers unless the time for prayers sets in. However, if he performs
tayammum for some other obligatory or recommended act and his excuse (on
account of which his religious obligation is tayammum) continues till
the time for prayers sets in, he can offer his prayers with that
tayammum.

**723.** If a person whose legal obligations is tayammum knows that his
excuse will continue till the end of the time prescribed for prayers, he
can offer prayers with tayammum during the early part of the time.
However, if he knows that his excuse will cease to exist by the end of
the time he should wait and offer prayers with ablutions or bath as the
case may be. Furthermore, if he hopes that his excuse will be removed
the obligatory precaution is that he should wait and offer prayers with
ablutions or bath or should offer it with tayammum if too little time is
left.

**724.** If a person, who cannot perform ablutions or take bath, is
sure, or considers it probable, that his excuse will not be removed, he
can offer the qaza of his past lapsed prayers with tayammum. However, if
his excuse if removed afterwards he should offer those prayers again
with ablutions or bath.

**725.** It is permissible for a person, who cannot take a ceremonial
bath, or perform ablutions, to offer with tayammum the daily recommended
prayers for which the time is fixed. However, if there is a probability
that his excuse will cease to exist before the time for prayers is over
(and he will be able to perform prayers after bathing or performing
ablutions) it is better that he should not offer the daily recommended
prayers during the earlier part of that time.

**726.** If a person who takes jabira bath and performs tayammum as a
measure of precaution, and offers prayers after hath and tayammum and
after the prayers a minor hadath takes place with him e.g. if he
urinates, he should, as a measure of precaution, perform tayammum
instead of bath for the later prayers and should also perform ablutions.
And if the hadath takes place before the prayers, he should perform
ablutions and tayammum for that prayers as well.

**727.** If a person performs tayammum on account of nonavailability of
water or because of some other excuse his tayammum becomes void when
that excuse ceases to exist.

**728.** The things which nullify ablutions also nullify the tayammum
performed instead of ablutions, and the things which nullify bath also
nullify the tayammum performed instead of bath.

**729.** If some obligatory baths are to be performed by a person but he
cannot take bath, it is permissible for him to perform one tayammum
instead of all those baths, and the recommended precaution is that for
each of those baths he should perform one tayammum.

**730.** If a person who cannot take bath wishes to perform an act for
which bathing is obligatory he should perform tayammum. And in case a
person who cannot perform ablutions wishes to perform an act for which
ablutions is obligatory he, too, should perform tayammum instead of
ablutions.

**731.** If a person performs tayammum in lieu of bath for ceremonial
uncleanness (Janabat) it is not necessary for him to perform ablutions
for offering prayers. However, if he performs tayammum in lieu of other
baths that tayammum does not suffice for ablutions and if he is unable
to perform ablutions he should perform another tayammum in lieu of
ablutions.

**732.** If a person performs tayammum instead of bath for ceremonial
uncleanness and later something happens to him which makes ablutions
void and if he cannot take bath for later prayers he should perform
tayammum instead of bath and the recommended precaution is that he
should also perform ablutions.

**733.** If a person should perform tayammum instead of ablutions or
instead of bath to fulfil, for example, an act like offering prayers and
if in the first tayammum he makes an intention to perform it instead of
ablutions, or an intention to perform it instead of bath, and performs
the second tayammum with the intention of carrying out his religious
obligation it is sufficient.

**734.** If a person whose obligation is tayammum performs tayammum for
some acts he can fulfil those acts which should be done with ablutions
or bath so long as his tayammum and excuse continue. However, if his
excuse was shortage of time or if he performed tayammum for offering
prayers for a dead body or to go to sleep in spite of the fact that
water was available with him he can perform only those acts for which he
performed tayammum.

**735.** In some cases it is better that a person should reoffer the
prayers which he has offered with tayammum; for instance:

(i) When he was afraid of harm caused by using water and made himself
ceremonially unclean intentionally and offered prayers with tayammum.

(ii) When he knew or thought that he would not be able to procure water
and made himself ceremonially unclean intentionally and offered prayers
with tayammum.

(iii) When he did not go in search of water intentionally till the time
for prayer became short and he offered the prayer with Tayammum and knew
later that if he had made a search for water he would have been able to
procure it.

(iv) When he delayed offering prayer intentionally and offered it with
tayammum when its time was coming to an end.

(v) When he threw away water intentionally although he knew or thought
that he would not be able to get water, and offered the prayers with
tayammum.


