Prayers
=======

Out of the religious acts prayers is of the most paramount importance.
If it is accepted by the almighty Allah other acts of worship will also
be accepted. However, if prayers are not acceptable other good acts will
also not be accepted. Offering of prayers five times during day and
night purifies us of sins in the same manner in which bathing five times
during day and night makes cur body clean of all filth and dirt.

It is better that one should offer prayers punctually. A person who
considers prayers to be something ordinary and unimportant is just like
one who does not offer prayers. The holy Prophet has said that a person
who does not attach any importance to prayers and considers it to be
something insignificant deserves to be tortured in the Hereafter.

One day, while the holy Prophet was present in the masjid (i.e. Masjidun
Nabi), a man entered the masjid and began offering prayers but did not
perform the bowing and prostrations properly. Therefore, the holy
Prophet said: "If this man dies and his prayers is offered in the same
way, he will not die on my religion".

Hence, one should not offer one's prayers hurriedly. While offering
prayers we should remember Allah constantly and should offer the prayers
humbly and with all solemnity. We should keep in mind the Greatness of
the almighty Allah with whom we converse while offering prayers and
should consider ourselves to be very humble and insignificant before His
Grandeur and Glory. And if a person keeps himself absorbed in these
thoughts while performing prayers he becomes unmindful and oblivious of
his own self. For example, an arrow was pulled out of the foot of the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (peace be on him) while he was
offering prayers but he did not become aware of it.

Furthermore, one who performs prayers should repent of one's
shortcomings and should refrain from all sins and especially those which
are an impediment in the way of acceptance of one's prayers (e.g. envy,
pride, backbiting, using unlawful things, drinking intoxicating
beverages, non-payment of religious taxes (Khums and Zakat etc.).
Similarly it is better not to perform acts which diminish the spiritual
recompense of prayers (e.g. we should not begin offering prayers while
we are drowsy or are controlling our urine, and while offering prayers
we should not also look up towards the sky). On the contrary one should
perform the acts which increase the spiritual recompense (e.g. we should
wear a ring containing agate (Aqiq) and also wear clean dress, comb our
hair, brush our teeth and apply perfume).

Obligatory Prayers
------------------

The following six prayers are obligatory: (i) Daily prayers. (ii) Signs
prayers. (iii) Prayers for a dead body. (iv) Prayers for the obligatory
Tawaf of the holy Ka'bah. (v) Lapsed prayers of father which are
obligatory upon his eldest son. (vi) Prayers which become obligatory on
account of hire, vow or oath.

Obligatory Daily Prayers
------------------------

It is obligatory to perform the following five prayers during day and
night: Midday (Zuhr) and afternoon prayers ('Asr) - each one consisting
of 4 units (Rak'at). Dusk prayers (maghrib) - 3 units. Night prayers
(Isha) - 4 units. Dawn prayers (Fajr) - 2 units.

**736.** While travelling the traveller should reduce the prayers of 4
units to 2 units. The conditions under which the units are shortened
will be mentioned later.

Prescribed Time For Midday And Afternoon Prayers
------------------------------------------------

**737.** If a stick or anything similar to it, which is called indicator
(Shakhis) is inserted in a levelled ground its shadow will fall towards
west when the sun rises in the morning and as the sun continues to rise
the shadow of the indicator decreases. And in our cities it becomes
smallest at the time of the commencement of miday. And when midday
passes the shadow of the indicator turns towards east and as the sun
moves towards west the shadow goes on increasing. Hence when the shadow
reaches the last stage of shortness and begins increasing again it is
known that midday has taken place. However, in some cities e.g. in Mecca
the shadow becomes extinct sometimes and when it reappears it becomes
known that it is midday.

**738.** The time prescribed for midday and afternoon prayers is from
the declining of the sun till sunset. However, if a person intentionally
offers afternoon prayers earlier than midday prayers his prayers is void
except when sufficient time is not left for more than one prayer. In
that event if a person has not offered midday prayers it becomes qaza
and he should offer afternoon prayers. And if before that time a person
offers complete afternoon prayers before midday prayers by mistake his
prayers is valid. And it is better that he should treat that prayers to
he midday prayers and should offer 4 more units of prayers with the
intention of nearness to Allah (Mafis zima Qurbatan ilial lah).

Legal miday means passing away of half the day. For example if the day
consists of 12 hours it will be legal midday when 6 hours pass away
after sunrise. And if the day consists of 13 hours legal midday will be
6h hours after sunrise. And if the day consists of 11 hours legal midday
will be 5h hours after sunrise. And the legal midday, which consists of
the middle of sunrise and sunset, is on certain occasions in a year a
few minutes more than 12 O'clock and any other occasions less than 12
O'clock by a watch.

**739.** If a person begins offering afternoon prayers in advertently
before midday prayers and during the prayers he realizes that he has
committed a mistake he should turn his intention towards midday prayers
i.e. he should make intention that what he has offered already and in
what he is engaged and what he is going to offer thereafter is entirely
midday prayers and after completing the prayers he should offer
afternoon prayers.

Friday Prayers
--------------

**740.** Friday prayers consist of 2 units like dawn prayers. The
difference between these two prayers is, however, that two sermons are
also to be delivered before Friday prayers. The offering of midday
prayers is an optional obligation. It means that we have the option to
offer Friday prayers, if the necessary conditions for the performance of
the same are present, or to perform midday (Zuhr) prayers. Hence, if
Friday prayers are offered they suffice for midday prayers (viz. it is
not then necessary to offer midday prayers).

The following conditions must be fulfilled for Friday prayers becoming
obligatory

(i) The time for Friday prayers (which commences with the decline of the
sun) should set in. And the apparent position is that it continues till
the shade of the indicator becomes equal to it. For this purpose an
indicator is used (a stick is usually stuck in the ground). Hence if
offering of Friday prayers is delayed till the shade of indicator equals
its length the time prescribed for it expires one should offer midday
prayers.

(ii) The number of persons (including the imam) who intend offering
Friday prayers should be at least seven. Hence, unless at least seven
Muslims come together, offering of Friday prayers does not become
obligatory. However, performance of Friday prayers by five persons
including the Imam is in order.

(iii) The Imam should fulfil the necessary conditions for leading the
prayers. These conditions include righteousness ('Adalat) and some other
attributes which are required of an Imam and which will be mentioned in
connection with the congregational prayers. Friday prayers does not
become obligatory unless an Imam possessing necessary qualifications is
available.

The following conditions should be fulfilled for the Friday prayers
becoming valid:

(i) The prayers should be offered in congregation. Hence, it is not in
order to offer Friday prayers individually. If a follower (Muqtadi)
joins Friday prayers before the bowing (Ruku') of the second unit
(Rakat) his prayers will be in order and he will have to perform another
unit. However, if he joins the Imam in the bowing of the second unit it
is difficult to say that his prayers could be valid and precaution
cannot be abandoned in such a case (i.e. he should offer midday
prayers).

(ii) Two sermons should be delivered before the prayers are offered. In
the first sermon the preacher should praise Allah and impress upon the
people to observe piety, and should also recite a chapter (Surah) of the
holy Qur'an. Thereafter he should sit down for a while and then stand up
again. This time also he should praise Allah and invoke peace and
blessings upon the holy Prophet and the holy Imams and seek forgiveness
for the believers.

It is also necessary that the two sermons should be delivered before
offering prayers. It will not, therefore, be in order to offer the
prayers before the two sermons are delivered. Furthermore, it is not
permissible to deliver the sermons before the sun declines. It is also
necessary that the preacher should be standing when he delivers the
sermons.

Hence, if he delivers these sermons while sitting, it will not be in
order. It is also necessary and obligatory that there should be a break
between the two sermons and the preacher should sit down during the
interval for a while. It is also necessary that the preacher who
delivers the sermons should also lead the prayers.

And the more apparent position is that purity (Taharat) is not a
condition for delivering the sermons although as a precautionary measure
it should be one of its conditions. The sermons should be delivered in
Arabic to the extent which is obligatory but it is not necessary to do
so beyond that, unless those present do not know Arabic in which case it
is better to combine Arabic and the language of the audience, especially
while impressing piety upon them.

(iii) The distance between the two places where Friday prayers are
offered should not be less than one league (3 miles). Hence if the
distance between the two places is less than a league and both the
prayers commence at one and the same time both will be void. And if one
of those prayers precedes the other (even to the extent of
Takbiratul-ehram i.e. the first Takbir) the one which precedes will be
in order and the other will be void.

In case, however, it transpires after the Friday prayers have been
offered that similar congregational prayers were commenced earlier or
simultaneously at a distance of less than a league it will not be
obligatory to offer midday prayers and it is immaterial whether
information about it is received within the time prescribed for midday
prayers or thereafter. Furthermore, establishing Friday prayers within
the said distance hinders the holding of another prayers when the first
one is itself valid and fulfills all the necessary conditions. Otherwise
it is difficult to say that it hinders the other prayers and it is more
probable that it does not hinder.

**741.** When Friday prayers which satisfies the necessary conditions is
going to be offered it is obligatory, on the basis of precaution, to be
present in it, and certain things are prerequisites for presence in it
being obligatory; such as:

(i) The person concerned should be a man. Presence in Friday prayers is
not obligatory for women.

(ii) Freedom. Hence it is not obligatory for the salves to be present in
Friday prayers.

(iii) Being present. Hence Friday prayers is not obligatory for a
traveller. And it makes no difference whether the legal obligation of
the traveller is shortened prayers or complete prayers as in the case of
a traveller who intends to stay for 10 days or more.

(iv) Being free from ailment and blindness. Hence it is not obligatory
for a sick or a blind man to offer Friday prayers.

(v) Not being old. Hence Friday prayers is not obligatory for old men.

(vi) That the distance between the place where the person concerned is
and the place where Friday prayers is going to be offered should not be
more than 2 farsakh (11 Km) and it is obligatory for a person who is at
the end to 2 farsakh to be present in the prayers. And similarly
participation in Friday prayers is not obligatory for a person for whom
it is difficult to participate in the prayers. Rather it is not unlikely
that it may not be obligatory to be present in Friday prayers if it is
raining although one's presence may not involve any inconvenience or
hardship.

**742.** A few orders which relate to Friday prayers areas follows:

(i) It is permissible for a person, who is excused from offering Friday
prayers, and whose presence in this prayers is not obligatory, to make
haste to offer midday prayers in the early part of the time prescribed
for it.

(ii) If Friday prayers fulfilling all the necessary conditions is
offered in the town of a person it is not permissible for him, on the
basis of precaution, to undertake a journey after the declining of the
sun.

(iii) It is not permissible to talk while the Imam is busy delivering
the sermon.

(iv) On the basis of precaution it is obligatory to listen to the two
sermons carefully. However, listening to the sermons carefully is not
obligatory for those persons, who do not understand their meanings.

(v) The second Azan (call for prayers) on Friday is an innovation. And
it is the same Azan which is usually called the third Azan.

(vi) What is apparent is that it is not obligatory for a person to be
present while the Imam is delivering the sermon.

(vii) Purchase and sale at the time when people are called to Friday
prayers is unlawful if it is creating hindrance in the prayers, but
otherwise it is not unlawful. And apparently in the case of its being
unlawful, the transaction does not become void.

(viii) When it is obligatory for a person to be present in Friday
prayers and he abandons it, and offers midday (Zuhr) prayers apparently
his prayers is in order.

Time For Dusk And Night Prayers
-------------------------------

**743.** The obligatory precaution is that so long as the redness in the
east, which appears after sunset, does not pass away from over our head
we should not offer dusk (Maghrib) prayers.

**744.** The prescribed time for dusk and night prayers is till
midnight. In case, however, night (Isha) prayers is offered
intentionally before dusk prayers the same would be void, unless no time
is left for it, and there is only time for night prayers, which should
then be offered before dusk prayers.

**745.** If a person offers night prayers before dusk prayers through
misunderstanding and takes notice of this after offering prayers, his
prayers is in order, and he should offer dusk prayers after it.

**746.** If a person begins offering night prayers by mistake before
dusk prayers and realizes while offering prayers that he has committed a
mistake and if he has not yet started bowing of the 4th unit he should
turn his intention to dusk prayers and complete that prayers and then
offer night prayers. However, if he has commenced bowing of the 4th unit
he should abandon that prayers and offer night prayers after offering
dusk prayers.

**747.** The end of the time for night prayers is midnight and the night
is from sunset to sunrise.

\*Hence upto twelve hours from the legal midday is the last time for
dusk and night prayers.

**748.** If a person does not offer dusk or night prayers till midnight,
either because he commits a sin by not offering them, or owing to some
excuse, he should, on the basis of obligatory precaution, offer the
prayers in question before the call to Dawn Prayers, without making an
intention of offering the two prayers in time or as lapsed ones.

Time For Dawn Prayers
---------------------

**749.** Near about the call for dawn prayers a whiteness rises from the
east, it is called the first dawn (Fajr). When this whiteness spreads,
it is called the second dawn, this the time for dawn prayers commences.
This time ends with sunrise.

Orders Regarding Time For Prayers
---------------------------------

**750.** A person can start offering prayers when he becomes certain
that its time has set in or two just ('Adil) persons give information
about the time having set in. Rather one can also content himself with
the Azan of a person, who recognizes the time and is reliable, or with
his giving information to the effect that the time has set in.

**751.** If a person cannot become sure about the time for prayers
having set in, on account of clouds or dust, and if he is inclined to
believe that the time has set he can commence offering prayers. However,
if there are things which prevent a person from recognizing the time
(e.g. blindness or being in a prison) the obligatory precaution is that
he should delay offer ing the prayers till he becomes certain or is
satisfied that the time for prayers has set in.

**752.** If a person is satisfied on the basis of any one of the methods
mentioned above that the time for prayers has set in and be begins
offering prayers, but realizes during the performance of the prayers
that the time has not yet set in, his prayers is void. And same is the
position if he realizes after offering prayers that he has offered the
entire prayers before time. And if he realizes while offering prayers
that the time for it has set in, or realizes after prayers that the time
for it had set in, while he was offering the prayers, he should, on the
basis of precaution, offer that prayers again.

**753.** If a person is not mindful of the fact that he should commence
offering prayers after he is certain that the time for it has set in,
and if he realizes after the prayers that he has offered the entire
prayers in time his prayers is in order. And if he realizes that he has
offered his prayers before time or does not realize whether he has
offered the prayers within time or before time his prayers is void. In
fact if he realizes after offering prayers that the time for prayers had
set in when he was offering the same, he should offer that prayers
again.

**754.** If a person is certain that the time for prayers has set in,
and begins offering prayers and doubts while offering prayers whether or
not the time for it has set in, his prayers is void. However, if he is
certain while offering prayers that the time for it has set in, and
doubts whether or not what he has performed, while offering the prayers,
has been in time or not, his prayers is valid.

**755.** If the time for offering prayers is so short that if we perform
some recommended acts of the prayers a part of the prayers will be
performed after the prescribed time we should not perform those
recommended acts. For example, if on account of reciting qunut[^1] a
part of the prayers is offered after the prescribed time we should do
without qunut.

**756.** If the time at the disposal of a person is sufficient for
performing one unit of prayers he should offer the prayers with the
intention of offering the same in time. However, one shod not delay
offering prayers intentionally.

**757.** If a person who is not a traveller has at his disposal time for
offering five units of prayers till sunset he should offer both midday
and afternoon prayers. And if he has less time than that he should offer
only afternoon prayers, and H thereafter he should offer qaza of midday
prayers. And similarly if he has time upto midnight sufficient for
offering five units he should offer dusk and night prayers and if he has
less time than that he should offer only night prayers and then offer
dusk prayers.

**758.** If a person who is a traveller has time at his disposal till
sunset sufficient for offering three units of prayers he should offer
midday and afternoon prayers and if he has lesser time than that he
should offer only afternoon prayers and then offer qaza of midday
prayers. And if he has time enough for offering 4 units of prayers till
midnight he should offer dusk and night prayers and if he has less time
he should offer night prayers and then offer dusk prayers. And in case
he learns after offering night prayers that he has still time at his
disposal till midnight during which one or more unit of prayers can be
offered he should immediately offer dusk prayers with the intention of
offering it within the prescribed time.

**759.** It is recommended that a person should offer prayers in the
early part of the time prescribed for it, and great stress has been laid
on it, and the nearer the prayers is to the early part of the prescribed
time the better it is, except that it may be better to delay it for some
reason e.g. he may wait so that he may offer the prayers with
congregation.

**760.** If a person has an excuse on account of which he is obliged to
offer prayers with tayammum and he wishes to offer the same in the early
part of the time and he knows that his excuse will continue to exist
till the end of the prescribed time, he can offer prayers in the early
part of the time, but if it is probable that his excuse will be removed
earlier, he should wait till his excuse is removed and if his excuse is
not removed he should offer prayers in the last part of the time. And it
is not necessary that he should wait so much that he may be able to
perform only the obligatory acts of the prayers. On the other hand if he
has time for the recommended acts of prayers like Azan, Aqamah and qunut
as well, he can perform tayammum and offer prayers along with these
recommended acts. And in the case of other excuses which do not occasion
tayammum if it is probable that his excuse will continue to exist it is
permissible for him to offer prayers in the early part of the prescribed
time. And if in the meantime his excuse is removed it is necessary for
him to offer the prayers again.

**761.** If a person doe not know the rule about prayers, e.g. rules
regarding "doubts" and "errors" etc. and it is probable that one of such
problems will arise during his prayers he should postpone the prayers
from the early part of the prescribed time in order to learn the
relevant rules. However, if he is satisfied that be can offer prayers
correctly he can engage himself in prayers during the early part of the
prescribed time. Hence, if no such problem arises during the prayers and
the relevant order are not known to him, his prayers is in order. And if
a problem arises and the orders relating to it are not known to him, it
is permissible for him to act on one of the two probabilities and
complete the prayers. However, after offering the prayers he should
enquire about the problem so that if his prayers has been void he should
offer it again and if it has been valid, he need not repeat it.

**762.** If there is ample time for offering prayers for a person and
his creditor demands repayment of his loan from him, he should repay the
loan first, if possible, and then offer prayers. And the position is the
same if there crops up another obligatory matter which must be attended
to, immediately, for example, if a man sees that the Masjid is impure he
should purify the Masjid first and then offer prayers. And in both the
case if he offers his prayers first he commits a sin but his prayers is
in order.

The Prayers Which Should Be A Performed In Sequence
---------------------------------------------------

**763.** One should offer afternoon prayers after the midday prayers,
and the night prayers after the dusk prayers. If one intentionally
offers afternoon prayers before midday prayers or offers dusk prayers
after night prayers one's prayers would be void.

**764.** If a person engages himself in prayers with the intention of
the midday prayers and during the prayers he recollects that he has
already offered the midday prayers he cannot turn the intention to the
afternoon prayers. On the other hand he should break the prayers and
offer the afternoon prayers. And the same rule applies to the dusk and
the night prayers.

**765.** If a person becomes sure while offering the afternoon prayers
that he has not offered the midday prayers and turns his intention to
the midday prayers, and if he recollects later that he has already
offered the midday prayers, he should turn on prayers and complete the
prayers.

**766.** If, while offering the afternoon prayers, a man doubts whether
or not he has offered the midday prayers, he should turn his intention
to the midday prayers. However, if the time is so short that after his
completing the prayers the sun would set, and sufficient time will not
be left for offering even one unit, he should complete the prayers with
the intention of afternoon prayers.

**767.** If while offering the night prayers a man doubts before the
bowing of fourth unit whether or not he has offered dusk prayers, and if
the time is so short that after the completion of the prayers it will be
midnight and time will not be left even for offering one unit of
prayers, he should complete the prayers with the intention of night
prayers. In case, however, he has more time than this, he sbould tum his
intention to dusk prayers and complete the prayers with 3 units, and
then offer the night prayers.

**768.** If while offering night prayers a person doubts after reaching
the bowing of the 4th unit whether or not he has offered dusk prayers
and if the time is short he should complete the night prayers and if the
time is sufficient for offering 5 units he should break the prayers and
offer the dusk and the night prayers.

**769.** If a person who has offered a prayers offers it again as a
measure of precaution and while offering that prayers he recollects that
he has not offered prayers which he should have offered earlier than
that, he cannot tum his intention to that prayers. For example, when he
is offering the afternoon prayers aa a measure of precaution he
recollects that he has not offered the midday prayers he cannot turn his
intention to the midday prayers.

**770.** It is not permissible to turn one's intention from qaza to the
prayers which is offered within the prescribed time and from a
recommended prayers to an obligatory prayers.

**771.** If a person has sufficient time at his disposal to offer
prayers within the prescribed time he can, while offering the prayers,
turn his intention to qaza prayers. However, it is necessary that it
should be possible to turn the intention to qaza prayers. For example,
if he is offering midday prayers he can turn his intention to dawn
prayers only when he has not entered the bowing of the third unit.

Recommended Prayers
-------------------

**772.** There are many recommended prayers (Nafila), but more stress
has been laid on the daily recommended prayers. The number of the units
of these prayers everyday other than Friday is 34. It is as follows 8
units for midday prayers, 8 units for afternoon prayers, 4 units for
dusk prayers, 8 units for night prayers, 11 units for midnight prayers
and 2 units for dawn prayers.

In accordance with obligatory precaution the night ('Isha) recommended
prayers should be offered in the sitting posture. Its 2 units are,
therefore, treated to be equal to one only. But on Friday 4 units are
added to the 16 units of the midday and the afternoon prayers, and it is
better that all these 20 units are offered before the sun declines.

**773.** Out of the 11 units of the midnight nafila 8 units should be
offered with the intention of the midnight nafila, 2 units with the
intention of Shaf'a prayers, and 1 unit with the intention of witr
prayers. Complete instructions regarding the midnight nafila are given
in the books of prayers.

**774.** Nafila prayers can be offered in the sitting posture. However,
it is better that 2 units of nafila prayers offered in the sitting
posture are reckoned to be equal to 1 unit. For example, if a person
wishes to offer midday nafila which consists of 8 units, in a sitting
posture, it is better that he should offer 16 units. And if he wishes to
offer witr prayers while sitting he should offer two prayers of 1 unit
each in the sitting posture.

**775.** Midday nafila and afternoon nafila should not be offered when
one is travelling and there is no harm in offering night nafila with the
intention of rija

The Timings of Daily Nafila Prayers
-----------------------------------

**776.** The midday nafi'la is offered before offering the midday
prayers. Its preferable time is from the commencement of the time of the
midday prayers up to the time when the shadow of indicator equals 2/7th
of its length. For example if the indicator is 7 yards long and the
shadow which appears after midday becomes 2 yards long, it is the last
moment for the offering of afternoon nafila.

**777.** The afternoon nafila are offered before afternoon prayers and
its preferable time is till the moment when the shadow of the indicator
which appears after midday reaches the stage of 4/7th of its length. In
case a person wishes to offer midday and afternoon nafila after the
prescribed time he should offer the midday nafila after midday prayers
and the afternoon nafila after afternoon prayers and should not, on the
basis of ohligatory precaution, make an intention of offering the nafila
or its lapsed ones.

**778.** The preferable time for dusk recommended prayers is from the
completion of dusk prayers till the disappearance of the redness which
appears in the sky in the west after sunset.

**779.** The time for night nafila is from the completion of night
prayers till midnight. It is, however, better to offer it immediately
after night prayers.

**780.** The dawn nafi'la is offered before the dawn prayers and its
preferable time is from the "first dawn" till the appearance of redness
in the east. The signs of the "first dawn" have already been stated
earlier. It is also permissible to offer it imniediately after the
midnight nafila (Tahajjud).

**781.** The time for midnight nafila is from midnight till the call for
dawn prayers and it is better to offer it near about the time for call
to dawn prayers.

**782.** A traveller and a person for whom it is difficult to offer
midnight nafila after midnight can offer it before midnight as well.

Ghufayla Prayers
----------------

**783.** Ghufayla prayers is one of the well-known recommended prayers
which is offerred between "dusk" and "night" prayers and on the basis of
precaution the time for its offering is before the disappearance of
redness from the west after sunset.

In its first unit after Surah al-Hamd instead of any other surah the
following verses should be recited: Wa zannuni iz zahaba mughaziban
fazanna an lan naqdira 'alayhi fanada fiz zulumati an la ilaha illa anta
subhanaka inni Kuntu minazzalimin fastajabna lahu wa najjaynahu minal
ghammi wa kazalika nunjil mu'minin. And in the second unit after Surah
al-Hamd instead of other surah the following verse should be recited:
Wa'indahu mafatihul ghaybi la ya'lamuha illa huwa wa ya'lamu ma fil
barri wal bahri wa ma tasqutu min waraqatin illa ya'lamuha wa la
habbatin fi zulumatil arz wa la ratbin wa la yabisin illa fi Kitabim
mubin. And in qunut the following supplication should be recited: Alla
humma inni as aluka bi mafatihil ghaybil lati la ya'lamuha illa anta an
tusalliya 'ala Muhammadin wa Ali Muhammad wa an tafal bi . . . . . (here
one's needs should be mentioned).

Thereafter the following supplication should be made: Alla humma anta
waliyyu nimati wal qadiru'ala talabati ta'lamu hajati fa as alukla
bihaqqi Muhammadin wa Ali Muhammadin alayhi wa'alay hiMussalamu lamma
qazaytaha li.

Orders Regarding Qibla
----------------------

**784.** Our Qibla is tbe holy Ka'bah which is situated in Makkah and
one should offer one's prayers facing it. However, if a person is away
from it and stands in such a manner that people say that he is offering
his prayers facing the Qibla, it is sufficient. This also applies to
other acts which should be performed facing the Qibla (e.g. while
slaughtering an animal etc.).

**785.** If a person is offering obligatory prayers while standing, his
face, chest and belly should be facing the Qibla and the recommended
precaution is that the fingers of his feet should also be facing Qibla.

**786.** If a person offers prayers in the sitting posture it is
necessary that at the time of his offering prayers his face, chest and
belly are facing the Qibla.

**787.** If a person cannot offer prayers in the sitting posture he
should, while offering prayers, lie on the right hand side in such a
manner that the front part of his body should face the Qibla. And if
this is not possible he should lie on the right hand side in such a
manner that the front part of his body should face the Qibla. And if
even this is not possible he should lie on his back in such a manner
that the soles of his feet should face the Qibla.

**788.** Precautionary prayers and forgotten prostration (Sajdatus sahu)
and forgotten tashahud should be offered facing the Qibla and on the
basis of recommended precaution forgotten prostration should also be
offered facing the Qibla.

**789.** A recommended prayers can be offered while one is walking or
riding and if a person offers recommended prayers in these two
conditions it is not necessary that he should be facing the Qibla

**790.** A person who wishes to offer prayers should make efforts to
locate the direction of the Qibla so that he may become certain about
the direction of the Qibla or acquire such information as may amount to
certainty. In case, however, he is not in a position to do so he should
form an idea about it from the arch (Mahrab) of the Masjid or from the
graves of the Muslims or by other ways and means and act accordingly. So
much so that it is sufficient if he forms an idea about it in the light
of the statement of a sinner (Fasiq) or an unbeliever (Kafir) who is
aware of the direction of the Qibia on the basis of scientific rules.

**791.** If a person, who has formed his own opinion about Qibla and can
acquire stronger opinion about it he cannot act on his own opinion. For
example, if a guest forms an opinion about the direction of the Qibla on
the statement of the owner of the house, but can acquire a stronger
opinion by some other means he should not act on his host's words.

**792.** If a person does not possess any means to locate the direction
of Qibia, or in spite of his efforts he cannot form an idea about it, it
is sufficient for him to offer his prayers facing any side. And the
recommended precaution is that if he has sufficient time at his disposal
he should offer the same prayers 4 times, facing every one of the four
directions once.

**793.** If a person is sure or thinks that Qibla is in one of the two
sides he should offer prayers facing both the sides.

**794.** If a person wishes to offer prayers facing a few sides and
wants to offer two prayers like midday prayers and afternoon prayers,
which should be offered one after the other, the recommended precaution
is that he should offer the first prayers facing those few sides and
then commence the second prayers.

**795.** If a person who is not certain about the direction of Qibla
wishes to do something other than prayers which should be done facing
the Qibla (e.g. if he wishes to slaughter an animal) he should act
according to the opinion formed by him about the direction of Qibla and
if he fails to form any opinion about it he may perfonn the act facing
any direction.

Prayers' Dress
--------------

**796.** While offering prayers a man should cover his private parts
even if no one is observing him and it is better that he should cover
his body from his navel up to his knees.

**797.** A woman should cover her entire body while offering prayers and
she should cover even her head and hair. And the recommended precaution
is that she should also cover the soles of her feet. It is not necessary
for her to cover that part of her face which is washed while performing
ablutions or the hands up to the wrists or the visible part of the feet
up to the ankles. Nevertheless, in order to ensure that she has covered
that part of her body which is obligatory for her to cover she should
also cover a part of the sides of her face as well as a part of her
wrists and some portion of her feet below the ankles.

**798.** When a person offers the forgotten lapsed prostration or
tashahhud he should cover himself in the same manner in which he has to
cover himself for prayers and the recommended pre- caution is that he
should also cover himself at the time of offering sajdahtus sakv.

**799.** If while offering prayers a person does not cover his private
parts intentionally or on account of not knowing the rule and thus
commits fault, his prayers is void.

**800.** If a person realizes while offering prayers that his private
parts are visible what is more apparent is that his prayers is void.
However, if he realizes after offering prayers that during the prayers
his private parts were visible his prayers is valid. And the position is
the same if he realizes while offering prayers that earlier his private
parts were naked but are covered at that moment.

**801.** If the dress of a person covers his private parts while he
stands but it is possible that it may not cover them in another posture
(e.g. in the state of bowing and prostration) and if he covers those
parts by some means when they are visible his prayers is in order but
the recommended precaution is that he should not offer prayers with that
dress.

**802.** When a person does not have dress he can cover himself at the
time of offering prayers with grass and the leaves of the trees.

**803.** In a state of helplessness one may, while offering prayers,
cover oneself with mud.

**804.** When a person does not have anything with which he should cover
himself while offering prayers, and if it is probable that he may get
some such thing it is better that he should delay offering his prayers,
and if he does not get anything, he should offer prayers according to
his legal obligation, when the time for prayers is coming to an end.

**805.** If a person who intends offering prayers does not have even
leaves of tress and grass and mud and slime to cover himself with and it
is not probable that he will acquire something with which to cover
himself, and in case it is probable that somebody will see him, he
should offer prayers in sitting posture and if he is satisfied that no
one will see him he should offer prayers in standing posture and as a
measure of precaution he should place his hand on his private parts and
in both the cases he should perform bowing and prostration by means of
signs and on the basis of recommended precaution he should make the sign
of prostration a little longer.

Conditions For Dress Worn During Prayers
----------------------------------------

**806.** There are six conditions for the dress of a person who offers
prayers:

(i) It should be pure.

(ii) It should be mubah (permissible for him to use).

(iii) It should not have been prepared with the parts of a dead body.

(iv) It should not have been prepared from the part of the body of an
animal whose meat is unlawful to eat.

(v) & (vi) If the person who offers prayers is a male he should not wear
dress made of pure silk or embroidered with gold. The details of these
rules will be given in later articles.

**807.** The dress of a person who offers prayers should be pure
(Tahir). In case, therefore, he offers prayers with impure body or dress
with his free will his prayers would he void.

**808.** If a person does not know on account of his fault that prayers
offered with impure body or dress is void and he offer prayers with
impure body or dresss his prayers is void.

**809.** If because of not knowing the rule on account of his fault a
person does not know about a thing being impure e.g. if he does not know
that the sweat of an unbeliever is impure, and offers prayers with that
thing, his prayers is void.

**810.** In case, a person is not aware whether his body or dress is
impure or not, and comes to know about it after having offered his
prayers, the prayers is in order.

**811.** If a person forgets that his body or dress is impure and
recollects this thing while offering prayers, or after having performed
the prayers, he should offer the prayers again and if the time
prescribed for that prayers has passed he should offer its qaza

**812.** If a person has ample time at his disposal and he is busy
offering prayers and his body or dress becomes impure during the prayers
and before he recites any of the prayers with that impurity he takes
notice of the fact that he has become impure, or realizes that his body
or dress is impure, doubts whether it has become impure at that time, or
was impure from an earlier moment, and if washing the body or dress or
changing the dress or taking it off does not nullify the prayers he
should wash his body or dress, while offering prayers, or change the
dress or take off the dress, if something else covers his private parts.
However, if the position is that if he washes his body or dress, or
changes his dress, or takes it off, the prayers is nullified, or he
becomes naked, if he takes off his dress, he should break that prayers
and should offer prayers de novo with pure body and dress.

**813.** When a person is busy offering prayers and the time at his
disposal is short and during the prayers his dress becomes impure and
before he offers anything of the prayers with that impurity he realizes
that he has become impure or that his dress is impure and doubts whether
it has become impure at that time or was impure from an earlier moment
and if washing or changing or taking off the dress does not nullify the
prayers and he can take off the dress he should wash or change it or if
something else covers his private parts he should take off the dress and
complete the prayers. However, if something else does not cover his
private parts and he cannot also wash or change his dress he should
complete his prayers with the same impure dress.

**814.** When a person is busy offering prayers and the time at his
disposal is short and during the prayers his body becomes impure and
before he recites anything of the prayers with that impurity it comes to
his notice that he has become impure or he realizes that his body is
impure and doubts whether it has become impure at that time or was
impure from an earlier moment and if washing the body does not nullifies
the prayers he should wash his body and if doing so nullifies the
prayers he should complete his prayers in that very state and his
prayers will be in order.

**815.** If a person, who is doubtful about the purity of his body or
dress, offers prayers and understands after prayers that his body or
dress was impure his prayers is in order.

**816.** If a person washes his dress and becomes sure that it has
become pure and offers prayers with it but learns after the prayers that
it had not become pure his prayers is in order.

**817.** If a person sees blood on his body or dress and believes that
it is not one of the impure bloods e.g. if he believes that it is the
blood of a mosquito and if after offering the prayers he learns that it
was one of those bloods with which prayers cannot be offered his prayers
is in order.

**818.** If a person is sure that the blood which is on his body or
dress is an impure blood it is permissible to offer prayers with it
(e.g. it is the blood of a wound or a sore), but comes to know, after
having offered his prayers that it is the blood, which makes prayers
void, the prayers offed by him is in order.

**819.** If a person forgets about a thing being impure and his wet body
or dress touches that thing and he offers prayers in the state of
forgetfulness, and recollects this thing after the prayers, his prayers
is in order. However, if his wet body touches something about whose
being impure he has forgotten and he takes bath and offers prayers
without having washed himself his bath and prayers are void, except when
the body also becomes pure by taking bath. Furthermore, if a part of the
limbs of ablutions touches with its wetness a thing about which the
person concerned has forgotten that it is impure and he performs
ablutions and offers prayers before washing that part his ablutions as
well as prayers are void except when the limbs of ablutions also become
pure by performing ablutions.

**820.** If a person possesses only one dress and if his body and dress
become impure and he has water with which only one of them can be washed
(i.e. body or dress) it is preferable for him to wash his body, and
offer prayers with the impure dress and it is permissible that he may
wash the dress and offer prayers with impure body. However. if the
impurity of one of them is more than that of the other it is necessary
that the thing, whose impurity is more should be washed.

**821.** A person who does not have any dress other than an impure dress
should offer prayers with that impure dress and his prayers will be in
order.

**822.**If a person who has two dresses knows that one of them is impure
but does not know which of them is impure and has sufficient time at his
disposal he should offer prayers with each one of them. For example if
he wishes to offer midday and afternoon prayers he should offer one
midday prayers and one afternoon prayers with each one of them. However,
if the time at his disposal is short he may offer the prayers with any
one of them and it will be sufficient.

**823.** The dress which a person uses for offering prayers should be
permissible. Hence, if a person knows that it is unlawful to use an
usurped dress, or does not know the rule on account of negligence, and
intentionally offers prayers with the usurped dress, his prayers would
be void. In case, however, his dress includes those usurped things which
cannot cover alone the private parts of the body or in case they can
cover the private parts, the person offering prayers is not wearing them
at that time (for example a big handkerchief which he is keeping in his
pocket) and similarly even if he is wearing the usurped things but he
also possesses a permissible covering, in all these cases the fect that
the things in question have been usurped does not affect the validity of
the prayers although, as a precautionary measure, their use should be
avoided.

**824.** If a person knows that it is unlawful to wear usurped dress but
does not know that it makes prayers void, and if he intentionally offers
prayers with usurped dress, his prayers will be void as explained in the
foregoing article.

**825.** If a person does not know that his dress is a usurped one or
forgets about its being usurped and offers prayers with it, his prayers
is in order, provided that he himself is not the usurper.

**826.** If a person does not know or forgets that his dress is a
usurped one, and realizes this during prayers, and if his private parts
are covered by another thing and he can take off the usurped dress
immediately and without the continuity of the prayers being broken, he
should take off that dress. And if his private parts are not covered by
something else or he cannot take off the usurped dress immediately or
the continuity of the prayers is not maintained if he takes it off, and
in case he has also one rakats (unit's) time, he should break the
prayers and should offer prayers with a dress which has not been
usurped. And if he does not have so much time, he should take o~f the
dress in the state of prayers, and complete the prayers according to the
orders applicable to the prayers of the naked.

**827.** If a person offers prayers with a usurped dress to safeguard
his life or, for example to save the dress from a thief his prayers is
in order.

**828.** If a person purchases a dress with money whose khums has not
been paid by him, offering prayers in that dress is govered by the same
orders which apply to offering prayers in a dress which has been
usurped.

**829.** The dress of the person who offers prayers should not have been
prepared with the parts of the dead body of an animal whose blood gushes
when its great artery is cut. And the obligatory precaution is that even
if the dress has been prepared with the parts of the dead body of an
animal whose blood does not gush (for example fish or snake) it should
not be used while offering prayers.

**830.** If the person, who offers prayers, has with him something of a
dead body which contains like e.g. its flesh and skin - it is not
unlikely that his prayers is in order.

**831.** If the person who offers prayers has with him something of the
dead body, whose meat is lawful to eat, and which does not contain like.
e.g. its hair and wool or he offers prayers with a dress which has been
prepared with these things, his prayers is in order.

**832.** The dress of a person who offers prayers should not have been
prepared with the parts of the body of an animal whose meat is unlawful
to eat. Hence, if he carries even one hair or such an animal while
offering prayers, his prayers would be void.

**833.** If the water of the mouth or nose or other wetness of an
animal, whose meat is unlawful to eat (e.g. cat) is present on the body
or dress of a person, who offers prayers, and it is wet, his prayers is
void, and if it has become dry and its original part has been
eliminated, the prayers is valid.

**834.** If the hair and sweat and saliva of a person are present on the
body or dress of a person, who offers prayers, there is no harm in it,
and the position is the same ithe possessed pearls, wax and honey with
him.

**835.** If the person, who offers prayers, doubts whether a dress has
been prepared with the parts of an animal whose meat is lawful to eat,
or with the parts of the animal, whose meat is unlawful to eat, it is
permissible to offer prayers with it, whether it has been prepared
within the country or abroad.

**836.** If it is not known whether a shell consists of the parts of an
animal, whose meat is unlawful to eat, it is permissible to offer
prayers with it.

**837.** There is no harm in wearing pure fur and similarly the fur of a
squirrel while offering prayers. However, recommended precaution is that
one should not offer prayers with the hide of a squirrel.

**838.** If a person offers prayers with a dress about which he does not
know or has forgotten as to whether it is made of the parts of an animal
whose meat is unlawful to eat, he should, on the basis of recommended
precaution re-offer that prayers.

**839.** The use of a dress embroidered with gold is unlawful for men
and the prayers offered by a man with such dress is void, but for women
its use whether in prayers or otherwise, is allowed.

**840.** It is unlawful for men to wear gold (e.g. to hang a chain of
gold on one's chest or to wear a gold ring or to use a wrist watch or
spectscles made of gold) and the prayers offerred by them while wearing
these things is void, but women are allowed to wear these things in
prayers or otherwise.

**841.** If a person does not know or forgets that his ring or dress is
made of gold, or her doubt about it, and offers prayers while wearing
it, his prayers is in order.

**842.** The dress of a man offering prayers and even his cap and the
trousers' thread should not be made of pure silk. And at other times
also (i.e. when he is not offering prayers) it is unlawful for a man to
use pure silk dress.

**843.** If the entire lining of a dress or a part of it is made of pure
silk, its wearing is unlawful for a man and offering prayers with it is
void.

**844.** If a man does not know whether a dress is made of pure silk or
something else, it is permissible for him to wear it and there is also
no harm in offering prayers while wearing it

**845.** There is no harm if a silken handkerchief or some other similar
things are in the pocket of a man,it does not nullify the prayers.

846 There is no harm if a woman wears silken dress whether she is
offering prayers or not.

**847.** There is no harm in wearing dress which is usurped or is made
of pure silk or is woven with gold when one has no other alternative.
And if a person is obliged to wear one of these dresses and does not
have any other dress, he can offer prayers with these dresses.

**848.** If a person does not have any dress other than a dress which
has been usurped, or has been prepared from the parts of a dead animal
and is not under obligation to wear dress, he should offer prayers in
accordance with the rules prescribed for the naked.

**849.** If a person does not have a dress other than one which has been
made of the parts of an animal whose meat is unlawful to eat and if he
is obliged to wear dress he can offer prayers with that very dress and
if he is not obliged to wear dress he should offer prayers in accordance
with the rules prescribed for the naked.

**850.** If a person does not have a dress other than a dress which is
made of pure silk or is woven with gold, and if he is not obliged to
wear dress he should offer prayers in accordance with the rules
prescribed for the naked.

**851.** If a person does not have anything with which he may cover his
private parts while offering prayers, it is obligatory for him to
procure such a thing on hire or to purchase it. However, if its
procurement necessitates payment of so much money that it is excessive
in proportion to his assets or the position is such that if he spends
his money on dress it will be harmful for him, he should offer his
prayers in accordance with the rules prescribed for the naked.

**852.** If a person does not have a dress and another person gives or
lends him a dress, and if its acceptance does not entail any hardship
for him, rather, if borrowing or seeking a gift is not hard for him, he
should borrow or take the gift of a dress from one, who possesses it.

**853.** Wearing of a dress whose cloth or colour or sewing is not
befitting for the person who wears it - for example if a scholarly
person wears the dress of a soldier - it is unlawful for him if it is
the source of violation of dignity due to him, and if he offers prayers
with that dress, which is his only covering, it is not unlikely that his
prayers may be void.

**854.** If a man wears the dress of a woman or a woman wears the dress
of a man and treats it as his/her garb, it is unlawful, on the basis of
precaution, and the orders contained in the foregoing article apply to
offering prayers with it.

**855.** If the quilt of a person who should offer prayers in lying
posture is made of the parts of an animal, whose meat is unlaw- ful to
eat, and if he does not become naked (by putting off the quilt) it is
not lawful to offer prayers in it, and it is also unlawful to offer
prayers in an impure or silken quilt if it may be said that it is 'being
worn'. However, there is no harm if it is only left on him and it does
not invalidate the prayers. And as regards a mattress there is no harm
in using it in any case except when the person concerned wraps a part of
it on his body which may usually be called "wearing". In that event the
same orders which apply to a mattress, will apply to a quilt.

Exceptional Cases
-----------------

**856.** In the following three cases the prayers offered by a person
will be in order even if his body or dress be impure: (i) If his body or
dress is stained with the blood discharged from his wound or sore. (ii)
If his body or dress is stained with blood which is spread over a space
lesser than a dirham (which is almost equal to the upper joint of the
first finger). (iii) If he is obliged to offer prayers with impure body
or dress. Furthermore, if small articles of dress of a person offering
prayers are impure (for example if his socks or cap are impure) his
prayers would be in order. Orders relating to these four conditions will
be narrated in detail in the following articles.

**857.** If there is blood of wound or sore on the body or dress of a
person who offers prayers, and the condition is such that in such a
condition it is hard for most of the people to wash their bodies or
dresses or to change their dresses, he may offer prayers with that blood
so long as the wound or sore does not heal up. And the same orders apply
if there is on his body or dress pus which has come out with blood, or a
medicine which has been applied to the wound and has become impure.

**858.** If on the body or dress of a person, who offers prayers, there
is the blood of a cut or wound which heals up soon and can be washed
easily his prayers is void.

**859.** If a place on the body or dress of a person which is at a
distance from a wound becomes impure owing to the fluid of the wound it
is not permissible for him to offer prayers with it. However, if a part
of the body or dress which usually touches the fluid of the wound
becomes impure owing to the fluid of the wound there is no harm in
offering prayers with it.

**860.** If blood reaches the body or dress of a person, who has piles
and the veins are not outside the rectum, or if there is blood of a
wound which is within one's mouth, nose etc. the apparent position is
that he can offer prayers with that blood. And as regards the blood of
the piles when the veins are outside the rectum it is undoubtedly
permissible to offer prayers with it.

**861.** If a person has a wound on his body and if he sees blood on his
body or dress, which is bigger than the area of a dirham and does not
know whether it is the blood of the wound or some other blood it is not
permissible for him to offer prayers with that blood.

**862.** If a person has a few wounds on his body and they are so near
one another that they may be treated to be one wound there is no harm in
his offering prayers with their blood so long as they do not heal up.
However, if the distance between them is so much that each one of them
is to be reckoned to be one wound one should wash one's body and dress
of the blood of each one of them for the purpose of prayers as and when
it heals up.

**863.** If the blood of a dog, a pig, an unbeliever, a carcass or an
animal whose meat is unlawful to eat is on the body or dress of a
person, who offers prayers, even to the extent of the point of a needle,
his prayers is void and on the basis of pre- caution the same order
applies to the blood of Hayz, Nifas and Istihaza. As regards other
bloods, however, (for example the blood of the body of man or the blood
of an animal, whose meat is lawful), even if they are found at some
places on the dress or body of a person there is no harm in offering
prayers with them provided that when added together their area is less
than that of a dirham.

**864.** A blood which falls on a dress which is without lining and
reaches its back is reckoned to be one blood. However, if the back of
the dress gets besmeared with blood separately and the bloods do not get
mixed up each one of them is reckoned to be a separate blood. Hence it
blood is present on the back and front part of a dress and their total
area is less than that of a dirham the prayers offered with it is in
order, and if it is more than that prayers offered with it is void. And
on the basis of precaution the same order applies when the two bloods
get mixed.

**865.** If blood falls on a dress which has lining and reaches its
lining or falls on its lining and reaches the front part of the dress
each of them is reckoned to be a separate blood. Hence if the area of
the blood of the dress and that of the lining, when added together are
less than the area of a dirham, the prayers offered with them is in
order and if they are more than that the prayers offered with these
bloods is void.

**866.** If the area of the blood on one's body or dress is less than
that of a dirham, and some wetness reaches it and spreads over its
sides, the prayers offered with that blood is void, although the blood
and the wetness which has spread there, is not equal to the area of a
dirham. However, if the wetness reaches the blood only and does not
spread over its sides the apparent position is that there is no
objection in offering prayers with it.

**867.** If blood is not present on the body or dress of a person but it
becomes impure on account of contact with blood with wetness, prayers
cannot be offered with it although the portion which has become impure
is less than the area of a dirham.

**868.** If the area of the blood, present on the body or dress of a
person, is less than that of a dirham, and another impurity reaches it
e.g. if a drop of urine falls on it, it is not permissible to offer
prayers with it.

**869.** If small articles of dress of a person offering prayers (e.g.
his socks or cap) with which his private parts cannot be covered, are
impure and if they have not been prepared with the parts of a carcass or
an animal, whose meat is unlawful to eat, the prayers offered with them
is in order. And there is also no objection if one offers prayers with
an impure ring.

**870.** It is permissible for a person who offers prayers to carry with
him impure things like impure handkerchief, key and knife and it is not
unlikely that separate impure dress which he is carrying may not affect
the validity of his prayers.

**871.** If a person knows that the area of the blood which is present
on his body or dress is less than that of a dirham but it is probable
that it may be one of those bloods (e.g.hayz, Nifas, Istihaza) which are
not excused, it is permissible that he may offer prayers with that blood
and it is not necessary to wash it.

**872.** If the area of blood present on the dress or body of a person
is less than that of a dirham and he is not aware whether it is one of
the bloods which are not excused and offers prayers and learns later
that it was one of those bloods which are not excused, it is not
necessary for him to offer the prayers again. And the position is the
same if he believes that the extent of the blood is less than that of a
dirham and offers prayers and comes to know later that it was equal to
or more than the area a dirham. In this case also it is not necessary to
offer the prayers again.

Recommended Things
------------------

**873.** A number of things are recommended to form part of the dress of
a person who offers prayers. Some of these are stated here: Turban along
with its fold passed under the chin (Tah tul-hanak with 'ammamah); loose
cloak (aba); white dress; and such dress as may be more neat and proper
than other dresses; use of perfume and wearing an agate ring.

Abominable Things
-----------------

**874.** To wear a black, dirty or tight dress or the dress of a person
who is a drunkard or a dress (or a ring) which carries the image of a
living creature upon it.

The Place Where To Offer Prayers
--------------------------------

There are seven conditions for the place where one should offer prayers.
The first condition is that the place, where prayers are offered, is
permissible.

**875.** If a person is offing prayers on a usurped property and his
limbs while offering prostration rest on usurped places. his prayers is
void not with standing the fact that he may be offering it on a carpet
or a couch or any other similar thing. Same is the position with regard
to the following articles. However, there is no harm in offering prayers
under a usurped roof or a usurped tent.

**876.** Prayers offered at a place, whose profit belongs to some one
else is void unless, permission is taken from the person who is entitled
to take the profit. For example if a house has been leased out and the
owner of the house or anyone else offers prayers in that house without
the permission of the tenant his prayers is void. And if a person made a
will before his death that one-third of his property should be used in a
particular manner prayers cannot be offered- in that property if the
will has not been executed.

**877.** If a person is occupying a place in a Masjid and another person
usurps his place and offers prayers there his prayers is void.

**878.** If a person forgets that a place is a usurped one and offers
prayers on it, and recollects it after offering prayers his prayers is
in order. However, if a person has usurped a place himself but forgets
it, and offers prayers there, his prayers is void. And if a person
offers prayers at a place about which he does not know that it is a
usurped one, and learns after offering the prayers than the place where
he performed prostration was a usurped one, it is not unlikely that his
prayers is void.

**879.** If a person knows that a certain place is a usurped one but
does not know that the prayers offered on a usurped place is void, and
offers prayers there, his prayers is void.

**880.** If a person is obliged to offer obligatory prayers while
riding, and if the animal of his riding, or its saddle or stirrups are
usurped ones his prayers is void. And the same rule applies if he wishes
to offer recommended prayers while riding that animal.

**881.** If a person owns a property in partnership with another person
and his share is not separate he cannot possess that property and offer
prayers on it without the consent or per- mission of his partner.

**882.** If a person purchases some property with the money, the zakat
and khums of which has not been paid by him, his possession of that
property is unlawful and the prayers which he offers on it is void.

**883.**If the owners of a property gives consent with his words to
another person for offering prayers on it, but the latter knows that he
is not agreeable to this from his heart offering prayers on his property
is void. And if he does not give per mission (formally) but the person
concerned is sure that he is agreeable to his offering prayers on his
property the prayers offered by him on it is in order.

**884.** Possession of the property of a dead person, who has not paid
zakat or khums, is unlawful, and offering prayers on it is void.
However, if the persons concerned pay these debts or guarantee their
payment there is no harm in possessing his property and in offering
prayers on it.

**885.** If a dead person had a property and was indebted to the people
and his heirs are not prepared to pay his debts on account of
negligence, it is unlawful to possess that property, and the prayers
offered on it is void.

**886.** If a dead person did not owe any debt to any person but some of
his heirs are either minors or insane or have disappeared, possession of
that property without the permission of the guardian of those heirs is
unlawful, and the prayers offered on it is unlawful.

**887.** There is no harm in offering prayers in a hotel or in a
bathhouse or other similar places which are meant for the visitors.
However, prayers can be offered in places other than such places, if
their owner accords permission or says something which indicates that he
has given permission for offering prayers there. For example, if he
permits a person to stay and sleep in his property from which it can be
understood that he has given him permission for offering prayers as
well.

**888.** If the land is so extensive that it is difficult for most of
the people to go from there to another place at the time of prayers, the
prayers may be offered without the permission of the owner in the same
way as explained in connection with ablutions in article **227.**

**889.** The second condition: The place where prayers are offered
should not be moving. In case, however, a person is obliged, on account
of shortage of time for prayers or for some other reason, to offer
prayers at a place which (e.g. in a motor car, a boat or a railway
train) he may do so, but he should, as far as possible, try to ensure
that he remains still and his face is towards Qibla and in case these
vehicles deviate from the direction of Qibla, he should turn his face
towards Qibla

**890.** There is no harm in offering prayers in an automobile or a boat
or a railway train or other similar things while they are motionless.

**891.** Prayers offered on a heap of wheat or barley or any other
similar thing, which cannot remain stationary, is void.

The Third Condition: A person should offer prayers at a place where
there is a probability of his completing the prayers. It is not valid to
offer prayers at a place about which he is not sure that he will be able
to complete his prayers there on account of its being crowded or because
of wind, rain, etc. although, by chance, he may succeed in completing
it.

**892.** If a person offers prayers at a place where it is unlawful to
stay e.g. under a roof which is about to collapse his prayers is in
order though he has committed a sin.

**893.** On the basis of precaution it is not correct to offer prayers
on a thing on which it is unlawful to stand or sit e.g. on that part of
a carpet on which the name of Almighty Allah is written.

The Fourth Condition: The ceiling of the place where one offers prayers
should not be so low that one may not be able to stand erect nor should
that place be so small that there may be no room for performing bowing
or prostration.

**894.** If a person is obliged to offer prayers at a place where it is
not generally possible to stand, it is necessary for him to offer
prayers in the sitting posture, and if it is not possible for him to
perform bowing.and prostration, he should make signs for them with his
bead.

**895.** One should not offer prayers ahead of the graves of the holy
Prophet and the holy Imams if it entails irreverence, but otherwise
there is no harm in it.

The Fifth Condition: In case the place where prayers is offered is
impure it should not be so wet that its wetness should pollute the body
or the dress of the person who offers prayers. However, if the place
where one has to place one's forehead while performing prostration is
impure, the prayers would be void even if that place is dry. And the
recommended precaution is that the place where one offers prayers should
not be impure at all.

The Sixth Condition: It is necessary that there should he a distance of
at least one span between a man and a woman while they are offering
prayers, and it is abominable for them to offer prayers when the
distance between them is less than ten cubits.

**896.** If a woman stands by the sides of a man, or at a distance less
than one span ahead of him and both of them begin offering prayers, they
should offer their prayers again. However, if one of them begins
offering the prayers earlier only that one of them who commences his
prayers later should offer his or her Prayers again.

**897.** If a man and a woman are standing side by side with each other
or the woman is standing ahead and they are offer- ing prayers and there
is a wall, curtain, or something else between them on account of which
they cannot see each other, the prayers of both of them are in order,
although the distance between them may not be even one span.

The Seventh Condition: The place, where the person offering prayers has
to place his forehead while performing prostration, should not be higher
or lower than four joined fingers as compared with the place where he
puts the toes of his feet. The details of this rule will be given in the
article relating to pros- tration.

**898.** Presence of a non-mehram man and woman at a place where none
else is present, and none can also arrive, is unlawful, in case there is
a possibility of their indulging in sin, and the recommended precaution
is that they should not offer prayers at that place.

**899.** Prayers offered at a place where musical or other similar
instrument is being played is not void, although hearing and using it
amounts to sin.

**900.** The obligatory precaution is that obligatory prayers should not
be offered on the roof of the Holy Ka'ba, if one has an opotion in the
matter, but there is no harm in offering it there if one is obliged to
do so. And what is apparent is that offering prayers in the Holy Ka'ba
is permissible even when one has an option in the matter.

**901.** There is no harm in offering recommended prayers in the Holy
Ka'ba or on its roof. Rather it is recommended that one should offer two
units of prayers before every pillar within the Holy House.

Recommended Places For Offering Prayers
---------------------------------------

**902.** In the sacred religion of Islam great stress has been laid on
the offering of prayers in a masjid. Masjidul Haram is superior to all
the masjids and after it the order of priority is as follows: Masjidun
Nabi (in Medina), Masjidul Kufa (in Kufa), Masjid baytul Maqdis
(Jerusalem). Then comes the number of Jami' Masjid (centra) mosque) of
every city and thereafter the masjids situated in the streets and
bazaars may be resorted to.

**903.** As regards women it is appropriate for them to offer their
prayers at home and it is still better that prayers should be offered by
them in the back room of the house.

**904.** Offering prayers in the shrines of the holy Imams is
recommended and is even better than offering prayers in a masjid. It has
been related that the spiritual reward for offer- ing prayers in the
sacred shrine of Amirul Mu'minin Imam Ali (peace be on him) is equal to
200,000 prayers.

**905.** Frequenting a masjid and going to a masjid where very few
persons come to offer prayers is recommended. And it is abominable for a
person who resides in the neighborhood"of a masjid to offer his prayers
else-where without a proper excuse.

**906.** It is recommended that if a person does not go to a masjid, one
should not share one's meals with him or consult him in any matters, or
reside in his neighborhood, or enter into matrimonial alliance with him.

Abominable Places For Offering Prayers
--------------------------------------

**907.** There are a number of places where it is abominable to offer
prayers. Some of them are the following:

(i) Public bathroom.

(ii) saline land.

(iii) Facing a human being.

(iv) Fig an open door.

(v) On a road or street, provided that offering of prayers at these
places does not cause inconvenience to others. If it is a source of
inconvenience and discomfort to them it is unlawful to obstruct their
way.

(vi) Facing fire or lamp.

(vii) In the kitchens and at every place where there is a furnace.

(viii) Facing a well or a pit where people often urinate.

(ix) Facing the picture or models of living creature unless it is
covered with something.

(x) In the room where ceremonially unclean person (Junub) is present.

(xi) At a place where there is a picture, although it may not be placed
in front of the person who offers prayers.

(xii) Facing a grave.

(xiii) On the grave.

(xiv) Between two graves.

(xv) In the graveyard.

**908.** If a person is offering prayers at a place where people are
walking here and there, or if somebody is present in front of him, it is
recommended that he should place something before him, and it is
sufficient if that thing is only a stick or a string.

Orders Regarding A Masjid
-------------------------

**909.** It is unlawful to impure the floor, roof, ceiling and inner
walls of a masjid and as and when a person comes to know that anyone of
these places has become impure he should immediately make it pure. And
the obligatory precaution is that the outer part of the wall of a
masjid, too, should not be made impure. In case, however, it becomes
impure it is not obligatory to remove the impurity unless its remaining
there causes desecration of the masjid.

**910.** If a person cannot purify a masjid or needs help for performing
this task and does not get it, it is not obligatory for him to purify
the masjid. However, on the basis of obligatory precaution he should
bring the matter to the notice of someone who can purify it.

**911.** If a place of a masjid becomes impure, and it cannot be
purified without digging or demolishing it, the place should be dug or
demolished, provided that it does not result in the demolition of its
foundation. Furthermore, it u not obligatory to fill the place which has
been dug and to repair the place which has been demolished. However, if
a thing, like the brick of the masjid, becomes impure it should be
washed and placed at its original place, if possible.

**912.** If a masjid is usurped and houses etc. are constructed on its
place, or it becomes so much dilapidated that it is not possible to
offer prayers in it, even then it is unlawful, on the basis of
precaution, to make it impure, hut its purification is not obligatory.

**913.** It is unlawful to impure the precincts (Haram) of the shrines
of the holy Imams and in case anyone of these precincts becomes impure
and its being impure is the cause of its desecration it is obligatory to
purify it. And there commended precaution is that it should be purified
even if no desecration is involved in its being impure.

**914.** If the mat of a masjid becomes impure it should, on the basis
of precaution, be purified with water. In case, however, the mat
remaining impure is the cause of the desecration of the masjid and it is
likely to be spoiled by washing, it is better to cut off the portion
which has become impure.

**915.** It is unlawful to, take an original impurity or a thing which
has become impure into a masjid if it causes desecration of the masjid.
Rather, the recommended precaution is that even if desecration of the
masjid is not involved, an original impurity should not be taken into
it.

**916.** If a tent is pitched, carpets are spread, and black curtains
are hung in a masjid, and tea is taken into it in connection with the
mourning ceremony of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (Peace be on him)
there is no harm in it, provided that these things are not harmful for
the masjid and do not impede the offering of prayers.

**917.** The recommended precaution is that a masjid should not be
decorated with gold and the pictures of things, which possess soul like
human beings and animals.

**918.** Even if a masjid is demolished it is not permissible to sell it
or to make it a part of a property or a road.

**919.** It is unlawful to sell the doors, windows and other things of a
masjid and even if the masjid becomes dilapidated these things should be
used for the repairs of that very masjid. In case, however, they are no
longer useful for that masjid they should he used in other masjids and
if they not he used in other masjids also they may be sold and the sale
proceeds should he used for that very masjid, if possible. If, however,
it is not possible the same should be spent on the repairs of some other
masjid.

**920.** Building a masjid and to repair the masjid, which is near
destruction, is recommended. And if a masjid is so demolished that it is
not possible to repair it, it can be built. Rather, a masjid, which is
not in a bad condition, can be demolished, and then enlarge to meet the
needs of the people.

**921.**To keep a masjid clean and tidy and to illuminate it, is
recommended. And if a person intends to go into a masjid it is
recommended that he should apply perfume and wear neat and good dress
and should verify that the soles os his shoes do not contain any
impurity, and while entering the masjid he should put his right foot in
first, and when he makes his exit, he should put his left foot out
first. Similarly it is recommended that one should come to the masjid
earlier than others and leave it after they have departed.

**922.** It is recommended that when a person enters a masjid he should
offer two-unit prayers as a mark of reverence to the masjid and it also
suffices if he offers obligatory or recommended prayers.

**923.** It is abominable to' sleep in the masjid without a just excuse,
to talk about worldly matters, to engage oneself in some craft and to
recite poetry which is not didactic. It is also abominable to spit or to
blow one's nose in a masjid or to throw phlegm in it, or to summon a
missing person or to raise one's voice, but there is no harm, however,
in raising one's voice to call the people to prayers.

**924.** It is abominable to allow a child or an insane person to enter
a masjid. It is also abominable for a person to enter a masjid if he has
eaten onions or garlic, whose bad smell is a source of inconvenience to
others.

Azan And Iqamah
---------------

**925.** It is recommended both for man and woman to say Azan (call to
prayers) and Iqamah before offering daily obligatory prayers, but they
have not been prescribed in connection with offering other obligatory or
recommended prayers. Nevertheless, in case the obligatory prayers which
are not offered daily (e.g. Prayers of Signs) and are offered in
congregation, it is recommended to say, As Salah thrice before offering
the prayers.

**926.** It is recommended that Azan be pronounced in the right ear of a
child and Iqamah in its left ear on the day it is born or before its
navel is severed.

**927.** Azan consists of the following 18 recitals:

Allahu Akbar... ... ...... . four times (Allah is great)

Ash hadu an la ilaha illal lah . . . . . . . . . . two times (I testify
that there is no deity but Allah)

Ash hadu anna Muhmmadan Rasu lul lah . . . . . . . : . . two times (I
testify that Muhammad is Allah's Messenger)

Hayya'alas Salah . . .. . . .. . ... two times (Hasten to prayers)

Hayya'alal Falah . .. .. . . . .two times (Hasten to deliverance)
Hayya'ala khayril'Amal. . . . . .two times (Hasten to the best act)
Allahu Akbar . .. . . .. . . . .. . .. two times (Allah is great)

La ilaha illal lah.. .....two times (There is no deity but Allah)

As regards Iqamah it consists of 17 recitals. In Iqamah Allahu Akbar is
reduced in the beginning of Azan to twice and in its end La ilaha illal
lah to once and after Hayya ala khayril 'Amal, Qadqa matis Salah (i.e.
the prayers has certainly been established) is pronounced twice.

**928.** Ash hadu anna Amiral Muminina'Aliyyan Waliyyullah (i.e. I
testify that the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (Peace be on him) is
the vicegerent of Allah) is not a part of either Azan or Iqamah It is,
however, better to pronounce it after Ash hadu anna Muhammadan Rasulul
lah to seek Divine pleasure.

**929.** There should not be an unusual interval between the recitals of
Azan or Aqamah and if an unusual duration occurs between them the Azan
or Iqamah should be repeated.

Translation Of Azan And Iqamah:
-------------------------------

The English translation of Azan and Iqamah has been given along with
Arabic transliteration in Articles 927 and **928.**

**930.** If Azan and Iqamah are recited in a rythmetical way so that it
becomes music i.e. if he pronounces Azan and Iqamah like professional
singers who sing in pleasure parties to amuse the people it is unlwful
and if it does not become music it is abominable.

**931.** Azan is not lawful for two prayers. Firstly for afternoon
('Asr) prayers in 'Arafat on the day of'Arafa which is the ninth of Zil
Hajj and secondly for the night prayers on the night of Eid Qurban for
one who is in Mash arul Haram. And in these two prayers the Azan is
eliminated only if there is no distance or very small distance between
these prayers and the preceding ones.

**932.** If Azan and Iqamah has been pronounced for congregational
prayers a person who is offering prayers with that congregation should
not pronounce Azan and Iqamah for his own prayers.

**933.** If a person goes to a masjid to offer congregational prayers,
but finds that the prayers is over, it is permissible for him not to
pronounce Azan and Iqamah, so long as the rows have not broken up and
the people have not dispersed.

**934.** If some persons are busy offering prayers at a place or their
prayers has ended only a short while ago and the rows have not yet
broken up and if a person wishes to offer prayers individually or with
another congregatian which is going to be set up soon he is excused from
pronouncing Azan and Iqamah on the fulfilment of six conditions:

(i) When prayers are being offered in a masjid. If it is not being
offered in a masjid, it is not knoivn whether a man is excused from
pronouncing Azan and Iqamah.

(ii) When Azan and Iqamah has already been recited for that prayers.

(iii) When the congregational prayers is not void.

(iv) When the prayers of the person concerned and the congregational
prayers are being offered at one place. Hence if the congregational
prayers is offered within the masjid and that person wishes to offer
prayers on the roof of the masjid it is recommended that he should
pronounce Azan and Iqamah.

(v) When the prayers of the man and the congregational prayers both are
offered in prescribed time (Ada') (not the lapsed ones).

(vi) When the time for both the person's prayers and the congregational
prayers is common. For example, both of them are offer midday prayers or
afternoon prayers, or the prayers being offered by the congregation are
midday prayers and the prayers being offered by the man are the
afternoon prayers, or he may he offerg midday prayers and the
congregational prayers are the afternoon prayers.

**935.** If the person concerned entertain doubt about the third
condition out of the conditions narrated in the foregoing article i.e.
if he doubts whether or not the congregational prayers is in order he is
excused from pronouncing Azan and Iqamah However, if he entertains doubt
in his mind about any one of the other five conditions it is recommended
that he should pronounce Azan and Iqamah

**936.** It is recommended that if a person hears Azan or Iqamah he
should also utter in a low voice the part which he happens to hear.

**937.** If a person hears another person pronouncing Azan and Iqamah,
(whether he has repeated the same or not) and there is not much
difference of time between that Azan andlqamah and the prayers he is
going to offer, it is permissible for him not to pronounce Azan and
Iqamah for his prayers.

**938.** If a man hears the Azan, pronounced by a woman, for the sake of
enjoyment, he himself is not excused from pro- nouncing Azan. On the
other hand even if his object in hearing her Azan is not enjoyment, he
is not excused from pronouncing the Azan.

**939.** It is necessary that the Azan and Iqamah of a congregational
prayets are pronounced by a man. However, if a woman pronounces Azan and
Iqamah in a congregational prayers of women it is sufficient.

**940.** Iqamah should be pronounced after Azan. However, it is reliable
that Iqamah should be pronounced in a standing posture and in a state of
purity from hadath by means of ablu- tion, bath or tayammum.

**941.** If a person pronounces the words of Azan or Iqamah without
proper order e.g. if he says 'Hayya'alal falah' before 'Hayya alas
salah' he should pronounce Azan or Iqamah again from the place where the
order has been disturbed.

**942.** Distance should not be allowed between Azan and Iqamah, and if
so much distance is given between them that the Azan which has been
pronounced cannot be treated to be the Azan of that Iqamah ' it is
recommended that Azan be pro- nounced once again. However, if so much
distance is allowed between Azan and Iqamah on the one hand and prayers
on the other than that Azan and Iqamah cannot be treated to be the Azan
and Iqamah. It is recommended to repeat them.

**943.** Azan and Iqamah should be pronounced in correct Arabic. Hence,
if they are pronounced in wrong Arabic or one letter is uttered for
another, or if, for example, its English translation is pronounced it
will not be correct.

**944.** Azan and Iqamah for a prayers should be pronounced when the
time for that prayers has set in. In case, therefore, a person
pronounces them before time, whether it be intentionally or due to
forgetfulness, his action is void.

**945.** If a person doubts before pronouncing Iqamah whether or not he
has pronounced Azan he should pronounce Azan. However, if he begins
pronouncing Iqamah and then doubts whether or not he has pronounced
Azan, the pronouncing of Azan is not necessary.

**946.** If before pronouncing a part of Azan or Iqamah a person doubts
whether or not he has pronounced the part preceding it, he should
pronounce the part about the pronoucement of which he is doubtful.
However, if he doubts while pronouncing a part of Azan or Iqamah whether
or not he has pronounced the part preceding it, it is not necessary to
pronounce that part.

**947.** It is recommended that while pronouncing Azan a person should
stand facing towards Qibla and should have performed ablutions or taken
ceremonial bath. He should place his hands on his ears and raise his
voice. Furthermore, he should pause for a while between the reatals of
different sentences and should not talk with anyone during the recital
of Azan

**948.** It is recommended that at the time of pronouncing Iqamah the
body of the person concerned should be motionless and he should
pronounce it with a lower voice as compared with Azan. He should not
make the sentences stick to each other, but should not also give as much
gap between the sentences of Iqamah as he gives between the sentences of
Azan

**949.** It is recommended that between the Azan and Iqamah a man should
take a step forward, or should sit down for a while, or perform
prostration, or recite the name of Allah, or make a supplication, or
become quiet for some time, or talk, or offer two units of prayers.
However, talking between the Azan and Iqamah of dawn prayers, or
offering prayers between the Azan and Iqamah of dusk prayers is not
recommended.

**950.** It is recommended that a person who is appointed to pronounoe
Azan is a just person ('Adil) and punctual and his voice is loud and he
should pronounce Azan from an elevated place.

Obligatory Acts Relating To Prayers
-----------------------------------

There are eleven obligatory acts for prayers:

(i) Niyyat (intention).

(ii) Qiyam (standing erect).

(iii) Takbiratul Ehram(saying Allahu Akbar while commencing the
prayers).

(iv) Ruku' (bowing).

(v) Sajdatayn (two prostrations).

(vi) Qiraat (recitation of Surah al-Hamd and other surah).

(vii) Zikr (prescribed recitation while bowing and prostrating).

(viii) Tashahhud (bearing witness after completing the prostrations of
the second unit).

(ix) Salam (salutation).

(x) Tartib (sequence) (xi) Muwalat (to perform the different acts of
prayers in regular order without stop).

**951.** Some of the obligatory acts of prayers are its basic elements
(rukn). Hence, a person who does not offer them, whether intentionally
or by mistake, his prayers becomes void. Some other obligatory acts of
prayers are not its basic elements. In case, therefore, they are omitted
by mistake the prayers does not become void. There are five basic
elements of prayers:

(i) Intention.

(ii) Takbiratul Ehram.

(iii) Standing before the bowing.

(iv) Bowing and

(v) Two prostrations in every unit. As regards performance of these acts
in excess of the prescribed limit, if such excessive performance is
intentional, the prayers becomes void automatically. In case, however,
it is by mistake, the prayers does not become void except when an
excessive bowing, and prostration in excess of two, are performed in one
and the same unit.

Niyyat (Intention)
------------------

**952.** A person should offer prayers with the intention of Qurbat i.e.
complying with the orders of the Almighty Allah. It is not, however,
necessary that he should make his intention pass through his mind or
should, for example, say: "I am offering four units of midday prayers
Qurbatan illal (ah (i.e. to comply with the orders of Allah)"

**953.** If a person makes intention for midday prayers or for afternoon
prayers that he is going to offer four units of prayers but does not
specify whether it is midday Prayers or afternoon prayers his prayers is
void. Furthermore if, for example, it is obligatory for a person to
offer the lapsed midday prayers and he wishes to offer at the time of
midday prayers the lapsed of that prayers or the midday prayers itself,
he should specify in his intention the prayers which he is going to
offer.

**954.** A person should stick to his intention from the beginning of
the prayers till its end. Hence, if, while offering prayers he becomes
so careless that if he is asked as to what he is doing he may not be
knowing what to say in reply, his prayers is void.

**955.** A person should offer prayers only to carry out the orders of
the Almighty Allah. Hence if a person dissimulates i.e. offers prayers
only for the sake of show, his prayers is void, whether this show is
only for the people or for keeping both Allah and the people in view.

**956.** If a person offers a part of prayers for the sake of any one
other than Allah his prayers is void. In fact if he offers prayers for
Allah but just to make a show of it before the people, he offers it at a
particular place, e.g. in a masjid or at a particular time e.g. in the
early part of the time prescribed for the prayers or in a special manner
e.g. in congregation, his prayers is void. And on the basis of
precaution if he performs even a recommended part of the prayers e.g.
qunut for the sake of any one other than Allah, his prayers is void.

Takbiratul Ahram
----------------

**957.** To say Allahu Akbar in the beginning of every prayers is
obligatory and one of its basic elements, and it is necessary that one
should say Allahu Akbar consecutively. It is also necessary that these
two words should be pronounced in correct Arabic. In case, therefore, a
person pronounces these words in wrong Arabic, or utters their
translation, his act will not be in order.

**958.** The obligatory precaution is that one should not combine
Takbiratul Ehram of the prayers with something which he is reciting
already e.g. with lqamah or with a supplication which be may be reciting
before the Takbir.

**959.** If a person wishes to join Allahu Akbar with the recital which
he is going to say thereafter for instance with Bismillahir Rahmanir
Rahim he should pronounce the "R" of Akbar as Akbaru However, the
obligatory precaution is that he should not join it with any other thing
in obligatory prayers.

**960.** It is necessary that when a person pronounces Takbiratul Ehram
his body is motionless and if he pronounces Takbiratul Ehram
intentionally at a time when his body is in motion his pronouncing the
Takbir is void.

**961.** The person concerned should pronounce Takbir, Hamd, Surah,
Recital and supplication in such a manner that he himself should hear it
And if he cannot hear it because of deafness or too much noise he should
pronounce them in such a manner that he should be able to hear it if
there is no impediment.

**962.** If a person is dumb or there is some defect in his tongue on
account of which he cannot pronounce Allahu Akbar he should pronounce it
in whatever manner he can pronounce it and if he cannot pronounce it at
all, he should, on the basis of precaution, say it in his heart, and
should make a sign for Takbir and should also move his tongue, if he
can.

**963.** It is recommended that after the Takbiratul Ehram the person
concerned should say this: Ya muhsinu qad atakal musiu wa qad amartal
muhsina an yatajawaza 'anil musiei antal Muhsinu wa anal Musio bihaqqa
Muhammadin wa Ali Muhammdin salli "ala Muhammadin wa Ali Muhammadin wa
tajawaz an qabihi ma ta'lamu minni. i.e. O Lord who are kind to your
slaves! This sinful slave has come before You and You have ordered that
good people should show indulgence to the sinners. you are Kind and I am
a sinner. Bestow Your blessings on Muhammad and his progeny and overlook
for the sake of Muhammad and his progeny my shortcomings of which You
axe aware.

**964.** It is recommended for a person who offers prayers that while
pronouncing the fist Takbir of the prayers and the Takbirs which occur
within the prayers, he should raise his hands up to his ears.

**965.** If a person doubts whether or not he has pronounced Takbiratul
Ehram and if he has commenced recitation, he should ignore his doubt and
if he has not recited anything he should pronounce the Takbir.

**966.** If after having pronounced Takbiratul Ehram a person doubts
whether or not he has pronounced it correctly he should ignore his doubt
whether he has commenced reciting something or not.

Qiyam (To Stand)
----------------

**967.** To stand erect while saying Takbiratul Ehram and before the
bowing (which is called qiyam muttasil ba ruku) is a basic element of
the prayers. However, standing while reciting Surah al-Hamd and the
other surah and after performing the bowing is not a basic element and
in case a person omits it inadvertently his prayers is in order.

**968.** It is obligatory for a person to stand for some time before and
after pronouncing Takbir so as to ensure that he has pronounced the
Takbir while standing.

**969.** If a person forgets to perform bowing and sits down after
reciting Hamd and surah, and then recollects that he has not performed
bowing, he should stand up and then go into bowing. In case, however, he
does not stand up and performs bowing while he is bent his prayers will
be void on account of his not having performed qiyam (standing) adjacent
to bowing.

**970.** When a person stands for Takbiratul Ehram or Qir'at
(recitation) he should not move his body and should not bend on one side
and on the basis of precaution he should not lean on anything
voluntarily. However, if he is obliged to lean on something there is no
harm in it.

**971.** If, while standing, a person moves his body or bends on one
side or leans on something owing to forgetfulness there is no harm in
it.

**972.** The recommended precaution is that at the time of standing both
the feet of the person concerned should be on the ground. However, it is
not necessary that the weight of his body should be on both the feet and
if the weight is on one foot there is no harm in it.

**973.** If a person, who can stand' properly, keeps his feet so wide
that it may not be possible to say that he is "standing". his prayers is
void.

**974.** When a person is busy reciting obligatory things in the
prayers, his body should be still. And when he wishes to go a little
backward or forward, or to move his body a little towards right or left,
he should not recite anything at that time.

**975.** If he recites something recommended while his body is in
motion, for example if he says Takbir while going into bowing or
prostration, his prayers is in order and Bi hawlil lahi wa quwwati Aqumu
wa Aq'ud should be said in the state of rising.

**976.** There is no harm in moving hands and fingers at the time of
reciting Hamd, although the recommended precaution is that they too
should not be moved.

**977.** If at the time of reciting Hamd and surah and Tasbihat somebody
moves so much involuntarily that he ceases to be in a state of stillness
of the body, the recommended precaution is that after his body becomes
stationary he should recite again all that he has recited while his body
was in motion.

**978.** It the person concerned becomes unable to stand while offering
prayers he should sit down, and if he cannot even sit, he should lie
down. However, until his body becomes motionless he should not utter any
of the obligatory recitations.

**979.** So long as a person is able to offer prayers in a standing
posture, he should not sit down. For example, if the body of a person
moves when he stands, or he is obliged to lean on something, or to bend
his body to a small extent, he should offer prayers in a standing
posture in whatever manner he can. However, if he cannot stand at all he
should sit straight and offer prayers in the sitting posture.

**980.** So long as a person can sit, he should not offer prayers in a
lying posture, and if he cannot sit straight, he should sit in any
manner he can. And if he cannot sit in any manner, he should lie, as
stated in the orders relating to Qibla on the right hand side, and if he
cannot lie on that side, he should lie on the left hand side, and if
even that be impossible, he should lie on his back in such a manner that
the soles of his feet should be facing Qibla.

**981.** If a person is offering prayers in a sitting posture, and if
after reciting Hamd and surah, he is able to stand and can perform
bowing, while standing, he should stand, and perform bowing while
standing. However, if he cannot do so he should also perform while
sitting.

**982.** If a person, who is offering prayers in a lying posture, can
sit during the prayers he should offer, while sitting, that part of the
prayers which he can, Furthermore, if he can stand he should offer,
while standing, that part of the prayers which he can. However, so long
as his body does not become still, he should not utter any of the
obligatory recitations.

**983.** If a person, who is offering prayers in a sitting posture
becomes capable, during prayers, to stand, he should offer while
standing, that part of the prayers which he can. However, so long as his
body does not become still, he should not utter any of the obligatory
recitations

**984.** If a person, who can stand, fears that, owing to standing he
will become ill, or will meet some harm, he can offer prayers in a
sitting posture, and if he is afraid of sitting also, he on offer the
prayers in a lying posture.

**985.** If a person considers it probable that in the last part of the
time prescribed for prayers he will be able to offer prayers standing,
it is better that he should delay the prayers. In case, however, he
cannot stand, he should offer prayers according to his obligation, when
the time is coming to an end. And in case he offers prayers in the early
part of the prescribed time and becomes able to stand when the time is
coming to the end he should offer the prayers again.

**986.** It is recommended for the person offering prayers that while
standing he should keep his body straight, slope down his shoulders,
place his hands on his thighs, join his fingers with each other, look at
the place of prostration, place the weight of his body equally on the
two feet, should be submissive and humble, and should not place his feet
backwards and forwards. If the person offering the prayers is a man, he
should keep distance between his feet equal to a minimum of three open
fingers, and a maximum of one span, and if she is a womam, she should
keep her feet joined.

Qir'at (Reciting The Surah Hamd And Other Surah Of Holy Qur'an)
---------------------------------------------------------------

**987.** While offering the daily obligatory prayers one should recite
Surah al-Hamd in the first and second unit and thereafter one should, on
the basis of precaution, recite one complete surah in each of the said
two units. While offering prayers Surah az Zuha and Surah inshirah are
treated to be one surah, and the same is the case with Surah al-Fiil and
Quraysh.

**988.** If the time is short for the prayers, or a person is obliged
not to recite the surah e.g. if he fears that if he recites the sura a
thief, a beast, or something else, will do him harm, he should not
recite the surah.

**989.** If a person intentionally recites surah before Hamd, his
prayers is void. In case, however, he recites surah before Hamd by
mistake and realizes this while reciting it, he should abandon the surah
and recite Hamd first and then the other surah.

**990.** If a person forgets to recite Hamd and surah or any one of them
and realizes after reaching the bowing his prayers is in order.

**991.** If a person realizes before bending for bowing that he has not
recited Hamd and surah he should recite them, and if he realizes that he
has not recited the surah, he should recite the surah only. However, if
he realizes that he has not recited only Hamd he should recite Hamd
first and then recite the surah de novo.

Furthermore, if he bends but realizes before reaching the bowing that he
has not recited Hamd and surah, or only surah, or only Hamd he should
stand up and act according to the foregoing orders.

**992.** If while offering prayers, somebody intentionally recites one
of the four surahs, which contain verses necessitating performance of
prostration as mentioned in article 361, his prayers is void on the
basis of precaution.

**993.** If a person begins reciting by mistake a surah which makes
prostration obligatory and he realizes this before reaching the verse
containing prostration. he should abandon that surah and recite some
other surah. And if he realizes this after reciting the verse of
prostration, he should, as a measure of precaution make a sign of
prostration and complete the surah, and should offer its prostration
after completing the prayers.

**994.** If while offering prayers a man listens to the verse making
prostration obligatory, his prayers is in order, and on the basis of
precaution he should make a sign of prostration and should offer its
prostration after offering the prayers.

**995.** It is not necessary to recite a surah in a recommended prayers,
although that prayers may have become obligatory on account of vow
(Nazr) However, as regards some recommended prayers like Wahshat prayers
in which a particular surah is to be recited if a person wishes to act
according to the orders prescribed for that prayers, he should recite
the same surah

**996.** While offering Friday prayers or midday prayers on Friday it is
recommended that after reciting Surah al-Hamd Surah alJumu'ah should be
recited in the first unit, and Surah al-Munafiqin in the second unit,
and in case a person begins reciting one of these surahs he is not
allowed to abandon it and recite another surah in its place.

**997.** If after Hamd somebody begins reciting the Surah Qul Howallah
or Qul ya ayyuhal Kafiroon he cannot abandon it and recite some other
surah However, if in Friday prayers and in midday prayers on Friday, he
recites one of these surahs owing to forgetfulness instead of surah
Jumu'ah and Surah Munafiqin he can abandon it and recite Surah Jumuah
and Surah Munafiqin and precaution is that he should not abandon that
surah after he has recited more than half of it.

**998.** If a person recites intentionally Surah Qul Huwallah or Surah
Qul ya ayyuhal Kafiroon in Friday prayers or in midday prayers on Friday
he cannot on the basis of obligatory precaution abandon it and recite
Surah Jumu'ah and Surah Munafiqin even though he may not have reached
half of it.

**999.** If, while offering prayers, a person recites a surah other than
Surah Qul Howallah and Surah Qul ya ayyuhol Kafiroon he can abandon that
surah before reaching half of it and recite some other surah and on the
basis of precaution he should not abandon it between its half and
two-third and when he reaches its two-third abandoning it and resorting
to another surah is not permissible.

**1000.** If the person offering prayers forgets a part of a surah or
cannot complete it owing to helplessness e.g. on account of shortage of
time, or for some other reason he can abandon that surah and recite some
other surah, although he may have recited two-third of that surah or it
may be Surah Qul Ho wallah or Surah Qul ya Ayyuhal Kafiroon.

**1001.** It is obligatory for a man to recite Surah al-Hamd and the
other surah loudly, while offering dawn, dusk and night prayers, and it
is obligatory for a man and a woman to recite Surah al-Hamd and the
other surah in a low voice while offering midday and afternoon prayers.

**1002.** While offering dawn, dusk and night prayers one should take
care to pronounce all the words and even the last word of Surah al-Hamd
and the other surah loudly.

**1003.** A woman can recite Surah al-Hamd and surah at dawn, dusk and
night prayers loudly or in low voice. However if a non-mehram hears her
voice she should, on the basis of precaution, recite it in a low voice.

**1004.** If a person intentionally offers loudly the prayers, which
should be offered in a low voice and vice versa his prayers is void. In
case, however, he does so owing to forgetfulness or not knowing the rule
his prayers is in order and it is not necessary for him to recite that
part of the prayers although he may come to know about his mistake while
he is reciting Surah al- Hamd or another surah.

**1005.** If a person raises his voice unusually while reciting Surah
al-Hamd and surah as if he is shouting, his prayers is void.

**1006.** A person should learn the prayers by heart so that he may not
recite it incorrectly and if he cannot learn it correctly he should
recite it as best as he can, and the recommended precaution is that he
should offer his prayer in congregation.

**1007.** If a person does not know Surah al-Hamd and surah and other
acts of prayers properly, and can learn them and if he has sufficient
time at his disposal for offering prayers, he should learn these things
and if the time is short he should, if possible, offer his prayers in
congregation.

**1008.** It is better not to take wages for teaching obligatory acts of
prayers and taking wages for teaching recommended things is undoubtedly
permissible.

**1009.** If a person does not know some words of Surah al-Hamd or
surah, or does not utter it intentionally or utters one letter for
another e.g. utters Za for Zad or gives zer or zabar (small diagonal
stroke below and above a letter) to a letter, which should be recited
without zer or zabr or does not pronounce tashdid (double letters), his
prayers is void. (See Qur'an Made Easy I.S.P. 1985).

**1010.** If a person has learnt a word which he considers to be Correct
and recites it in the same manner in prayers, but comes to know later
that he has been reciting it incorrectly, it is not necessary for him to
offer the prayers again.

**1011.** If a person is not acquainted with the zer or zabar of a word
e.g. if he does not Know whether a word contains Sin or Swad he should
learn it, and if he reads it in two or more than two ways e.g. if he
recites the word Mustaqim in ihdinas Siratal Mustaqim with sin and
another time with Swad his prayers is void. However, if the words which
he reads in two ways is a recitation and his reading it incorrectly does
not make it cease to be a recitation his prayers is in order.

**1012.** If there is the letter waw in a word and the letter preceding
it is in that word contains Zammah and the letter after waw, in that
words is Hamza eg. the word Su' the person concerned should prolong the
waw i.e. he should raise or draw its utterance. Similarly if there is
Alif in a word and the letter preceding Alif in that word has stroke and
the letter after Alif in that word is Hamza e.g. Ja'a the person
concerned should raise its Alif.

Furthermore, if there is Ya in a word and the letter preceding Ya in
that word has stroke below and the letter following Ya in that word is
Hamza (e.g. Ji'a, Ya should be read with prolongation and if after these
letters (i.e. Waw and Alif and Ya) there happens to be a letter instead
of Hamza which is silent (i.e. it does not have any stroke) even then
those three letters should be read with prolongation. For example, as
regards wa lazzal leen after Alif the letter lam is silent, its Alif
should be read with prolongation. And if the person concerned does not
act according to the rules mentioned above the obligatory precaution is
that he should complete the prayers and should offer the same de novo.

**1013.** The obligatory precaution is that while offering prayers we
should not resort to waqf ba harkat and wasl ba sukun. And the meaning
of Waqf ba harkat is that we utter different strokes occurring at the
end of a word and allow distance between that word and the succeeding
word. For example while saying Ar Rahmanir Rahim we recite with stroke
below Mim of Ar Rahim and thereafter allow a little distance and then
say Malikiyaw Middin. And the meaning of wasl ba sukun is that we do not
utter the different strokes of a word and join that word with the
succeeding Word. For example, while saying Ar Rahmanir Rahim we do not
give stroke below Mim of Rahim and at once say Ma likiyaw middin.

**1014.** In the third and fourth units of prayers either only Surah
al-Hamd be recited once, or instead of that Tasbihate Arba'ah Subhanal
ahi wal hamdu lillahi wa la illha illalahu wallahu Akbar may be said
once, although it is better that it should be said thrice. It is also
permissible for one who offers prayers to recite Surah al-Hamd in one
unit and the above recital in the other, but it is better for one who
offers prayers individually, to make the said recital in both the units.
And when prayers is required to be offered loudly it is necessary (in
the congregational prayers) for a mamum (follower), as a measure of
necessary precaution, to resort to the recital of the Tasbihat Arba'ah.

**1015.** When time is short one should recite Tasbihate Arba'ah once.

**1016.** It is obligatory for men and women that in the third and
fourth units of prayers they recite Surah al-Hamd or Tasbihat Arba'ah in
a low voice.

**1017.** If a person recites Surah al-Hamd in the third and fourth
units of the prayers he should, on the basis of obligatory precaution
recite its Bismillah in a low voice.

**1018.** A person, who cannot learn Tasbihate Arba'ah or cannot
pronounce them correctly should recite Surah al Hamd in the third and
forth units.

**1019.** If a person recites Tasbihat Arba'ah in the first two units of
a prayers under the impression that they are the last two units and if
he realizes the correct position before performing the bowing, he should
recite Surah al-Hamd and surah and if he realizes this during or after
the bowing his prayers is in order.

**1020.** If a person recites Surah al-Hamd in the last two units of a
prayers thinking that they are the first two units, or recites Surah
al-Hamd in the first two units, thinking that they are the last two
units, his prayers is in order, whether he realizes the correct position
before bowing or after it.

**1021.** If in the third or fourth unit a person wishes to recite Surah
al-Hamd, but the words of Tasbihat Arba'ah come on his tongue or he
wishes to recite Tasbihat Arba'ah but Surah al-Hamd comes on his tongue,
he should abandon it and recite Tasbihat Arba'ah or Surah al-Hamd de
novo. However, if he is habituated to reciting the thing which has come
on his tongue he can complete that very thing and his prayer will be
order.

**1022.** If a person who has the habit of reciting Tasbihate Arba'ah in
the third and fourth units ignores his habit and begins reciting Hamd
with the intention of carrying out his obligation, it is sufficient, and
it is not necessary for him to recite Surah al-Hamd or Tasbihate Arbaah
again.

**1023.** In the third and fourth units it is recommended for a person
offering prayers that he should ask Divine forgiveness (Istighfar) after
Tasbihat Arba'ah For example, he should say AstaghFirulahha Rabbi wa
Atubu ilayhi or he should say Allahummaghfir li. And although he may be
busy uttering forgiveness or may have finished it, if he doubts before
bending himself for bowing whether or not he has recited Surah al-Hamd
or Tasbihate Arba'ah he should recite Surah al-Hamd or Tasbihat Arba'ah.

**1024.** If the person offering prayers doubts in the bowing position
of third or fourth unit whether or not he has recited surah al-Hamd, he
should ignore his doubt. And if he has doubt before reaching the bowing
it is necessary for him to recite Surah al-Hamd or Tasbihat Arba'ah

**1025.** If the person offering prayers doubts whether or not he has
pronounced a verse or a word correctly eg. whether or not he has uttered
Qul Huwallahu Ahad correctly he can ignore his doubt. However if he
repeats that verse or word correctly as a precautionary measure there is
no harm in it. And if he doubts many times he can repeat many times.
However, if he becomes whimsical and utters it once again he should on
the basis of recommended precaution offer his prayers de novo.

**1026.** It is recommended that in the first unit the person offering
prayers should say Auzubillahi Minash shaytanir Rajim before reciting
Surah al Hamd and in the first and second units of midday and afternoon
prayers he should say Bismillah loudly, should recite Surah al-Hamd and
surah distinctly, and should pause at the end of every verse i.e. he
should not join it with the next verse and while reciting Surah al Hamd
and surah, should pay attention to the meanings of each verse. And he
should say. Alhamdulilahi Rabbil 'Alamin after the completion of Surah
al-Hamd by the Imam if he(the follower) is offering prayers in
congregation, and after completion of his Surah alHamd if he is offering
the prayers individually. And after reciting Surah Qul huwallahu Ahad he
should say, "Kazalikaahu Rabbi" once, twice or thrice or Kazalikallahu
Rabana" thrice. And after reciting the surah he should wait a little and
then pronounce the Takbir before bowing or recite qunut.

**1027.** It is recommended that in all the prayers one should recite
Surah Qadr in the first unit and Surah Ikhlas in the second unit.

**1028.** It is abominable that one may not recite Surah Ikhlas even in
one of the daily prayers.

**1029.** It is abominable to recite Surah Ikhlas in one breath.

**1030.** It is abominable to recite in the second unit the same surah
which he has recited in the first unit However, if one recites surah
Ikhlas in both the units it is not abominable.

Ruku' (Bowing)
--------------

**1031.** In every unit the person offering prayers should, after
reciting the surahs (Qirat) bow to such an extent that he may be able to
rest his hands on his Knees. This act is called bowing.

**1032.** If the person offering prayers bows to the extent of bowing
there is no harm even if he does not place his hands on his knees.

**1033.** If a person performs bowing in an unusual manner e.g. if he
bends towards left or right, his bowing is not in order even though his
hands may reach his knees.

**1034.** Bending oneself should be with the object of bowing. Hence, if
a person bends for some other purpose (e.g. to kill an insect) he cannot
reckon it to be bowing. Then he should stand up and should bend again
for bowing. Hence bowing does not increase because of this action, and
the prayers is not nullified.

**1035.** If there is a difference between hands and Knees of a person
and the hands and knees of other people e.g. if his hands are very long
so, that if he bends a little they reach his knees, or his knees are
lower than others, so that he must bend himself much to make his hands
reach his knees, he should bend to the usual extent.

**1036.** A person, who performs bowing in the sitting posture should
bend so much that his face reaches opposite his Knees. And it is better
that he should bend so much that his face reaches near the place of
prostration.

**1037.** It is better that if a person has option in the matter he
should say in bowing Subhannallah thrice or Subhana Rabbiyal Azimi wa bi
hamdih once. And what is apparent is that uttering any recitation to
this extent is sufficient. However if time is short or one is helpless
in the matter saying only Subhana is sufficient.

**1038.** The recitation of bowing should be uttered consecutively and
in correct Arabic, and it is recommended that it should be uttered 3 or
5 times or 7 times and even more than that.

**1039.** In bowing our body should be still to the extent of uttering
obligatory recitation and in recommended recitation also stillness of
the body is better if it is restricted to bowing.

**1040.** If at the time when a man is uttering the obligatory
recitation of bowing he moves so much involuntarily that he ceases to be
in a state of stillness of the body, it is better that after his body
becomes still he utters the recitation again. However, if he moves so
little that he does not cease to be in a state of stillness of the body,
or moves his fingers, there is no harm in it.

**1041.** If the person concerned utters intentionally the recitation of
bowing before he bends to the extent of bowing and his body becomes
still his prayers is void.

**1042.** If a person intentionally raises his head from bowing before
the completion of obligatory recitation, his prayers is void. In case,
however, he raises his head by mistake and before he ceases to be in the
state of bowing he recollects that he has not completed the recitation
of bowing, he should utter the recitation in a state of calmness of the
body, and if he recollects it after he has ceased to be in the state of
bowing, his prayers is in order.

**1043.** If a person cannot remain in the state of bowing to the extent
of recitation the obligatory precaution is that he should complete the
rest of the recitation while standing up from bowing.

**1044.** If a person cannot remain calm during bowing owing to ailment
or some other similar reason, his prayer is in order. However, before he
ceases to be in the state of bowing he should utter the obligatory
recitation in the manner mentioned above.

**1045.** If a person cannot bend to the extent of bowing he should lean
on something and perform bowing and if he cannot perform bowing in the
usual manner even after he has been given support, he should bend to the
maximum extent he can, and should also make a sign for bowing. And if he
cannot bend at all he should make a sign for bowing with his head.

**1046.** If a person, who should make a sign with his head for bowing
and utter its recitation, and open his eyes with the intention of rising
from bowing. And if he cannot do even this, he should, on the basis of
precaution, make an intention for bowing in his heart and utter its
recitation.

**1047.** If a person cannot perform bowing while standing but can bend
for bowing while sitting he should offer prayers while standing and
should make a sign with his head for bowing. And the recommended
precaution is that he should offer another prayers also and should sit
down at the time of bowing and bend for bowing.

**1048.** If some one raises his head after reaching the stage of bowing
and the body becoming calm, and bends again to the extent of bowing, his
prayers is void.

**1049.** After the completion of the recitation of bowing we should sit
straight and go into prostration after our body has become calm and if
we go into prostration intentionally before standing or before our body
becomes calm, our prayer is void.

**1050.** If a person forgets to perform bowing, and before he reaches
the stage of prostration he recollects it, he should stand up and then
go into bowing, and if he returns to bowing in the state of bending, his
prayers is void.

**1051.** If the person offering prayers recollects after his forehead
reaches the earth that he has not performed bowing it is necessary that
he should return and perform bowing after standing up and in case he
recollects this in the second prostration his prayers is void.

**1052.** It is recommended that before going into bowing a person
should say Takbir while he is standing erect, and in bowing he should
push his knees back, keep his back flat, draw his neck, keep it equal to
his back, see between his two feet, say Salawat before or after
recitation, and when he rises after bowing and stands erect, and when
his body is calm, he should say Sami'allahu liman hamidah.

**1053.** It is recommended for women that, while performing bowing,
they should keep their hands higher than their knees, and should not
push back their knees.

Sajdatayn (Two Prostrations)
----------------------------

**1054.** A person offering prayers should perform two prostrations
after the bowing in each unit of the obligatory as well as recommended
prayers. Prostration means that one should place one's forehead on earth
with the intention of humility (before Allah).

While performing prostration during prayers it is obligatory that both
the palms and the knees, and both the big toes are placed on the ground.

**1055.** Two prostrations together are a 'Rukn" (principal element) and
if a person omits to perform two prostration in one unit of an
obligatory prayers, whether intentionally or owing to forgetfulness, or
adds two more prostrations, his prayers is void.

**1056.** If a person omits or adds one prostration intentionally his
prayers becomes void. And if he omits or adds a prostration by mistake
the orders regarding it will be narrated later.

**1057.** If a person does not place his forehead on the ground, whether
intentionally or by mistake, he has not performed prostration, although
other parts of his body may have touched the ground. However, if he
places his forehead on the earth but does not, by mistake, make other
parts of his body reach the ground or does not, by mistake, utter the
recitation, his prostration is in order.

**1058.** It is better that if the person concerned has an option in the
matter he should say Subhanallah thrice or Subhna Rabiyal-Aala wa bi
hamdih once. And he should utter these words one after the other in
correct Arabic. And what is apparent is that uttering any recitation to
this extent is sufficient. And it is recommended that Subhana Rabbiyal
Ala wa bi hamdih should be said thrice or five times or seven times or
more than that.

**1059.** In prostration the body of the person concerned should be calm
to the extent of uttering obligatory recitation and at the time of
recommended recitation also calmness of the body is better if it is with
the intention of the particular action of prostration.

**1060.** If a person utters the recitation of prostration intentionally
before his forehead reaches the ground and his body becomes calm or if
he raises his head from prostration intentionally before the recitation
completes, his prayers is void.

**1061.** If a person utters the recitation of prostration by mistake
before his forehead reaches the ground and realizes his mistake before
he raises his head from prostration he should utter the recitation again
when his body is calm.

**1062.** If after raising his head from prostration a person realizes
that he has raised his head before the completion of the recitation of
prostration his prayers is in order.

**1063.** If at the time of uttering recitation of prostration a person
raises one of his seven limbs from the ground his prayers becomes void.
However, if he raises from the ground parts of his body other than his
forehead when he is not uttering recitation and places them on the
ground again, there is no harm in it.

**1064.** If a person raises his forehead from the ground by mistake
before the completion of the recitation of prostration he cannot place
it on the ground again, he should treat it as one prostration. However,
if he raises other parts of the body from the ground by mistake he
should place them on the earth again and utter the recitation.

**1065.** After the recitation of the first prostration is completed we
should sit, till our body becomes calm, and then perform prostration
again.

**1066.** The place where the person offering prayers should place his
forehead should not be higher than four joined fingers as compared with
the place of the tips of the toes of his feet. Rather it is obligatory
that the place of his forehead should not also be more than four joined
fingers lower than the toes of his feet.

**1067.** If the place where the forehead of the person offering prayers
rests is in a sloping land, whose slope is not correctly known, is
higher than four joined fingers from the place of the toes of his feet,
there is no harm in it.

**1068.** If a person places his forehead by mistake on a thing which is
higher than four joined fingers as compared with the place, where the
toes of his feet rest, he should raise his head and place it on a thing,
which is not high or its height is about four joined fingers or less
than that, and on the basis of precaution, he should offer the prayers
again after completing it.

**1069.** It is necessary that there should be nothing between the
forehead of the person offering prayers and the thing on which he offers
prostration. Hence, if the mohr (earthen tablet) is dirty and the
forehead does not reach the mohr itself the prostration is void. There
is, however, no harm if for example, the color of the mohr undergoes a
change.

**1070.** In prostration the person offering prayers should place the
two palms of his hands on the ground. In a state of helplessness,
however, there is no harm in placing the back of the hands on the
ground, and if even this is not possible, he should, on the basis of
precaution, place the wrists of hands on the ground. And in case he
cannot do even this, he should place any part of the body up to his
elbow on the ground, and if even this is not possible it is sufficient
to place the arms on the earth.

**1071.** In prostration the person offering prayers should place his
two big toes on the earth, and if he places other toes of the foot or
its upper part on ground or owing to the nails being long his big toes
do not reach the ground his prayers is void. And a person, who has been
offering his prayers in this manner owing to his negligence or because
of his being unaware of the rule, should offer his prayers again.

**1072.** If a part of the big toe is cut off the person concerned
should place the remaining part of it on the ground and if nothing of it
has remained or what has remained is too short he should, on the basis
of precaution, place the remaining toes on the ground and if he has no
toes he should place on the ground whatever part of the foot is intact.

**1073.** If a person performs prostration in an unusual manner e.g. if
he joins his chest and belly with the ground or stretches his feet, he
should, on the basis of recommended precaution, offer the prayers again,
notwithstanding the fact that the seven limbs mentioned above touch the
ground. However, if he stretches his feet so much that it cannot be said
that he is performing prostration, his prayers is void.

**1074.** The mohr (tablet for prostration) or other thing on which a
person performs prostration should be pure. However, if, for example, he
places the mohr on impure carpet, or one side of the mohr is impure and
he places his forehead on its pure side, there is no harm in it.

**1075.** If there is a sore or some other similar thing in the forehead
of a person he should, if possible, offer prostration on the healthy
part of his forehead. And if this is not possible he should dig the
earth and place the sore in the cavity and as much of the healthy part
of his forehead on the earth as is sufficient for prostration.

**1076.** If the sore or wound has covered the entire forehead of a man,
he should, on the basis of precaution, perform prostration with one of
the two sides of forehead and chin, even possible he should do it with
chin only. And if it is not possible to perform prostration even with
his chin he should make a sign for prostration.

**1077.** If a person cannot make his forehead reach the ground he
should bend as much as he can, and should place the mohr or any other
thing on which it is lawful to perform prostration, on something which
is high, and should place his forehead on it in such a way that it may
be said that he has performed prostration. He should however place the
palms of his hands, and his knees and toes on the ground as usual.

**1078.** If the person offering prayers cannot procure something high
on which he place the mohr or any other thing on which it is lawful to
perform prostration, he should raise the mohr or the other thing on his
hand and perform prostration on it.

**1079.** If a person cannot perform prostration at all, he should make
a sign for prostration with his head, and if he cannot do even that, he
should make a sign with his eyes. And if he cannot make a sign even with
his eyes he should, on the basis of recommended precaution, make a sign
for prostration with his hand etc. and should also make an intention for
prostration in his heart.

**1080.** If the forehead of a person is raised involuntarily from the
place of prostration he should not, as far as possible, let it reach the
place of prostration again, and this is treated to be one prostration
though he has not uttered the recitation of prostration. And if he
cannot control his head and it reaches the place of prostration once
again involuntarily, both of them will be reckoned to be one
prostration, and if he has not uttered the recitation, he should utter
it then.

**1081.** At a place where a person has to observe taqayyah (concealing
one's faith in dangerous situation against the enemy) he can perform
prostration on a carpet or other similar things, and it is not necessary
for him to go somewhere else to offer prayers. In case, however, he can
perform prostration on a mat or any other thing on which it is lawful to
perform prostration he should perform prostration on it, if he has not
to face any hardship by doing so. In that event he should not perform
prostration on a carpet or any other similar thing.

**1082.** If a person performs prostration on a mattress filled with
feathers or any other similar thing, his prostration is void if his body
cannot remain calm on it.

**1083.** If a person is obliged to offer prayers on a muddy ground and
it is not difficult for him if his body and dress become covered with
mud, he should perform prostration and tashahhud as usual. In case,
however, it is difficult for him, he should make a sign for prostration
with his head while he is standing and should recite tashahhud in the
standing posture and his prayers will be in order.

**1084.** The recommended precaution is that in the first unit and in
the third unit which does not contain tashahhud (like the third unit in
midday, afternoon and night prayers) one should sit still for a while
after the second prostration and then stand up.

Things On Which Prostration Is In Order
---------------------------------------

**1085.** Prostration should be performed on earth and on those things
which are not edible and which grow from earth (e.g. wood and leaves of
trees).

It is not in order to perform prostration on things which are used as
food or dress (e.g. wheat, barley and cotton etc.) or on things which
are not considered to be parts of the earth (e.g. gold, silver, agate,
tar etc.).

**1086.** The obligatory precaution is that prostration should not be
performed on the leaves of vine before they become dry.

**1087.** It is in order to perform prostration on those things which
grow from earth and serve as food for animals (for example grass, hay
etc.).

**1088.** It is in order to perform prostration on flowers which are not
edible and also on medicinal herbs which grow from earth (for example on
the flowers like violet or borage etc.).

**1089.** Performing prostration on a grass which is usually eaten in
some cities, but is not usually eaten in other cities, and on unripe
fruit is not in order.

**1090.** It is in order to perform prostration on lime-stone and gypsum
and the recommended precaution is that prostration should not be
optionally performed on baked gypsum, lime, brick and baked earthenware
and other things resembling them.

**1091.** It is in order to perform prostration on paper even if it is
made of cotton or something resembling it.

**1092.** Turbatul Husayn (clay of Karbala) is the best thing for
performing prostration. After it there are earth, stone and grass in
order of priority.

**1093.** If a person does not possess anything on which it is lawful to
perform prostration or, even if he does posses such a thing but cannot
perform prostration on it on account of severe heat or coldness, he
should perform prostration on his dress and if even this is not possible
he should perform prostration on the back of his hand or on any other
thing on which it is not permissible to perform prostration optionally.
However, the recommended precaution is that so long as it is possible to
perform prostration on the back of one's hand it should not be performed
on any other such thing.

**1094.**The prostration performed on mud and on soft clay on which
one's forehead cannot remain calm is void.

**1095.** If the mohr sticks to the forehead in the first prostration it
should be removed from the forehead for the second prostration.

**1096.** If the thing on which a person performs prostration, is lost
while he is offering prayers, and he does not possess any other thing on
which prostration may be in order, and he has sufficient time at his
disposal he should break the prayers. In case however, time is short he
should act in the manner narrated in article **1093.**

**1097.** If a person realizes in the state of prostration that he has
placed his forehead on a thing, on which prostration is void, he should
raise his head from that thing, and perform prostration on a thing, on
which prostration is in order. And if this is not possible, and time for
offering prayers is ample, he should break the prayers. And if the time
is short he should act in the manner narrated in article **1093.**

**1098.** If a person realizes after prostration that he has placed his
forehead on a thing, on which prostration is void, he should perform
prostration on a thing, on which prostration is in order, and should, on
the basis of recommended precaution, offer the prayers de novo and if
this thing happens twice in one unit, he should make amends for the
prostration (i.e. he should perform one prostration on a thing on which
prostration is in order) and the obligatory precaution is that he should
offer the prayer again.

**1099.** It is unlawful to perform prostration for anyone other than
Almighty Allah. Some of the common people place their foreheads on earth
before the graves of the holy Imams. If this is done to thank Allah,
there is no harm in it, but other- wise it is unlawful.

The Recommended And Abominable Acts Of Prostration
--------------------------------------------------

**1100.** Certain things are recommended in prostration:

(i) A person, who is offering prayers in a standing posture, should
stand properly after raising his head from bowing, and a person who is
offering prayer in a sitting posture, should sit properly after raising
his head from bowing, and then say takbir for going into prostration.

(ii) While going into prostration a man should first place his hands
(palms) on the ground and a woman should first place her knees on the
ground.

(iii) The person offering prayers should place his nose on a mohr or on
any other thing on which prostration is in order.

(iv) While performing prostration the person offering prayers should
join the fingers of the hands with one another and place them parallel
to the ears in such a way that their tips should face Qibla.

(v) While in prostration he should pray to Allah an seek his needs from
Him and should recite this supplication: Ya Khayrul Masulin wa ya
Khayral Mu'tin Urzuqni warzuq Ayali Min Fazlika Fa innaka zulfazlil
Azim. (Translation: O You Who are the best from whom people seek their
needs, and O You, who the best bestower of gifts Give me and the members
of my family sustenance with Your grace. Undoubtedly You possess the
greatest grace).

(vi) After performing prostration a man should sit on his left thigh and
should place the instep of the right foot on the sole of the left foot.

(vii) After every prostration, when a person sits down and his body
becomes calm, he should say takbir.

(viii) When his body becomes calm after the first prostration he should
say: "Astaghfirullha Rabbi wa Atubu Ilayhi.

(ix) He should prolong the prostration, and when he sits, he should
place his hands on his thighs.

(x) He should say Allahu Akbar for going into second prostration when
his body is in a state of calmness.

(xi) He should recite Salawat while reciting prostrations.

(xii) At the time of standing up he should raise his hands from the
ground after raising his knees.

(xiii) Men should not make their elbows and bellies touch the ground;
they should keep their arms separated from their sides. As regards women
they should place their elbows and bellies on the ground and should join
their limbs with one another. Other recommended acts of prostration have
been mentioned in detailed books.

**1101.** It is abominable to recite the holy Qur'an in prostration. It
is also abominable to blow off the dust from the place of prostration
and if, as a result of such blowing, one utters any- thing intentionally
the prayers is void.

Besides these there are other abominable acts, which are given in
detailed books.

Obligatory Prostrations Of The Holy Qur'an
------------------------------------------

**1102.** To recite or hear anyone of the following verses of the holy
Qur'an the performance of prostration becomes obligatory: (i) Surah as
Sajdah, 32:15 (ii) Surah Ha Mim Sajdah, 41:38 (iii) Surah an-Najm, 53:62
and (iv) Surah al-Alaq, 96:**19.** Whenever a person recites such a
verse or hears it being recited by someone else he should perform
prostration immediately when the verse ends, and if he forgets to
perform it, he should do it as and when he recollects it, and the
apparent position is that if a person hears involuntarily it is not
obligatory for him to perform prostration, although it is better to
perform it.

**1103.** If a person hears the prostration verse being recited by
someone else and also recites it himself he should, on the basis of
obligatory precaution, perform two prostrations.

**1104.** If a person is performing prostration which is not a part of
prayers and hears someone else reciting the prostration verse or recites
it himself he should raise his head from prostration and perform another
prostration for that verse.

**1105.** If a person hears or listens to the verse of obligatory
prostration from gramophone, or tape-recorder, or a small child, who
cannot distinguish between good and bad, or a person who does not intend
reciting the holy Qur'an, it is not obligatory for him to perform
prostration, and the same order applies if the verse of prostration is
transmitted from radio or television or through a tape-recorder.
However, it a person recites the verse of obligatory prostration from
the radio station with the intention of reciting the holy Qur'an and
another person hears it on the radio, it is obligatory for him to
perform prostration.

**1106.** The place, where a person performs an obligatory prostration
of the holy Qur'an should not be a usurped one, and, on the basis of
obligatory precaution, the place where he places his forehead should not
be higher than four joined fingers from the place where the tips of his
toes rest. However, it is not necessary that he should have performed
ablutions or taken bath and should be facing Bible and should conceal
his private parts and his body and the place where he has to place his
forehead are, pure. Furthermore, the things which are a pre-requisite in
the matter of the dress of a person offering prayers are not a
prerequisite in the matter of the dress of one who is performing
obligatory prostration.

**1107.** The obligatory precaution is that in the obligatory
prostration of the Qur'anic verse the person concerned should place his
forehead on a mohr or any other thing on which prostration is in order,
and should keep other parts of his body on the ground as required in a
prostration of prayers.

**1108.** When a person places his head on the ground with the intention
of performing an obligatory prostration of the holy Quran it suffices
even if he does not recite anything. However, recital is recommended and
it is better that the following recital should be made: La ilaha illal
lahu haqqan haqqa; La illha illal lahu imanan wa tasdiqa; La ilaha illal
lahu ubudiyyatan wa riqqa; Sajadtu laka ya Rabbi ta'abbudan wa riqqa la
mustankifan wa la mustakbiran bal ana abdun zalilun zaifun Kha'ifun
mustajir.

Tashahhud (Bearing Witness During Prayers)
------------------------------------------

**1109.** In the second unit of all obligatory payers and in the third
unit of dusk prayers and in the fourth unit of midday, afternoon and
night prayers one should sit after the second prostration with a
tranquil body and recite tashahhud thus: "Ash hadu an la ilaha illal
lahu wahdahu la sharika lah waash hadu anna Muhammadan Abduhu wa
Rasuluh, Ala humma salli ala Muhammadin wa Aali Muhammad And the
obligatory precaution is that tashahhud should not be recited in any
order other than that mentioned. Furthermore it is also necessary to
recite tashahhud while offering witr (in midnight) prayers.

**1110.**The words of tashahhud should be recited in correct Arabic and
consecutively, as is usual.

**1111.** If a person forgets tashahhud and stands up and recollects
before bowing that he has not recited tashahhud he should sit down and
recite it, and stand up again, and should recite that which should be
recited in that unit and should complete the prayers. And after the
prayer he should, on the basis of obligatory precaution, perform two
sajdatus sahv for standing unnecessarily. And if -he recollects this in
bowing or there- after he should complete the prayers and after the
salam of prayers should, on the basis of obligatory precaution, perform
the qaza of tashahhud and should perform two sajdatus sahv for the
forgotten tashahhud.

**1112.** It is recommended for us to sit, while we are performing
tashahhud on the left thigh and place the upper part of the right foot
on the sole of the left foot and should say, 'Al-hamdu lillah' or
'Bismillahi wa billahi walhamdu lillahi wa khayril asmai lillah' before
reciting tashahhud. It is also recommended that one should place one's
palms on one's thighs with joined fingers and should look at one's lap
and should say this after tashahhud and salawat: Wa taqabbal shafa'atahu
wa arfa' darajatahu.

**1113.** It is recommended for women that while reciting tashahhud they
should keep their thighs joined with each other.

Salam (Salutation) Of The Prayers
---------------------------------

**1114.** While a person is sitting after he has recited tashahhud of
the last unit of the prayers and his body is tranquil it is recommended
to say: Assalamu allayka ayyuhan Nabiyyu wa rahmatullahi wa barrakatuh;
and then he should say: Assalamu alayna wa ala ibadil lahis salihin; or
he should say instead: Assalamu alaykum. And it is recommended that he
should add wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh after Assalmu alaykum and should
recite both the salams.

**1115.** If a person forgets the salam of prayers and recollects this
when the shape of the prayers has not yet been upset, and has also not
performed any act, which, if done intentionally or by mistake, nullifies
the prayers (e.g. turning from qibla) he should recite the salam and his
prayers is in order.

**1116.** If a person forgets the salam of prayers and recollects this
when the shape of the prayers has been upset, or he has performed an
act, which, if done intentionally or by mistake, nullifies the prayers
(e.g~ turning back from Qibla) his prayers is in order.

Tartib (Sequence)
-----------------

**1117.** If a person intentionally changes the sequence of the
component acts of the prayers, for example, if he recites the other
surah before reciting Surah al-Hamd or performs the two prostrations
before performing bowing, his prayers is void.

**1118.** If a person forgets a rukn (basic element) of the prayers and
performs the succeeding rukn, for example before performing bowing he
performs the two sajdas, his prayers would become void.

**1119.** If a person forgets a rukn and performs an act which comes
after it and is not a rukn, for example if he recites tashahhud before
performing the two prostrations he should perform the rukn and should
recite again the thing which he recited earlier than the Rukn by
mistake.

**1120.** If a person forgets a thing which is not a rukn and performs s
rukn which comes after it, for example if he forgets Surah al-Hamd and
begins performing bowing his prayers is in order.

**1121.** If a person forgets a thing which is not a rukn and performs a
thing preceding it which, too, is not a rukn for example if he forgets
Surah al-Hamd and recites the surah, he should perform what he has
forgotten, and then recite again the thing, which he recited earlier by
mistake.

**1122.** If a person performs the first prostration under the
impression that it is the second prostration or performs the second
prostration under the impression that it is the fat prostration his
prayers is in order and his first prostration will be treated to be the
first prostration and his second prostration will be treated to be the
second prostration.

Muwalat (Maintenance Of Continuity)
-----------------------------------

**1123.** A person should maintain continuity during prayers viz. he
should perform the various acts of prayers (for example, bowing, two
prostrations and tashahhud) consecutively and continuously and whatever
he recites should be continuous in the usual manner. And in case he
allows such an interval between the different acts that the people do
not say that he is offering prayers his prayers would be void.

**1124.** If while offering prayers a person allows gap between letters
or words by mistake and the gap is not so much that the very form of the
prayers is destroyed and if he has not yet begun performing the
succeeding rukn he should recite those letters or words in the usual
manner, and if anything thereafter has been recited it is necessary that
he should repeat it, and if he has engaged himself in the next Rukn his
prayers is in order.

**1125.** Prolonging bowing and prostration, or reciting big chapters
(Surahs) does not break continuity.

Qunut
-----

**1126.** It is recommended that qunut be recited in all obligatory and
recommended prayers before the bowing of the second unit and it is also
recommended that qunut be recited in the Witr ('Midnight) prayers before
bowing (although that prayers is of one unit only).

In Friday prayers there is one qunut in every unit. In the Sign Prayers
there are five qunut and in Eid prayers there are five qunut in the
first unit and tour qunut in the second unit.

**1127.** It is also recommended that while reciting qunut a person
should keep his hands in front of his face, join the palms of his hands,
and keep them facing the sky, join all his fingers except the thumbs,
and should keep his eyes on the palms.

**1128.** Whatever a person recites in qunut is sufficient, even if he
says, 'Subhanallah' only once. It is, however, better to make the
following supplication: La illaha illallahul Halimul Karim, La illaha
illallahul 'Aliyyul 'Azim Subhanallahi Rabbis samawatis sabi we Robbil
arazinas sabi wama fi hinna wama bayna hunna wa Rabbil arshil azim wal
hamdu lillahi Rabbilalamin.

**1129.** It is recommended that qunut should be recited loudly.
However, if a person is offering prayers in congregation and the Imam
can hear his voice it is not recommended for him to recite qunut loudly.

**1130.** If a person does not recite qunut intentionally there is no
qaza for it. And if he forgets it and recollects before he bends to the
extent of bowing it is recommended that he should stand up and recite
it. And if he recollects it while performing bowing it is recommended
that he should perform its qaza after bowing. And if he recollects it
while performing Prostration it is recommended that he should perform
its qaza after salam

Translation Of Prayers
----------------------

### I. Translation of Surah al-Hamd

Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim (I commence with the Name of Allah - in whom
all excellences are combined and who is free from all defects. The
Compassionate - One whose blessings are extensive and unlimited. The
Merciful - One whose blessings are inherent and eternal).

Alhamdu lillahi Rabbil alamin (Praise be to Allah. the Nourisher of the
creation).

Arrahmanir Rahim (The Compassionate, the Merciful).

Maliki yaw middin (Lord of the Day of Judgement).

Iyyaka na'budu wa iyyka nastain (You alone we worship and to You alone
we pray for help).

Ihdinas sirirtal mustaqim (Guide us to the straight path - which is the
religion of Islam).

Siratal lazina an'amta alayhim (The path of those whom You have favoured
(the prophets and their successors).

Ghayril moghzubi alayhim walazzalin. (Not of those who have incurred
Your wrath, nor of those who have gone astray).

### II. Translation of Surah al-Ikhlas

Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim (I commence with the Name of Allah - in whom
all excellences are combined and who is free from all defects. The
Compassionate - One whose blessings are extensive and unlimited. The
Merciful - One whose blessings are inherent and eternal).

Qul huwallahu Ahad (O Prophet!) Say: Allah is One - the Eternal Being).

Allahus Samad (Allah is He Who is independent of all beings).

Lam yalid walam yulad (He begot none, nor was He begotten).

Walam yakullahu kufuwan ahad (And none in the creation is equalto Him).

### III. Translation of the Recitals During Bowing and Prostrations, and of Those Recommended After Them

Subhana Rabbiyal Azime wa bihamdih (My Nourisher is Great and free from
all defects and I am busy in His praise).

Subhna Rabbi yal Ala wa bihamdih (My Nourisher is the Most High and free
from all defects and I am busy in His praise).

Sami Allahu liman hamidah (When one praises Allah, He hears the praise
and accepts it).

Astaghfirulaha Rabbi wa utubu ilayh (I seek forgiveness from Allah who
is my Nourisher and I turn to Him).

Bi haw lilahi wa quwwatihi aqumu wa aqud (I stand and sit with the help
and strength of Allah.

### IV. Translation of Qunut

La illaha illallahul Halimul Karim,(There is none worth Worshipping but
Allah who is forbearing and Generous).

La illaha illallahul 'Aliyyul 'Azim. (There is none worth worshipping
but Allah Who is Eminent and Great).

Subhanallahi Rabbis samawat issabi we Robbil arazinas sabi (Independent
and pure is Allah, Who is the Nourisher of the seven heavens and of the
seven worlds).

wama fi hinna wama bayna hunna wa Rabbil arshil azim (And who is the
Nourisher of all the things which are in the heavens and the worlds as
well as of those which are between them and Who is the Lord of the great
'Arsh (Throne).

wal hamdu lillahi Rabbilalamin. (And praise be to Allah, the Nourisher
of the creation).

### V. Translation of Tasbihat Arba'ah (Four )

Subhhnallahi wal hamdu lillahi wal Hamdu lillahi wa la illaha illala ho
wallaho Akbar (Allah is Pure and Independent and all praise is tor Him
and there is no one worth worshipping other than Allah and He is Greater
than that He may be praised).

### VI. Translation of Tashahhud and Salaam

Ash hadu an Ia ilaha illalahu wahdahu la shareeka lahu wa ashhadu anna
Mohammedan abduhu wa rasuluh. (All praise is due to Allah and I testify
that there is none worth worshipping except the Almighty Allah Who is
One and has no partner. And I testify that Muhammad is His servant and
Messenger).

Allahumma salle allah Mohammedin wa alle Mohammed (O Allah! Send Your
blessings on Muhammad and his progeny).

We taqqabal shafa'atuhu warfa darajatahu (And accept his - the holy
Prophet's - intercession and raise his rank).

Assalamu allayka ayyuhan Nabiyyu wa rahmatullahi wa baraktuh (O Prophet!
Allah's peace, blessings and grace be upon you!)

Assallmu allayna wa ala ibadil lahis salihin (Allah's peace be on us -
those offering prayers - and upon all pious servants of Allah).

Assalamu alaykum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh. (Allah's peace, blessings
and grace be on you believers!)

Taqeeb (Supplications After Prayers)
------------------------------------

**1131.** It is recommended that after offering the prayers one should
engage oneself for some time in reciting supplications and reading the
holy Qur'an. It is better that before he leaves his place and his
ablutions, or ceremonial bath or tayammum becomes void, he should recite
supplications facing Qibla

It is not necessary that supplications be recited in Arabic but it is
better to recite those supplications, which have been given in the book
of supplications. The tasbih (hymn) of Lady Fatima-tuz-Zahra (peace be
on her) is one of those supplications which have been stressed upon
most. This tasbih should be recited in the following order: Allahu Akbar
34 times; Alhamdulillah 33 times and Subhanallah 33 times. It is
permissible to recite Subhanallah earlier than Alhamdulillah, but it is
better to maintain the said order.

**1132.**It is recommended that after the prayers a person performs a
prostration of thanksgiving and it is sufficient that he places his
forehead on the ground with the intention of thanksgiving. However, it
is better that he should say Shukran lillah or Al-'afv 100 times or
thrice or once only and it is also recommended that whenever a person is
favoured with a blessing or gets rid of a hardship he should perform a
prostration of thanksgiving.

Salawat (Greeting) On The Holy Prophet
--------------------------------------

**1133.** It is recommended that whenever a person hears or utters the
sacred name of the holy Prophet of Islam (for example Muhammad or
Ahmad), or his title (for example, Mustafa) or his patronymic (for
example, Abul Qasim) he should say. "Alahumma salli 'ala Muhommadin wa
Ale Muhammad" even though he may be offering prayers at that time.

**1134.** It is recommended that while writing the sacred name of the
holy Prophet greeting be written for him. And it is also preferable that
whenever his name is mentioned greeting be sent on him.

[^1]: Raising the hands for supplication after completing the surah in
the second unit.


