Prayers of a Traveller
======================

A traveller should curtail the midday, afternoon, and night prayers tie.
he should perform two units instead of four) subject to the fulfillment
of following eight conditions:

(i) The first condition is that his journey is not less than 8 legal
farsakh (or farsangs). A legal farsakh is a little less than 5 1/2
kilometers. (As regards it's conversion into miles 8 farsakh are equal
to 28 miles approximately).

**1281.** A person, the total of whose outward journey and return
journey is 8 farsakh, and neither his outward journey nor his return
journey is less than 4 farsakh, should shorten his prayers. In case,
therefore, his outward journey is 3 farsakh and his return journey is 5
farsakh or vice verse he should offer complete prayers (i.e. prayers
consisting of four units).

**1282.** If the total distance of outward and return journey is 8
farsakh, the traveller should shorten his prayers even though he may not
return on the same day or night. However it is better that he should
also offer complete prayers.

**1283.** If a brief journey is less than 8 farsakh or the person does
not know whether or not his journey is 8 farsakh, he should not shorten
his prayers, and if he doubts whether or not his journey is 8 farsakh,
it is not necessary for him to make investigation in the matter, and
should offer complete prayers.

**1284.** If an Adil or a reliable person tells a traveller that the
distance of his journey consists of 8 farsakh, he should shorten his
prayers.

**1285.** If s person, who believes that the distance of his journey
consists of 8 farsakh, shortens his prayers, and learns later that it
was not 8 farsakh, he should offer four units of prayers, and if the
time prescribed for the prayers has passed, he should perform its qaza.

**1286.** It a person is sure that his journey is not of 8 farsakh or
doubts whether or not it is of 8 farsakh and if he realizes on the way
that the distance of his journey has been 8 farsakh, he should offer
shortened prayers, though a part of the journey still remains, and it he
has offered complete prayers, he should offer it again in the shortened
form.

**1287.** If a person comes and goes 8 number of times between two
places the distance of which is less than 4 farsakh he should offer
complete prayers, though the total distance covered by him may be 8
farsakh.

**1288.** If two roads lead to a place, and one of them is less than 8
farsakh long, and the length of the other is 8 farsakh or more, the
traveller should offer shortened prayers if he travels.by the road which
is 8 farsakh long and should offer complete prayers if he travels by the
road which is less than 8 farsakh long.

**1289.** If the city has a wall, the traveller should reckon 8 farsakh
from the wall of the city, and if it does not have a wall, he should
reckon the same from the last houses of the city.

(ii) The second condition is that the traveller should intend, at the
time of the commencement of the journey, to cover a distance of 8
farsakh. In case, therefore, he travels up to a point which is at a less
distance than 8 farsakh and after reaching there determines to go to
another place and the two distances, when combined, come to 8 farsakh he
should offer full prayers. This is so because he did not intend
travelling 8 farsakh when he commenced his journey. In case, however, he
intends travelling 8 farsakh further or to go up to a distance of 4
farsakh and then to cover another 4 farsakh to return home, or to go to
a place, where he intends staying for 10 days, he should shorten his
prayers.

**1290.** A person, who does not know how many farsakh his journey is
(for example, if he travels to rind out something which has been lost
and does not know how much he should travel to find it out) should offer
complete prayers. However, if the return journey up to his home or up to
a place, where he intends staying for 10 days, is 8 farsakh or more, he
should offer shortened prayer. Moreover, if he makes an intention, while
travelling, that he will perform outward journey coveting 4 farsakh and
also return journey covering 4 farsakh, he should shorten his prayers.

**1291.** A traveller should offer shortened prayers only when he has
determined to travel 8 farsakh. Hence, if a person goes outside the city
and, for example, he intends performing a journey of 8 farsakh if he
finds a companion, he should offer shortened prayers, if he is sure that
he will find a companion, but should offer complete prayers, if he is
not sure about it.

**1292.** Though a person, who intends to travel 8 farsakh, may cover
only a short distance every day. yet he should shorten his prayers, but
when he reaches a point where he cannot hear the Azan of his town, and
the people of his town cannot see him (and the sign of the people or his
town not seeing him is that he himself may not be able to see them) he
should shorten his prayers. However, if he covers a very short distance
every day so that the people may not say usually that he is a traveller
he should offer complete prayers and the recommended precaution is that
he should offer shortened as well as complete prayers.

**1293.** If a person who is under the control of another person while
going on a journey (for example, a servant, who is travelling with his
master) knows that his journey is 8 farsakh, he should offer shortened
prayers. and if he does not know this, he should offer complete prayers,
and it is not necessary for him to make inquiry in the matter.

**1294.** It a person, who is under the control of another person. while
going on a journey, knows or thinks that he will get separated from that
person, before covering a distance of 4 farsakh, he should offer
complete prayers.

**1295.** If a person, who is under the control of another person, while
going on a journey doubts whether or not he will get separated from that
person, before covering a distance of 4 farsakh should offer complete
prayers. However, if his doubt is due to the fact that he considers it
probable that an impediment will take place in his journey, and if this
probability is not valid in the eyes other people, he should offer
shortened prayers. Fe that the traveller does not change

(iii) The third condition his intention while on his way. In case,
therefore, he changes his mind, or wavers his intention before covering
4 farsakh. he should offer full prayers.

**1296.** It after covering a distance of 4 farsakh the traveller
abandons the journey; and if he decides to remain at that place or to
return after 10 days; or wavers in the matter of returning or staying
there, he should offer complete prayers.

**1297.** If a person abandons the journey after reaching a distance of
4 farsakh and decides to return, he should offer shortened prayers
though he may wish to stay there for less than 10 days.

**1298.** If a person commences his journey to go to a place, which is
at a distance of 8 farsakh, and after covering a part of the journey
decides to go to another place, and the distance between the place Prom
where he started his journey up to the place where he intends going, is
8 farsakh. he should shorten his prayers.

**1299.** If after covering a distance of 4 farsakh a person wavers
whether he should cover the rest of the journey of 8 farsakh or should
return to his place without staying at any place for 10 days, he should
shorten his prayers, as he is not sure as to whether he should continue
his journey or not, although later he may take a firm decision as to
whether he should cover the remaining journey or should return to his
place.

**1300.** If after covering a distance of 4 farsakh. a person wavers
whether he should continue his journey for the remaining part of the
total of 8 farsakh or should return to his place, but the probability is
that he will stay for 10 days at the place where he wavers or at some
other place, although he may decide later to proceed on his way without
staying for 10 days, it is necessary for him in these circumstances to
offer complete prayers whether or not he proceeds on his way during the
state of indecision. However, if his intention is to cover another 8
farsakh or to perform outward journey of 4 farsakh and return journey of
4 farsakh, he should offer shortened prayers from the time he departs.

**1301.**If before covering a distance of 4 farsakh a traveller wavers
as to whether he should perform his remaining journey or not, and
decides later to cover that part of the journey and if his remaining
journey is of 8 farsakh or if he intends to go 4 farsakh and then to
cover return journey of 4 farsakh, he should shorten his prayers from
the time he starts his journey after taking the said decision. And in
this event it makes no difference whether of not he covers the journey
in the state of indecision.

(iv) The fourth condition is that the traveller does not intend passing
through his home town or to stay at some place for 10 days or more,
before he reaches a distance of 8 farsakh Hence a person, who intends
passing through his home town or to stay at a place for 10 days, before
he covers a distance of 8 farsakh. should offer full prayers.

**1302.** A person, who does not know whether or not he will pass
through his home town, before reaching a place, which is at a distance
of 8 farsakh, or whether he will stay at a place for 10 days, or a
person who is not sure as to whether he should pass through his
home-town, or stay at a place for 10 days, should offer complete prayers
even though he may abandon the idea of staying at a place for 10 days or
passing through his home-town. However, if the remaining distance is 8
farsakh or it is 4 farsakh and he wishes to go and return and the return
journey, too, is of 4 farsakh, he should offer shortened prayers.

**1303.** A person who wishes to pass through his home-town before he
reaches a distance of 8 farsakh or to stay at a place for 10 days or a
person who is not sure about passing through his home-town or staying at
a place for 10 days, should offer complete prayers even though he
abandons the idea of passing through his home town or staying at a place
for 10 days. However, if the remaining journey is of 8 farsakh or 4
farsakh. and he wishes to go and return and the return journey is also
of 4 farsakh. he should shorten his prayers.

(v) The fifth condition is that the purpose of travelling is not an
unlawful act. In case, therefore, a person travels to do some- thing
unlawful (for example to commit theft) he should offer full prayers. The
same order applies when travelling itself is unlawful, for example, when
travelling harms the traveller it is unlawful, or when a wife travels
without the permission of her husband and it may be said that the wife
is disobedient to her husband, or when a child does, son or daughter)
travels in spite of the parents prohibiting him/her from doing so, and
it may be said that the child if disobedient to his/her parents when
travelling is also not obligatory for them. But when travelling is
obligatory (e.g. pilgrimage to Makkah), the prayers should be shortened.

**1304.** A journey, which is not obligatory, and is a source of trouble
to one's parents, is unlawful, and while going on such a journey one
should offer complete prayers and should also fast.

**1305.** A person, whose journey is not unlawful and who is not going
on the journey to do something unlawful, should shorten his prayers
notwithstanding the fact that he may, during the journey, commit some
sin (e.g. he may indulge in back-biting or may drink liquor).

**1306.** If a person undertakes a journey to abandon some obligatory
act, whether or not he has some other interest in the journey, should
offer complete prayers. Hence, if a person can repay his debt during his
journey and undertakes the journey to escape repayment of the debt, he
should offer complete prayers. However, if his journey is in connection
with some other matter, he should shorten his prayers although by going
on the journey he may also be abandoning an obligatory act.

**1307.** If the journey of the person concerned is not unlawful, but
his animal of riding or other means of conveyance being used by him, is
a usurped one, or he is travelling on an usurped land, he should shorten
his prayers.

**1308.** If a person is travelling along with an oppressor, and if he
is not helpless in the matter and his journeying is a source of help to
the oppressor, he should offer complete prayers. In case, however, he is
helpless or, for example, is travelling with the oppressor to get an
oppressed person released, he should shorten his prayers.

**1309.** If a person travels for recreation and outing, his journey is
not unlawful, and he should shorten his prayers.

**1310.** If a person goes out for hunting with the object of sport and
pleasure, his prayers during the time of outward journey should be
performed completely, but it should be shortened during his return
journey. In case, however, a person goes out for hunting to earn his
livelihood, he should offer shortened prayers. And the position is the
same when he goes for business and increase in his wealth, although in
this case the precaution is that he should offer shortened as well as
complete prayers.

**1311.** If a person has journeyed to commit a sin, he should, on his
return, shorten his prayers if the return journey alone covers 8
farsakh. And the recommended precaution is that if he has not repented
he should offer shortened as well as complete prayers.

**1312.** If the journey of a person is a journey of sin (i.e. he is
journeying with the object of doing something wrong) and if during the
journey he abandons the idea of committing the sin, and if the remaining
journey consists of 8 farsakh, or it is 4 farsakh and he wants to go and
then return covering a distance of 4 farsakh, he should offer shortened
prayers.

**1313.** If a person, who has not proceeded on his journey to commit a
sin, decides during his journey to proceed further to commit a sin, he
should offer complete prayers. However, if the prayers shortened by him
are done according to the prescribed distance of his past journey (i.e.
if he has completed 8 farsakh of his journey at the place where he has
changed his mind) they are in order. Otherwise the obligatory precaution
is that he should offer these prayers once again.

(vi) The sixth condition is that the traveller is not one of the nomads,
who roam about in the deserts and stay at places, where they find food
for themselves and fodder and water for their animals, and proceed to
some other place after a few days' halt. During these journeys the
nomads should offer full prayers.

**1314.** If a nomad travels to find out residence for himself and
pasturage for his animals, and carries his baggage with him, he should
offer complete prayers, otherwise, if his journey is 8 farsakh he should
shorten his prayers.

**1315.** If a nomad travels for Ziyarat. (pilgrimage) Hajj, trade or
any other similar purpose, he should shorten his prayers.

(vii) The seventh condition is that the travelling is not the profession
of the traveller. Hence the cameldrivers, herdsmen, drivers, and sailors
etc. should offer full prayers even if they are travelling to transport
their household effects. Orders which apply to a person whose profession
is travelling also apply to a person who works elsewhere and after
reaching there returns to his place on a considerable number of days -
e.g. ten or more days during a month. Persons who reside at one place
and work at another (in connection with business, education etc.) fall
under the same category.

**1316.** If a person whose profession is travelling travels for another
purpose e.g. for pilgrimage or Hajj he should shorten his prayers.
However, if for example, the driver of an automobile hires out his
vehicle for pilgrimage and incidentally performs pilgrimage himself as
well, he should offer complete prayers.

**1317.** If the profession of a courier (i.e. the person who travels to
make the pilgrims reach Makkah) is travelling, he should offer complete
prayers, and if his profession is not travelling and he travels only
during Hajj days for the purpose of couriership, the obligatory
precaution is that he should offer shortened as well as complete prayer.
However, if the period of his journey is short, like air travel during
the present time, it is not unlikely that he may be required to offer
shortened prayers

**1318.** If a person, whose profession is that of a courier and who
takes pilgrims to Makkah from distant places. spends a consider- able
part of the days of a year in travelling, he should offer complete
prayers.

**1319.** A person, whose profession for a part of the year is
travelling e.g. a driver, who hires out his automobile during winter or
summer, should offer complete prayers during his journeys, and the
recommended precaution is that he should offer shortened prayers as well
as complete prayers.

**1320.** If a driver or a hawker, who goes round within an area of 2 or
3 farsakh from the city, travels by chance on a journey consisting of 8
farsakh, he should shorten his prayers.

**1321.** If a herdsman, whose profession is traveling, stays in his
home town for 10 days or more, whether he has intended to stay there for
10 days from the very outset or stays there for so many days without
intention, should offer shortened prayers during the first journey,
which he performs after 10 days, and the same order applies if he
intends and stays for 10 days at a place other than his home town.

**1322.** Except a herdsman if a person, whose profession is travelling,
stays at a place other than his home town for 10 days with an intention
to do so, or stays in his home town for 10 days even without an
intention to dose, he should offer complete prayers in the first
journey, which he undertakes, after 10 days, but the recommended
precaution is that he should offer complete as well as shortened
prayers.

**1323.** If a herdsman, whose profession is travelling, doubts whether
or not he has stayed in his home town or at another place for 10 days,
he should offer complete prayers.

**1324.** A person, who tours different cities and has not adopted a
homeland for himself, should offer complete prayers.

**1325.** As regards a person whose profession is not travelling, if,
for example, he happens to possess a property in a town or a village for
the transport of which he has to travel again and again, he should offer
shortened prayers.

**1326.** If the profession of a person is not travelling and he has
abandoned his homeland and wants to adopt another homeland, he should
shorten his prayers while he is travelling.

(viii) The eighth condition is that the traveller reaches the limit of
tarakhkhus (i.e. at a point where he cannot hear the Azan of the town.
and the people of the town do not see him vide Article 1292). However,
the limit of tarakhkhus cannot be relied upon at places other than the
hometown of the traveller. As such, as soon as a traveller leaves his
residence, his prayers will have to be shortened.

**1327.** If a traveller reaches a place, where he cannot hear the Azan,
but can see the people of the town, or cannot see the people of the
town, but can hear the sound of Azan, and wishes to offer prayers there,
he should, on the basis of obligatory precaution, offer shortened as
well as complete prayers.

**1328.** When a traveller, who is returning to his home town sea the
people of his town and hears their Az(in, he should offer complete
prayers. However, a traveller, who wants to stay at a place for ten
days. should offer shortened prayers so long as he does not reach that
place.

**1329.** If a city is situated at such a height that its residents can
be seen from a far distance or is so deep that if a person covers a
little distance, he cannot see its residents, a resident of that city
who travels should offer shortened prayers when he is at about as much
distance from the city that if it had been situated on even land its
residents would not have been seen from that place. Furthermore if the
highness and the lowness of the path is unusual, the traveller should
take into account the usual highness and lowness.

**1330.** If a person starts his journey from a place which is
uninhabited, he should shorten his prayers when he reaches a place from
which the residents of that uninhabited place would not have been seen
if it had beef inhabited.

**1331.** If a person reaches so distant a place from the starting place
of his journey that he cannot decide whether the sound which he is
hearing is the sound of Azan or some other sound, he should shorten his
prayers. However, if he realizes that it is the sound of Azan but cannot
distinguish its words, he should offer complete prayers.

**1332.** If a traveller reaches such a distance that he cannot hear the
Azan of the houses, but hears the Azan of the city. which is usually
pronounced from an elevated place, he should not shorten his prayers.

**1333.** If a person reaches a place, where the Azan of the city which
is usually pronounced from an elevated place cannot be heard, but the
Azan pronounced from a very high place can be hoard, he should shorten
his prayers.

**1334.** If the sight or power of hearing of the traveller or the sound
of the Azan are unusual, he should offer shortened prayers at a place,
from where a medium eye cannot see the residents of the city, and a
medium ear cannot hear the sound of the usual Azan.

**1335.** It while going on a journey a person doubts whether or not he
has reached the limit of tarakhkhus he should offer complete prayers.
And it a traveller who is returning from his journey doubts whether or
not he has reached the limit of tarakhkhus he should shorten his
prayers.

**1336.** A traveller who is passing through his hometown during his
journey should offer complete prayers when he sees the people of his
hometown and hears the sound of their Azan.

**1337.** When a traveller reaches his hometown during his journey he
should offer complete prayers so long as he remains there. However, if
he wishes to go from there at a distance of 6 farsakh or to go on an
outward journey of 4 farsakh and return journey of 4 farsakh, he should
offer shortened prayers when he reaches the limit of tarakhkhus.

**1338.** A place which a person adopts as his residence for passing his
life is his home, whether he was born there and it was the home of his
parents or he himself has selected it as his residence.

**1339.** If a person intends to stay for some time at a place other
than his real home and thereafter goes to another place, that place
cannot be reckoned to be his home.

**1340.** A place, which s person makes his residence like one whose
home it is (like many students who live in educational centers and if
they go on a journey and come back there. although they may not be
intending to stay there for ever) is reckoned to be his home.

**1341.** If a person lives at two places e.g. he lives in one city for
six months and in another city for another six months) both of them are
his home. Furthermore, if he resides at more than two places all of them
are reckoned to be his home.

**1342.** If a person, who is the owner of a residential house in a
place, lives there continuously for six months with the intention of
living there, he should, so long as that house is owned by him, offer
complete prayers as and when he returns from a journey.

**1343.** If a person reaches a place, which was his home at one time,
but has since abandoned it, he should not offer complete prayers there,
though he may not have adopted a new home.

**1344.** If a traveller intends to stay at a place continuously for ten
days or knows that he will be obliged to stay at a place for ten days,
he should offer complete prayers at that place.

**1345.** If a traveller intends to stay at a place for ten days, it is
not necessary that his intention should be to stay there during the
first night or the eleventh night. And as soon as he deter- mines that
he will stay there from sunrise on the first day up to sunset of the
tenth day, he should offer complete prayers. And the position is the
same if, far example, he intends staying there from noon of the first
day up to noon of the eleventh day.

**1346.** A person, who intends to stay at a place for ten days, should
offer complete prayers when he wants to stay for ten days at one place.
In case, therefore, he intends to stay, for example, for ten days at
Najaf and Kufa, or at Tehran and Shamiran, he should offer shortened
prayers.

**1347.** If a traveller, who wants to stay at a place for ten days, has
determined at the very outset that, during the period of ten days, he
will go to different sides of that place up to the limit of tarakhkhus
or more, and if the period of his going and return is, for example,
about one or two hours which is not usually inconsistent with ten days'
stay, he should offer complete prayers. And if the period is more than
that, he should, as a precautionary measure, offer shortened as well as
complete prayers, and it that period is full day or the larger part of
it, he should offer shortened prayers.

**1348.** A traveller, who is not determined to stay at a place for ten
days e.g. if his intention is that he will stay there for ten days if
his companion comes, or if he finds a good house to stay in, he should
offer shortened prayers.

**1349.** If a traveller, who has decided to stay at a place for ten
days, considers it probable that his stay at that place will be impeded,
and this probability is rational, he should offer shortened prayers.

**1350.** If a traveller knows, for example, that ten days or more
remain before the month comes to an end, and determines to stay at a
place till the end of the month he should offer complete prayers.
Suppose he does not know as to how many days remain in the month coming
to an end, and determines to I stay till the end of the month when it is
known, for example, that the month will come to an end on Friday, but
the traveller does not know whether the first day of his determination
is Thursday, in which case the period of his stay will be nine days, I
or it is Wednesday, in which case it will be ten days. In this case,
too, if it becomes known later that the first day of his determination
was Wednesday, he should offer complete prayers. Otherwise he should
offer shortened prayers, though the number of days from the time he made
his determination till the end of the month comes to ten days or more.

**1351.** If a traveller determines to stay at a place for ten days and
abandons this idea before offering one prayers consisting of four units
or is uncertain as to whether he should stay there or should go to
another place, he should shorten his prayers. However, if he abandons
the idea of staying there after having offered one prayers consisting of
four units or wavers in his intention he should offer complete prayers
so long! till he is at that place.

**1352.** If a person, who has determined to stay at a place for ten
days, observes a fast and abandons the idea of staying there after
midday and has offered one prayers consisting of four units, his test is
in order, so long as he stays there, and he should offer complete
prayers. And if he has not offered a prayers consisting of four units,
the fast observed by him on that day is in order, but he should offer
shortened prayers and cannot also observe fast on the following days.

**1353.** If a traveller, who has determined to stay at a place for ten
days, abandons the idea and doubts before changing his intention to
stay, whether or not he has offered one prayers consisting of four
units, he should offer shortened prayers.

**1354.** If a traveller starts offering prayers with the intention of
offering shortened prayers and decides while offering prayers that he
would stay there for ten days or more, he should offer complete prayers
consisting of four units.

**1355.** If a traveller, who has determined to stay at a place for ten
days, changes his mind while offering a prayers consisting of four units
and has not yet started the third unit, he should complete the prayers
with two units and should shorten his later prayers. And the position is
the same if he has started the third unit, but has not gone into bowing,
then he should sit down and complete the prayers in its shortened term.
In case, however, he has gone into bowing, his prayers is void, and he
should offer it again in shortened form, and should offer shortened
prayers so long as he stays at that place.

**1356.** If a traveller, who has determined to stay at a place for ten
days, stays there for more than ten days, he should offer complete
prayers so long as he does not start journeying, and it is not necessary
that he should make a determination again for staying for ten days.

**1357.** A traveller, who determines to stay at a place for ten days,
should observe the obligatory fast; he may also observe a recommended
fast and offer friday prayers and Nafila (recommended everyday prayers)
of midday, afternoon and night prayers.

**1358.** If a traveller, who has determined to stay at a place for ten
days, wishes, after offering a prayers of four units or after staying
for ten days - though he may not have offered one complete prayers - to
go to a place which is less than 4 farsakh away and to return, and to
stay again at his first place for ten days or less than that he should
offer complete prayer from the time he goes till the time he returns and
after his return. However, if his return to the place of his stay is
only for the reason that it is located on the way of his journey and his
journey is a legal journey (i.e. 8 farsakh) it is necessary for him to
offer shortened prayers at the time of his return.

1359; If a traveller who has determined to stay at a place for ten days,
wishes, after offering an obligatory prayers (i.e. prayers of the same
day) of four units, to go to another place which is less than 8 farsakh
away and to stay there for ten days, he should offer complete prayers
while going and at the place where he intends staying for ten days.
However, if the place where he wants to go is 8 farsakh or more, he
should shorten his prayers while going and if he does not want to stay
there for ten days he should also shorten his prayers during the period
he stays there.

**1360.** If a traveller, who has determined to stay at a place for ten
days, wishes, after offering an obligatory prayers (i.e. of the same
day) of four units, to go to a place, which is less than 4 farsakh away,
and is uncertain whether or not he should return to his first place, or
is totally unmindful of returning to that place, or he wishes to return,
but is uncertain whether or not he would stay there for ten days, or is
totally unmindful of staying there for ten days or travelling from
there, he should from the time of his going till the time of his return,
and after his return, offer complete prayers.

**1361.** If a person decides to stay at a place for ten days under the
impression that his companions wish to stay there for ten days, and
after offering an obligatory prayer (i.e. of the same day) of four units
he understands that they have not taken such a decision, he should offer
complete prayers so long as he is there, though he himself gives up the
idea of staying there.

**1362.** If a traveller stays at a place by chance for thirty days -
for example, he remained undecided throughout those thirty days whether
he should stay there or go away from there - he should offer complete
prayers after thirty days even though he may stay there for a short
period.

**1363.** If a traveller intends to stay at a place for nine days or for
a less period, and if after spending nine days or a less period there,
he determines to stay there for another nine days or a less period, and
similarly thirty days pass away in this manner, he should offer complete
prayers on the thirty-first day of his arrival there.

**1364.** A traveller should offer complete prayers after thirty days if
he stays for thirty days at one place. Hence, if he stays for a part of
that period at one place, and for some part at another place, he should
offer shortened prayers even after thirty days.

Miscellaneous Matters
---------------------

**1365.** A traveller can offer full prayers in Masjidul Haram and
Masjidun Nabi and even in the entire cities of Makkah and Medina as well
as in Masjidul Kufa. He can also offer full prayers in the shrine
precincts of Imam Husayn, though he may be at quite some distance from
the sacred tomb of the holy Imam (in Karbala, Iraq).

**1366.** If a person who knows that he is a traveller, and should offer
shortened prayers, intentionally offers complete prayers at places other
then the tour places mentioned in the fore- going article, his prayers
is void. And the same is the case if he forgets that a traveller should
offer shortened prayers, and offers complete prayers. However, if he
forgets (that a traveller should offer shortened prayers) and recollects
after the prescribed time for prayers has passed, it is not necessary
for him to re-offer that prayers.

**1367.** if a person, who knows that he is a traveller and should offer
shortened prayers, offers complete prayers by mistake and takes notice
of this fact during the time prescribed for prayers, his prayers is
void.

**1368.** If a traveller, who does not know that he should shorten his
prayers, offers complete prayers, his prayer is in order.

**1369.**If a traveller knows that he should offer shortened prayers but
does not know some of its particular aspects - for example, if he does
not know that shortened prayers should be offered when the distance of
the journey is of 8 farsakh and offers complete prayers and realizes the
mistake within the time prescribed for prayers, it is necessary for him
to offer the prayers again and if he does not offer the prayers again,
he should offer its qaza. However, if he knows the problem after the
time for prayers is over, it is not necessary for him to offer its qaza.

**1370.** If a traveller, who knows that he should offer shortened
prayers, offers complete prayers under the impression that his journey
is of less than 8 farsakh, he should, when he realizes that his journey
has been of 8 farsakh, offer in shortened form the prayers which he has
offered in complete form. And if he realizes this after the prescribed
time for the prayers has passed, it is not necessary for him to offer
qaza.

**1371.** If a person forgets that he is a traveller and offers complete
prayers, and if he recollects this within the time prescribed for
prayers, he should offer shortened prayers, and if he realizes this
after the prescribed time is over, it is not obligatory for him to offer
qaza of that prayers.

**1372.** If a person, who should offer complete prayers, offers
shortened prayers, his prayers is void in all circumstances except when
he intends staying at a place for ten days and offers shortened prayers
owing to his not knowing the orders on the subject.

**1373.** If a person begins offering a prayers consisting of four
units, and recollects during prayers that he is a traveller, or takes
notice of the bet that his journey is of 8 farsakh, and has not gone
into the bowing of the third unit, he should complete prayers consisting
of two units, and if he goes into the bowing of the third unit, his
prayers is void, and in case he has at his f disposal sufficient time
even to offer one unit. he should offer shortened prayers again.

**1374.** If a traveller does not know some of the particular aspects of
the prayers of a traveller, for example, if he does not know that if he
goes on an outward journey of 4 farsakh and a return journey of 4
farsakh, he should offer shortened prayers, and he gets engaged in
prayers with the intention of offering four unit prayers, and comes to
know the rule before the bowing of the third unit he should complete the
prayers consisting of two units, and if he knows this rule during
bowing, his prayers is void. And in case he has time at his disposal
even to offer one unit of prayers, he should offer shortened prayers
again.

**1375.** If a traveller, who should offer complete prayers gets engaged
in prayers with the intention of prayers of two units on account of his
not knowing the rule, and comes to know the rule during the prayers, he
should complete the prayers consisting of four units, and the
recommended precaution is that after the completion of the prayers, he
should offer a prayers of four units once again.

**1376.** If before the time for prayers comes to an end, a traveler,
who has not offered prayers, reaches his home town, or a place where he
intends to stay for ten days, he should offer complete prayers. And if.a
person who is not a traveller does not offer prayers in the early part
of the time prescribed for it, and proceeds on a journey, he should
offer the prayers during his journey in shortened form.

**1377.** If the midday, afternoon, or night prayers of a traveler, who
should offer shortened prayers, becomes qaza (lapses) he should perform
its qaza by performing shortened prayers consisting of two units.though
he may perform that qaza when he is not travelling. And if one of these
three prayers of a person who is not a traveller becomes qaza he should
perform its qaza by offering prayers consisting of four units, though he
may be travelling at the time he offers its qaza.

**1378.** It is recommended that a traveller should say thirty times
after every prayers: "Subhanallahi walhamdu lillahi wala ilaha illalahu
wal lahu Akbar" Supplication after midday, afternoon and night prayers
is greatly insisted on. Rather it is better that the above recital
should be repeated sixty times after these three prayers.

Lapsed Prayers
--------------

**1379.** A person who does not offer his obligatory prayers in time
should offer lapsed prayers though he may have been sleeping during the
entire time prescribed for the prayers or may have failed to offer it
owing to his having been unconscious all the time. However it is not
obligatory for a woman to offer lapsed prayers which she fails to offer
during the period of hayz (menses) or nifas (lochia) and it makes no
difference whether those are daily obligatory prayers or other ones.

**1380.** If a person realizes after the prescribed time for the prayers
has passed that the prayers, which he offered in time was void, he
should perform its lapsed prayers.

**1381.** If a prayers of a person has lapsed, he should not be
negligent in offering its lapsed prayer though it is not obligatory for
him to offer it at once.

**1382.** A person who is required to offer lapsed prayers, can offer
recommended prayers.

**1383.** If a person considers it probable that he has to offer the
lapsed prayers, or that the prayers offered by him have not been in
order, it is recommended that, as a measure of precaution, he should
offer their lapsed prayers.

**1384.** It is not necessary to maintain order in the offering of
lapsed prayers, except in the case of prayers for the offering of which
order has been prescribed (for example midday and afternoon prayers or
dusk and night daily prayers). However, it is better to maintain order
in other lapsed prayers also.

**1385.** If a person wishes to offer some lapsed prayers other than the
daily prayers like "Sign Prayers", or, for example, wishes to offer one
daily prayers and a few other prayers, it is not necessary to maintain
order in offering them.

**1386.** If a person forgets the order of the prayers, which he has not
offered, it is better that he should offer them in such a way that he
should become sure that he has offered them in the order in which they
lapsed. For example if it is obligatory for him to offer one lapsed
prayers of midday and one prayers of dusk, and he does not know which of
them lapsed first he should first offer one lapsed dusk prayers and
thereafter one midday prayers, and then one dusk prayers once again, or
he should offer one midday prayers and then one dusk prayers and then
one midday prayers once again so that he may become sure that the lapsed
prayers which lapsed first has been offered first.

**1387.** If midday prayers of one day and afternoon prayers of another
day or two midday prayers or two afternoon prayers of a person lapse,
and it he does not know which of the them lapsed first, it is sufficient
for acquiring order, if he offers two prayers of four unit each with the
intention that the first is the lapsed prayers, which lapsed on the
first day, and the second is the lapsed prayers, which lapsed on the
second day.

**1388.** If one midday prayers and one night prayers, or one afternoon
payers and one night prayers of a person lapse, and he does not know
which of them lapsed first, it is better that he should perform their
lapsed prayers in such a way that he may become sure that he has
maintained the order. For example, if one midday prayers and one night
prayers of his have lapsed, but he does not know which of them lapsed
first, he should first offer one midday prayers and thereafter one night
prayers and then one midday prayers once again, or he should first offer
one night prayers and thereafter one midday prayers and then one night
prayers once again.

**1389.** If a person knows that he has not offered a prayers consisting
of four units but does not know whether it is midday prayers or night
prayers, it is sufficient, if he offers a four unit prayers with the
intention of offering lapsed prayers, which he has not offered, and he
has option to offer it loudly or in low voice.

**1390.** If five prayers of a person have lapsed one after the other,
and he does not which of them lapsed first, and he offers nine prayers
in order (e.g. he commences with dawn prayers and after having offered
midday, afternoon, dusk and night prayers offers once again dawn,
midday. afternoon and dusk prayers) he will ensure the requisite order.

**1391.** If a person knows that one each of his daily prayers has
lapsed, but does not know the order in which they have lapsed, it is
better that he should offer five days, daily prayers and if his six
prayers of six days have lapsed he should offer six days, daily prayers.
Thus for every lapsed prayers of an additional day he should offer an
additional days' daily prayers, so that he may become sure that he has
offered the prayers in the same order in which they had lapsed. For
example, if he has not offered seven prayers of seven days he should
perform lapsed prayers of seven days' daily prayers.

**1392.** If, for example, a few dawn prayers or a few midday prayers of
a person have lapsed and he does not know their number or has forgotten
it, for example if he does not know whether they were three, four or
five prayers, it is sufficient if he offers the smaller number. However,
it is better that he should offer so many prayers that he becomes sure
that he has offered all of them. For example, if he has forgotten as to
how many dawn prayers of his have lapsed and is certain that they were
not more than ten, he should, as a measure of precaution, offer ten dawn
prayers.

**1393.** If a person is required to offer only one lapsed prayers of
previous days, it is better that, if possible, he should offer it first,
and then start offering prayers of that day. Furthermore, if he has not
to offer any lapsed prayers of previous days but one or more prayers of
that very day have lapsed it is better that.if possible, he should offer
lapsed prayers of that day before offering the present obligatory
prayers.

**1394.** If while offering prayers a person recollects that one or more
prayers of his of that very day have lapsed, or he has to offer only one
lapsed prayers of the previous day and he has sufficient time at his
disposal, and it is possible for him to turn his intention to lapsed
prayers, it is better that he should make intention of lapsed prayers.
For example, if he recollects before the bowing of the third unit of the
midday prayers that his dawn prayers has lapsed and if the time for
midday prayers is not short, he should turn his intention to the dawn
players and complete it with two units, and then offer midday prayers.

However, if the time is short or if he cannot turn his intention to
lapsed prayers for example, if he recollects in the bowing of the third
unit of the midday prayers that he has not offered the dawn prayers, and
if he turns his intention to dawn prayers on bowing, which is a rukn
(basic element) will increase, he should not turn his intention to the
lapsed dawn prayers.

**1395.** If a person is required to offer some lapsed prayers of
previous days, and one or more prayers of that very day have also
lapsed, and if he does not have time to offer lapsed prayers of all of
them, or does not wish to offer lapsed prayers of all of them on that
day, it is recommended that he should offer the lapsed prayers of that
day before offering of (the same day's) prayers and it is better that
after offering previous lapsed prayers, he should offer once again the
lapsed prayers, the lapsed prayers which has been offered by him before
offering the ada prayers of that day.

**1396.** So long as a person is alive no other person can offer prayers
on his behalf, even though he himself may be unable to offer them.

**1397.** Lapsed prayers can be offered in congregation whether the
prayers of the Imam be ada or lapsed. And it is not necessary that both
of them should offer the same prayers - for example, there is no harm if
a person offers lapsed dawn prayers with the midday prayers or afternoon
prayers of the Imam.

**1398.** It is recommended that a discerning child i.e. a child who on
distinguish between good and bad, should he habituated to offer prayers
and to perform other acts of worship. Rather, it is recommended that he
should also be persuaded to offer lapsed prayers.

Obligatory Lapsed Prayers Of A Father, Is Obligatory On The Eldest Son To Offer
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**1399.** If a person fails to offer some of his prayers and does not
also offer their lapsed ones in spite of his being in a position to do
so, he no doubt fails to discharge a religious obligation and thus
becomes guilty of disobedience to Allah's commands. Notwithstanding
this, however, it is obligatory for his eldest son to offer his father's
lapsed prayers after the latter's death, or to get them offered by some
one else on payment. Of course, it is not necessary for the eldest son
to offer the lapsed prayers of his mother, though it is better that he
should also offer her mother's lapsed prayers.

**1400.** If the eldest son doubts whether or not any lapsed prayers
remained to be offered by his father, he is under no obligation to offer
them.

**1401.** if the eldest son knows that some lapsed prayers were not
offered by his father, but he is in doubt whether his father has offered
them or not, he should offer them on the basis of obligatory precaution.

**1402.** If it is not known as to who is the eldest son of a person it
is not obligatory on any one of the sons to offer their father's lapsed
prayers. However, the recommended precaution is that they should divide
his prayers between them or should draw lots for offering them.

**1403.** If a dying person has made a will that a person should be
hired to offer his lapsed prayers and if the hired person offers the
prayers properly, the eldest son is free from obligation.

**1404.** If the eldest son wishes to offer the lapsed prayers of his
mother, he should act in the matter of offering prayers loudly. or in
low tone, according to his own obligation. Hence he should offer the
lapsed prayers of his mother in respect of dawn, dusk and night prayers
in loud voice.

**1405.** If a person has to offer his own lapsed prayers and he also
wishes to offer the lapsed prayers of his parents, whichever he offers
first is in order.

**1406.** If the eldest son is minor or insane at the time of the death
of his father, he should offer the lapsed prayers of his father when he
reaches the age of puberty or becomes sane.

**1407.** If the eldest son of a person dies before offering the lapsed
prayers of his father, nothing is obligatory on the second son.


