Congregational Prayers
======================

**1408.** Offering obligatory prayers and especially the Five Daily
Prayers in congregation is recommended and offering dawn, dusk and night
prayers in congregation has been specially stressed on those persons,
who live near a masjid or hear Azan being announced from it.

**1409.** It has been stated in authentic narrations that the spiritual
reward for congregational prayers is twenty-five times as much as that
for prayers offered individually.

**1410.** It is not permissible to abstain from participation in
congregational prayers on account of levity and it is not proper for one
to abandon congregational prayers without a just excuse.

**1411.** It is recommended that a person should wait in order to
participate in congregational prayers, because congregational prayers it
better in comparison to the prayers offered individually in the early
part of the time prescribed for prayers. However, it is better to offer
prayers individually at the recommended time as compared with the
congregational prayers which is not offered during such time.
Furthermore, a comparatively brief congregational prayers is better than
a long prayers which is offered individually.

**1412.** When congregational prayers is going to be offered, it is
recommended for a person, who has already offered the prayers alone, to
reoffer the prayers in congregational. And if it transpires later that
his first prayers was void, the second prayers will suffice.

**1413.** If the imam (leader) or the Mamum (follower) wishes to offer
in congregation once again the prayers already offered in congregation,
and even if there no probability of any flaw in that prayers, it is
difficult to say that which prayers is in order, except when he offers
the prayer again as an Imam; provided that there is a person among the
followers who has not offered obligatory prayers.

**1414.** If a person is so whimsical during prayers that it becomes the
cause of invalidity of his prayer and gets rid of his whim only when he
offers prayers in congregation, he should offer prayers in congregation.

**1415.** If a father or a mother orders his/her child to offer prayers
in congregation, and if his failing to do so becomes the cause of their
disobedience, congregational prayers becomes obligatory on him, but
otherwise it is not obligatory.

**1416.** Recommended prayers cannot be offered in congregation except
Isatasqa prayers (which is offered for rains) or prayers which were
obligatory at one time, but became recommended later (e.g. Eidul Fitr
and Eidul Azha prayers, which were obligatory during the period of Imam
Mahdi (P) and have become re- commended since his Occultation).

**1417.** When the Imam of the congregation is leading one of the five
daily prayers, any of the daily prayers can be offered behind him.

**1418.** If the Imam of the congregation is offering his own daily
lapsed prayers, or on behalf of another person whose prayers has
certainly lapsed he can be followed. However, if he is offering as a
precautionary measure his own lapsed prayers or of the prayers of
another person. it is not permissible to follow him.

**1419.** If a person does not know whether the prayers which is being
led by the Imam is an obligatory daily prayers or a recommended prayers,
he cannot follow him.

**1420.** For the congregation being in order it is a pre-requisite that
there is no barrier between the imam and the follower (Muqtadi) and
between one follower and the other follower, who is a link between that
follower and the Imam. And a barrier is something which obstructs
seeing, such as a curtain or a wall etc. Hence, if in all or some
conditions of the prayers there is such a barrier between the Imam and
the follower or between one follower and the other follower, who is the
means of connection, the congregation will be void. However, it will be
explained later, a woman is exempted from this order.

**1421.** If the persons standing on the two sides of the first row
cannot see the Imam owing to the row being long, they can follow the
Imam; and similarly if out of the other rows, the persons, standing on
the two sides of a particular row, cannot see, owing to their row being
long, the row, which is in front of them even then they can follow the
Imam.

**1422.** If the rows of the congregation reach the gate of the masjid,
the prayer of a person, who is standing in front of the gate behind the
row is in order and the prayers of those persons, who are following the
Imam while standing behind that person, is also in order. Rather, the
prayers of those persons who are standing on both the sides and are
linked with the congregation by means of some other followers are also
in order.

**1423.** If a person who is standing behind a pillar. is not linked
with the Imam by means of another follower from the rift of the left
side, he cannot follow the Imam.

**1424.** The place where the Imam stands should not be more than an
ordinary span higher than the place of the follower and there is no harm
if it is less than a span. Furthermore, if the ground is sloping and the
Imam stands on the higher side of it there is no harm if the slope is
not much, and is such that the people call it flat.

**1425.** In the congregational prayers there is no harm if the place of
the follower is higher than that of the Imam. In case, however, it is so
high that it cannot be said that they have gathered together, the
congregation is not in older.

**1426.** If there is a distance of one person whose prayers is void,
between the persons who are standing in the row, they can follow the
Imam. However, if there is a distance of a few persons, whose prayers
are void, between them or the distance becomes much owing to some other
reason, they cannot follow the Imam.

**1427.** If after the takbir of the Imam the persons in the front row
are ready for prayers and are about to say takbir, a person standing in
the back row can also say takbir. However, the recommended precaution is
that he should wait so that the takbir of the front row may be
completed.

**1428.** If a person knows that the prayers of one of the followers of
front rows is void, he cannot follow the Imam in the back rows, but he
can follow the Imam, if he does not know whether or not the prayers of
those persons is in order.

**1429.** If a person knows that the prayer of the Imam is void - for
example, if he knows that the Imam is without ablutions, though the Imam
may not be attentive to this fact himself - he cannot follow that Imam.

**1430.** If the follower learns after the prayers that the Imam was not
a just person (or was an unbeliever, or for some reason, for example,
owing to his not having performed ablutions, his prayers was void, but
he himself (i.e. the follower) has not performed any act which makes
individual prayers void, even it performed by mistake (e.g. an
additional bowing) his prayers is valid.

**1431.** It a person doubts while offering prayers whether he has
followed the Imam or not, and if he was offering prayers under the
impression that he was offering congregational prayers and it is
probable that owing to forgetfulness he did not make the intention of
congregational prayers and if (at the time doubt crosses his mind) he is
in the condition which is the obligation of a follower e.g. if he is
listening to Surah al-Hamd and surah of the Imam, he should end his
prayers with the congregation, but if at the time of having doubt he is
busy in an act which is the obligation of both himself and the Imam
(e.g. if he is in bowing or prostration posture) he should end his
prayers with the intention of individual prayers.

**1432.** If while offering the prayer the follower wishes to make
intention of individual prayer, and he did not have such f intention
from the very outset, there is no harm in it. However, if this was his
intention from the very beginning, it is difficult that this act of his
is in order.

**1433.** If the follower makes an intention of individual prayers after
the Imam has recited Surah al-Hamd and surah, he should, on the basis of
obligatory precaution, recite entire Surah al- Hamd and surah, and if he
makes the intention of individual prayers before (the Imam's) ending
Surah al-Hamd and surah, it is necessary that he recite, the portion,
which the Imam has recited.

**1434.** If a person makes the intention of individual prayers during
the congregation prayers, he cannot make the intention of congregational
prayers again. Rather, if he is undecided as to whether or not he should
make the intention of individual prayers, and eventually decides to end
the prayers with congregation, it is difficult to say that his
congregational prayers is in order.

**1435.** It a person doubts whether or not he has made intention of
individual prayers during the congregational prayers, he should consider
that he has not made the intention of individual prayers:

**1436.**If a person follows the Imam at the time when the Imam is in
bowing state and participates in the bowing of the Imam, his prayers is
in order, though the recitation by the Imam may have come to an end, and
it will be treated as one unit. However, if he bends to the extent of
bowing but does not join the bowing of the Imam, his prayers void.

**1437.** It a person follows the Imam when he is in bowing and bends to
the extent of bowing and doubts whether or not he has joined the bowing
of the Imam, his prayers is void.

**1438.** If a person follows the Imam when he is in bowing and. before
he bends to the extent of bowing, the Imam raises his head from bowing.
that person should, on the basis of obligatory precaution, make the
intention of individual prayers.

**1439.** If a person follows the Imam from the beginning of the prayers
or during the time Surah al-Hamd and surah are being recited and by
chance, before he goes into bowing, the Imam raises his head from
bowing, the prayers of that person is in order.

**1440.** If a person arrives for prayers when the Imam is reciting the
last tashahhud of the prayer, and if he wish to earn the spiritual
reward of congregational prayers, he should sit down after making
intention and pronouncing takbiratul ehram, and should recite tashahhud
with the Imam, but should not say salaam and should wait till the Imam
says salaam of the prayers. Then he should stand up and without making
an intention again should pronounce takbir and recite Surah al-Hamd and
surah and should treat it as the first unit of his prayers.

**1441.** The followers should not stand ahead of the Imam, and, on the
basis of obligatory precaution, if the follower is one man he should
stand a little behind the Imam on his right- hand side and if there are
many men, they should stand at the back of the Imam. And in the first
case, if the follower is taller than the Imam, he should, on the basis
of obligatory precaution, stand in such a way that at the time of bowing
and prostration he should not be ahead of the Imam.

**1442.** If the Imam is a man and the follower is a woman, and if there
is a curtain or something similar to it between that woman and the Imam,
or between that woman and another follower, who is a man, and the woman
is linked with the Imam through him, there is no harm in it.

**1443.** If after the commencement of the prayers a curtain or
something else intervenes between the follower and the Imam, or between
the follower and the person, through whom the follower is linked with
the Imam, the congregation is invalidated, and it is necessary that the
follower should act according to his individual obligation.

**1444.** The obligatory precaution is that the distance between the
place where the follower performs prostration, and the place where the
Imam stands, is not as much as a meter, and the same order applies, if a
person is linked with the Imam through another follower, who is standing
in front of that person. And the recommended precaution is that there
should be no distance between the place where the follower performs
prostration and the place, where the person in front of him stands.

**1445.** If a follower is linked with the Imam by means of a person,
who has followed the Imam on his right or left side and is not linked
with the Imam from the front the obligatory precaution is that he should
not be at a distance of one meter from one, who has followed the Imam on
his right or left side.

**1446.** If during the prayers a distance of one meter takes place
between the follower and the Imam, or between the follower and the
person, through whom the follower is linked with the Imam, he (the
follower) should make an intention of individual prayers and his prayers
will be in order.

**1447.** If the prayers of all the persons, who are in the front row
comes to an end; and if they follow the Imam at once for another
prayers, the congregational prayers of the persons in the back row is in
order.

**1448.** If a person follows the Imam in the second unit, it is not
necessary for him to recite Surah al-Hamd and surah, but he should
recite qunut and tashahhud with the Imam, and the precaution is that, at
the time of reciting tashahhud, he should place the fingers of his hands
and the front part of his feet on the ground and raise his knees. And
after the tashahhud he should stand up with the Imam and should recite
Surah al Hamd and surah. And if he does not have time for the surah, he
should complete Surah al-Hamd, and should join the Imam in bowing and if
he cannot join the Imam in bowing he should, on the basis of obligatory
precaution, make an intention of individual prayers.

**1449.** If a person follows the imam, when he is in the second unit of
the prayers consisting of four units, he should sit after the two
prostrations in the second unit of his prayers, which is the third unit
of the Imam, and should recite tashahhud to the extent it is obligatory,
and should then stand up. And if he does not have time to recite the
Tasbihat Arba'ah thrice, he should recite the same once and should then
join the Imam in bowing.

**1450.** If the Imam is in the third or fourth unit and the follower
knows that if he follows him and recites Surah al-Hamd he will not be
able to join the Imam in bowing he should wait on the basis of
obligatory precaution till the Imam goes in bowing and should then
follow him.

**1451.** If a person follows the Imam, when he is in the state of qiyam
of third or fourth unit he should recite Surah a[-Hamd and surah. and if
he does not have time for the surah he should complete Surah al-Hamd and
should join the Imam in bowing. And if he cannot join the Imam in bowing
he should, on the basis of obligatory precaution, make intention for
individual prayers.

**1452.** If a person, who knows that, if he completes surah or qunut,
he will not be able to join the Imam in his bowing, purposely recites
surah or qunut and does not join the Imam in bowing what is more
apparent is that his prayers is in order and he should act according to
the obligation of a person offering prayers individually.

**1453.** If a person is satisfied that if he commences a surah or
completes it, he will join the Imam in his bowing provided that the
surah is not very long, it is better for him to commence the surah or to
complete it, if he has already commenced it, and if the surah is too
long the obligatory precaution is that he should not commence it, and if
he has commenced it he should not complete it.

**1454.** If a person is sure that if he recites the surah he will join
the Imam in bowing and if he recites the surah and cannot join the Imam
in bowing his congregational prayers is in order.

**1455.** If the Imam is standing and the follower does not know in
which unit he is, he can follow him, but he should recite Surah al-Hamd
and surah with the intention of complying with the orders of the
Almighty Allah, though he may come to know after that the Imam was in
the first or second unit.

**1456.** If a person does not recite Surah al-Hamd and surah under the
impression that the Imam is in the first or second unit and realizes
after bowing that he was in the third or fourth unit his prayers is in
order. However, if he realizes this before bowing he should recite Surah
al-Hamd and surah and if he does not have sufficient time for this he
should recite only Surah al-Hamd and should join the Imam in bowing and
if.he cannot do so he should, on the basis of obligatory precaution,
make an intention of individual prayers.

**1457.** If a person recites Surah al-Hamd and surah under the
impression that the Imam is in the third or fourth unit and realizes
before bowing or thereafter that he was in the first or second unit his
(i.e. the follower's) prayers is in order, and if he realizes this while
reciting Surah al-Hamd and surah it is not necessary for him to complete
them,

**1458.** If a congregational prayers is established while a person is
offering a recommended prayers, and he is not sure that. if he completes
his (recommended) prayers, he will be able to join the congregational
prayers, it is recommended that he should abandon the recommended
prayers, and should engage himself in congregational prayers. Rather, if
he is not certain that he will be able to join the first unit, he should
follow this very order.

**1459.** If a congregational prayers is established while a person is
offering a three unit or tour unit prayers, and if he has not gone into
the bowing of the third unit and is not sure that if he completes his
prayers he will be able to join the congregational prayers, it is
recommended that he should bring the prayers to an end with the
intention of offering a recommended prayers of two units and should then
join the congregational prayers.

**1460.** If the prayers of the Imam comes to an end, but the follower
is still busy reciting tashahhud or the first salam, it is not necessary
for him to make the intention of individual prayers.

**1461.** If a person has lagged behind the Imam by one unit it is
better that when the Imam is reciting tashahhud of the last unit he (the
follower) should place the fingers of his hands and put front part of
his feet on the ground and should raise his knees, and wait till the
Imam says salaam of the prayers and should then stand up. And if he
makes intention of individual prayers at that very time there is no harm
in it, but if he intended this from the very beginning, it is difficult
to say that his prayers, may be valid.

Pre-Requisites For An Imam Of Congregational Prayers
----------------------------------------------------

**1462.** The Imam of a congregational prayers should be Adult, Sane, an
ithna 'Ashari Shia aadil, and Legitimate, and should offer the prayers
correctly. Furthermore, if the follower is a man the Imam, too, should
be a man. And there is no harm in a discerning child (i.e. a child who
can distinguish between good and bad) following another discerning
child, although it does not fulfil the conditions of a congregational
prayer (i.e. it cannot be called a congregational prayers).

**1463.** If a person, who once considered an Imam to be 'Adil, doubts
whether he is still adil, can follow him.

**1464.** A person who offers prayers in a standing posture cannot
follow a person, who offers his prayers while sitting or lying, and a
person who offers his prayers in a sitting posture cannot follow a
person, who offers his prayers while lying.

**1465.** A person, who offers prayers in a sitting posture can follow
another person, who offer his prayers while sitting. However, it is
difficult that, if a person offers prayers while lying, his following a
person, who offers prayers in sitting or lying posture, is in order.

**1466.** If the Imam of a congregation leads the prayers in an impure
dress, or with tayammum, or jabira ablutions, for some excuse, it is
permissible to follow him.

**1467.** If the Imam is suffering from a disease, owing to which he
cannot control his urine or faeces, it is permissible to follow him.
Moreover, a woman, who is not mustahaza (in a state undue menses) can
follow a woman who is mustahaza.

**1468.** It is better that a person who suffers from leukemia or
leprosy should not lead the congregational prayers and, on the basis of
obligatory precaution, a person, who has been subjected legal
punishment, should not be followed. Similarly inhabitant of urban area
should not follow a bedouin.

Orders Regarding Congregational Prayers
---------------------------------------

**1469.** When a follower makes his intention, it is necessary for him
to specify the Imam. However, it is not necessary for him to know his
name, and if he makes the intention that he is following the Imam of the
present congregation, his prayers is in order.

**1470.** It is necessary for the follower to recite all the things of
the prayers himself, except Surah al-Hamd and surah. However, if the
first or second unit of the follower is the third or fourth unit of.the
Imam, he should recite Surah al-Hamd and surah.

**1471.** If the follower hears Surah al-Hamd and surah of the Imam in
the first and second unit of the dawn, dusk and night prayers he should
not recite Surah al-Hamd and surah although he may not be able to
distinguish the words. And if he does not hear the voice of the Imam it
is recommended that he should recite Surah al-Hamd and.surah. However,
he should recite them in low voice, but if he recites them loudly by
mistake there is no harm in it.

**1472.** If the follower hears some words of Surah al-Hamd and surah
recited by the Imam, the obligatory precaution is that he should not
recite Surah al-Hamd and surah.

**1473.** If the follower recites Surah al-Hamd and surah by mistake
recites Surah al-Hamd and surah thinking that the voice which he is
hearing is not the voice of the Imam and realizes later that it was the
voice of the Imam his prayers is in order.

**1474.** If a follower doubts whether he is hearing the voice of the
Imam or hears a voice and does not know whether it is the voice of the
Imam or of some one else, he can recite Surah al- Hamd and surah.

**1475.** The follower should not recite Surah al-Hamd and surah in the
first and second unit of midday and afternoon prayers and it is
recommended that instead of them he should utter some recital (e.g.
Subhan allah)

**1476.** The follower should not say Takbiratul ehram before the Imam.
On the other hand the obligatory precaution is that he should not, say
the takbir until the takbir of the Imam comes to an end.

**1477.** If the follower says the salaam by mistake before the Imam
does it, his prayers is in order, and it is not necessary that he should
say salaam again along with the Imam. On the other hand what is apparent
is that even if he says salaam before the Imam intentionally there is
nothing wrong with his prayers. provided that he did not intend doing so
from the very start.

**1478.** If a follower says other things of prayers (i.e. other than
Takbiratul ehram and salaam) before the Imam, there is no harm in it.
However, if he hears them (being said by the Imam) or knows when the
Imam is going to say them the recommended precaution is that he should
not say them before the Imam.

**1479.** It is necessary for the follower that besides that which is
recited in the prayers, he should perform other acts like bowing and
prostration along with the Imam or a little after him, and if he
performs them before the Imam or a considerable time after him
intentionally, his congregational prayers becomes void. However, if he
acts according to the obligation of an individual worshipper, his
prayers is in order.

**1480.** If a follower raises his head from bowing before the Imam by
mistake, and if the Imam is in bowing. he (the follower) should return
to bowing, and should raise his head with the Imam, and in this case the
excess of a bowing, which is a rukn, does not invalidate the prayers.
However, if he returns to bowing and the Imam raises his head before he
(the follower) joins him in bowing his prayers is void.

**1481.** If a follower raises his head by mistake and sees that the
Imam is in prostration he should return to prostration, and if this
thing happens in both the prostrations the prayers becomes void, only to
the excess of two prostration which is a rukn

**1482.** If a person raises his head from prostration before the Imam
by mistake, and when he returns to prostration he comes to know that the
Imam has already raised his head, his prayers is in order. However, if
this thing happens in both the prostrations his prayers is void.

**1483.** If a follower raises his head from bowing or prostration by
mistake and does not return to bowing or prostration by mistake, or
under the impression that he cannot join the Imam, his congregational
prayers is in order.

**1484.** If a follower raises his head from prostration and sees that
the Imam is in prostration and thinking that it is the first prostration
of the Imam he goes into prostration with the intention of performing
prostration with the Imam and comes to know later that it was the second
prostration of the Imam, it will be deemed to be the second prostration
of the follower. And if he goes into prostration under the impression
that it is the second prostration of the Imam and then learns that it
was his first prostration he should complete the prostration with the
intention of performing prostration with the Imam and should go into
prostration again along with the Imam. And in both the cases it is
better for him to complete the prayers with the congregation and offer
it again.

**1485.** If a follower bows before the Imam by mistake and the position
is such that if he raises his head he may hear some part of the qir'at
(Surah) of the Imam, and if he raises his head and goes into bowing with
the imam, his prayers is in order, and if he does not return
intentionally, his prayers is void.

**1486.** If a follower bows before the Imam by mistake and the position
is such that, if he returns to the state of qiyam, he cannot hear
anything of the qir'at of the Imam, and if he raises his head with the
intention of offering prayers along with the Imam and goes into bowing
with the Imam, his congregational prayers is in order. In case, however,
he does not return (to the state of qiyam) intentionally his prayers is
in order and becomes the prayers of an individual.

**1487.** If a follower prostrates before the Imam by mistake and if he
raises his head with the intention of offering prayers along with the
Imam and prostrates with the Imam his congregational prayers is in
order, and if he does not return intentionally, his players is in order,
and becomes the prayers of an individual.

**1488.** If, owing to mistake, the Imam recites qunut in a unit which
does not contain qunut or recites tashahhud in a unit which does not
contain tashahhud the follower should not recite qunut or tashahhud.
However, he cannot go into bowing before the Imam or stand before the
Imam stands. On the other hand he should wait until the qunut or
tashahhud of the Imam comes to an end, and should offer the remaining
prayers with him.

Recommended Things In Congregational Prayers
--------------------------------------------

**1489.** On the basis of obligatory precaution if the follower is one
man, he should stand a little behind on the right-hand side of the Imam,
and if there are one or several women they should stand behind the Imam,
and if they are one man and one woman or one man and several women, the
man should stand a little behind the Imam on his right-hand side, and
one or several women should stand behind the Imam and if there are a few
men and one or a few women the men should stand behind the Imam and the
women should stand behind the men.

**1490.** If the Imam and the followers are both women the obligatory
precaution is that all of them should stand in a row and the Imam should
not stand ahead of others.

**1491.**It is recommended that the Imam should stand in the middle of
the row and the learned and pious persons should stand in the first row.

**1492.** It is recommended that the rows of the congregation are
properly arranged and there should be no distance between the persons
who are standing in one row; their shoulders should be adjacent to one
another's.

**1493.** It is recommended that after the iqamah 'Qadqa matis salah(
the prayers has certainly been established) has been said, the followers
should stand up.

**1494.** It is recommended that the Imam of the congregation should
take into account the condition of the follower who is weaker than
others and should not prolong qunut, bowing and prostration except when
he knows that all those who are following him are in favor of their
prolongation

**1495.** It is recommended that while reciting Surah al-Hamd and surah
and the recitations which he is saying loudly, the Imam of the
congregation should make his voice so loud that others may hear it.
However, he should not make his voice extraordinarily loud.

**1496.** If the Imam realizes in bowing that a person has just arrived
and wants to follow him it is recommended that he should prolong the
bowing twice as much as usual and then stand up, although he may come to
know that another person has also arrived to follow him.

Things Which Are Abominable In Congregational Prayers
-----------------------------------------------------

**1497.** If there is space in the rows of the congregation it is
abominable fora person to stand alone.

**1498.** It is abominable that the follower recites the recitations of
the prayers in such a way that the Imam may hear them.

**1499.**It is abominable for a traveller, who offers midday, afternoon
and night prayers in shortened form (two units), to follow in the
prayers a person, who is not a traveller. And it is abominable for a
person who is not a traveller to follow a traveller in these prayers.


