Taharat
=======

Pure and Mixed Water
--------------------

**15.** Water is either pure or mixed. Mixed water (Mā ul muzaf) means
the water which is obtained from something (e.g. from a melon or a
rose), or that water in which something else is mixed for example, so
much dust is mixed in it that it may no longer be called water). Mixed
water does not purify anything and it is also not valid to take
ceremonial bath (Ghusl) or to perform ablutions (Wudhu’) with it. Any
water other than mixed water is called pure water (Maul mutlaq) and
there are five kinds of it: (i) Kurr Water, (ii) Under-Kurr Water, (iii)
Running Water, (iv) Rain Water, (v) Water of a Well.

Kurr Water
----------

**16.** Water, which fills a container whose length, breadth and depth
are three spans each is equal to a Kurr; it is about 884 liters.

**17.** If original Impurity like urine, or blood or anything which has
become impure (Najis) (e.g. an impure cloth) falls in Kurr Water and the
water acquires the smell, color or taste of that impurity it becomes
impure, but if it does not acquire the smell, color or taste of the
impurity it does not become impure.

**18.** If the smell, color or taste of Kurr water changes owing to
something which is not intrinsically impure, it does not become impure.

**19.** If an original impurity like blood etc. reach water which is
more than a Kurr and changes the smell, color or taste of a part of it,
and the remaining part of water the smell etc. of which has not changed
is less than a Kurr, the entire water becomes impure, and if it (i.e.
the remaining part) is one Kurr or more than that, only that part will
become impure the smell, color or taste of which has changed.

**20.** If the water of a spring which gushes out in torrents, joins a
water which is equal to a Kurr, the water of the spring purifies the
impure water. However, if it falls on the impure water in the shape of
drops it does not purify it except that something is placed before the
spring so that before its water is divided into drops it may join the
impure water, and it will be better if the water of the spring is
totally mixed with the impure water.

**21.** Suppose an impure thing is washed under a tap which is connected
with pure water equal to a Kurr, and if the water which drops from that
thing joins the water which is equal to a Kurr and does not contain the
smell, color or taste of the impurity, and original impurity is also not
in it, that water will be pure.

**22.** If a part of Kurr water freezes and the remaining water is not
equal to a Kurr and impurity reaches it, it becomes impure and the
quantity of ice which melts and becomes water also becomes impure.

**23.** If the quantity of water is equal to a Kurr and later one doubts
whether it has become less than a Kurr it will be treated to be equal to
a Kurr i.e. it purifies an impure thing and does not become impure if an
impurity (Najasat) reaches it. And if water was less than a Kurr and one
doubts whether it has become equal to a Kurr it will be treated as
under-Kurr water.

**24.** There are two ways for deciding that the quantity of water is
equal to a Kurr: (i) A person should be sure about it personally and
(ii) Two men who are just should say so. And it is not unlikely that the
word of one just man and even of a reliable person in this behalf should
be sufficient.

Under-Kurr Water
----------------

**25.** Under-Kurr water means water which does not spring up from the
earth and its quantity is also less than a Kurr.

**26.** If under-Kurr water is poured on something which is impure it
becomes impure, or if an impure thing contacts it, it becomes impure.
However, if such water falls on an impure thing from above, only that
part of it which contacts it will become impure, and the water above it
will be pure (Tahir).

**27.** Under-Kurr water which is thrown on something to remove the
original impurity (Najasat) from it and gets separated from it is
impure. However, the under-Kurr water which is thrown on a thing to
purify it after the original impurity has been separated from it will be
pure after getting separated from it provided that the place of impurity
is purified immediately after water is thrown on it. For example if the
place of impurity is a thing which becomes pure after washing once and
does not also contain an original impurity its washed out water i.e. the
water which gets separated from it at the time of washing is pure.
However, if a thing must be washed twice, then on the basis of
obligatory precaution, its first washed out water should be considered
impure, and the washed out water of its second washing is pure.

**28.** The water with which the outlets of urine and stool are washed
is pure subject to the following five conditions: (i) It does not have
the smell, color or taste of the impurity. (ii) An impurity has not
reached it from outside. (iii) Any other impurity like blood has not
come out with urine or stool. (iv) Particles of stool do not appear in
the water. (v) More than usual impurity has not reached the sides of the
outlet

Running Water
-------------

**29.** Running water is that water which springs up from the earth and
begins to flow (e.g. the water of a spring or a canal). Even if such
water is less than a Kurr it does not become impure by contacting an
impurity so long as it does not acquire the smell, color, or taste of
that impurity.

**30.** If an impurity reaches the running water that part of the water,
whose smell, color, or taste changes on account of the impurity, is
impure and that side which is connected with a spring is pure although
it may be less than a Kurr. As regards the water of the other side of
the canal if it is equal to a Kurr or is connected with the water of the
side of the spring by means of the water which has not changed, it is
pure, but otherwise it is impure.

**31.** The water of a spring which is not running but is such that if
water is taken from it, it gushes once again is as good as running water
i.e. if an impurity reaches it, it is pure so long as its smell, color
or taste does not change because of the impurity.

**32.** When water adjacent to the bank of a canal is stationary and is
connected with running water it does not become impure if its smell,
color or taste does not change by meeting an impurity.

**33.** When, for example, the water of a spring gushes m winter but
ceases to gush in summer, it can be treated as running water only when
it gushes.

**34.** If the water of the basin of a bath-room (Hammam) is less than a
Kurr but is connected with a store of water which when added to the
water of the basin becomes equal to a Kurr it does not become impure by
meeting an impurity if its smell, color or taste does not undergo a
change.

**35.** If the water of the pipes of bathrooms and buildings, which
pours through taps and showers, becomes equal to a Kurr after the
addition of the water of the tank with which they are connected, it is
treated to be Kurr water.

**36.** If water flows on the earth but does not gush from it and its
quantity is less than a Kurr and an impurity reaches it, it becomes
impure. However, if the water is flowing with pressure and, for example,
if the impurity touches its lower part its upper part will not become
impure.

Rain Water
----------

**37.** An impure thing becomes pure if rainwater falls on it once,
provided that it does not contain an original impurity. It is also not
necessary to squeeze a carpet or a dress after rainwater has fallen on
it. However, it is not sufficient that only a few drops of rain should
fall on it. On the other hand it is necessary that so much rain should
fall that it could be said that it has really rained.

**38.** If it rains on an original impurity and splashes elsewhere, but
the original impurity is not included in the water and it does not
acquire the smell, color or taste of the impurity, that water is pure.
Hence, if it rains on blood and then splashes and particles of blood are
present in the water or it acquires the smell, color or taste of blood,
it is impure.

**39.** If there is original impurity on the ceiling or roof of a
building then so long as it rains on the roof the water, which touches
an impure thing and comes down from the ceiling or fall down from the
rainwater pipe, is pure. However, if after it has ceased to rain and it
becomes known that the water which is falling has touched an impure
thing, that water is impure.

**40.** The impure place on which rain falls becomes pure, and if the
rainwater begins flowing on the ground and, while it is still raining,
reaches an impure place on the ceiling it purifies that place as well.

**41.** Impure dust which assumes the shape of mud by means of rain
becomes pure.

**42.** If rainwater collects at a place (although its quantity may be
less than a Kurr) and an impure thing is washed in it while it is
raining and the water does not acquire the smell, color or taste of the
impurity, that impure thing becomes pure.

**43.** If it rains on a pure carpet which is spread on an impure earth
and the water begins flowing on that impure earth the carpet does not
become impure and the earth, too, becomes pure.

Water of a Well
---------------

**44.** If the water of a well springs up from earth (although its
quantity may be less than a Kurr) that water does not become impure
owing to something impure falling in it, unless its color, smell or
taste is also changed. However, it is recommended that, in the event of
some impurities falling in it, water should be pulled out of the well in
the prescribed quantity. Details about this quantity are given in the
relevant books.

**45.** If an impurity falls in a well and changes the smell, color or
taste of its water the water will become pure when the change in its
smell etc. is removed. And it is better that this water should become
mixed with the water which gushes from the well.

**46.** If rainwater is collected in a pit and its quantity is less than
a Kurr it will become impure if an impurity reachesitafter it has ceased
to rain.

**47.** Mixed water, the meaning whereof has been explained in Article
15 does not purify any impure thing and it is also not correct to take
ceremonial bath or to perform ablutions with it.

**48.** Mixed water, however large its quantity may be, becomes impure
if a small particle of an impurity falls in it. However, if such water
falls on an impure thing from above, or with pressure that portion of it
which touches the impurity will become impure, and that portion which
does not touch the impurity will remain pure. For example, if rose water
is sprinkled on an impure hand from the rose-water bottle, that part of
it which reaches the hand will be impure and that part which does not
reach the hand will remain pure.

**49.** If impure mixed water is mixed with Kurr water or running water
in such a way that it can no longer be called mixed water it becomes
pure.

**50.** The water which was pure and it is not known whether it has
reached the stage of mixed water will be treated to be pure water i.e.
it will purify an impure thing and it will also be in order to perform
ablutions and ceremonial bath with it and if it was mixed water and it
is not known whether it has become pure water or not it will be treated
to be mixed water i.e. it will not purify an impure thing and it will
also be invalid to perform ablutions or ceremonial bath with it.

**51.** The water about which it is not known whether it is pure or
mixed and it is not known whether it was pure or mixed previously does
not purity an impurity and it is also not permissible to perform
ablutions or ceremonial bath with it and it becomes impure when an
impurity reaches it, although it may be equal to a Kurr or more than
that.

**52.** When an original impurity like blood and urine reaches water and
changes its smell, color or taste it becomes impure although it may be
Kurr-water or running water. However, if the smell, color or taste of
the water changes owing to an impurity which is outside it for example,
if a corpse, which is lying by the side of the water, changes its
smell - the water does not become impure.

**53.** If the water in which original impurity like blood or urine
falls and changes its smell, color or taste, joins Kurr-water or running
water or rain water falls on it, or wind makes the rain water fall on it
or rain water falls on it through rain-water pipe

**54.** If an impure thing is purified in Kurr-water or running water
the water, which falls from it, after the washing with which it becomes
pure, is pure.

**55.** The water, which was pure, and it is not known whether or not it
has become impure, is pure; and the water, which was impure and it is
not known whether or not it has become pure, is impure.

**56.** The leavings of a dog, a pig and an infidel, who is not one of
the people of the Book, and on the basis of obligatory precaution even
the people of the Book (like Jews and Christians), are impure and it is
unlawful to eat or drink the same. However, the leavings of the animal
whose meat is unlawful, are pure, and with the exception of cat, it is
abominable to eat or drink the leavings of all such animals.

The Use of Lavatory
-------------------

**57.** It is obligatory to conceal one's private parts, while
evacuating one's bowels or bladder as well as on other occasions, from
adult and sane persons even though they be one's near relatives (like
mother, sister etc.) Similarly it is obligatory to conceal one's private
parts from insane persons or intelligent children who can differentiate
between good and evil. However, husband and wife are exempted from this
obligation.

**58.** It is not necessary for a person to conceal his/her private
parts with a particular thing and it is sufficient if, for example,
he/she conceals them with his/her hand.

**59.** When evacuating one's bowels or bladder the front or the back
part of one's body should not face the holy Ka'bah.

**60.** If at the time of evacuating one's bowels or bladder the front
part of the body or back faces the holy Ka'bah the turning of private
parts from the side of the Ka'bah is not sufficient and if the front
part of the body or back does not face the Ka'bah the obligatory
precaution is that one should not turn one's private parts in such a way
that the front part or back of it should be facing the Ka'bah.

**61.** Recommended precaution is that while performing Istibra’ (the
process of cleaning the urethra: see Article 73), and at the time of
purifying the outlets of urine and stool the front part or the back part
of one's body should not face not be opposite the holy Ka'bah. **2.**
When one is obliged to sit facing or with his back to Qibla, so as to
avoid somebody seeing him or her, or when there is an unavoidable excuse
for sitting that way, it is permissible to do so.

**69.** Obligatory precaution lies in this that a child should not be
made to sit for evacuating his/her bowels or bladder in such a way that
his/her face or back may be opposite the holy Ka'bah. However, if the
child himself/herself sits in such a way it is not obligatory to
restrain him/her from doing so.

**64.** It is prohibited (Haram) to evacuate one's bowels or bladder at
the following four places: (i) In blind alleys without the permission of
the people of those alleys. (ii) In the property (land) of a person who
has not granted permission for its use for this purpose. (iii) At a
place which is reserved for a particular group (e.g. school, hostel,
orphanage etc.). (iv) On the graves of the believers or at the sacred
places whose use for these purposes amount to their desecration.

**65.** In the following three cases anus can be purified only with
water: (i) If another impurity also comes out along with the faeces.
(ii) If an external impurity touches the anus. (iii) If more than usual
impurity spreads on the anus. In the cases other than those mentioned
above, anus can be purified either by water or by using tissue paper,
cloth or stone etc., although it is better to wash it with water. (for
details: see Article 68 - 70).

**66.** The urinary organ cannot be purified without water. It would
suffice if after washing the original impurity the urinary organ is
washed once with Kurr water or with running water. However, in the case
of under-Kurr water the obligatory precaution is to wash it twice and it
is still better to wash it thrice.

**67.** If the anus is washed with water it is necessary that no trace
of faeces should be left on it. However, there is no harm in its color
and smell remaining there. And if it is washed in such a way in the
first instance that no particle of stool remains there it is not
necessary to wash it for the second time.

**68.** The anus can be purified with stone, clod or cloth provided they
are dry and pure and there is no harm if they have slight moisture,
which does not reach the outlet.

**69.** The obligatory precaution is that there should be three pieces
of stone or clod or cloth with which the faeces is to be removed. And if
it is not removed with three pieces one should increase the number to
such an extent that the outlet is purified fully. However, there is no
harm if its small particles which cannot be seen are still there.

**70.** It is unlawful to purify the anus with things which must be
respected (e.g. a paper on which the names of Allah and those of the
Prophets are written) and it is hard to say that the outlet may become
pure with a bone or with dung.

**71.** If a person doubts whether or not he has purified the out- let
it is necessary that he should purify it although he may have been
purifying it always as a matter of habit after evacuating bowels or
bladder.

**72.** When a person doubts after offering prayers whether he purified
the outlet before offering prayers and the probability is that before
commencing the prayers he had taken notice of his condition the prayers
offered by him will be valid but for the next prayers he must purify the
outlet.

Istibra’ (The Process of Cleaning the Urethra)
----------------------------------------------

**73.** Istibra’ is a recommended act which is performed by men after
urinating. Its object is to ensure that no more urine is left in the
urethra. There are certain ways of performing Istibra’ and the best of
them is that if after the passing of wind the anus also becomes impure
it should be purified first. Thereafter the portion from the anus up to
the root of male organ should be pressed thrice with the middle finger
of the left hand. Then the thumb should be placed on the penis and the
forefinger should be placed below it and it should be pressed thrice up
to the point of circumcision and the front part of the male organ should
be jerked thrice.

**74.** The liquid which comes out of the penis of man after joking and
jesting with or embracing a woman and is called 'Mazi' is pure and same
is the case with the liquid which at times comes out after semen, and is
called 'Wazi' Similarly the liquid which at times comes out after urine
and is called 'Wadi' is pure, if urine does not reach it. And if a
person performs Istibra’ after urinating and then liquid comes out of
his penis and he doubts whether it is urine or one of the above-
mentioned three liquids that liquid is pure.

**75.** If a person doubts whether he has performed Istibra’ or not and
a liquid comes out of his penis about which he does not know whether it
is pure or not that liquid is impure and if he has performed ablutions
it becomes void. However, if he doubts whether he performed the Istibra’
correctly or not and a liquid comes out of his body about which he does
not know whether it is pure or not that liquid is pure and it does not
also invalidate the ablutions.

**76.** If a person performed Istibra’ after urinating and also per- for
ablutions and if after ablution a liquid comes out of his body which he
considers to be urine or semen it is obligatory for him to perform
ceremonial bath as a precautionary measure and also to perform
ablutions. However, if he has not already performed ablutions it is
sufficient to performed ablutions.

**77.** In case a person does not perform Istibra’ after urinating and
on account of sufficient time having passed since he urinated he is sure
that no urine is left inside the urinary organ and in the meantime some
liquid discharges from it about which he is not sure as to whether it is
pure or not, that liquid is pure and does not also make the ablutions
void.

**78.** Istibra’ is not prescribed for female after urinating and if a
liquid comes out of her body and she doubts whether it is urine that
liquid is pure and it does not also invalidate ablutions and ceremonial
bath.

Recommended and Abominable Acts
-------------------------------

**79.** When a person enters the lavatory it is recommended (Mustahab)
that he should first place his left foot inside it and having covered
his head he should sit at a place where no one can see him. It is also
recommended that he should place the weight of his body on the left
foot, and while leaving the lavatory he should first place his right
foot.

**80.** It is abominable (Makrooh) to face the sun or the moon while
evacuating bowels or bladder. But if a person somehow covers his private
parts it is not abominable. Apart from this it is not desirable to sit
for urinating etc. facing the current of the wind; it is also abominable
to sit on the roadside or in lanes and y lanes or in front of the doors
of the house or under the shade of the fruit-yielding trees. It is also
not desirable to eat something in this condition or take more than usual
time sitting there or to wash with the right hand. Unnecessary talking
is also not desirable. However it does not matter if one is constrained
to talk or if one utters Allah's words.

**81.** It is abominable to urinate while standing, or on hard earth, or
in the holes of the animals, or in the water (especially standing
water).

**82.** It is also abominable to suppress evacuation of bowels or
ladder, and unlawful if it is injurious for health.

**83.** It is recommended that one should urinate before offering
prayers, sleeping and having sexual intercourse, and after the seminal
discharge.


