Eid Ul Fitr And Eid Ul Azha Prayers
===================================

**1525.** Eid ul Fitr and Eid ul Azha prayers were obligatory up to the
period of Imam Mahdi, peace be on him, and it was also necessary to
offer, them in congregation. However, during the present times, when the
holy Imam is in Occultation, these prayers are recommended and can be
offered individually as well as in congregation.

**1526.** The time for Eid prayers is from sunrise up to noon.

**1527.** It is recommended that Eidul Azha prayers is offered after
sunrise. As regards Eidul Fitr it is recommended that one should break
one's fast after sunrise and should also pay Zakatul Fitr and then offer
Eid prayers.

**1528.** Eid prayers consists of two units. In the first unit of the
prayers a person should recite Surah al-Hamd and a surah and then say
five takbirs and after every takbir he should recite qunut. After the
fifth qunut he should say another takbir and then preform bowing and two
prostrations. He should then stand up and say four takbirs in the second
unit and recite qunut after every one of these takbirs. Thereafter he
should say the fifth takbir and should then perform bowing and two
prostrations. After the second prostration he should recite tashahhud
and then complete the prayers with salaam.

**1529.** Any recital or supplication suffices as qunut in the Eid
prayers. However, it is better that the following supplication be
recited: Alahumma ahlal kibriya'i wal 'azamah wa ahlal judi wal jabarut,
wa ahlal 'afwi war rahmah, wa ahlat taqwa wal maghfirah. Asaluka bihaqqi
hazal yawmil lazi ja'altahu lil muslimina 'Ida wali Muhnmmadin sal lal
lahu 'alayhi wa aalihi zukhran wa sharafan wa karamatan wa mazida an
tusalliya 'ala Muhammad wa Aali Muhammad wa an tudkhilani fi' kulli
khayrin adkhalta fihi Muhammadan wa Aali Muhammad wa an tukhrijani min
kulli suin akhrajta minhu Muhammadan wa Aali Muhammad salawatuka 'alayhi
wa 'alayhim. Alla humma inni as aluka khayra ma sa'alaka bihi 'ibadukas
Salihun, wa auzubika mim masta aza minhu 'ibdukal mukhlisun.

**1530.** During the period of Occultation of the Imam of the Time it is
recommended that two sermons (Khutbas) be delivered after Eid prayers
and it is better that, in the sermons orders regarding Zakatul fitr are
explained and in those delivered on the occasion of Eidul azha orders
relating to slaughtering of animals be made known to the people.

**1531.** No particular surah has been specified for being recited
during Eid prayers. However, it is better that after reciting surah
al-Hamd in the first and the second units the following surahs be
recited: surah ash-Shams in the first unit and Surah al-Gashiya in the
second unit or surah al-A'la in the first unit and Surah ash-Shams in
the second unit.

**1532.** It is recommended that Eid prayers be offered in the fields
However, in Makkah it is recommended that it should be offered in
Masjidul Haram.

**1533.** It is recommended that before offering Eid prayers a person
should take bath and wear a white turban and should go for prayers on
foot and barefoot in a dignified manner.

**1534.** It is recommended that during Eid prayers prostrations be
performed on earth and hands be raised while saying takbirs. It is also
recommended that a person who is offering Eid prayers (whether he offers
them alone or in the congregational prayers) pronounce the words loudly.

**1534.** It is recommended that during Eid prayers prostrations be
performed on earth and hands be raised while saying takbirs It is also
recommended that a person who is offering Eid prayers (whether he offers
them alone or in the congregational prayers) pronounce the words loudly.

**1535.** It is recommended that the following takbirs be said on Eidul
Fitr night (i.e. night preceding the Eid day). after-dusk and night
prayers and on the Eid day after dawn players as well as after Eidul
fitr prayers: "Allahu Akbar, Allahu Akbar, la ilaha illal lahu Wallahu
Akbar, Allahu Akbar, Wa lillahil hamd Allahu Akbar ala ma hadana.

**1536.** In Eidul azha it is recommended that the above-mentioned
takbirs be said after ten prayers, of which the first is the noon
prayers of Eid day and the last is the dawn prayers of 12th of Zilhaij.
It is also recommended that after the above mentioned takbirs the
following supplication be recited:"Allahu Akbar ala ma razaqna min
bahimatil anam wal hamdu lillahi ala ma ablana.

In case, however, a person happens to be in Mina at the time of Eidul
qurban it is recommended that he should say these takbirs after fifteen
prayers of which the first is midday prayers of Eid day and the last is
the dawn prayers of the 13th Zilhaj.

**1537.** The recommended precaution is that women should refrain from
going to offer Eid prayers. This precaution need not, however, he
observed by old women.

**1538.** As in other prayers the follower should also recite in the Eid
prayers, the things of the prayers other than Hamd and surah.

**1534.** If a follower joins the prayers at a time when the Imam has
already said some takbirs he should, while the Imam performs bowing, say
all the takbirs and qunut which he has not said along with the Imam and
it is sufficient if in each qunut he says: Subhanallah or Alhamdu lillah
only.

**1540.** If a person joins the Eid prayers when the Imam is in bowing,
he can make intention and say the first takbir of the prayers and then
go into bowing.

**1541.** If a person forgets one prostration of tashahhud in Eid
prayers the precaution lies in that he should perform it after prayers.
However, if something takes place for which a sajdatus sahv is necessary
after daily prayers, it is not necessary that he should perform two
sajdatus sahv after the Eid prayers.


