Rules of the Lost Property When Found
=====================================

**2573.** If a person finds the lost property of another person which is
not an animal, and which does not bear any sign, by means of which it
may be possible to locate its owner, and its value is not less than a
dirham (**12.**6 chickpeas of coined silver) the obligatory precaution
is that the person, who has found that property, should give it to
indigent persons as alms on behalf of the owner of that property, and
should not appropriate it himself.

**2574.** If a person finds a property the value of which is less than a
dirham and if its owner is known and the person who finds it does not
know whether or not he is agreeable he cannot pick it up without his
(i.e. the owner's) permission. And if its owner is not known the person
who finds it can pick it up for his own use as if it is his own
property. And it is obligatory that as and when its owner is known, he
should give him that property if it has not perished, and should give
him compensation for it if it has perished.

**2575.** If a person finds something which bears a sign by means of
which its owner can be located, and even though he comes to know that
its owner is a sunni or an unbeliever, whose property is respectable,
and the value of that thing reaches one dirham, the person, who finds
it, should make an announcement about it at the place of gathering of
the people for one year from the day on which he finds that thing.

**2576.** If a person does not wish to make an announcement himself he
can ask another person to make the announcement, if he is satisfied that
he will perform the duty in this behalf.

**2577.** If the person who finds such a thing makes announcement for
one year but the owner of the property does not turn up he (the person
who has found the property) should act as follows:

(i) If he has found that thing at a place other than the Haram of Makkah
he can retain it himself, or keep it for its owner so that he may give
it to him when he appears, or give it as alms to indigent persons on
behalf of the owner.

(ii) If he has found that thing in the Haram the obligatory precaution
is that he should give it away as alms.

**2578.** If the person who finds such a thing makes announcement for
one year and the owner of the property does not turn up and he (i.e. the
person who has found the thing) looks after it for the sake of its owner
so that he may deliver it to him as and when he is found and in the
meantime it perishes and he has not been negligent in looking after it,
and has also not been extravagant, he is not responsible. However, if he
has appropriated it himself he is responsible. And in case he gives it
as alms on behalf of the owner he (the owner) has the option in
endorsing the giving of alms or demanding compensation for his property.
And the spiritual reward for the alms is enjoyed by him, who gives the
alms.

**2579.** If a person finds something and does not make intentionally an
announcement according to the orders narrated above, he not only commits
a sin but it is still obligatory on him to make an announcement about
it.

**2580.** If an insane person or a minor child finds something his
guardian can make an announcement about it and thereafter (i.e. if the
owner is not found) he on own it as the property of the insane person or
the minor child, or give it away as alms on behalf of the owner.

**2581.** If during the year in which a person is making an announcement
(about something having been lost and found) he loses all hope of
finding the owner of the thing, and wishes to give it away as alms, it
is difficult that his action in this behalf may be in order.

**2582.** If the property perishes during the year in which the person
who found it is making an announcement about it, and he has been
negligent in looking after it, or has been extravagant, he should
compensate the owner for it. However, if he has not been negligent or
extravagant, it is not obligatory for him to pay anything.

**2583.** If the property which bears a mark and whose value reaches one
dirham is found at a place about which it is known that the owner of the
property will not be found by means of announcement he can give it to
the indigent persons as alms on behalf of the owner on the very first
day and it is not necessary for him to wait till the year ends.

**2584.** If a person finds a thing and takes possession of it under the
impression that it is his own property, but learns later that it is not
his property he should make announcement for one year.

**2585.** At the time of making announcement it is not necessary for the
person who finds the lost thing to tell what kind of thing it is. On the
other hand it is sufficient if he says that he has found a thing like
that.

**2586.** If a person finds something and another person says that it is
his property and also mentions the marks of identification the former
should give that thing to him if he is satisfied that it belongs to him.
It is not necessary for the latter to mention the marks of which mostly
even the owners do not take notice.

**2587.** If the value of a thing which a person finds reaches one
dirham and he does not make an announcement about it and leaves it in
the masjid or at another place, where the people gather, and the thing
perishes, or some other person picks it up, the person who found the
thing is responsible.

**2588.** If a person finds a thing which would decay if allowed to
remain as it is, he should fix its price with the permission of the
religious Head or his representative, and sell it and keep its sale
proceeds with himself, and give the same as alms on behalf of the owner,
if he is not found.

**2589.** If the thing found by somebody is with him at the time of
performing ablutions and offering prayers there is undoubtedly no harm
in it if his intention is to find out its owner (and to give it to him).
Otherwise, however, it falls under the category of usurped property.

**2590.** If the pair of shoes of a person is taken away and is replaced
by another pair of shoes and the person who has lost his shoes knows
that the pair of shoes which is now with him belongs to the person who
has taken away his pair of shoes, and who is prepared to keep that pair
of shoes in lieu of his pair of shoes which that person has taken away,
he can keep that pair of shoes. And the same order applies if he knows
that he has taken away his pair of shoes unjustly and by way of
oppression. In that case, however, it is necessary that the price of
that pair of shoes should not exceed the price of his own pair of shoes,
otherwise order of 'unknown ownership' will apply. And in cases other
than these two the order of 'unknown ownership' applies to that pair of
shoes.

**2591.** If a man has some property of 'unknown ownership' i.e. its
owner is not known and if the word 'lost' does not apply to it, it is
necessary for him to make a search for its owner and give it as alms to
the indigent persons when he loses all hope of finding the owner. And it
is better that he should give it away as alms with the permission of the
religious Head and if the owner of the property turns up afterwards the
man is not responsible.


