Vow and Covenant
================

Vow (Nazr)
----------

**2649.** Vow means making it obligatory upon oneself to do some good
act, or to refrain from doing an act, which it is better not to do, in
order to please Allah.

**2650.** While making a vow one should utter the formula and it is not
necessary that it should be uttered in Arabic. In case, therefore, a
person says: "If my patient recovers from his ailment, it will be
obligatory upon me to pay $ 10 to a poor man for the sake of Allah." his
vow will be in order.

**2651.** It is necessary that the person making a vow is an adult and
sane and makes the vow with will and intention. In case, therefore, he
has been coerced to make the vow or he makes it involuntarily owing to
excitement, his vow is not in order.

**2652.** If a person, who is bankrupt or a prodigal (i.e. one who
spends his property on absurd things) makes a vow, for example, to give
something to an indigent person, his vow is not in order.

**2653.** If a husband restrains his wife from making a vow the wife
cannot make the vow (i.e. her vow will not be in order) if her
fulfilling the vow is contrary to the rights of her husband. The fact is
that without the permission of the husband the wife's making the vow is
void.

**2654.** If a woman makes a vow with the permission of her husband he
cannot cancel her vow, or restrain her from performing her vow except
when her acting in pursuance of her vow is contrary to the rights of her
husband, because in that event it is not unlikely that he may be able to
cancel her vow.

**2655.** If a child (son or daughter) makes avow with or without the
permission of his/her father, he/she should act according to his/her
vow. However, if his/her father or mother restrains him/her from
performing the vow, his/her vow is void.

**2656.** A person can make a vow for something, which it is possible
for him to perform. In case, therefore, a person is not capable of
traveling up to Karbala on foot and he makes a vow that he will go there
on foot, his vow will not be in order.

**2657.**If a person makes vow that he would perform an unlawful or
abominable act, or that he would refrain from an obligatory or
recommended act, his vow is not valid.

**2658.** If a person makes a vow that he will perform or abandon a
permissible act, and if performing that act or abandoning it is equal in
all respects, his vow is not in order. And if its end is better in some
respect and the vow is made with that intention for example, if he makes
a vow that he will eat a certain food in order to gain strength for
worshipping Allah his vow is in order. And if its abandonment is better
in some respect and the vow to abandon it is made with that view for
example, as tobacco is harmful and a person makes a vow not to use it,
his vow is in order.

**2659.** If a person makes a vow that he will offer his obligatory
prayers at a place, where offering prayers does not in itself carry
higher spiritual reward for example, he makes avow to offer his prayers
in a certain room and offering prayers there is better in some respects
for example owing to solitude he is enable to offer prayers with perfect
devotion and presence of mind, his vow is in order.

**2660.** If a person makes a vow to perform an act he should perform it
according to his vow. In case, therefore, he makes a vow to give alms,
or to fast on the first of the month, or to offer prayers of the first
of the month, and performs these acts before that day or after it, it
does not suffice. Moreover, if he makes a vow that he will give alms
when his patient recovers, but gives alms before the recovery of the
patient it does not suffice.

**2661.** If a person makes a vow that he will fast but does not specify
the time and number of fast it is sufficient if he observes fast on one
day. And if he makes a vow that he will offer prayers but does not
specify its quantity and particulars, it is sufficient if he offers one
two rak'at prayers. And if he makes a vow that he will give alms, but
does not specify its quality or quantity and he gives something about
which it may be said that he has given alms he has performed his vow.
And if he makes a vow that he will do something to please the Almighty
Allah he fulfill his vow, if he offers one prayers, or observes one
fast, or gives away something by way of alms.

**2662.** If a person makes a vow that he will observe fast on a
particular day, he should observe fast on that very day; and in case he
does not observe fast on that day intentionally he should, besides
observing the lapsed fast of that day, also make atonement for it. And
what is more apparent is that its atonement is the same as it is for
violating the oath, as will be told later. However, he has the option to
proceed on a journey on that day and do without observing fast, and in
case he is journeying it is not necessary for him to make an intention
of staying for ten days and observe fast. And in case he does not fast
on account of traveling or because of some other excuse, like ailment
(or menses in the care of women) it is necessary for him to observe the
lapsed fast of that day.

**2663.** If a person intentionally violates his vow he should make an
atonement for it.

**2664.** If a person makes a vow to abandon an act till a particular
time, he can perform that act after that time has passed, and if he
performs that act before that time owing to forgetfulness, or
helplessness, nothing is obligatory on him. Even then it is necessary
for him not to perform that act again till the appointed time, and if he
performs that act again before that time without an excuse, he must make
atonement for it.

**2665.**If a person makes a vow to abandon an act but does not specify
any time for it, and performs that act owing to forgetfulness,
helplessness or negligence, it is not obligatory for him to make
atonement, but if he performs that act again at any time voluntarily, he
must make atonement for it.

**2666.** If a person makes a vow that he/she will observe fast every
week on a particular day e.g. on Friday, and Eidul Fitr or Eidul Azha
falls on one of the Fridays or an excuse like journey (or menses in the
case of women) appears for him/her on a Friday he/she should not observe
fast on that day but observe its qaza.

**2667.** If a person makes a vow that he will give a specific amount as
alms, but dies before giving alms, it is not necessary that that amount
should be given as alms from out of his property. It is better that the
adult heirs of the deceased should give that amount as alms on his
behalf out of their own share.

**2668.** If a person makes a vow that he will give alms to a particular
person he cannot give it to another pool and if that poor person dies he
should, on the basis of precaution, give the alms to his heirs.

**2669.** If a person makes a vow that he will perform the ziyarat
(homage) of one of the holy Imams for example of Abu Abdullah Imam
Husayn (P) his going for the ziyarat of another Imam is not sufficient,
and if he cannot perform the ziyarat of that particular Imam on account
of some excuse nothing is obligatory on him.

**2670.** If a person has made a vow that he will go for ziyarat, but
has not made a vow for the bath for ziyarat and its prayers, it is not
necessary for him to perform the same.

**2671.** If a person makes a vow that he would spend some amount of
money on the shrine of one of the Imam or the descendant of the Imam he
should spend it on the repairs, lighting, carpeting etc. of the shrine.

**2672.** If a person makes a vow to use something for a Holy Imam
himself and has made an intention to put it to a specific use, he should
spend it for that very purpose, and if he has not made an intention to
put it to any specific use, it is better that he should use it for a
purpose which has some relationship with the Imam for example, he should
spend it on indigent pilgrims or on the shrine of the Imam like its
repairs etc. And the position is the same if he makes a vow to use
something for the descendant of an Imam.

**2673.** If someone makes a vow that he would give a sheep as alms or
dedicate it to a Holy Imam and it gives milk or gives birth to a young
one before it is put to use in accordance with the vow, the milk or the
lamb is the property of the person who has made the vow, but the wool of
the sheep and the extent to which it grows fat form part of the vow.

**2674.** If a person makes a vow that he would do such and such good
act if his patient recovers or his traveler returns home, and it
transpires later that the patient had already recovered or the traveler
had already returned before he had made the vow, it is not necessary for
him to act upon his vow.

**2675.** If a father or a mother makes a vow that he/she will marry
their daughter to a sayyid the option rests with the girl when she
attains the age of puberty, and the vow made by the parents has no
significance.

**2676.** When a person makes a covenant with Allah that if his
particular lawful need is fulfilled he will perform such and such act,
it is necessary for him to perform that act. Similarly if he makes a
covenant, without any need, that he will perform such and such good act,
the performing of that act becomes obligatory upon him.

**2677.** As in the case of vow a formula should be pronounced in the
case of covenant (Ahd) as well. And what is well known is that the
covenant that one makes should be either worship like obligatory or
recommended prayers or an act whose performance is better than its
abandonment. On the basis of obligatory precaution, however, he should
perform the act for which he has made the covenant, if it is not
preferable according to religious law.

**2678.**If a person does not act according to the covenant made by him,
he should make an atonement for it i.e, he should either feed sixty
indigent persons or fast consecutively for two months, or sat a slave
free.

Orders Regarding Oath (Qasam)
-----------------------------

**2679.** If a person takes an oath that he would do such and such act
(e.g. that he will fast) or will refrain from doing such and such act
(e.g. that he will not smoke tobacco), but does not act according to his
oath, he should make atonement for it viz. he should set a slave free,
or should feed fully ten indigent persons or should provide dress to ten
indigent persons. In case, however, he is not able to perform these acts
he should fast for three consecutive days.

**2680.** There are certain conditions for taking an oath. They are as
below:

(i) A person who takes an oath should be adult and sane and should take
oath with intention. Hence taking an oath by a child, an insane person,
an intoxicated person, or a person who has been coerced to take an oath
is not in order. And the position is the same if he takes an oath
unintentionally in a state of excitement.

(ii) The task for the performance of which he takes the oath should not
be unlawful or abominable and the task for the abandonment of which he
takes the oath should not be obligatory or recommended. And if he takes
oath to perform a permissible act, its abandonment should not be better
in the eyes of the people than its performance. And if he takes oath to
abandon a permissible act its performance should not be better than its
abandonment.

(iii) He should swear by one of those names of the Almighty Lord which
are not used for anyone except for His sacred Being (e.g. 'Allah'). And
even if he swears by a name which is used for beings other than Allah as
well, but is used so much for Him that as and when any person utters
that name one is reminded of His sacred Being for example if he swears
by the Khaliq (the Creator) and the Raziq (the Bestower) it is in order.
Rather the obligatory precaution is that in other circumstances also he
should act according to his oath.

(iv) He should utter the oath with his tongue and if he writes it on
something or makes its intention in his heart, it is not in order.
However, if a dumb person swears by means of signs, it is in order.

(v) It should be possible for him to act upon his oath. And if he is
able to act upon the oath when he takes it, but becomes incapable of
acting upon it later, the oath is nullified from the time he becomes
incapable of acting upon it. And the same order applies if acting upon
one's vow, oath or covenant involves such hardship that it is not
possible for one to bear it.

**2681.** If the father forbids his son to take an oath or the husband
forbids his wife to take an oath, their oath is not valid.

**2682.** If the son takes an oath without the permission of his father,
or the wife takes an oath without the permission of her husband, then
the father or the husband can nullify the oath. But the apparent
position is that their oaths are ineffective without the permission of
the father or the husband. And the same order applies to a slave girl or
a slave vis-a-vis their master.

**2683.** If a person does not act upon his oath on account of
forgetfulness, helplessness or negligence, he is not required to make an
atonement for it. And the same order applies if he is compelled not to
act upon his oath. And if a capricious person takes oath for example if
he says: "By Allah I am going to offer prayers at once, and does not
offer prayers owing to his caprice, and if his whim is such that he does
not act upon his oath involuntarily on account of his whim it is not
necessary for him to make any atonement.

**2684.** If a person swears that he is telling the truth when what he
says is correct, his taking the oath is abominable; and if it is false
his taking the oath is unlawful and one of the major sins. However, if a
person takes a false oath in order to save himself or another Muslim
from the mischief of an oppressor there is no harm in it, and in fact at
times it becomes obligatory. However, if a person can resort to
'Tauriyat' (dissimulation) i.e. if at the time of taking oath he makes
an intention in such a way that what he says does not become false, it
is better for him to resort to dissimulation. For example, if a cruel
person who wants to harm some one asks another person as to whether he
has seen him and he has seen him five minutes earlier, he should say
that he has not seen him and should make an intention to the effect that
he has not seen him for the last five minutes.


