Miscellaneous Problems
======================

**2821.** If the roots of a tree belonging to a person's neighbor reach
his property, he can stop them, and if he also sustains harm from them,
he can ask the owner of the tree to compensate him for it.

**2822.** If a father gives dowry to his daughter and. for example, he
makes it her property by means of compromise or gift, he cannot take it
back from her. However, if he has not made it her property there is no
harm in his taking it back.

**2823.** If a person dies, his adult heirs can spend money on his
mourning ceremonies out of their own share, but nothing can be taken
from the share of a minor.

**2824.** If a person backbites a Muslim he should seek forgiveness of
that Muslim, provided that there is no danger of any disturbance being
created by his doing so. In case, however, it is not possible for him to
seek forgiveness of that person, he should pray to Allah for his
salvation. And in case that Muslim has been insulted owing to his
backbiting, he (i.e. the person who has spoken ill of the Muslim)
should, if possible, make amends for the insult.

**2825.** If a person knows that someone has not paid Khums he cannot
take Khums out of his property without the permission of the Religious
Head and deliver it to him (Religious Head).

**2826.** The tune which is peculiar to the assemblies of amusement and
pleasure is music, which is unlawful. It is also unlawful to recite the
Holy Qur'an or mournful verses in commemoration of the martyrdom of Imam
Husayn in a musical tone, but there is no harm if they are recited in a
sweet tone which does not fall under the category of music.

**2827.** There is no harm in killing an animal which is harmful and
does not belong to anyone.

**2828.** The prize which a bank gives to some of its account holders of
its own accord to attract the clients, is lawful.

**2829.** If something is given to an artisan to mend, and its owner
does not come to take it back, and the artisan makes a search for him
and loses hope of finding him he should give it away as alms with the
intention that he is giving it on behalf of the owner. And it is better
that he should obtain the permission of the Religious Head in this
behalf

**2830.** There is no harm in beating one's breast in the streets and
bazaars (i.e. as a sign of mourning) though the women may be passing
from there. However, on the basis of precaution, the mourners should be
wearing shirts. Furthermore, there is no harm if standard ('Alam) etc.
are carried before the mourning party, but instruments of amusement
should not be used.

**2831.** To have golden teeth set in one's mouth, or to get one's teeth
plated with gold, is not prohibited, either or men or women, though it
is for adornment.

**2832.** To masturbate or to cause the semen come out with oneself or
by other means (except by intercourse with ones wife or slave girl which
is permissible) is unlawful.

**2833.** Shaving one's beard or cutting it with a machine in such a way
that it becomes like the shaved one is unlawful on the basis of
obligatory precaution.

**2834.** On the basis of obligatory precaution the guardian should get
his child circumcised before he attains puberty, and if he does not get
him circumcised it becomes obligatory on the child himself when he
reaches the age of puberty.

**2835.** If the parents of a person are indigent and cannot earn
anything, their son should if it is possible for him to meet their
expenses.

**2836.** If a person is indigent and cannot earn anything his father
should bear his expenses. And if his father is not alone, or cannot bear
his expenses, and he does not also have a son who may bear his expenses
what is well known is that his paternal grandfather should bear his
expenses. And if his paternal grandfather is not alive or he cannot meet
his expenses, his mother should meet his expenses. And if his mother is
not alive or she cannot meet his expenses, his paternal and mother and
maternal and mother and maternal grandfather should meet his expenses
jointly. And if some of them are not alive or cannot meet his expenses
others should help him. And this commonly known verdict is according to
precaution.

**2837.** If a wall is owned jointly by two persons none of them is
entitled to rebuild it without the permission of the other or to place
the beam or pillar of his building on that wall or to drive a nail in
it. However, there is no harm in doing things about which it is known
that the other owner is agreeable to them e.g. to lean on the wall or to
spread clothes on it. However, if the other owner is not agreeable even
to these things being done, it is not permissible to do them.

**2838.** Painting of the entire body of an animal or a human being is
unlawful even though it is not a statue. However. there is no harm in
producing pictures by means of photography.

**2839.** If the branches of a fruit bearing tree go beyond the garden
wall and a person does not know whether the owner of the garden is
agreeable to its fruit being plucked, he cannot on the basis of
precaution, pluck its fruit, and cannot also pick up the fruit which has
fallen on the ground.


