Purifying Things
================

**149.** There are twelve things which make impure objects pure: (i)
Water (ii) Earth (iii) The sun (iv) Transformation (Istihala) (v) Change
(Inqilab) (vi) Transfer (Intiqal) (vii) Islam (viii) Relation
(Taba'iyat) (ix) Removal of original impurity (x) Confining (Istibraâ€™ )
of the animal which feeds on impurities (xi) Disappearance of a Muslim,
(xii) Flowing off the usual quantity of blood from the slaughtered body
of the animal.

**150.** Detailed orders with regard to these purifying things will be
narrated in the following articles:

Water
-----

Water purifies impure things when the following four conditions are
fulfilled: (i) The water should be clean. Hence an impure thing cannot
be purified with mixed water like rose-water or melon-water etc. (ii)
The water should be pure. (iii) The water should not become mixed while
the impure thing is being washed. Furthermore, the smell, color or taste
of the impurity should not exist after the washing after which no
further washing is necessary, but if the smell, color or taste of the
water changes during earlier washings there is no harm in it, for
example, if a thing is washed with Kurr-water or under-Kurr water and,
in order to purify it, it is necessary to wash it twice, it will become
pure if the color, smell or taste of the water with which it is washed
for the second time does not change, even though the color, smell or
taste of the water undergoes a change during the first washing. (iv)
Original impurity should not remain in the impure thing after washing it
with water. There are certain other conditions also for the purification
of a thing with under-Kurr water which will be mentioned later.

**151.** In order to purify an impure household utensil it is necessary
to wash it thrice with under-Kurr water, but if it is running water or
it is equal to a Kurr it is sufficient to wash the utensil only once.
However, to purify a utensil from which a dog has drunk water or some
other liquid, some dust and water should be put in it in the first
instance and rubbed. As a precautionary measure the dust should also be
pure. Thereafter some water should be put in the utensil so that the
dust is washed off. Then the utensil should be washed with Kurr water
once or with under- Kurr water twice. Similarly if a utensil has been
licked by a dog it should be rubbed with dust, as a measure of
obligatory precaution, before washing it. However, if the saliva of a
dog falls in a utensil it is not necessary for its purification to rub
it with dust.

**152.** If the opening of a utensil in which a dog has put its mouth is
narrow dust should be thrown into it and after adding some quantity of
water severe jolts should be given to the utensil so that the dust may
reach everywhere in it. Thereafter the utensil should be washed in the
manner mentioned above.

**153.** A utensil which is licked by a pig or from which it drinks
something liquid or in which a field-mouse has died should be washed
with under-Kurr, Kurr or running water seven times and it is not
necessary to rub it with dust.

**154.** A utensil which becomes impure on account of wine should be
washed thrice and it does not matter whether the water used is
Kurr-water, under-Kurr water or running water.

**155.** If a jug, which has been made of impure clay or in which impure
water has penetrated, is put into Kurr-water or running water those of
its places, where the water reaches become pure. And if it is desired
that its interior should also become pure It should be left in
Kurr-water or running water for such a long time that the water
penetrates into its entire structure. And if the utensil contains
moisture which prevents the water from reaching its inner parts that
moisture should be dried and there- after it should be put in Kurr-water
or running water.

**156.** A utensil can be washed with under-Kurr water in two ways: (i)
The utensil should be filled with water and emptied and this act should
be repeated thrice. (ii) Water should be put in the utensil in
appropriate quantity and the utensil should be jerked so that the water
reaches all the impure parts and then the water should be poured out.
This act should be performed thrice.

**157.** If a big utensil like cauldron or jar becomes impure it becomes
pure if it is filled with water thrice and emptied every time. And the
position is the same if water is thrown into it thrice from above in
such a way that it reaches all its sides and the water which gathers at
the bottom every time is taken out and it is necessary that on the
second and third occasion the utensil with which the water is taken out
is washed and purified with water.

**158.** If impure copper and other things like it are melted and washed
with water their exterior becomes pure.

**159.** If an oven (underground furnace for baking bread) becomes
impure with urine and water is thrown into it from above in such a way
that it reaches all its sides and this is done twice the oven becomes
pure. And in the event of its becoming impure on account of something
other than urine if, after the removal of the impurity, water is thrown
into it once in the manner mentioned above it becomes pure. And it is
better that a pit may be dug in its bottom so that the water may collect
in it and may then be taken out and thereafter the pit may be filled
with pure dust.

**160.** If an impure thing is immersed once in Kurr-water or running
water in such a way that the water reaches all its impure parts it
becomes pure. And as regards a carpet or dress it is also necessary to
squeeze it. If dress etc. becomes impure with urine, it is necessary for
its purification to wash it with Kurr-water twice.

**161.** If it is proposed to purify with under-Kurr water something
which has become impure on account of urine and water is poured on it
once and it flows off and the urine is also washed away from it, the
thing becomes pure when water is poured on it for the second time.
However, if it is something like a carpet or dress it should be squeezed
so that water is removed from it.

**162.** If anything becomes impure with the wine of a suckling child
who has not yet started taking food, it becomes pure when water is
poured on it in such a manner that it reaches all the impure parts.
However, according to the recommended precaution, water should be poured
on it once again. And if it is a carpet or dress etc. it is not
necessary to squeeze it.

**163.** If anything becomes impure with an impurity other than urine,
it becomes pure (Tahir) by first removing the original impurity and then
pouring water on it once, allowing it to flow off. However, if it is a
dress etc. it should be squeezed so that the water present in it should
flow off.

**164.** If it is proposed to purify a mat, in the weaving of which
thread has been used, it u necessary that in whatever way it may be
possible it should be squeezed so much that the water present in it
should run out, even if it becomes necessary to press it with feet to
achieve this end.

**165.** If the exterior of wheat, rice, soap etc. becomes impure it
becomes pure by dipping it in Kurr-water or running water. However, if
their interior becomes impure they can be purified in the same manner in
which an impure earthen jug is purified vide Article No. **155.**

**166.** If one doubts whether impure water has reached the interior of
soap or not its interior is pure.

**167.** If the outer part of rice, meat, soap or any other similar
thing becomes impure and it is placed in a bowl etc. and then water is
put into it and thereafter the water is poured out and this act is
repeated thrice the thing as well as the container become pure. In case,
however, it is proposed to purify with water, and by putting in a
container, things like dress which must be squeezed, they should be
squeezed every time water is poured on them and the container should be
kept in an inclined position so that the water which gets collected in
it should flow off.

**168.** If an impure dress, which has been colored with indigo or with
any other similar thing, is dipped into Kurr-water or running water, or
is washed with under-Kurr water, and the mixed water does not come out
of it at the time of squeezing, it becomes pure.

**169.** If a dress is washed with Kurr-water or running water and
later, for example, black mud is found in it, the dress will be pure if
there is a probability that the black mud has not prevented water from
reaching the dress.

**170.** If particles of mud or soda-plant are seen in dress etc. after
its being washed with water it will be pure. However, if impure water
has reached the interior of mud or soda-plant their exterior will be
pure and their interior will be impure.

**171.** A thing does not become pure unless the original impurity is
removed from it, but there is no - if the color or smell of the impurity
remains in it. Hence, if blood is removed from a cloth and thereafter
the cloth is purified with water it will become pure even though the
color of blood remains on it. But if, on account of the smell or color,
it becomes certain or probable that some particles of impurity are still
present in doth etc. it will remain impure.

**172.** If the impurity of the body is removed in Kurr-water or running
Water the body will become pure and it is not necessary to re-enter the
water after coming out of it.

**173.** If impure food remains between the teeth and water is taken in
the mouth and kept in motion in such a way that it reaches the entire
impure food, the food becomes pure.

**174.** If the impure hair of head and face are washed with
under-Kurr-water it is not necessary to squeeze them to separate the
water from them.

**175.** If a part of the impure body or dress is washed with
under-Kurr-water the places which are adjacent to it and water usually
reaches them at the time of washing will become pure when the impure
place becomes pure. It means that it is not necessary to wash those
sides separately and the impure place and its sides become pure together
by washing. And similar is the case if a pure thing is placed by the
side of an impure thing and water is poured on both of them. Hence, if
in order to wash an impure finger water u poured on all the fingers and
the impure water reaches all of them all the fingers will become pure on
the impure finger becoming pure.

**176.** The meat or fat which becomes impure can be washed with water
like other things. Same is the case if the body or dress has a little
grease on it which does not prevent the water from reaching it.

**177.** If a utensil or one's body is impure and then it becomes so
greasy that water cannot reach it and it is proposed to purify it with
water, one should first remove the grease so that water may reach one's
body or the utensil.

**178.** If a water-tap is connected with Kurr-water the tap water is
considered to be Kurr-water.

**179.** If a person washes a thing with water and becomes sure that it
has become pure but doubts later whether or not he had removed the
original impurity from it he should wash it again and become sure that
the original impurity has been removed.

**180.** If the ground which absorbs water (e.g. land on the surface of
which there is fine sand) becomes impure it can be purified with
under-Kurr water.

**181.** If the floor which is made of stones or bricks or other hard
ground in which water is not absorbed, becomes impure, can be purified
with under-Kurr water. However, it is necessary that so much water is
thrown on it that it begins to flow.

**182.** If the exterior of salt-stone or something resembling it
becomes impure, it can be purified with under-Kurr water.

**183.** If sugar-loaf is made out of impure melted sugar and it is
placed in Kurr or running water, it does not become pure.

Earth
-----

**184.** The earth purifies the sole of one's foot or shoe, provided
that the following three conditions are fulfilled: (i) The earth should
be pure (ii) The earth should be dry (iii) If an original impurity, like
blood or urine, or something which has become impure, like impure clay,
is stuck on the sole of the foot or shoe of a person, it should be
cleared by walking on earth or by rubbing the foot or shoe on it.
Furthermore, it is necessary that the earth consists of clay, or floor
made of stones or bricks, or any other similar thing. In case, however,
the sole of one's foot or shoe is impure, it does not become pure by
walking on a carpet or a mat or on green grass.

**185.** Purification of impure lower part of one's foot or shoe is also
difficult as a consequence of walking on tar or wooden floor.

**186.** In order to purify the sole of one's foot or shoe it is better
that one should cover a distance of at least fifteen cubits by walking
on earth, even though the impurity present there is already cleared by
covering a lesser distance, or by rubbing one's foot on earth.

**187.** It is not necessary that the impure sole of one's foot or shoe
is wet. They become pure by walking on earth even if they are dry.

**188.** When the impure sole of one's foot or shoe is purified by
walking on earth the parts adjacent to it, which are usually stained
with mud, are also purified.

**189.** If a person walks on his hands and knees and his hands or knees
become impure, it is difficult that they become pure by such walking,
and same is the case with the bottom of a stick and the lower part of an
artificial foot and the shoe of a quadruped and the wheel of an
automobile or a carriage, and other similar things.

**190.** If after walking, the smell or color of the impurity or its
small particle, which cannot be seen, remain in the sole of the foot or
the lower part of the shoe, there is no harm in it, although the
recommended precaution is that one should walk so much that these things
are also removed.

**191.** The inner part of the shoe does not become pure by walking and
it is also difficult that the lower part of the socks become pure by
walking on earth.

The Sun
-------

**192.** The sun purifies the earth, building, things affixed to the
building (like doors, windows etc.) and the nails which are fixed is the
walls, provided the following five conditions are fulfilled: (i) The
impure thing should be wet and if it is not wet it should be made wet so
that the sun may dry it up. (ii) If the original impurity is present on
an impure thing it should be removed from it before it is dried by the
sun. (iii) Nothing should intervene between the impure thing and the
sun. Hence, if the sun falls on the impure thing from behind a curtain
or a cloud and makes it dry the thing will not become pure. However,
there is no harm if the cloud is so thin that it does not serve as an
impediment between the impure thing and the sun. (iv) Only the sun
should make the impure thing dry. Hence, if an impure thing becomes dry,
for example, with wind as well as with the sun, it will not become pure.
However, it does not matter if the wind u so light that it may not be
said that it has had any share in making the impure thing dry. (v) The
sun should dry up, in one instance, the whole impure part of the
building, and in case the sun dries in the first instance, the surface
of the impure earth or building, and in the second instance the inner
part becomes dry, only the outer part will become pure and the inner
portion will remain impure.

**193.** It is difficult to say that an impure mat may be made pure by
the sun, but the sun purifies trees and the grass which have not been
cut yet.

**194.** If the sun shines on impure earth and a doubt arises later
whether the earth was wet or not at the time of sunshine and whether the
wetness dried up with sunshine or not the earth will remain impure. And
the position will also be the same (i.e. the earth will remain impure)
if doubt arises as to whether the original impurity was removed from the
earth or not, or whether anything prevented the sun from shining on the
earth or not.

**195.** If the sun shines on one side of an impure wall and as a
consequence of it the other side of the wall also becomes dry it is not
improbable that both the sides may be purified.

Transformation (Istihala)

**196.** If an impure thing undergoes such a change that it assumes the
shape of a pure thing it becomes pure; for example, if an impure piece
of wood burns and is reduced to ashes or a dog falls in a salt-marsh and
becomes salt it becomes pure. But the thing does not become pure if its
essence does not change; for example, if wheat is ground into flour or
is used for baking bread it does not become pure.

**197.** A jug or anything similar to it which is made of impure clay,
and coal which is made from impure wood, are impure.

**198.** An impure thing, about which it is not known whether it has
undergone transformation (Istihala) or not, is impure.

Change (Inqilab)

**199.** If wine becomes vinegar automatically or by mixing it with
vinegar or salt, it becomes pure.

**200.** Wine which is prepared from impure grapes and is then placed in
another pure container and thereafter becomes vinegar becomes pure.
Similarly, if some other impurity falls in the wine and gets dissolved
and then the wine becomes vinegar that impurity will also become pure,
provided that it has not touched the container.

**201.** The vinegar which is prepared from impure grapes, raisins and
dates is impure.

**202.** If vinegar is prepared from grapes or dates and particles of
their skins are also with them there is no harm in it. There is also no
harm in putting into it cucumber orbrinjal or any other such thing even
before their becoming vinegar unless they become intoxicating before
becoming vinegar.

**203.** If the juice of grapes ferment: automatically or by the heat of
fire it becomes unlawful. However, if it boils so much on fire that only
1/3 part of it is left, it becomes lawful. And it has already been
mentioned in Article 114 that the juice of grapes does not become impure
on account of boiling.

**204.** If 2/3 of the juice of grapes gets reduced without its boiling,
and the remainder gets boiled it becomes unlawful.

**205.** The juice of grapes, about which it is not known whether it has
boiled, is lawful. However, if it boils it does not become lawful unless
one becomes sure that 2/3 of it has been reduced.

**206.** If, for example, there are some ripe grapes also in a bunch of
unripe grapes and the juice taken from that bunch is not called "grape
juice" and it boils it is lawful to drink it.

**207.** If one grape falls in something which is boiling and boils, but
does not get dissolved in it, eating of only that grape is unlawful.

**208.** If juice of grapes is being cooked in several pots it is
permissible to use the same spoon for the pot which has not boiled and
for the pot which has boiled.

**209.** A thing, about which it is not known whether it consists of the
juice of unripe grapes or of ripe grapes, is lawful if it boils.

Transfer (Intiqal)

**210.** If the blood of a human being or of an animal, whose blood
gushes out when its great artery is cut, is sucked by an animal (or an
insect) whose blood does not gush and is treated to be the blood of the
latter animal, it becomes pure. This process is called Intiqal.

The above order also applies to other impurities, but since the blood of
a human being, sucked by a leech, is not considered to be the blood of
the leech, and is treated to be the blood of a human being, it is
impure.

**211.** If one kills a mosquito sitting on one's body and blood comes
out of the body of the mosquito, but it cannot be said whether that
blood is the blood of the mosquito itself or the blood which it had
sucked from one's body, that blood is pure. The same order applies if it
is known that it is the same blood which the mosquito sucked from the
body of the human being but is treated to be its own blood (i.e. it is
pure). But that blood will be treated to be impure if the gap between
the mosquito's sucking the blood and its being killed is so short that
it is treated to be the blood of the human being, or if it is not
possible to decide whether it is the blood of the mosquito or of the
human being.

Islam
-----

**212.** If an unbeliever professes Islam by saying: Ashhadu an la ilaha
illallah wa ash hadu annaMuhammadan Rasulullah (1 testify that there is
no deity but Allah and I also testify that Muhammad is His Prophet) and
acknowledges the Oneness of Allah and the Prophethood of the Prophet of
Islam in any language, he becomes a Muslim and as soon as he becomes a
Muslim his body, sweat, saliva and mucus become pure. However, if there
be any original impurity on his body at the time of embracing Islam it
is necessary that it should be purified with water. And even if the
original impurity had already been removed before his embracing Islam he
should, on the basis of obligatory precaution, purify that spot with
water.

**213.** If before an unbeliever becomes a Muslim, his dress has touched
his body with wetness and is not on his body at the time of his becoming
a Muslim, it is impure. And even if it is on his body at that time he
should purify it on the basis of obligatory precaution.

**214.** If an unbeliever professes Islam he will be pure even if
another person does not know whether or not he has embraced Islam
sincerely. And the same order applies even if it is known that he is not
sincere in embracing Islam but his words or deeds do not betray anything
which may be contrary to the confirmation by him of the Oneness of Allah
and of Prophet Muhammad being the last Prophet of Allah.

Relation (Tabaâ€™iyat)
--------------------

**215.** Taba'iyat means that an impure thing may become pure as a
consequence of the purification of something else.

**216.** If wine is transformed into vinegar, the part of the container
up to which it reaches on account of fermentation will also become pure,
However, if the other part of the container became impure on account of
having come in contact with wine obligatory precaution is that even
after the wine having been transformed into vinegar its use should be
avoided.

**217.** The child of an unbeliever becomes pure by means of relation
(taba'iyat) in two cases: (i) if an unbeliever embraces Islam his child
is subordinate to him in the matter of purity. The same is the case if
the mother, paternal grandfather or paternal grandmother of a child
embraces Islam. (ii) if the child of an unbeliever is captured by
Muslims and his father, paternal grandfather or maternal grandfather is
not with him, he becomes pure. In both the cases purity of the child by
means of relation is subject to the condition that he is intelligent
i.e. if he can differentiate between good and evil, he should not
display blasphemy.

**218.** The plank or slab of stone on which a dead body is bathed and
the cloth with which his private parts are covered and the hands of the
person who bathes him are washed along with the dead body, become pure
when ceremonial bath (the three prescribed baths) is completed.

**219.** When a person washes something with water, his hands, which are
washed along with that thing, are purified when that thing itself
becomes pure.

**220.** If cloth etc. is washed with under-Kurr water and is squeezed
as much as it is usually squeezed so that the water poured on it flows
off, the water which still remains in it, is pure and that water which
has separated from it is also pure as explained in Article **27.**

**221.** When an impure utensil is washed with under-Kurr water the
small quantity of water which remain in it after throwing away the water
which has been poured on it to purify it, is pure. And as explained in
Article 27 the water which is thrown away after washing it is also pure.

Removal of Original Impurity
----------------------------

**222.** If the body of an animal is stained with an original impurity
like blood or with something which has become impure, for example impure
water, its body becomes pure after the removal of the impurity.
Similarly the inner parts of the human body, for example, mouth or nose,
become pure after the removal of impurity from there. Hence, if blood
comes out of the gums of a person and loses all its traces in saliva,
rinsing the mouth is not necessary. However, if artificial teeth become
impure within the mouth they should be purified with water.

**223.** If some particles of food remain between one's teeth and then
blood comes out within his mouth and he is not aware whether blood has
touched those particles of food they are pure and if blood touches them
they become impure.

**224.** If those parts of the lips and eyelashes, which join each other
when the lips or eyes are closed, and those parts of the body, about
which it is not known as to whether they should be treated to be
external parts or internal ones, become impure, they should be washed
with water.

**225.** If impure dust settles on a cloth or carpet but is shaken off
and thereafter something wet touches that cloth etc. that thing will not
become impure.

Confining (Istibraâ€™ ) of an Animal Which Eats Impurities
--------------------------------------------------------

**226.** The dung and urine of an animal, which gets habituated to
eating faeces, is impure, and it could be purified by subjecting it to
"Istibraâ€™ " i.e. it should be prevented from eating impurities and pure
fodder should be given to it till such time that it may not be called an
animal which eats impurities.

On the basis of obligatory precaution the following animals should be
prevented from eating impurities for the period specified: Camel for 40
days. Cow for 20 days. Goat/Sheep for 10 days. Water-fowl for 7 or 5
days. Domestic hen for 3 days. If on the expiry of the said period
people still say that the animal is one who eats impurities it should be
prevented from eating impurities till such time that the people do not
style it to be such.

Disappearance of a Muslim
-------------------------

**227.** When the body, dress, household utensil or carpet or any other
similar thing in the possession of a Muslim becomes impure and
thereafter that Muslim disappears the thing in question can be treated
to be pure when the following six conditions are fulfilled:

(i) The Muslim should consider impure the thing which has made his body
or dress impure. In case, therefore, his dress comes in contact with the
wetness of the body of an infidel and he does not consider it to be
impure that dress cannot be treated to be pure after his disappearance.

(ii) That Muslim should know that his body or dress has touched an
impure thing.

(iii) That the man should have been seen using that thing for a purpose
for which use of a pure thing is necessary. For example, he should have
been seen offering prayers with that dress.

(iv) There should be a probability of the fact that the Muslim knows
that the purity of that thing is necessary for the purpose for which he
is using it. For example, if he does not know that the dress of one who
offers prayers should be pure and he offers prayers with an impure dress
that dress cannot be considered to be pure.

(v) There should be a probability of the fact that the Muslim has
purified the impure thing. Hence, if it is certain that he did not
purify that thing it cannot be treated to be pure. Furthermore, if that
Muslim does not differentiate between pure and impure things it is
difficult to consider that thing to be pure.

(vi) The Muslim should be adult and should be able to differentiate
between purity and impurity.

**228.** If a person becomes sure that a thing which was impure has
become pure or two just persons give intimation about its having become
pure, that thing is pure. And similarly when person possesses the impure
thing says that it has become pure or when a Muslim has washed the
impure thing with water, although it may not be known whether or not he
has washed it properly. And it is not unlikely that information given
about its purity by one just or reliable person may also suffice.

**229.** If a person undertakes to wash and purify the dress of another
person and says that he has washed the dress and the other person is
satisfied with what he says the dress is pure.

**230.** If the state of mind of a Person becomes such that he does not
believe that an impure thing has been purified with water he should
content himself with his opinion.

Coming out of Blood of a Slaughtered Animal in Normal Quantity
--------------------------------------------------------------

**231.** As stated in Article 98, if an animal is slaughtered in
Accordance with the rules prescribed by Islam, and blood comes out of
its body in normal quantity, the blood which still remains the body of
the animal is pure.

**232.** The above order is peculiar to an animal, whose meat is lawful
to eat and does not apply to an animal, whose meat is unlawful. On the
other hand on the basis of recommended precaution it does not also apply
to the unlawful parts of the body of an animal whose meat is lawful to
eat.

Household Utensils
------------------

**233.** If a household utensil has been made with the hide of a dog or
a pig or the dead animal (not slaughtered lawfully), it is unlawful to
eat or drink anything from that utensil, in case some wetness becomes
the cause of its impurity. Furthermore, that utensil should not be used
for ablutions and ceremonial bath and for other purposes for which only
pure things can be used. And the recommended precaution is that the hide
of a dog or a pig or a dead animal should not at all be used, even if it
is not a utensil.

**234.** It is prohibited to use gold and silver vessels for eating and
drinking purposes and on the basis of obligatory precaution, their
general use is also unlawful. However, decorating the rooms with them or
possessing them is not unlawful, although it is better to avoid them as
a precautionary measure. And the same rule applies to the manufacture of
gold and silver vessels and their possession, purchase and sale.

**235.** If the clip of a glass used for drinking tea which is made of
gold or silver is called a utensil even after its being detached from
the glass it will be equivalent to a glass made of gold or silver (and
it will be unlawful to use it for drinking purposes). And if it (the
clip) is not called a utensil after being detached from the glass there
is no harm in using it.

**236.** There is no harm in using vessels which are gold-plated or
silver-plated.

**237.** There is no harm in using a utensil which is made of metal
mixed with gold and silver and the proportion of that metal is such that
the utensil cannot be said to be made of gold or Silver.

**238.** If there is food in a gold or silver container and, in view of
the fact that eating and drinking in utensils made of gold or silver is
unlawful, a person transfers that food to another utensil, there is no
harm in eating or drinking in that utensil, provided that the people do
not say that food is being eaten from gold or silver utensils.

**239.** There is no harm if the cover of the smoking-pipe which
contains tobacco and fire, or the scabbard of a sword or knife or the
receptacle of the holy Qur'an is made of gold or silver. However, the
recommended precaution is that the receptacles of scent, or antimony or
opium which are made of gold or silver should not be used.

**240.** If it cannot be helped there is no harm in eating or drinking
from gold and silver utensils to the extent necessary but eating or
drinking from them more than this is not permissible.

**241.** There is no harm in using a utensil about which it is not known
whether it is made of gold or silver or something else.


