Ablutions
=========

**242.** In ablutions it is obligatory that the face and hands are
washed, and wiping (Masah) of the front portion of the head and of the
upper part of two feet should be performed.

**243.** The length of the face should be washed from the upper part of
the forehead where hair grow up to the farthest end of the chin and its
breadth should be washed to the extent of the maximum distance between
the tips of the thumb and the middle finger. If even an insignificant
part of this length and breath is left out of washing, the ablutions
will be void. Thus, in order to ensure that the prescribed part has been
washed, one should also wash the adjacent parts to a small extent.

**244.** If the hands or face of a person are bigger or smaller than
usual he should see up to where the people normally wash their faces he
too should wash his face to the same extent. Furthermore, if hair have
grown on his forehead or there are no hair on the front part of his head
he should wash his forehead as it is usually washed by the people.

**245.** If a person considers it probable that there is dirt or
something else in the eyebrows and comers of his eyes which does not
permit water to reach them and in case this probability is valid in the
eyes of the people he should verify the position before performing
ablutions and should remove any such thing if it is there.

**246.** If the skin of the face is visible from within the hair one
should make the water reach the skin, but if it is not visible it is
sufficient to wash the hair and it is not necessary to make the water
reach below them.

**247.** If a person doubt whether or not his skin is visible from
within the hair of the face he should, on the basis of obligatory
precaution, wash his hair and also make the water reach the skin.

**248.** While performing ablutions it is not obligatory that one should
wash the inner parts of the nose, lips, and eyes. However, in order to
ensure that all those parts which must be washed have been washed, it is
obligatory that some portion of these parts (i.e. inner parts of nose,
lips and eyes) should also be washed. And if a person does not know
about the extent to which the face must be washed and does not remember
whether he has washed his face to that extent during ablutions which he
has already performed he should perform ablutions again and also offer
the prayers again which he has already offered with the previous
ablutions, provided that time for the offering of that prayers still
exists. However, it is not obligatory to reoffer those prayers, whose
time has already passed.

**249.** The face and hands should be washed from above to below and if
one washes them from below to above his ablutions will be void.

**250.** If a person makes his hand wet and draws it on his face and
hands and if the wetness of the hand is so much that by drawing it on
the face and hands little water begins to flow on them it is sufficient.

**251.** After washing the face one should first wash the right hand and
then the left hand from the elbows up to the tips of the fingers.

**252.** In order to ensure that each elbow has been washed to the
prescribed extent one should also include some portion above it.

**253.** If before washing his face a person has washed his hands up to
the wrist he should, while performing ablutions, wash them up to the
tips of the fingers and if he washes them only up to the wrist his
ablutions is void.

**254.** While performing ablutions it is obligatory for man to wash his
face and hands once and it is recommended to wash them twice. Washing
them three or more times is, however, unlawful. As regards the fact as
to which washing should be treated to be the first, the second or the
third one, it depends on the intention of the person performing
ablutions. Hence, there is no harm in it if he pours water on his face
ten times with the intention of the first washing and this action of his
will be treated to be the first washing. However, if he pours water on
his face thrice with the intention of washing it three times, his
washing the face for the third time will be an unlawful act.

**255.** After washing both the hands the person performing ablutions
should wipe the front part of his head with the wetness which is in his
hand, the obligatory precaution being that he should wipe it with the
palm of his right hand from the upper side to the lower side.

**256.** The part on which wiping should be performed is one fourth of
the head above the forehead. It is sufficient to wipe approximately at
any place in this part of the head, although the recommended precaution
is that the length of the place of wiping should be equal to the length
of a finger and its breadth should be equal to three joined fingers.

**257.** It is not necessary that the wiping of the head should be
performed on its skin. It is also in order if a man wipes his hand on
the hair of the head. However, if the hair of a man's head are so long
that on combing them they fall on his face or on other parts of his head
he should wipe his hand on the roots of his hair or part the hair and
wipe the skin. Hence, if a person collects on the front side of his head
the hair which fall on his face or on other parts of his head and wipes
them or the hair of other places such a wiping would be void.

**258.** After wiping of the head one should wipe, with the wetness
present in one's hands, one's feet from the tip of any toe of the foot
up to the plump of the upper part of it, and the obligatory precaution
in this behalf is that the wiping of the feet should be up to the ankle.
It is also an obligatory precaution that the wiping of the right foot
should be with the right palm and that of the let foot should be with
the let palm.

**259.** Whatever the breadth of the wiping on the foot may be it is
sufficient. However, it is better that the breadth of the wiping should
be equal to three joined fingers and it is still better that the wiping
of the entire foot should be with the entire palm.

**260.** It is an obligatory precaution that at the time of wiping the
foot one should place one's hand on the tips of the fingers and then
draw it on the instep, or that one should place the hand on the joint
and draw it up to the tips of the fingers and not that one should place
the entire hand on the foot and draw it a little.

**261.** While wiping one's head and feet it is necessary to draw one's
hand on them and in case the feet and head are moved and the hand
remains stationary the ablutions would be void. However, there is no
harm in it if the head and feet also move slightly while the hand is
being drawn on them.

**262.** The part of the wiping should be dry and if it is so wet that
the wetness of the palm of the hand has no effect on it the wiping will
be void. However, there is no harm in it if the wetness on that part is
so insignificant that people consider the wetness of the head or foot
after wiping to be the wetness transferred by the palm of the hand.

**263.** If wetness disappears in the palm of the hand, it cannot be
made wet with some other water. However, the person performing ablutions
should obtain wetness from his beard. In case, however, wetness is
obtained from any spot other than the beard it would be difficult to say
that wiping has been performed properly.

**264.** If the wetness of palm is such that only the wiping of head can
be performed one should wipe the head first and for the wiping of
insteps the wetness should be obtained from the beard.

**265.** Wiping performed on socks or shoes is void. Hence, if it is
very cold or socks or shoes cannot be taken off on account of the fear
of an enemy or a beast etc., one should perform tayammum. (See, Article
No. 708). And in case a person is under Taqayyah (hiding one's faith) he
should perform wiping on his socks and shoes and should also perform
Tayammum.

**266.** If the instep is impure and it cannot also be washed for wiping
one should perform Tayammum.

Ablutions Through Immersion (Wudhuâ€™ Irtimasi)
---------------------------------------------

**267.** Ablutions through immersion means that one should dip one's
face and hands into Kurr or running water with the intention of
performing ablutions. However, it is difficult to perform valid wiping
with the wetness which one's hand acquires in this manner. Hence one
should not wash one's left hand in the immersion way.

**268.** Even while performing ablutions through immersion one should
wash one's face and hands downwards from above. Hence when a person dips
his face and hands in water with the intention of ablutions he should
put his face in water from the side of forehead and his hands from the
side of elbows.

**269.** There is no harm in performing ablutions of some parts of the
body in immersion way and of others in the usual way.

Recommended Supplications
-------------------------

**270.** It has been recommended that a person who is performing
ablutions should recite the following supplication when his eyes fall on
water. Bismillahi wa billahi wal hamdu lil lahil lazija'alalma a tahura
wa lam yaj 'alhu najisa. (I begin my ablution in the Name of Allah. All
praise is due to Allah who made water purifying and not impure). While
washing the hands before performing ablutions one should say: Alla
hummaj'alni minat tawwabina waj'alni minal mutatah harin. (O Lord! Make
me of those who repent and purify themselves).

While rinsing the mouth one should say: Alla humma laq qini hujjati
yawma alqaha wa atliq lisani biiihriha. (O Lord! Dictateto me the
principles of faith on the Day before You and make my tongue fluent with
Your remembrances).

While washing the nose one should say: Alla humma la tuharrim 'alayya
rihal jannati waj 'alni mim man yashummu riha ha wa rawha ha wa tiba ha.
(O Lord! Do not deprive me of the fragrance of Paradise and make me of
those who are benefited by them and seek enjoyment thereof).

While washing the face one should say: Alla humma bayyiz wajhi yawma
taswaddul wujuh wala tusawwid waj hi yawma tabyazzu wujuh. (O Lord: Make
my face bright on the Day when the faces will turn black. Do not blacken
my face on the Day when the faces are made bright).

While pouring water over the right elbow one should say: Alla humma
a'tini kitabi bi yamini wal khulda fil jinani bi yasari wa hasibni
hisaban yasira. (O Lord! Give my deed-record in my right hand and (the
right of) permanent stay in Paradise in my left hand and make my
reckoning an easy and a favourable one).

While pouring water over the left elbow one should say: Alla humma la
tu'tini kitabi bishimali wala min wara'i zahri wala taj'alha maghlu
latan ila unuqi wa a'uiu biha min muqat ta'atin niran. (O Lord! Do not
give my deed-record in my left hand nor from behind my back nor make it
chained to my neck. I seek refuge in You from the Hell-fire).

While performing the wiping of the head one should say: Alla humma
ghashshini -i rahmatika wa barahatika wa'afwika. (O Lord! Cover me with
Your Mercy, Blessings and Forgiveness).

While performing the wiping of the insteps of feet one should say: Alla
humma thabbitni alas siratiyawma tuzillu fihil aqdam. Waj'al sayi fi'ma
yurzika'anni ya zal jalali wal ikram. (O Lord! Keep me firm on the
Bridge (to Paradise) on the Day when the feet will tremble, and help me
in my efforts to do things which will please You, O'the Glorious and the
Mighty!).

Conditions for the Validity of Ablutions
----------------------------------------

Following are the conditions for ablutions being valid: (i) The water
should be pure. (ii) The water should be clean.

**271.** Ablutions performed with impure water or mixed water is void
even though one may not be aware of its being impure or mixed or may
have forgotten it. And if one has offered prayers with that ablutions
one should offer that prayers again with valid ablutions.

**272.** If a person does not have any water to perform ablutions except
that with which clay is mixed he should perform Tayammum if only a short
time is left for prayers, and if he has time at his disposal, he should
wait till the water becomes limpid, and should then perform ablutions
with it. (iii) The water and the spot in which a person is performing
ablutions should be permissible for him at the time of performing the
wiping and according to obligatory precaution at the time of washing the
face and hands as well.

**273.** Performing ablutions with usurped water or with water about
which it is not known whether or not its owner is agree able to its
being used is unlawful and void. Furthermore if the water of ablutions
with which face and hands are washed falls in usurped land and if the
person concerned cannot perform ablutions elsewhere his obligation is to
perform Tayammum. And if he can perform elsewhere it is necessary that
he should do so. However, if commission of sin is involved in either
case, and he performs ablutions at the first place his ablutions will be
in order.

**274.** If a person does not know whether the pool or tank of water of
a school has been dedicated to the general public or to the students of
that school only and if people usually perform ablutions with the water
of that pool there is no harm in his performing ablutions with its
water.

**275.** If a person who does not wish to offer prayers in a particular
mosque is not aware whether its pool has been dedicated to the general
public or to those persons who offer prayers in that mosque he cannot
perform ablutions with the water of the pool of that mosque. However, if
usually those persons also perform ablutions with the water of that pool
who do not wish to offer prayers in that mosque that person can also
perform ablutions with the water of that pool.

**276.** Performing ablutions with the water of the pools of the inns
and hotels etc. by persons who are not staying there is valid in case
other persons who are not staying there also usually perform ablutions
with that water.

**277.** There is no harm if a person performs ablutions with the water
of big canals although he may not be knowing whether the owner of those
canals is agreeable to it. However, if the owner of the those canals
prohibits performing ablutions with their water or if it is known that
he is not agreeable to ablutions being performed with their water or if
he is a minor or an insane person or the canals are in the control of a
usurper it is not permissible in all such cases to perform ablutions
with the water of those canals. However, there is no harm in performing
ablutions with the water of the canals which are situated in villages
and places like villages and to utilize them if the people usually
utilize those canals, although their owner may be a minor or an insane
person. Furthermore the owner is not entitled to forbid the use of those
of by the people.

**278.** If a person forgets about the water being usurped water and
performs ablutions with it his ablutions is in order. However, if a
person has usurped the water himself but forgets about its having been
usurped and performs ablutions with it his ablutions is void. (iv) The
fourth condition is that the container of the water used by the person
concerned for ablutions should be allowable for him. (v) The fifth
condition is that in accordance with obligatory precaution the container
of the water used for ablution should not be made of gold or silver.

**Explanation of these two conditions is as follows:**

**279.** If the water for ablutions is in a usurped container and the
person concerned has no other water and if he can transfer that water to
another container in accordance with a legal method it is necessary for
him to transfer it to another container and then to perform ablutions
with it and if he cannot perform this act successfully he should perform
Tayammum. And if he has some other water also it is necessary for him to
perform ablutions with it. And if he commits sin in both the cases and
throws water on the parts of ablutions with his hand or something like
it and performs ablutions his ablutions is in order. And if in such
circumstances he performs ablutions from a container made of gold or
silver his ablutions is in order whether he has some other water except
it or does not have it. And if he performs immersion ablutions in a
container made of gold or silver it is difficult to say that the
ablutions is valid.

**280.** If, for instance, an usurped stone or brick is fixed in a pool,
there is no harm in drawing water from it if in common parlance this
does not amount to unlawful possession of that brick or stone, and in
case it does amount to unlawful possession owing to it, it is unlawful
to draw water from the pool but performing ablutions with that water is
in order.

**281.** If a pool or a canal is dug in the precinct of the tomb of an
Imam or a descendant of Imams which was previously a grave-yard and one
does not know that area has already been dedicated to the grave-yard
there is no harm in performing ablutions with the water of that pool or
canal.

(vi) The sixth condition is that those parts of the body on which
ablutions is performed should be pure at the time of washing and
performing wiping.

**282.** If the place which has been washed or wiped becomes impure
before the completion of the ablutions, the ablutions is in order.

**283.** If a place on the body other than the limbs on which ablutions
is performed is impure the ablutions is in order. However, if the outlet
of urine or faeces has not been purified the recommended precaution is
that one should purify it first and then perform ablutions.

**284.** If one of the limbs of ablutions of a person is impure and
after performing ablutions he doubts whether or not he washed it before
performing ablutions and if at the time of ablutions he did not take
notice whether that place was pure or impure his ablutions is void. And
if he knows that he did take notice of this or doubts whether or not he
took notice of it, his ablutions is in order. And in all cases the place
which was impure should be washed with water and purified.

**285.** If a person has a cut or wound on his face or hands and the
blood from it does not stop, and water is not harmful for it he should,
after washing the healthy part of that limb in proper order, put the
place of wound or cut in Kurr-water or running water and press it a
little so that the blood may stop and should draw his finger on the
wound or cut within the water from above to below so that the water may
flow on it. And his ablutions will then be in order. (vii) The seventh
condition is that the person performing ablutions should have sufficient
time at his disposal to perform ablutions and to offer prayers.

**286.** In case, time is too short for offering prayers and, if
ablutions is performed, the entire prayers or a part of it may be
offered after the prescribed time, he should offer prayers after
performing Tayammum (instead of ablutions). In case, however, an equal
period of time is required for performing ablutions or Tayammum, he
should perform ablutions.

**287.** If a person who should perform Tayammum owing to shortage of
time for offering a particular prayers performs ablutions to seek Divine
pleasure or to carry out some recommended deed, like reading the holy
Qur'an, his ablutions is in order, but if knowing the orders on the
subject, he intentionally performs ablutions to offer that particular
prayers his ablutions is void. (viii) The eighth condition is that one
should perform ablutions with the intention of seeking Divine pleasure
i.e. to obey the orders of Allah. In case, therefore, a person performs
ablutions with the intention of comforting his body or for some other
purpose the ablutions would be void.

**288.** It is not necessary that one should express the intention of
performing ablutions in words or think about it in his mind. It is
sufficient that all acts relating to ablutions should be performed in
compliance with the orders of Almighty Allah. (ix) The ninth condition
is that a person should perform ablutions in the prescribed order viz.
he should first wash his face, then his right hand and then his left
hand and thereafter he should perform wiping of the head and the feet.
And in accordance with obligatory precaution, he should perform wiping
of the right foot first and of the left foot thereafter. If ablutions is
not performed in this order it will be void. x) The tenth condition is
that the person performing ablutions should perform its acts
consecutively (coming one after the other without delay).

**289.** If there is so much gap between the acts of ablutions that when
the person concerned wishes to wash or wipe a place the wetness of the
place already washed or wiped by him has dried up, his ablutions will be
void. But if only the wetness of the place preceding the place which he
wants to wash or wipe has dried up e.g. when he wants to wash the left
hand the wetness of the right hand has dried up but his face is still
wet his ablutions will be in order.

**290.** If a person performs the acts of ablutions consecutively but
the wetness of the previous places dries up owing to hot weather or
excessive heat of the body or any other similar cause his ablutions is
in order.

**291.** There is no harm in walking while performing ablutions. Hence,
if after washing his face and hands a person walks a few steps and then
wipes his head and feet his ablutions is valid. (xi) The eleventh
condition is that the person performing ablutions should wash his hands
and face and wipe his head and feet personally. Hence, if some other
person makes him perform ablutions, or helps him in throwing water on
his face, or hands, or in wiping his head, or feet, his ablutions is
void.

**292.** If a person cannot perform ablutions himself he should appoint
some one as his assistant who should make him perform his ablutions. And
if that person demands wages he should pay him the same provided that he
can make payment, and in the light of his circumstances such payment is
not harmful for him. However, he should make the intention of ablutions
himself and should perform wiping with his own hand. And if he cannot do
so his assistant should hold his hand and draw it at the place of
wiping. And if it is not possible to do even that the assistant should
take wetness from his hand and wipe his (that man's) head and feet with
that wetness.

**293.** One should not obtain assistant in performing those acts of
ablutions which one can perform oneself. (xii) The twelfth condition is
that there should be no legal objection to the use of water by the
person concerned.

**294.** If a person fears that as a consequence of performing ablutions
he will fall ill, or that if he uses the water on performing ablutions
no water will be left with him to drink, he should not perform
ablutions. In case however, he is not aware that water is harmful to him
and he performs ablutions, his ablutions will be in order, even if he
comes to know later that water was harmful to him, but has not sustained
as much harm as is unlawful according to religious law.

**295.** If the small quantity of water with which the face and the
hands can be washed is not harmful, but a quantity more that is harmful,
one should perform ablutions with that small quantity of water.
(xiii)The thirteenth condition is that there should be no impediment in
the way of water reaching the relevant parts of the body.

**296.** If the person concerned is aware that something has stuck to
the limbs on which ablutions is performed but is doubtful whether or not
it prevents water from reaching the relevant places he should remove
that thing or make water reach under it.

**297.** If there is dirt under the nail there is no harm in performing
ablutions. However, if the nail is cut it is necessary to remove the
dirt before performing ablutions. Furthermore, if the nail is unusually
long it is necessary that dirt should be removed from under that part
which is longer than usual.

**298.** If swelling takes place on the face or hands or front part of
the head or the instep of a person because of being burnt or for some
other reason it is sufficient to wash it and to wipe it and if a hole
takes place in it, it is not necessary to make water reach under the
skin. On the other hand if a part of the skin gets pulled off it is not
necessary to make water reach under the part which has not got pulled
off. However, if the skin which has got pulled off sticks to the body at
one time and gets detached from it at another time it should either be
cut off or water should be made to reach under it.

**299.** If a person doubts whether or not something has stuck to those
parts of his body on which ablution is to be performed and if his doubt
is valid in the eyes of the people - for example, if he is a gardener or
a potter (one who works with clay) and thereafter doubts whether clay
has or has not stuck to his hand he should verify the position or should
rub his hand so much that he should become sure that if there is clay on
it, it has been removed or water has reached under it.

**300.** If there is dirt on the part of the body which is to be washed,
or on which wiping is to be performed, but that dirt does not stop water
from reaching the body, the ablutions will be in order. Similar is the
case when some whitewash is stuck to the body, but does not prevent
water from reaching the body. However, if a person doubts whether water
will reach his body in the presence of the dirt or the whitewash, he
should remove it before performing ablutions.

**301.** If a person is aware before performing ablutions that on some
parts of the body, on which ablutions is to be performed, there is
something which prevents water from reaching them and doubts after
performing ablutions whether water reached those limbs at the time of
performing ablutions and the possibility is that at the time of
performing ablutions he had taken notice of this matter his ablutions is
in order.

**302.** If there is something to stop water from reaching the skin of
the limbs on which ablutions is to be performed and at times water goes
under it automatically and at other times it does not go there and the
person concerned doubts after performing ablutions whether water has
reached under it and if he is aware that at the time of performing
ablutions be did not take notice of the fact that water reached under it
the obligatory precaution is that he should perform his ablutions again.

**303.** If after performing ablutions a person sees some such thing on
the parts of his body on which ablutions is performed and which prevents
water from reaching the body and he does not know whether that thing was
present at the time of per- forming ablutions or appeared later his
ablutions would be in order. But if he knows that at the tune of
performing ablutions he did not take notice of this impediment the
obligatory precaution is that he should perform his ablutions again.

**304.** If a person doubts after performing ablutions whether a thing
which stops water from reaching the skin was or was not present on the
limbs on which ablutions is performed, and if the possibility is that
while performing ablutions he did take notice of this matter, his
ablutions is in order.

Orders Regarding Ablutions
--------------------------

**305.** If a person doubts too much about the acts of ablutions and the
conditions attached to it (for example about the water being pure or its
not having been usurped) and his doubt assumes the shape of an
obsession, he should not pay any heed to his doubt.

**306.** If a person doubts whether or not his ablutions has become
void, he should treat it to be valid. However, if he does not perform
Istibraâ€™ (See, Article No. 13) after urinating and then performs
ablutions and thereafter some fluid discharges about which he is not
sure whether it is urine or something else, his ablutions will be void.

**307.** If a person doubts whether or not he has performed ablutions he
should perform ablutions.

**308.** If a person is sure that he has performed ablutions and also
knows that he has done something which makes ablutions void (e.g.
urinating), but does not remember which thing happened fÃ®st, he should
act as follows: If the situation aries before he offers his prayers he
should perform ablutions; if it arises while he is offering prayers he
should break the prayers and perform ablutions; if it arises after he
has offered his prayers those prayers will be valid, provided that it is
probable that when he commenced his prayers he was mindful of this fact
but for the next prayers, however, he should perform ablutions.

**309.** If after performing ablutions or while performing it a person
becomes sure that he has not washed certain place or has not wiped them
and if the wetness of the places preceding them has dried up due to
passage of long time he should perform ablutions again. And if the
wetness has not dried up or has dried up owing to hot weather or other
similar causes he should wash or wipe the place forgotten by him as well
as the place which follow it. And if while performing ablutions he
doubts whether or not he has washed or wiped a place he should follow
this rule in that case as well.

**310.** If after a person has offered prayers, a doubt crosses his mind
whether or not he performed ablutions and there is a probability of his
having been mindful of this condition when he commenced his prayers, the
prayers offered by him would be in order, but as regards future prayers
he should perform ablutions for them.

**311.** If a person doubts while offering prayers whether or not he has
performed ablutions his prayers is void and he should perform ablutions
and then offer prayers.

**312.** If a person realizes after offering prayers that his ablutions
became void, but doubts whether it became void before his having offered
the prayers or after the prayers the prayers offered by him is in order.

**313.** If a person suffers from an ailment owing to which his urine
comes out continuously drop by drop, or he is not in a position to
control his faeces, he should act as follows: (i) If he is sure that he
can offer his prayers after performing ablutions, at any time within the
time prescribed for prayers, he should offer his prayers within that
time. (ii) In case he can control his urine or faeces only for so much
time within which he can perform obligatory acts relating to prayers he
should perform only the obligatory acts and abandon the recommended acts
(for example Azan, Iqamah, Qunut etc.)

**314.** If a person cannot control his urine or faeces for the time
required for ablutions and prayers and urine or faeces comes out a
number of times while he is offering prayers and in case it is not hard
for him if he wishes to perform ablutions after every such instance the
precaution is that he should place a container by his side and every
time the urine or faeces comes out he should perform ablutions at once
and then offer the remaining part of prayers, although apparently if he
offers that prayers with one ablutions it will be sufficient.

**315.** If urine or faeces comes out of the body of a person
successively in such a manner that it is hard for him to perform
ablutions every time de novo, one ablutions for each prayers is
sufficient for him without any objection. Rather what is apparent is
that one ablutions is sufficient for a number of prayers except that the
person concerned may get involved in some other impurity, And it is
better that he should perform one ablutions for every prayers. However,
a fresh ablution is not necessary for lapsed (Qaza) prostration and
Tashahhud and for precautionary prayers.

**316.** If the urine or faeces comes out of the body of a person
successively it is not necessary for him to offer prayers immediately
after performing ablutions although it is better that he should be quick
in offering prayers.

**317.** If the urine or faeces of a person comes out successively it is
permissible for him to touch the writing of the holy Quran after
performing ablutions although he may not be in the state of offering
prayers.

**318.** A person whose urine comes drop by drop should secure himself
for offering prayers by means of a bag filled with cotton or something
else which prevents urine from reaching other places and the obligatory
precaution is that before every prayers he should wash the outlet of
urine which has become impure. Furthermore, as regards a person who
cannot prevent faeces from coming out he should, if possible, prevent
faeces from reaching other places for the time required for offering
prayers and the obligatory precaution is that if hardship is not
involved he should wash the outlet of anus for every prayers.

**319.** A person who cannot prevent urine and faeces from coming out
should, if possible, prevent urine and faeces from coming out during the
time required for offering prayers even though he may have to incur some
expenditure for this purpose. Rather, if his ailment can be treated
easily he should get necessary treatment.

**320.** When a person, who cannot control his urine or faeces, recovers
from the ailment, it is not necessary for him to reoffer those prayers
which he offered according to his religious duty during the period of
his ailment. However, if he recovers while offering prayers, he should
reoffer that prayers.

**321.** The orders detailed above with regard to the persons who cannot
control their urine or faeces should also be acted upon by persons who
cannot control the gas (discharging through the anus).

Things for Which Ablutions is Obligatory
----------------------------------------

**322.** It is obligatory to perform ablutions for the following six
things: (i) For all obligatory prayers, except prayers for a dead body.
As regards recommended prayers ablutions is a condition for their
validity. (ii) For that Sajdah (prostration) and Tashahhud(recital of
bearing witness before getting up for the third Rak'at) which a person
forgot to perform during the prayers, in case he did, between the end of
prayers and the performance of those Sajdah and Tashahhud, something
which makes ablutions void (e.g. if he urinates during that time). It is
not, however, obligatory to perform ablutions for Sajda-e sahu. (iii)
For the obligatory circumambulation (Tawaful wajib] of the holy Ka'bah.
(iv) If a person has vowed or pledged his word or sworn to perform
ablutions. (v) If a person has vowed that he would touch the writing of
the holy Qur'an with a part of his body. (vi) To wash and purify the
holy Qur'an which has become impure, or to take it out of lavatory etc.
in which it has fallen, when he is obliged to touch the writing of the
holy Qur'an with his hand or some other part of his body. In case,
however, desecration of the holy Qur'an takes place to the delay caused
by performing ablutions one should take out the holy Qur'an from
lavatory etc., or wash and purify it (in case it has become impure),
without performing ablutions.

**323.** It is unlawful to touch the writing of the holy Qur'an with any
part of one's body without performing ablutions. However, there is no
harm in touching, without performing ablutions, the translation of the
holy Qur'an in any language.

**324.** It is not obligatory to prevent a child or an insane person
from touching the writing of the holy Qur'an. However, if their touching
the holy Qur'an involves desecration of the holy Book they should be
prevented from touching it.

**325.** It is unlawful, on the basis of obligatory precaution, to touch
without ablutions, the Name of Allah or His special Attributes, in
whichever language they may have been written. And it is also better not
to touch, without ablutions, the names of the holy Prophet of Islam, the
holy Imams and Lady Fatima Zahra, the daughter of the holy Prophet.
(Peace be on them).

**326.** If a person performs ablutions or takes bath before the time
for prayers in order to be in a state of purity his act is correct. And
there is no harm if he performs ablutions when the time for prayers is
near so that he may get ready for the prayers.

**327.** If a person believes that the time for a prayers has commenced
and makes the intention of obligatory ablutions, but realizes after
performing the ablutions that the time for the prayers has not
commenced, his ablutions is in order.

**328.** Performance of ablutions has been recommended for the following
purposes: (i) Prayers for a dead body. (ii) Visiting the graves. (iii)
Entering a mosque. (iv) Entering into the mausoleums of the holy
Prophets and Imams. (v) To read, write or touch the margin or border of
the holy Qur'an, or to keep it with oneself. (vi) Before going to bed.
If ablutions is performed for the purpose of any one of the above acts
it suffices for the performance of other acts also. For example, prayers
can also be offered with that ablutions. Furthermore, if a person has
already performed ablutions, its performance for the second time is
recommended for him.

Things Which Nullify Ablutions
------------------------------

**329.** Ablutions becomes void on account of the following seven
things: (i) Discharge of urine (ii) Discharge of faeces (iii) Discharge
of gas through anus (iv) A sleep on account which the eyes cannot see
and the ears cannot hear. However, if the eyes cannot see anything, but
the ears a hear something, ablutions does not become void. (v) Things on
account of which a person loses his senses (for example insanity,
intoxication or unconsciousness). (vi) Undue menses (Istihaza blood)
which comes out of the womb of women. (vii) Ceremonial uncleanness
(Janabat) and, on the basis of recommended precaution, every- thing for
which ceremonial bath (Ghusl) is obligatory.

Jabira Ablutions
----------------

The thing with which a wound or a fractured bone is bandaged and the
medicine which is applied to a wound is called jabira.

**330.** If there is an open wound or sore or a fractured bone on the
parts on which ablutions is performed, and the use of water is not
harmful for it, one should perform ablutions in the usual manner.

**331.** In case, however, there is a wound or sore on one's face or
hands or a bone thereof is fractured and water is harmful for it, one
should wash the space adjoining the wound from above downwards in the
manner explained in connection with ablutions. And it is better to draw
wet hand on it, in case it is not harmful to do so, or to place a pure
piece of cloth on it and draw wet hand on that cloth.

**332.** If there is a wound or a sore or a fractured bone on the front
part of the head or on the feet of a person and its mouth is open and he
cannot wipe it, for example the wound has covered the entire spot of
wiping or if he cannot wipe even the healthy spots of wiping it is
necessary for him to perform tayammum. And as a precautionary measure he
should also perform ablutions and should also place a piece of pure
cloth on the wound etc. and should wipe the required spot on that cloth
with the wetness of the water of ablutions which is on his hands.

**333.** If the mouth of the sore or wound or fractured bone is closed
and if it is possible to open it and water, too, is not harmful for it
the person concerned should open it and perform ablutions, whether the
wound etc. be on his face and bands or on the front part of his head or
on his feet.

**334.** If the wound or sore or the fractured bone which has been tied
with something is on the lace or hands or a person and if opening it and
pouring water on it is harmful he should wash those of its adjacent
parts which it is possible to wash and should perform wiping on the
jabira.

**335.** If it is not possible to open the mouth of the wound but the
wound and the thing which has been placed on it is pure and it is
possible to make water reach the wound and it is also not harmful for it
water should be made to reach the wound from above downward. And if the
wound or the thing placed on it is impure and it is possible to wash it
and to make water reach the face of the wound the person concerned
should wash it and should make water reach the wound at the time of
ablutions. And if water is not harmful for the wound but it is not
possible to make water reach it or the wound is impure and cannot be
washed he should perform tayammum.

**336.** If the jabira covers completely one's face or one hand or both
the hands the person concerned should, as a precautionary measure,
perform tayammum and should also perform jabira ablutions and if his
entire head or feet are covered by jabira he should perform tayammum.

**337.** It is not necessary that jabira should consist of things with
which it is permissible to offer prayers. On the other hand if it
consists of silk cloth or even the parts of an animal whose meat is
unlawful to eat, it is permissible to perform wiping on it.

**338.** If a person has a jabira on the palm of his hand and fingers
and he draws wet hand on it while performing ablutions he should also
perform the wiping of his head and feet with the same wetness.

**339.** If the jabira has covered the entire expanse of the surface of
the foot but a part from the side of the fingers and a part from the
upper side of the foot is open the person concerned should perform
wiping on the surface of the foot at the places which are open and on
the surface of the jabira.

**340.** If there are a few jabiras on the face or on the hands the
person concerned should wash the places between them and if the jabiras
are on the head or on the feet he should perform wiping at the places
lying between them. And as regards the places where there are jabiras he
should oct according to the orders on the subject of jabira

**341.** If the jabira has covered the sides of the wound more than
usual and it is not possible to remove it the person concerned should
perform tayammum except when the jabira is at the places at which
tayammum is performed in which case it is necessary that he should
perform both ablutions and tayammum. And in both the cases if it is
possible to remove the jabira he should remove it. Hence, if the wound
is on the face and hands he should wash its sides and if it is in the
head or on the feet he should wipe its sides and as regards the place of
the wound he should follow the rules prescribed for jabira

**342.** If there is no wound or fractured bone at the place of
ablutions but water is harmful for it for some other reason one should
perform tayammum.

**343.** If a person has got opened a vein of one of the parts of the
body on which ablution is to be performed and he cannot apply water to
that part or water is harmful for him, it is necessary for him to
perform tayammum.

**344.** If something has stuck on the place of ablution or ceremonial
bath and it is not possible to remove it, or its removal involves
unbearable hardship, the duty of the person concerned is to perform
tayammum. However, if the thing which has stuck is a medicine the rules
relating to jabira apply to it.

**345.** In all kinds of ceremonial bath, except the bath of a dead
body, the jabira bath is like jabira ablutions. However, in such cases
one should resort to sequence bath (Ghusl-i tartibi]. And what is more
apparent is that if there is a wound or a sore on the body and the place
is covered with jabira, bath is obligatory and as a precautionary
measure one should also wipe the jabira. And if the mouth of the wound
or sore is open it is optional for the person concerned to take bath or
perform tayammum. And in case he takes bath the recommended precaution
is that he should place a pure piece of cloth on the open wound or sore
and perform wiping on that cloth. However, if there is a fractured bone
in the body he should take bath and should, as a precautionary measure,
perform wiping on the jabira. And in case it is not possible to wipe on
the jabira or the locality of the fractured bone is open it is necessary
for him to perform tayammum.

**346.** If the legal obligation of a person is tayammum and if at some
of the places of tayammum he has wound, sore or fractured bone he should
perform jabira tayammum according to the orders applicable to jabira
ablutions.

**347.** If a person who should offer prayers with jabira ablutions or
jabira bath knows that his excuse will not be removed till the latest
time for prayers he can offer prayers in the early part of the time
prescribed for it. In case, however, he hopes that his excuse will be
removed before the latest time for that prayers it is better for him to
wait and in case his excuse is not removed he should offer prayers with
jabira ablutions or jabira bath at the latest time prescribed for
prayers. In case, however, he offers prayers in the early part of time
prescribed for it, and his excuse is removed before the latest time for
the prayers it is necessary for him to perform ablutions or to take bath
and to offer the prayers again before the time for it is over.

**348.** In case the eyes of a person are sore and consequently he has
to keep his eye lashes shut, he should perform tayammum.

**349.** If a person does not know whether it is obligatory to perform
tayammum or jabira ablutions, the obligatory precaution is that he
should perform both of them.

**350.** If the excuse of a person continued to exist till the latest
time for prayers the prayers offered by him with jabira ablutions are in
order and he can also offer later prayers with that ablutions if the
excuse still exists.


