Obligatory Ceremonial Baths
===========================

There are seven kinds of obligatory ceremonial baths: (i) Bath for
ceremonial uncleanness (Janabat) (ii) Bath for menses (Hayz) (for women
only) (iii) Bath for lochia (Nifas) (for women only) (iv) Bath for
Istihaza (for women only) (v) Bath for touching a dead body. (vi) Bath
for a dead body. (vii) Bath which becomes obligatory on account of one's
having taken a vow or an oath to perform it.

Orders Regarding Janabat (Ceremonial Uncleanness)
-------------------------------------------------

**351.** A person becomes ceremonially unclean (Junub) by two things:
(i) Sexual intercourse and (ii) Discharge of semen, whether it comes out
when one is asleep or awake, or it is in a large or small quantity, or
it comes out with lust or otherwise, or it comes out voluntarily or
involuntarily.

**352.** Suppose some fluid comes out of the body of a person and he
does not know whether it is semen or urine or something else. If it
comes out with lust and leaps and after its coming out the body becomes
feeble that wetness will be treated to be semen. But if all or some of
these signs are not present the fluid will not be treated to be semen.
In the case of sexually diseased person, however, it is not necessary
that the fluid should leap while it comes out. On the other hand if it
comes out with lust and the body becomes feeble at the time of its
coming out it will be treated to be semen.

**353.** If a liquid substance comes out of the body of a man who is not
a diseased person and it possess one of the three signs mentioned in the
foregoing article and he does not know whether or not it also possesses
other signs, and if before the coming out of that liquid substance he
was with ablutions he can content himself with that ablutions. And if he
was not with ablutions it is sufficient for him to perform only
ablutions and it is not necessary for him to take bath.

**354.** It is recommended that a person should urinate after the
seminal discharge. In case, therefore, he does not urinate and a liquid
comes out of the penis after bath, and about it, it cannot be said
whether it is semen or something else, it will be treated to be semen.

**355.** If a person has sexual intercourse with a woman and the male
organ enters either of the secret parts of the woman up to the point of
circumcision or more than that, both of them become unclean
ceremonially, whether they are adults or minors and whether semen comes
out or not.

**356.** If a person doubts whether or not his penis entered the body of
the woman up to the point of circumcision it is not obligatory for him
to take bath.

**357.** If (God forbid!) a person has sexual intercourse with an animal
and semen comes out of his body it is sufficient for him to take bath,
and if semen does not come out and he was with ablutions at the time of
committing the unnatural act even then taking a bath is sufficient for
him. However, in case he was not with ablutions at that time the
obligatory precaution is that he should take bath and should also
perform ablutions. And the same orders apply if one commits sodomy with
a man or boy.

**358.** If semen moves from its place but does not come out or the
person concerned doubts whether or not semen has come out of his body,
taking bath is not obligatory for him.

**359.** If a person cannot take bath but can perform tayammum he can
have sexual intercourse with his wife even when the time for prayers has
commenced.

**360.** If a person observes semen on his dress - and knows that it is
his own semen and he has not taken bath on that account, he should take
bath. He should also re-offer those prayers about which he is certain
that he offered them after the discharge of semen. However, it is not
necessary for him to re-offer those prayers about which there is a
probability that he offered them before the discharge of semen.

Unlawful Acts for Ceremonially Unclean Person (Junub)
-----------------------------------------------------

**361.** The following five things are unlawful for junub: (i) To touch
with any part of his body the writing of the holy Qur'an or the Names of
Almighty Allah in whichever language they may have been written. And it
is better that the names of the holy Prophet and Imams and Lady Fatima
Zahra (peace be on them) should also not be touched in that condition.
(ii) Entering Masjidul Haram or Masjidun Nabi, even though it may be
only entering from one gate and going out of another. (iii) To stay in
all other Masjids except Masjidul Haram or Masjidun Nabi, and similarly,
on the basis of obligatory pre- caution, to stay in the shrines of the
holy Imams. As regards the Masjids other than Masjidul Haram and
Masjidun Nabi, however, there is no harm if a person enters through one
gate and goes out of another (iv) To go and place something in the
Masjid, or to enter or take out something from it even from outside. (v)
To recite any one of those verses of the holy Qur'an on the recitation
of which performance of prostration becomes obligatory. These verses
occur in four surahs of the holy Qur'an: (i) Surah Alif Lam Mini
as-Sajdah, 32:15 (ii) Surah Ha Mim Sajdah, 41:98 (iii) Surah an-Najm,
59:62 and (iv) Surah al- 'Alaq, 96:**19.**

Things Which are Abominable for Junub
-------------------------------------

**362.** The following nine things are abominable for junub: (i) To eat
(u) or to drink. In case, however,the person concerned performs
ablutions or washes his hands, eating and drinking will not be
abominable for him. (iii) To recite more than seven verses of the holy
Qur'an in which an obligatory prostration does not occur. (iv) To touch
with any part of his body the cover, the margin or border of the holy
Qur'an or the space between its lines. (v) To keep the holy Qur'an with
oneself. (vi) To sleep. But it would not be abominable to sleep if the
person concerned performs ablutions or performs tayammum instead of
ceremonial bath on account of non-availability of water. (vii) To dye
one's hair with henna etc. (viii) To apply oil on one's body. (ix} To
have sexual intercourse after nocturnal pollution (i.e. discharge of
semen during sleep).

Bath for Ceremonial Uncleanness (Janabat)
-----------------------------------------

**363.** Bath for janabat is recommended in itself but becomes
obligatory for offering obligatory prayers or other similar acts of
worship. However, it is not obligatory for offering prayers for a dead
body or for sajdatus sahu (prostration on account of oversight) or
sajdatush shukr (prostration for thanksgiving) or for the obligatory
prostrations for reciting the four particular verses of the holy Qur'an.
(Vide Article 36:V)

**364.** At the time of taking ceremonial bath it is not necessary that
one should express in words one's intention to perform obligatory bath
or recommended bath. It is sufficient if one performs the bath with the
intention of complying with Allah's orders.

**365.** If a person is sure that time for prayers has set in and
intends to perform obligatory bath, but comes to know after performing
the bath that it has been performed before the time for prayers had set
in, the bath would be in order.

**366.** There are two methods of performing ceremonial bath, whether
the bath be obligatory or recommended: (i) Sequence Bath (Ghusl tartibi)
and (ii) Immersion bath (Ghusl Irtimasi).

Sequence Bath (Ghusl Tartibi)
-----------------------------

**367.** In sequence bath a person should first intend to take a bath.
Thereafter he should first wash his head and then his neck and
thereafter the remaining parts of his body and it is better that he
should wash the right part of his body first and the left part
afterwards And in case he only moves each one of these parts under the
water with the intention of ceremonial bath (Ghusl), it is difficult to
consider sequence bath having been performed properly and the precaution
is that one should not content oneself with it. And in case the person
concerned washes his body before washing his head, either intentionally,
or on account of forgetfulness or because of not knowing the rule, his
bath is void.

**368.** If the person concerned washed his body before his head it is
not necessary for him to repeat the bath. On the other hand if he washes
his body again before happening of any such thing, which invalidates his
bath, his bath will be in order.

**369.**In order to ensure that both the parts (head and neck; and
remaining part of the body have been washed properly one should, while
washing a part, also include some portion of the other part with it.

**370.** If after taking the bath the person concerned realizes that he
has not washed some part of the body but does not know which part of the
body it is, it is not necessary to wash the head again and only those
places should be washed about which there is a possibility that they
have not been washed.

**371.** If a person realizes after taking bath that he has not washed a
part of his body it is sufficient to wash only that part in case it lies
on the left side. However, if that part lies on the right side the
recommended precaution is that after washing that part of the body he
should wash the left side once again. And if the unwashed part is that
of head and neck he should, after washing that part, wash the body once
again.

**372.** If a person doubts before completing his bath whether he has
washed a part on the left or right side it is necessary for him to wash
that part and if he doubts about his having washed a part of his head
and neck his doubt is not valid and his bath is in order.

Immersion Bath (Ghusl Irtimasi)
-------------------------------

**373.** In the case of immersion bath it is necessary that the entire
body should go down in water at one and the same time. In case a person
dives in water with the intention of immersion bath and his feet touch
the earth he should lift them up.

**374.** It is necessary, on the basis of obligatory precaution, that
when a person intends to perform immersion bath a part of his body
should be out of water.

375, If after performing immersion bath it becomes known that water has
not reached some part of the body one should take the bath again,
whether the part up to which water has not reached is known to him or
not.

**376.** If somebody does not have sufficient time for sequence bath, he
should perform immersion bath.

**377.** If a person is observing an obligatory fast for which the day
is fixed or if he has put on Ehram (pilgrim's garb) for Umra or Hajj he
is not allowed to perform immersion bath. In case, however, he performs
it by mistake his bath will be in order.

**378.** It is not necessary that the entire body of a person should be
pure before immersion bath or sequence bath. On the other hand if the
body becomes pure by diving in water or pouring water over one's body
with the intention of ceremonial bath the bath will be in order.

Other questions on Ghusl
------------------------

**379.** If a person has become ceremonially unclean (junub) on account
of an unlawful act, takes a bath with warm water, his bath will be in
order even though be may be perspiring at that time and the recommended
precaution is that be should take bath with cold water.

**380.** If while taking bath a part of the body, however small it may
be remains unwashed the bath is invalid. But, it is not obligatory to
wash, the inside of the ear or nose and other places which are reckoned
to be the interior of the body.

**381.** If a person doubts whether a particular part of the body is to
be treated as its exterior or interior and if previously that part was
treated to be the exterior it should be washed. Other- wise it is not
obligatory to wash it.

**382.** If the hole for wearing an earring and any other similar thing
is so wide that its interior is treated to be exterior it should be
washed, but otherwise it is not necessary to wash it.

**383.** A thing which prevents water reaching the body should be
removed, and if the person concerned takes bath before he becomes sure
that thing has been removed his bath is void.

**384.** If at the time of taking bath the person concerned doubts
whether or not there is something on his body which prevents water
reaching it he should make investigation until be is satisfied that
there is no such impediment.

**385.** While taking bath the person concerned should wash the short
hair which are treated to be a part of the body. Washing of the long
hair is not, however, obligatory. On the other hand if he makes water
reach the skin in such a way that those long hair do not become wet his
bath is in order. However, if it is not possible to make water reach the
skin without washing those hairs he should wash them so that water may
reach the body.

**386.** The conditions mentioned before for the validity of ablutions
(e.g. the water being pure and not having been usurped) are also
applicable for the validity of ceremonial bath. However, in the case of
bath it is not necessary that the body should be washed downwards from
the head. Moreover, it is not necessary in the case of sequence bath
that the body should be washed immediately before washing the head and
the neck. There is no need, therefore, in one's waiting for some time
after washing one's head and neck and then washing one's body. It is not
necessary that one should wash one's head, neck and body in one
instance. For example it is possible if a person washes his head first,
and then washes his neck after the lapse of some time. In case, however,
a man who cannot control his urine or faeces but can control them for so
much time that he could be able to offer prayers after bath then he
should take bath at once and offer his prayers immediately.

**387.** If a person intends defer payment to the bath-keeper (of public
bath-house) without knowing whether he is agreeable to it his bath is
void, even though he may later make the bath-keeper agreeable to this
agreement.

**388.** If the bath-keeper is agreed to the bath being taken on credit
but the person taking bath intends not to pay the wages to him or to pay
him out of the property which has been acquired illegally his bath is
void.

**389.** If a person pays to the bath-keeper out of money whose Khums
(1/5 of the yearly profit see: Article 1160) has not been paid by him he
commits an illegal act but apparently his bath is in order and he
remains responsible to pay Khums to those persons who are entitled to
it.

**390.** If a person purified the outlet of faeces with the water of the
reservoir of the bath-house and doubts before taking bath as he has
purified the outlets of faeces with the water of the reservoir whether
or not the bath-keeper is agreeable to his taking bath his bath is void.
It is valid if before taking bath the parties the bath-keeper agree to
it.

**391.** If a person is in doubt whether he has taken bath or not he
should take bath. However, if doubt arises in his mind after taking bath
as to whether he has taken bath correctly or not and the probability may
be that he exercised care while taking bath it is not necessary for him
to take bath again.

**392.** If while taking bath a minor hadath (uncleanness) takes place
e.g. if he urinates he should abandon that bath and take a fresh bath
and if he wishes to take a sequence bath he should, on the basis of
recommended precaution, perform ablutions as well.

**393.** If the legal obligation of a person is tayammum on account of
shortage of time, but he takes bath under the impression that there is
sufficient time for taking bath and offering prayers, his bath will be
in order, provided that he took bath with the intention of complying
with the orders of Allah. In fact the bath would be in order even if he
performed it with a view to offer prayers.

**394.** If a person becomes ceremonially unclean and doubts whether or
not he took bath and if there is a possibility that when he began
offering prayers he had the matter in mind the prayers which has already
offered are in order, but he should take bath for future prayers. And in
case of minor hadath (discharge of urine or gas from rectum ) after the
prayers it is necessary that he should also perform ablutions and if
there is still time he should repeat the prayers which he has offered
already.

**395.** If a person is under obligation to perform a number of baths he
can take one bath with the intention of performing all of them. And the
apparent possibility is that if he takes bath with the intention of
taking one bath it will suffice for the rest.

**396.** If a verse of the holy Qur'an or a Name of the Almighty Allah
is written at a place on the body of a person and if he wishes to
perform sequence ablutions or to take sequence bath he should make water
reach his body in such a way that his hands do not reach the writing.

**397.** If a person takes the ceremonial bath of janabat, it is not
necessary for him to perform ablutions for prayers. In fact one can
offer prayers without performing ablutions after obligatory bath (except
the bath for middle Istihaza) as well as after recommended bath (See:
Article No. 651), although as a precautionary measure it is recommended
that one should also perform ablutions.


