Orders Regarding a Dying Person
===============================

**539.** A Muslim who is dying, whether man or woman or old or young,
should, on the basis of precaution, be laid on his/her hack as far as
possible, in such a manner that the soles of his/her feet should face
the Qibla (direction towards the holy Ka'bah).

**540.** It is better that the dead body should also be made to lie
facing the Qibla until its bathing is completed. However, when its
bathing is completed it is better to make it lie in the same state in
which it is made to lie when prayers is offered for it.

**541.** It is obligatory upon every Muslim on the basis of precaution
to make a dying person lie facing the Qibla and it is better to obtain
permission in this behalf from his guardian.

**542.** It is recommended that Islamic fundamentals viz.
acknowledgement of the Oneness of Allah and the Prophethood of the holy
Prophet Muhammad and the acknowledgement of the twelve Imams and other
principles of faith should be spoken out to a dying person in such a
manner that he should under- stand it. It is also recommended that these
things should be repeated till the time of his death.

**543.** It is recommended that the following supplication should be
spoken out to a dying person in such a manner that he should understand
it: Alla hummaghfir liyal kathina mim ma'asika waqbal minniyal yasira
min ta'atika ya man yaqbalul yasira wa yaafu 'anil kathir, Iqbal
minniyal yasira wa'fu 'anniyal kathir. lnnaha antal afuwwul Ghafur. Alla
hummar hamni fa innaka Rahim.

**544.** If a person is experiencing difficulty in the matter of
departure of his soul it is recommended to carry him to the place where
he used to offer prayers, provided that it does not cause him
discomfort.

**545.** If a person is experiencing the pangs of death it is re-
commended to recite by his side Surah Yasin, Surah as-Saffat, Surah
al-Ahzab, Ayat al-Kursi and 54th verse of Surah al-A'raf and the last
three verses of Surah al-Baqarah. In fact it is better to recite as much
out of the holy Qur'an as possible.

**546.** It u abominable to leave a dying person alone or to place
anything on his belly, or to talk much or cry near him or to let only
women remain with him. Going of a junub or a ha'iz near him is also
abominable.

Orders Regarding Acts to Be Performed With Regard to a Dead Person
------------------------------------------------------------------

**547.** It is recommended that the eyes and lips of a dead body should
be closed, its chin should be tied, its hands and feet should be
straightened and it shoUld be covered with a cloth.

If a person dies at night the persons concerned should illuminate the
place and inform the believers to join the funeral and should make haste
in burying the dead body. In case, however, they are not certain that
the person is actually dead they should wait till the position becomes
clear. Furthermore, if the dead person is a pregnant woman and there is
a living child in her womb, her burial should be delayed till such time
that her left side is cut and the child is taken out and then her body
is sewn.

**548.** Bathing and shrouding of a Muslim who is dead and offering
prayers for him and burying him is obligatory for every responsible
(adult and sane) person even though the corpse may not be an Ithna
'Ashari Shi'ah. However, if some persons accomplish these acts, others
are absolved from the responsibility. But if none discharges these
obligations all those who know it shall be sinners.

**549.** If a person begins performing the acts relating to the dead
body it is not obligatory for others to participate in them. In case,
however, that person leaves these acts incomplete others should complete
them.

**550.** If a person is certain that another person is busy looking
after the jobs relating to the dead body it is not obligatory for him to
take steps in this behalf. However, if he doubts or suspects he should
take necessary steps.

**551.** If a person is certain that the bathing, shrouding, prayers for
or burial of a dead body has been performed wrongly he should perform
these acts again. In case, however, he is only suspicious about their
validity or doubts whether they have been performed properly it is not
necessary for him to take any action in the matter.

**552.** On the basis of precaution permission should be taken from the
guardian of a dead body for its bathing, shrouding, performing prayers
and burial.

**553.** The guardian of a woman is her husband. And after him the men
who inherit from the dead person enjoy precedence over their women.

**554.** If a person says that he is the guardian of the dead body, or
that the guardian of the dead body has given him permission to carry out
its bathing, shrouding and burial, or he says that he is the executor of
the dead body in the matter of its equipment, and if what he says is
relied upon, or the dead body is in his possession, or two just (Adil)
persons and even one reliable person testify to his statement, his word
should be accepted.

**555.** If a dead person appoints some one other than his guardian to
carry out his bathing, shrouding, burial and prayers the guardianship
with regard to these matters rests with that person. And it is not
necessary that the person whom the dead person has appointed to carry
out these jobs should accept the will. However, if he does accept it he
should act upon it.


