Deviation in Principles and Branches of Faith
=============================================

Introduction
============

As we all know, one of the aims of unity of Islam is to avoid clashes,
disputes, wars and bloodshed between Muslims.

Every Muslim is safe under Islamic civil regulations according to
Islamic legislation. Life and property of a Muslim comes at the top of
this civil law. On the other hand differences in belief have been ground
for destroying sanctity of ones life and property throughout history.
Proponents of Islamic unity desire to have a word about sectarian
differences among Muslims. Their end is that these differences may not
hurt individuals because of their being Muslims. As a result, any excuse
for any kind of separation among Muslims could be repudiated. Therefore
they usually say:

“…all of them (Muslims) are together in basic beliefs. In other words,
beliefs which have bearing on one’s being a Muslim. The difference that
lies in certain matters is not to the extent to deny one’s being a
Muslim, but it is an adherence to a particular faith.”!**[1]**

“What we mean is that unity or proximity with one another should push
Islamic faiths to be together on those conditions that are subject to
being a Muslim. All are Muslims. The difference among them is not a
fundamental one. It is a marginal one which does not rescind one’s
Islam.”!**[2]**

“Issues of difference existing in between are not of a category that
could qualify one to blame the other of infidelity. The difference lies
outside the principle and foundation. Therefore it is not a reason to
say that these faiths have fundamental differences with each
other.”!**[3]**

“In this way they should seek real truth, fact and knowledge. As far as
they can, they should settle their disputes by reason and proof. Thus
they can reach mutual agreement on any issues of difference. What good
it would yield to reserve for himself what he likes and to be a cause of
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: *Payaam-e-Wahdat*, Pg. 257  
 **[2]** Ibid. *Payaam-e-Wahdat*, Pg. 258  
 **[3]** Shaikh Muhammad Taqi Qummi: quoted in
*Hambastigi-e-Mazaahib-e-Islami* (Unity of Islamic Sects), Pg. 57

dread for others? On the other hand difference in branches is not
harmful nor does it push them out of the circle of Islam.”!**[1]**

Criticism and Analysis
----------------------

Declarations such as these towards gaining political unity are
acceptable. Perhaps they may prove strong enough to achieve the aim.
However in view of the highly exalted station of Imamate in Islam and
Shia belief, they are bereft of originality and sincerity of thought.

We rather make divisions between teachings of Islam and principles of
Islam and religion instead of maintaining Islamic principles and
religious fundamentals. This is the important point overlooked that
results in this outlook. The negligence is: We do not distinguish
between worldly jurisprudence and fate of human beings in the next
world.

Against the above division, unity-seekers have erroneously divided the
principle (the common belief) and branches (the belief on personal make
out) into two batches:

1 – The basic faith: i.e. common among all sects. It constitutes the
basic principle of Islam. This gives the identity of being a Muslim.

2 – Branches of faith: i.e. beliefs particular to its relative faiths or
sects. They are independent from fundamentals of Islam. They have no
bearing on limits of Islam.**[2]**

Hence it is said:

“Principles means pillars on which rests the entity of a Muslim. If one
rejects all of them or a part of it, he is no more a Muslim.”!**[3]**

“Branches are same issues that revert to the principle irrespective of
views.”!**[4]**

“The meaning of branches is not only the side commandments but it also
means issues stretched out of the basic principle in both dimensions
prior  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. quoted in *Hambastigi-e-Mazaahib-e-Islami* (Unity of
Islamic Sects), Pg. 56  
 **[2]** One of the wrong consequences of this is that Imamate is
shifted to branches as we shall explain in coming pages.  
 **[3]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Interview in ‘Haft Aasmaan’
(Seven Skies) Magazine, Issues 9 & 10, Spring & Summer 80, Pg. 13  
 **[4]** Ibid. Interview in ‘Haft Aasmaan’ (Seven Skies) Magazine,
Issues 9 & 10, Spring & Summer 80, Pg. 15

and after the commands and beliefs. In beliefs too we have a principle
and a branch.”!**[1]**

Here rises a question: When we can attain the goal without injuring the
quality of thought and attain knowledge of all beliefs by personal
conclusion why should we stick to unpleasant ideas or thoughts? Besides,
according to real teachings of religion in this respect, which is
agreeable to both sects, political unity too can be attained.**[2]**
Descriptions about principles of faith and its standards; we make appear
as brief knowledge is sufficient because principle is a scale agreed by
all sects. As such, Islamic sects have no difference at all in
principles and fundamentals of faith. Their religious differences,
considering these narrations, consist of beliefs as a whole except
common subjects related to branches!

It is thus said:

“Data mentioned in Quran and traditions; that is the principles Muslims
had accepted and in the time of the Prophet too all Muslims were in
agreement.”!**[3]**

“By the common sum of principle we mean final principle of Islam
acceptable to all Muslims. They are proved and established by Quran and
traditions which Muslims have necessarily accepted.”!**[4]**

“In this respect also we must go after deeds**[5]** of a category, a
necessity of Islam and which are acknowledged by all faiths as an
obligatory mandate in Quran and traditions. As in principles of belief,
here too standard of acceptance of these actions is agreement of all
upon it.”!**[6]**

“Muslim unity rests on the pivot of basic Islamic principles and all
Muslims agree upon it.”!**[7]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Interview in ‘Haft Aasmaan’ (Seven Skies) Magazine, Issues
9 & 10, Spring & Summer 80, Pg. 13  
 **[2]** That is the principles of Islam that shall be dealt in
detail.  
 **[3]** Ibid. Interview in ‘Haft Aasmaan’ (Seven Skies) Magazine,
Issues 9 & 10, Spring & Summer 80, Pg. 15  
 **[4]** Ibid. *Nida-e-Wahdat,,* Pg. 26  
 **[5]** [Religious acts (Laws)]  
 **[6]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Essay quoted in *Kitab-e-Wahdat,*
Pg. 210  
 **[7]** Ibid. *Payaam-e-Wahdat,* Pg. 235  
 [Of course, this question remains unanswered: How agreement among
Muslims equals

“The difference of Muslims does not lie in issues of jurisprudence
alone. It runs partly in side beliefs too. Besides, it also exists in
common principles.”!**[1]**

Because of this narrow-mindedness, like the Muslims are excused in their
differences about contents of common subjects they are also excused
about belief in Imamate!**[2]**

Rather it is said that their faith will not be harmed because of not
having such beliefs.**[3]**

Whether a claim like this:

“A brief knowledge about principles and belief in it to the extent of
common understanding is sufficient. Not in sense of comprehension that
embraces principles in detail. It suffices to form a standard of being a
Muslim and a ground for Islamic unity. Belief in this principle runs to
the extent of a common understanding to all.”!**[4]**

Is there something that goes beyond testimony of oneness of God and
prophethood?

The above element creates confusion. Beyond necessary knowledge of
principles which is a combination of subjects and general comprehension
all arguments are side and branch ones. As a result they rest on
personal conclusions! Therefore:

“Muslims in matter of branches should allow each other to have different
beliefs.”**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

religions concurrence that has resulted in a standard to distinguish the
principles and decide its absoluteness? What is a reason or a proof for
it?!!]**  
 [1]** Ibid. *Payaam-e-Wahdat,* Pg. 228  
 [This claim includes all matters of belief in which there are
differences in side and common principles.]  
 **[2]** We shall deal in the following pages about the claim that the
Ummah is excused in Usool (beliefs) and Furu (Laws).  
 **[3]** Regarding the difference between Islam and (Imaan) Faith,
please refer to the book, *Marefat-e-Imam-e-Asr (a.t.f.s.)*, (Knowing
the Imam of the Age) by Dr. Bani Hashimi.  
 **[4]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Article quoted in
*Kitab-e-Wahdat,* Pgs. 207-208  
 **[5]** Ibid. Interview in ‘Haft Aasmaan’ (Seven Skies) Magazine, Issue
9 & 10, Spring and Summer 80, Pg. 13

Now according to faith one who gives testimony of God being one (i.e.
monotheism) and prophethood, is a Muslim. And he is obliged to obey the
commandments of Islam and enjoy the rights thereby.

As such, there is no need for a Muslim to know followers of all Islamic
faiths and to claim wrongly:

“Justice and Imamate are principles of faith not principles of religion.
Why they say so? Because Shias considers them Muslims who do not believe
in this issue. Yes, they are Muslims though they may not believe in the
said issue.”**[1]**

Because to consider followers of other Islamic sects Muslims has a root
in fundamentals of other than Ja’fari (Shia) jurisprudence.

Conclusion
----------

On this base:

“Principles of faith are elements that constitute a faith. Principles of
faith in Islam are of two categories. One is the same, which entitles
one to be called a Muslim according to issues**[2]** of
jurisprudence**[3]** that is: testimony of God’s unity and
prophethood.**[4]**

The other is salvation in the next world from divine punishment and
resurrection to attain God’s pleasure and entrance in heaven. This
depends upon that alone. Entering heaven is subject to acknowledgement
of that principle. Otherwise heaven is prohibited. He who does not
believe in this principle is regarded as infidel and thrown into hell.
This part of principle is called principle of faith**[5]** that is to
believe in Imamate and to accept the Imam.”**[6]**

Allamah Sayyid Abdul Husain Sharafuddin has dealt with this issue in two
chapters in his book *Al-Fusool al-Muhimma Fi Taleef al-Ummah.*
According to him, sanctity of being a Muslim is preserved and protected
by rights of Islam by uttering two testimonies. This is agreed upon by
Shias and Sunnis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. *Nida-e-Wahdat,* Pg. 155  
 **[2]** [That is it includes Islamic rights]  
 **[3]** [This part is called the principles of Islam]  
 **[4]** [To pronounce the two testimonies of faith]  
 **[5]** [Having the right and correct belief in Islamic sciences]  
 **[6]** Allamah Marashi Najafi: *Ahqaaq al-Haqq,* Vol. 2, Pg. 306

He in the same way writes in the third chapter that: A great part in
this regard is narrated by Sunni sect to the effect that whoever says:
There is no god but God and Muhammad is the Prophet of God is a Muslim
and his life and property is entitled to respect and regard. We shall
evaluate it.

He further writes below the subsequent chapter: We shall dwell on a few
traditions of Infallible Imams who have given sanction of Islam, i.e. of
being Muslims, to Sunnis. They have regarded Sunnis in all respects
entitled to rights**[1]** that a Muslim enjoys like Shias.”**[2]**

“Authority of jurisprudence and faith, the Second Martyr (Shaheed Thani)
says after arguing about the reality of faith: From the data above you
know that acknowledgement of Imamate of Imams forms a principle of faith
in Imamiyah sect and a necessity of their religion. A thing if it be a
part of another thing will vanish at disappearance of its origin or main
source. There is no doubt about it. It is same as the matter in
question. Accordingly decree becomes necessary to declare one an infidel
if he be not at home with the testimony of Imamate although he might
have uttered the two testimonies. Some have said this decree varies with
what you say: Who admits the two testimonies is a Muslim not infidel.
The answer is there is no difference between the two decrees. We issue a
decree that whoever does not admit the said testimonies is an infidel in
the sense of the gist itself and a Muslim outwardly. As such, these two
decrees on this subject are different but there is no negation in it.

**He further says:** Outwardly, a Muslim means that most religious
commitments take shape thereat. Consequently, the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) has fixed two testimonies as ground to carry out religious
obligations or mandates on the person who confesses.

The chief of jurisprudents and researchers, Shaykh Muhammad Hasan author
of al-Jawahir says: Perhaps the numerous narratives that have come
regarding infidelity of denier of Ali and denier of Imam are in the
sense of absolute infidelity against faith...”**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This does not mean that believers do not enjoy special rights
such as back-biting which is prohibited for believers. Refer: Ahmad
Rahmani Hamadani. Translation of *Ali bin Abi Talib* (by Husain
Ostadoli) Pg. 665  
 **[2]** Allamah Sharafuddin: *Mubaahis-e-Ameeqi Dar
Jahat-e-Wahdat-e-Islami* (Deep discussions about Islamic unity), Pgs.
33-45  
 **[3]** Ahmad Rahmani Hamadani. Translation of *Ali bin Abi Talib* (by
Husain Ostadoli) Pgs. 201-202

As observed in religious teachings, we do not have divisions by name of
principles of faith and principles of religion or basic principles and
branches of faith. Principles of religion are of two kinds. Principles
**of Islam** that is to pronounce two testimonies and its
acknowledgements, the other is principles **of Faith** that is to have
correct beliefs. Therefore it is distinguished as religious recognition.

Conclusion
----------

What are principles of religion and how they are specified and fixed, is
in itself a debate. And what kind of denial it is with regard to
principles that results in exit from jurisprudential obligations leaving
only an outward appearance of Islam in this world? This constitutes
another debate that the standards that fix principles of religion have
no part. It enjoys special calculations particular to itself. In other
words, conditions and standards of exit from the borders of being a
Muslim and from the circle of outer Islam has no bearing on the main or
branches of argument of Imamate in Islam.

Therefore from religious viewpoint belief such as Imamate can be a
principle and a cornerstone of Islam as well. But an open denial of it
based on any interests could cause exit from borders of being a Muslim
in this world.

It is never allowed to create a new description for principles and
branches of religion and belief and introduce self-made standards for
religious base wherein the station of Imamate is shifted to a lower
grade; all this for sake of preserving the outcome of fake and feeble
facade of Islam.

Therefore in accordance with sagacious religious decree an open denial
of Imamate and *Wilayat* of infallible Imams will not qualify one to be
discarded as a Muslim had he adhered to testimony of oneness of God and
the testimony of prophethood.

Although Imamate is the basic element of faith yet the testimony of
monotheism and prophethood holds one from going out of the circle of
Islam**[1]** unless he has enmity to Infallible Imams or he denies both
testimonies, i.e. monotheism and prophethood.

Therefore it does not befit necessary to consider contents of belief in
field of monotheism, prophethood and resurrection as branches. As a
result contents could be considered as personal conclusion and wrong
beliefs of Sunni sect  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The wrong beliefs can be treated with the same status.

could be justified.**[1]** It is not necessary to discard Imamate from
category of principles of religion and make it a branch
discussion.**[2]**

Reminder
--------

“Ayatullah Kashiful Ghita says with regard to Imamate, which is the only
basic cardinal difference between Shia and Sunni sects: **[3]** Shias
regard Imamate a principle among principles of religion at the level of
monotheism and prophethood. Further, their belief goes to extent that
Imamate too, like prophethood is choice of God. Imam is chosen and
appointed by God and Prophet. Ummah has no choice in appointment of a
prophet and it is out of its reach and choice.

But our Sunni brothers do not treat this issue as a principle of
religion. They have lowered and downgraded it to a political issue that
can be accommodated by consensus or election which has no bearing on
principles or branches of faith.

Yet, inspite of that…

Do you find a Shia pronouncing infidelity of one who has no belief in
Imamate? Never!...

On the basis of this:

Acknowledgement of Imamate or its denial has nothing to do with Islamic
society and relative commandments. The blood and properties (of both
sects) is respectable and liable to protection…”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Interview in ‘Haft Aasmaan’
(Seven Skies) Magazine, Issues 9 & 10 Spring & Summer 80, Pg. 12, 16 &
24  
 **[2]** Refer: Ibid. Interview in ‘Haft Aasmaan’ (Seven Skies)
Magazine, Issues 9 & 10 Spring & Summer 80, Pg. 13, 14 & 18  
 **[3]** [The root of all differences, i.e. those of belief, behavior
and jurisprudence, etc. go back to this fundamental difference.]  
 **[4]** Sayyid Ahmad Mawassaqi: *Istiratazi-e-Wahdat* (Strategy of
Unity), Vol. 2, Pg. 205 quoted from *Hambastigi-e-Mazaahib-e-Islami,*
Pg. 46
