First Batch Three Types of Separations Between Imamate and Rulership
====================================================================

Introductory conjecture
=======================

“Difference between issue of Caliphate and that of Imamate is one of
strong pillars. Of course each one justifies it in one way or
another.”!**[1]**

This conjecture is expressed in the following thought:

Type A)
-------

Separation of Imamate from Rulership in the sense of setting aside
Caliphate and considering it out of discussion:

“Muslims today are in no need to discuss about past Caliphate. The thing
that we must stress thereon and prove is this: The Prophet had set
Members of his Household at the level of Quran and oracles for Muslims.
Therefore Muslims even today stand in need of them. The issue of
Caliphate or rulership does not matter here…”!**[2]**

“We already differ with Sunni sect in issue of Caliphate. Now presently
Caliphate does not exist. Therefore there should not be any ground to
quarrel. But the thing that is useful to us is aspect of Wilayat. In
other words, the authority of learning or knowledge and their being
final oracle or source of religious issues to refer. The position of
Prophet’s Ahle Bayt still exists. Their fountain still gushes.”!**[3]**

“The Prophet in his time held the office of the oracle of Muslims. Then
he (the Prophet) appointed Imam Ali (a.s.) as the final authority of
knowledge and his inheritor after his death. The Prophet acquainted
people with the names of all twelve Imams as his heirs.”!**[4]**

“It is very much interesting that people feel pity at the issue of
Caliphate and its getting shifted. But nobody laments nor does he feel
sorry for our  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: *Nida-e-Wahdat,* Pg. 218  
 **[2]** Ibid. Article: ‘Elements of Islamic Unity and its Hindrances’
quoted in *Kitab-e-Wahdat,* Pg. 256  
 **[3]** Interview in ‘Haft Aasmaan’ (Seven Skies) Magazine, Issues
9-10, Spring and Summer 80, Pg. 18  
 **[4]** Abdul Kareem Bi-Aazaar Shirazi: Kayhan Farhangi, Issue 184,
Bahman 80, Pg. 14

having been deprived of benefits of knowledge of Ali and his sons –heirs
of the Prophet. The shifting of Caliphate severed for us the link of
Guardianship.”!**[1]**

“Commonly all people in their various categories and capacities –
speakers of congregations, speak on subject of Caliphate snatched away
at Saqifah.”!**[2]**

“When Shaykh Attar refers to Lord Ali, he mentions him from the angle of
Guardianship.**[3]** Likewise, Maulana too mentions him in the same
angle and adds: This Caliphate, a matter of dispute for you, is not
important. The status and position that Imam Ali (a.s.) held in the
scope of knowledge is far greater one. The link of soul that he enjoyed
is more important. Ali himself did not pay any importance to
Caliphate.”!**[4]**

Type B)
-------

Separation of Imamate from Rulership in the sense of Caliphate being
independent of Imamate:

“Imamate and Caliphate are two separate entities quite different from
each other but coherent. The best way of peace is: to recognize or
acknowledge the Caliph as a trustee and a guard over treasures of earth
and Imam over treasures of divine knowledge through the
Prophet.”!**[5]**

In this outlook deviation with regard to link between Imamate and
Caliphate starts thus:

“As a matter of fact, there is no difference between the two. These two
offices since the beginning until the end are at congruity with each
other. Therefore in Shia dictionary, Imamate has never been against
Caliphate.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Interview in ‘Haft Aasmaan’ (Seven
Skies) Magazine, Issues 9-10, Spring and Summer 80, Pg. 19  
 **[2]** Ibid. Interview in ‘Haft Aasmaan’ (Seven Skies) Magazine,
Issues 9-10, Spring and Summer 80, Pg. 19  
 **[3]** [Inner guardianship.]  
 **[4]** Ibid. Interview in ‘Haft Aasmaan’ (Seven Skies) Magazine,
Issues 9-10, Spring and Summer 80, Pg. 20  
 **[5]** Muhammad Salih Haeri Mazandarani: Article quoted in
*Hambastigi-e-Mazaahib-e-Islami* (Unity of Islamic Sects), Pg. 217;
Narrators of his outlook: Abdul Kareem Bi-Aazaar Shirazi: *Seemai
Imam-e-Muttaqeen,* (Portrait of the Imam of the Pious), Vol. 5, Pg. 23;
Dr. Ali Shariati: *Tashayyo-e-Alawi o Tashayyo-e-Safavi* [Alawite
Shiaism and Safavid Shiaism] (Collected Writings 9) Pg. 76, quoted from
statement about belief of Alawite Shias.

As such, an understanding or co-ordination is possible between the two
to the extent to acknowledge one (Caliphate) as a trustee of earthly
treasures and the other (Imam) as a trustee of divine and Prophet’s
knowledge.”!**[1]**

Because: “Caliphate of righteous Caliphs is a position other than
Imamate.”!**[2]**

As a result:

“The issue of Caliphate and Imamate are two issues separate from each
other but with a caliber of co-ordination with each other.”!**[3]**

In fact it could be summed up as:

The outcome of this claim to separate Imamate and Caliphate from each
other. Imamate is considered at a station other than Caliphate and
Caliphate occupies a place other than Imamate.

Thus it is said:

“The subject of Imamate from the outlook of the strong verses of Quran
is separate from rulership.”!**[4]**

“The late Allamah Simnani**[5]** writes in Islam magazine: ‘Imamate and
Caliphate are actually two issues. Caliphs had accepted and acknowledged
Imamate of Imam Ali (a.s.). Ali too had accepted their Caliphate. He
used to say: You rule but I will solve the difficulties. They had agreed
to this. Particularly the Second Caliph had sincerely accepted this
proposal of Ali.**[6]** These are the ways we can follow.”!**[7]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Salih Haeri Mazandarani:
*Hambastigi-e-Mazaahib-e-Islami* (Unity of Islamic Sects), Pgs.
218-223  
 **[2]** Ibid. *Hambastigi-e-Mazaahib-e-Islami* (Unity of Islamic
Sects), Pg. 219  
 **[3]** Dr. Ali Shariati: *Tashayyo-e-Alawi o Tashayyo-e-Safavi*
[Alawite Shiaism and Safavid Shiaism] (Collected Writings 9) Pg. 75,
quoted from statement about belief of Alawite Shias.  
 **[4]** Mustafa Husaini Tabatabai: *Raahi Bi Soo-e-Wahdat-e-Islami*
(Way to Islamic Unity), Pg. 158  
 **[5]** [Shaykh Muhammad Salih Haeri Mazandarani]  
 **[6]** [The above analysis is also explained as follows: The authority
in learning and knowledge of Imam Ali was already known and recognized
by Caliphs and they had accepted it. (Abdul Kareem Bi-Aazaar Shirazi:
Kayhan Farhangi, Issue 184, Bahman 80, Pg. 16)]  
 **[7]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Interview in ‘Haft Aasmaan’
(Seven Skies) Magazine, Issues 9-10, Spring and Summer 80, Pg. 20

At this wrong belief it is said:

“Imam Ali (a.s.), with the high spirit he had, went far and far, beyond
and beyond Caliphate.”!**[1]**

“Imam Ali (a.s.), in fact, was far beyond above elected
Caliphate.”**[2]**

“Imam Ali (a.s.) has openly and frankly stated: I have no rivalry with
you in an elected Caliphate. He enjoyed a far more important spiritual
position and distinction; that is Guardianship of Muslims. Besides, he
was an Imam and father of Imams. Imamate was his lot. Besides, the most
close and intimate relation and link he enjoyed with the
Prophet.”!**[3]**

“There is another duty among duties of Imamate and Guardianship which is
far important than Caliphate. That duty is to preserve and safeguard
treasures of knowledge of the Prophet and to transfer it honestly and
correctly to scholars, people and clerics.”!**[4]**

“Another example of the activity of the office of Wilayat and Imamate of
Ali in the era of Caliphs, we clearly see how high and important it is
than the elected office.”!**[5]**

“The Guardianship and heritage of divine information vested with him by
God goes far beyond elected Caliphate.”!**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdul Kareem Bi-Aazaar Shirazi: *Hambastigi-e-Mazaahib-e-Islami*
(Preface to the 2<sup>nd</sup> Edition), Pg. 10  
 **[2]** Abdul Kareem Bi-Aazaar Shirazi: *Seemai Imam-e-Muttaqeen,*
(Portrait of the Imam of the Pious), Vol. 5, Pg. 20  
 **[3]** Ibid. Vol. 5, Pg. 22  
 **[4]** Ibid. Vol. 6, Pg. 16  
 **[5]** Ibid. Vol. 7, Pg. 14  
 **[6]** Ibid. Vol. 7, Pg. 18
