Deviated Repercussions of This Conjecture
=========================================

First Wrong Result
------------------

Since the great Caliphate of Ali was active immediately after passing
away of Prophet throughout the period of Caliphate, which was in
appearance, so no right of his was usurped or confiscated.

Thus it is said:

“Imam Ali (a.s.) besides the five years he was physically in the scene
he had great Imamate and great Caliphate all over the period of thirty
years since passing away of Prophet.”!**[1]**

Second Wrong Result
-------------------

Considering differences between great Caliphate and Caliphate, visible
to the people, it is not usurpation – that is the actions committed by
those (other than Ali) who took over Caliphate. So their government was
not illegitimate.

Third Wrong Result
------------------

That the holder of great Caliphate acknowledged Caliphate held by other,
which was visible to people, is a natural and normal thing.

In this respect, they say:

“After a short period he did Bay’at for the sake of unity, peace, calm
and safety of Islam.”!**[2]**

Consequently the invalid and illegitimate Caliphate of Abu Bakr and Umar
is being shown as lawful, valid and under supervision of Ali. A
Caliphate (as though) approved and accepted by Ali!

Reminder
--------

Whatever you read up to here was a report of claim coined in a new
thought of unity-seekers. This new thought was erroneous and wrong in
addition to dimension which too was wrong and deviated.

The writer of the article has tried to reason and give evidence in order
to establish the validity of his theory that the great Caliphate was
active  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Article quoted in Collected Papers of International
Conference on Imam Ali, Vol. 1, Pg. 78  
 **[2]** Ibid. Article quoted in Collected Papers of International
Conference on Imam Ali, Vol. 1, Pg. 70

throughout the period in which others had worn the gown of Caliphate.
They are as follows:

“The great Caliphate of Imam Ali (a.s.) during a period of thirty years
after passing away of Prophet – we shall revise...

Guiding Caliphs in political, economical, legal and judicial affairs and
keeping them from going astray.

Appointing his own persons in key posts.”!**[1]**

Then the writer explains ways and proceeds of his great Caliphate giving
details about consultations of Caliphs with him. He further adds and
explains the part he and his companions had in government and military
advances.

We would like to remark here that we shall deal with all these points in
the second and third chapters of second volume in detail.

**The claim that his great Caliphate was active during the period of
twenty-five years of Caliphs is nothing but an exaggeration far from
reality and remote from facts. It is against history.**

Here we draw your attention to a short criticism of the conjecture of
Caliphate being separate from Imamate and *Wilayat*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Article quoted in Collected Papers of International
Conference on Imam Ali, Vol. 1, Pg. 64
