Criticism and Opinion Guardianship and Imamate Is Inseparable From Apparent Caliphate
=====================================================================================

Ustad Ja’far Subhani writes in this respect:

“There is another theory against all we have said so far. Shia scholars
agree unanimously on it. The theory goes to say: Imamate is a
guardianship bestowed by God to Imam. To make it more clear: Imamate is
a position similar to prophethood. It is neither selected nor elected.
It is chosen or appointed by God Himself. The holder of this position,
the Imam, is chosen and appointed by God.

Therefore Imamate is extension of Message brought down to people by
Prophet. A Prophet is a founder of divine legislation over the earth.
Imam is a guard of this legislation and guard of Message. Imam goes
parallel with the Prophet except in getting revelation, which is the
only distinction of Prophet. The Imam too is distinguished with
qualifications and qualities necessary to a Prophet. He must be unique
in knowledge and well conversed with principles, fundamentals, branches,
decrees, rules, etc. An Imam too must be protected from committing any
mistakes, big or small.**[1]** The office of Imamate in Shia school is
extension of duties, which are Prophet’s responsibility. Imam performs
all duties of a Prophet. The obligations that bind a Prophet are
transferred to the Imam.”**[2]**

As such if rulership is within the ambit of prophethood of a prophet and
this office is established in the entity of prophet, then it cannot be
separated from the entity of an Infallible Imam also. Therefore it
cannot belong to other than the person of Imam. Since Imamate is the
extension of prophethood, rulership too comes within the range of Imam’s
responsibilities as it was the case with the Prophet. Therefore it is
unreasonable to think of separation between office of Imamate and
rulership.

We follow this discussion from the angle of knowing minutely the duties
of a Prophet:

Ustad Ja’far Subhani writes under the heading: Whether government is
possible without an Infallible Imam – if it is a divine right:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ustad Ja’far Subhani: *Rahbari-e-Ummat* (Leadership of the
nation), Pg. 20  
 **[2]** Ibid. *Peshwayi az Nazar-e-Islam* (Leadership in the view of
Islam), Pg. 3

“There is no doubt that one of the duties of prophets and one of the
branches of their Guardianship is their government and their command
over people. The government which in reality and originally belongs to
God and delegated to Prophet and then to men of God, is a government
framed and formed by justice, divine regulations and virtue of God’s
commands.

In Bani Israel Prophets Dawood and Sulaiman had such a divine rightful
government by God’s decree. The right and just government is that which
is established by God’s orders; not on conjectures, fancies or guess,
which is always accompanied with surmise and suspicion. So it is often
associated with lust, desire, aspiration and greed. It is absolutely
impossible to administer such a government unless the administrator has
extensive knowledge in all sciences and fields relative and necessary,
such as punishments and particularities of a ruling. He should be cold
and calm, able to overcome his own anguish and anger. He must be able to
control his personal greed, selfishness, lust and pleasure. In short,
only a man with such qualities can be an infallible Imam. The Prophet
according to Quranic verse was a ruler, commander and governor of
Muslims. He was their politician, judge and arbitrator. If all verses
descended in this regard are scrutinized, it will come to light that the
Prophet was an absolute undisputed ruler, an arbitrator and a judge of
Muslim Ummah. He was a rightful politician too. When we pay visit in a
form of pilgrimage to Imam in his shrine we read in the text of pilgrim
devotions (Ziarat Jame Kabeera) – “…politicians of the people.” The Imam
performs the duties of the Prophet. The Imam performs the job of
government and judiciary. He stands parallel to the Prophet. As we
pointed above, he must be having the same qualities, the Prophet had.
All rules, commandments and details of religion must be known to him.
Similarly, he must be infallible like the Prophet, far from faults,
remote from wrongs, pure and purged of sins. If Imam wants to administer
his government in a different way, there will be no issue of Caliphate
or succeeding the Prophet. It will be a government like other
governments. It is obvious that the Imam whom God appoints is to fill
the gap created by the death of Prophet. The Prophet ruled on the basis
of divine laws. He did not commit mistake or go astray in applying laws
of God whatever subject or case might have been. Therefore his
government was in fact the mirror of this Quranic verse: “And rule among
the people with truth and do not obey the (personal) lust.” Now passing
away of Prophet has created a vacuum that cannot be filled by anyone who
has no knowledge of all the rules. Their ignorance in the events of any
problem

pushed them here and there to beg for a solution. What an agony it is
when no goal obtained, he takes shelter in his own conjecture. Therefore
the file of their life is full of mistakes, errors, wrongs and faults;
all dangerous and harmful. How to fill such a deep crack and crevice;
and who is to fill it? He must be of highest spirit in position; a copy
of the Prophet – having knowledge of each branch and side of Islam, He
must be able to solve difficulties and problems without making mistakes.
It is quite apparent that ordinary persons cannot fill the gap nor can
they continue the Message brought down by the Prophet. Therefore it is
here the presence of an Infallible Imam becomes necessary and a need to
tread the path of the Prophet. Imam is a need to be in place of the
Prophet to carry out his duties and make restrictions and prohibitions
prescribed by God and conveyed by Prophet.”**[1]**

Ustad Murtuza Mutahhari in this respect writes:

“Prophethood itself is a reality containing thousands of issues. The
presence of Prophet suffices people from having anyone else to govern
them. Imamate in Shia school entails prophethood. However it is higher
than prophethood. It is such a fact we have accepted. As long as the
Prophet exists, there is no saying as to who should be the ruler. The
reason is the Prophet enjoys a status beyond people. Likewise, as long
as Imam exists, there is no question of who must be the ruler. In Shia
school, Imamate is a phenomenon and stretched entity of prophethood at
its highest grades.”**[2]**

“From Shia outlook, the issue of rulership in the period of Imam is like
rulership in the time of the Prophet. In other words, it is an
exception. With the supposition of existence or presence of Imam in
consideration of the extent of Shia belief; the issue of rulership also
becomes a branch issue – depending on other issues.”**[3]**

Reminder
--------

There is another criticism with regard to inadvertency towards standard,
sincerity and originality of this thought. Distance has been taken from
spirit of Islam and its social teaching; because:

“Separation between these two positions actually is a sort of
Christianity on tongues of those who share this theory. This is a
deviated constitution  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Pg. 142- 146  
 **[2]** Ustad Murtuza Mutahhari: *Imamat-o-Rahbari* (Imamate and
Leadership), Pg. 162-163  
 **[3]** Ibid. Pg. 147

of Christianity of today, which says: I hand over affairs of Caesar to
Caesar himself. This is not an Islamic constitution. All its regulations
and laws reflect one system overall compressing all material and moral
aspects sufficient to cater to needs of human beings in social, conduct
and character, political and economical fields.

The constitution of Islam and its root frames the regulations of human
policy, which is to administer Islamic social affairs. The station of
moral leadership cannot be separated from government and political rule.
Some among open-minded ones in the past and present consider it as a
necessity to divide or separate the two, i.e. Caliphs and Infallible
Ahle Bayt of Prophet as it is the only way of unity between Shia and
Sunni. The government must be the lot of Caliphs and moral leadership on
the part of Infallible Ahle Bayt. By this way alone, dispute lasting a
thousand and four hundred years can be brought to an end. By so doing
Muslims can stand against the imperialism of East and West with strength
and unity.

But this very thought is a mistake. The sum of this unity is constituted
by a wrong consideration, which rather reflects a kind of Christianity
or secularism. Why at all should we separate these two offices, which is
against Quranic verse? Why at all, should it be divided like sacrificed
meat?”**[1]**

“The Holy Quran clearly says about Prophet Lut and Prophet Joseph: We
gave to them rulership and command. About Prophet Dawood, Quran says: We
gave him judgment and power of arbitration. About Prophet Sulaiman the
Holy Quran narrates his government. Likewise, about Talut too talks of
his government and that he had other distinctions. Therefore it shows
that divine prophets are founders of divine governments on the earth and
executors of divine authority.”**[2]**

“There is no denying the fact that the Prophet, besides being a ruler of
masses was ruler of people also. He was a spiritual leader as well as a
moral guide. There are verses of Quran, texts of Islam and historical
evidences that narrate that the Prophet laid the foundation of Islamic
government. He took the responsibility of all affairs as a real ruler
does. Islam obtained expansion at…teaching of constitution of monotheism
and legislating laws at the invitation for holy war and extensive
military training among masses in addition to teachings laws particular
to Jihad.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ustad Ja’far Subhani: *Rahbari-e-Ummat* (Leadership of the
nation), Pgs. 102-103  
 **[2]** Ibid. Pg. 96

The training of defense was made common among the people. Besides,
personal physical participation of the Prophet in twenty-seven battles
and appointment of captains and brigadiers for fifty-five brigades
showed the government’s face. In addition to this, it went as far as to
establish that the Prophet’s call was not only spiritual. Likewise, his
leadership was not only confined to convey divine decrees or religious
messages through advices, admonishments or preaching. His orders were
obeyed because of his capacity of a ruler and commander-in-chief of the
army. In doing thus he safeguarded his Ummah from harm of enemies and
protected the Message and Book of God from all perversions and
deviations. He stood security to execute divine laws in a human
society.**[1]** The financial system of Islam is the most obvious
evidence to prove that Islam is a complete and consummate model to run a
society. The system was complete and nothing was short in it. Every core
and corner of human field in a society has not escaped the care and
attention of the system. It attended and answered all human needs that a
society could possibly have. The way this system has chosen to attain
this goal is to enjoin people to do what is good, i.e. to bind
themselves to good. Similarly to avoid doing bad, being hurtful to self
and others is prohibited. All laws and regulations the Prophet
established show a thorough and a deep study of society. Then the
Prophet laid its foundation which swiftly took root in society.**[2]**
Apart from being political head of government, the Prophet was a
spokesman of divine or heavenly laws and a commentator expounding and
explaining contents of Quranic verses. In short, he was a coach for
God’s words and a teacher to teach the Book of God.**[3]**

The Prophet in his life held these two positions (i.e. head of the
government and conveyor of Divine Message.) After passing away of
Prophet, a vacancy arose for position of the Prophet. As such, the
Islamic society needed one to fill the position of Prophet to carry out
duties related with this position.

Now the question is to see who is qualified to take over the charge. Who
has those qualities to occupy the two vacant offices?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [In other words, the prophethood of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
and the Imamate of His Eminence Ali (a.s.) have been always together as
power of executive and the position of their Wilayat cannot be separated
from the power of executive.]  
 **[2]** Ibid. Pgs. 94-97  
 **[3]** Ibid. Pgs. 94-97

It is quite clear and hence conceivable that the job of preaching to the
people and guidance of masses to acquaint them with Divine laws; as to
what is allowed and what prohibited and to encourage the society to high
morals and demeanor befitting human beings can only be undertaken by
those who are safeguarded from sins, protected from faults and are
themselves infallible. They can control their own self. Besides,
knowledge of everything rests with them. An absolute leader of the
people cannot be otherwise. His conduct and character, his words and
deeds become a model for masses to follow. Such a one must be pious
without a margin of sin, forgetfulness, fault or error. We call this
quality Ismat; that is infallibility. At the same time, he must have
knowledge of every science. This is impossible unless God has vested his
bosom with His knowledge.**[1]**

In brief, leader of Islamic society should be well versed with
fundamentals, principles, branches and side rules and constitution of
Faith. Otherwise he cannot be a divine spokesman over the earth and
leader from God to His creatures. He cannot be, likewise, an absolute
guide without being infallible.”**[2]**

Another Criticism
-----------------

There is another point, which should not be far from sight. These
conjectures are harmful to the extent of irretrievability to framework
of Shia belief. However they put the next generation into doubt with
regard to separation of right from wrong. From another aspect, it
encourages propaganda of a thought, which can be named ‘separation of
faith from politics’.

“Islam is a compendious and complete constitution consisting of all
aspects of human life – the open and hidden ones. Islam has brought a
new system with a new thought. As it is a school of moral and
civilization at the same time, it is a social and political system.
Islam gives meaning to matter, makes the hidden apparent and obvious,
frames the next world in this world, houses the essence in a shell and
preserves seed in a pod. Deviation of Caliphate and rulership from its
original track is tantamount to make Caliphate a pod without a seed or a
shell without kernel…

So it was at this point that politics were separated from piety or being
bound to a religion. As a result, those who were heirs of Islam and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Pgs. 94-97  
 **[2]** Ibid. Pg. 98

guards of moral heritage were sidelined.**[1]** They had no say in
affairs. Those at the helm of affairs were strangers to spirit of
Islam.**[2]** They could only run the legislature apparent to the eyes.
From this one can understand the fatal hit that hurt the body of Islam.
It started the day politics were separated from faith.**[3]**

This was the greatest danger to Islamic world and to those who aspire
expansion and advancement of Islam should rely on unification of
politics and faith. These two are like spirit and body. The spirit and
body, this pulp and shell should get together with each other. Islam has
paid much care with regard to politics, rulership, holy war, political
laws and preserving the heritage of Islam. If this is separated from
this pulp, the pulp will rot while the shell will dry up…”**[4]**

The Result
----------

“The issue of Imamate from the aspect of leadership and rulership is
such: Now presently there exists an infallible exactly like the person
of the Prophet. The Prophet, at the behest by God, has introduced and
identified to us his successor. His successor is above the level of
ordinary people. As far as qualities and qualifications are concerned he
is exceptional like the Prophet. Therefore in this case there is no
question of consultation, election or committee.

In the days of the Prophet, there was nothing of these words such as:
the Prophet is only a Messenger. Divine revelation descends on him.
Responsibility of government rests with a consulting committee. People
should vote whether the Prophet must be the ruler or someone else. In
fact, the people had some other trend in their thought. In spite of
being a Prophet and being above level of a human and having a link with
unseen world of revelation nobody raised this question of an executive
of the government. Now too (after his death) there is no necessity for
such words. The Prophet had twelve successors. In their existence, there
remains no ground for election, consultation and selection.

Having had an infallible one, with knowledge of everything, who does not
mistake; rather no possibility of error can be attributed to him, should
we go after an ordinary man?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [Imams (a.s.)]  
 **[2]** [Usurpers of caliphate]  
 **[3]** [Since Saqifah]  
 **[4]** Ustad Murtuza Mutahhari: *Imamat-o-Rahbari* (Imamate and
Leadership), Pg. 31-32

The position of Ali’s Imamate was in the sense we said above that Ali
was already an Imam in the sense of the word. So naturally all by itself
leadership or administration of the government too will have to be his
lot. The Prophet had issued statements in this regard. The Prophet
described Ali’s position because the other position (Imamate) was
his…”**[1]**

Because:

“Imamate is a pillar of Shia belief. A branch of Imamate is rulership.
When an Imam is present, i.e. in existence of an infallible Imam the
right of rulership goes to no one as it was with the Prophet. In the
time of his existence, no one had the right to run the government. The
Prophet, at the command of God, had appointed Ali for Imamate. Rulership
is joined to Imamate. The necessity of Imamate is administration
also.**[2]** In some instances, the Prophet appointed Ali to
administration on the basis and standard of Imamate. The base he held
was Imamate but he said: He (Ali) is the Imam after me.”**[3]**

Therefore:

“Imamate among Shia is regarded above rulership. Rulership becomes one
of the affairs of Imamate. The explanation of Islam, the decrees and its
rulings occupy a level, which must be Infallible. It cannot be
otherwise.

We say one of the functions of the Prophet was rulership. Rulership not
from the side of people nor was it a people’s right to give him
rulership. This rulership was one, which God had bestowed on him. The
reason was that the Prophet was above human beings. In other words, he
was a teacher of divine laws and rules besides his link with the unseen
world. He had rulership over the people. Among Shias, there is another
issue. If that issue is established, rulership itself will be
established. We believe a position entailing that of prophethood. In
existence and presence of that position, rulership is itself contained
therein.

Likewise, when the Prophet was present, question of rulership was
contained within. As such when an Imam exists, of course at the level
Shias stress on, the question of rulership is clear and a settled
one.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ustad Murtuza Mutahhari: *Imamat-o-Rahbari* (Imamate and
Leadership), Pgs. 80-81  
 **[2]** [That is rulership is included among the duties of the
Imams.]  
 **[3]** Ibid. Pg. 81  
 **[4]** Ibid. Pgs. 112-113
