Preface
=======

***By: Ustad Sayyid Muhammad Dhiyabaadi  
 for the First and Second Editions***

**In His Exalted Name**

I have read this book with care and attention and found it a collection
compiled with a motive emanated from an ardent belief in the
fundamentals of Shia school, which is the only clear manifestation of
Islam. The great deal of constancy and research is much appreciable,
which is further espoused with truth, sincerity and openness in dealing
with the doubts by way of evaluation and review. Furthermore, it rises
from staunch love and affection to defend the sanctity of divinely
ordained authority of Ahle Bayt of Prophet, peace be on them.

Regretfully it is being witnessed that there are individuals having long
been fed at the widespread table of the Prophet’s Ahle Bayt who are
under mandate of reason and religion to strengthen the foundation of the
school of those sacred rays of divine throne. However, they have no
regard to the bread they have grown upon. They have weakened, rather
ruined the very pillars of Shia school disguised as if adhering to truth
and defending the sanctity of Islamic unity which is only a deceptive
show and a polite blow. Tabarra; that is distancing oneself from enemies
of the Prophet’s Ahle Bayt and despising them is one of the two
keystones of religion. They have created a question mark against it.
They claim that it is against Quran and tradition.

Sometimes according to them, the office of Imamate is a separate entity
independent from Caliphate. Sometime in principles of belief also they
have created a base and a branch. They introduce belief in Imamate as a
branch, as a subsidiary thing liable to personal jurisprudence. As such,
it does not constitute any obligation on the part of the person in event
of his denial.

Sometimes the words and deeds of Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.), in his
dealings with Caliphs is a ground to them to justify their allegation
that Ali was totally in agreement with their Caliphate.

It seems that they have not heard the painful cries of that oppressed
Imam that used to come out of his aching heart as he says:

“When Allah took the Prophet (to himself) a group of men went back on
their tracks. The ways (of misguidance) ruined them and they placed
trust in deceitful intriguers, showed consideration to other than
kinsmen, abandoned the kin whom they had been ordered to love and
shifted the building from its strong foundation and built it in other
than its (proper) place. They are the source of every shortcoming and
the door of gropers in the dark. They were moving to and fro in
amazement and lay intoxicated in the way of the people of the Pharaohs.
They were either bent on this world and taking support on it or away
from faith and removed from it.”

(Nahjul Balagha*, Faid, Sermon 150 End of Part Two*)

Attention to it is a matter of absolute necessity. Research about a true
religion is the most essential element of life for Islamic society. A
tangible proof of its salubrity and originality of being from divine
should be brought home to people. The minds of young generation should
be enlightened with regard to its principles and fundamentals as well as
to defend the precincts of its sanctity. This does not mean sedition
among groups or creating differences in thoughts of people. It is a
matter of regret that there are individuals who refrain from discussing
facts about religion and analyzing issues pertaining to beliefs and its
literature. Their excuse is to preserve unity. Those who discuss and
debate such matters perhaps are accused of sedition causing disunity and
creating crevices in a concrete block of unity. It seems that this fact
has escaped their sight. Unity appreciated by reason and religion – and
at the same time a sacred one – is unity that should be framed over the
pivot of truth rotating around truth. Otherwise it will be a unity at
wrong (supposing if it comes into being). It will be unholy unity
resulting in nothing but loss, havoc and emptiness.

It is natural first to know the truth. Then people should be invited
towards unity based on truth. This needs to undergo a discussion and
all-sided research in religion to find out what is there after truth
except losing the way and going astray.**[1]**

Now the present collection which is an output of a year-long labor of a
group of learned, believer youths and committed persons; to do justice
to it, one should say honestly that it has originated from faith and a
staunch love towards the most sacred position of divinely authorized
Guardianship (*Wilayat*) of Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.) and Ahle Bayt of
Prophet. Peace be upon them all.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Yunus 10:32

Those who are acquainted with the task of writing books know that
constancy in discourses and in scattered writings of speculators is not
easy. Grouping and collecting the doubted data from spoken words and
writings and then their orderly arrangement and classification, then to
make it coherent is not an easy job. Obvious it is as to what could be
the corrupt aftermaths begotten by a doubtful belief. They have not
allowed this to escape without replying. In this regard, they have made
full use of books of great scholars of religion and faith. Considering
all this, one should honestly acknowledge the difficulty and labor
involved in it. One cannot undergo this burden unless one is blessed
with moral impetus and love to defend the true faith.

Therefore all who love Shia faith, particularly the youths, will read
this collection with interest in order to know how conjectures and
allegations are spread which should not go without answering.

In the end, I beseech the Lord to bless the author and his colleagues
with prosperity in both the worlds and bestow upon him bounty of service
to religion in future also.

***1-10-80 (9th Shawwal 1422)***

***Sayyid Muhammad Dhiyabaadi***

By the Grace of the Almighty, this valuable book: *A Victim Lost in
Saqifah***[1]** is being published for the second time, revised and with
additional data on some parts of original text. After reading the
additional matter, I realized that it was necessary for the original
text as it completes it.

I hope for continuation of such a service to religion on the part of the
author by the grace of God.

***12-8-83 (18th Ramadan al-Mubarak 1425)***

***Sayyid Muhammad Dhiyabaadi***

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The title of this set of volumes is adapted on the work written
by Martyr Dr. Paknijad under the same title with the hope that it will
be published again after being out of print for so many years.
