Second Batch To Show Rulership of Less Value Than Imamate
=========================================================

Introduction
============

Now it is the turn to answer the second category of conjectures having
had replied the conjecture of separation of Imamate from rulership. This
conjecture too is in the same dimension with the same aim; that is to
prove existence of good terms between the Imam and Caliphs.

This conjecture can be framed in the mold of following expressions:

“The office of Guardianship vested to Ali by God and Prophet according
to texts and verses is so high that worldly offices and elected
Caliphates before it are like polluted water with a putrid stench or a
morsel that suffocates the throat or a worn out shoe or nasal liquid. It
is so worthless and of such low value.”!**[1]**

“He was in background the Prophet’s successor Waliullah (i.e. God’s
friend) and Caliph of God. His dignity and status was so high as not to
let him compete for worldly Caliphate.”!**[2]**

“Ali was the successor of the Prophet according to Quranic verses and
Prophet’s confirmations on several occasions. But his spirit was so high
that he saw the office of Caliphate too little that he himself says:
“Rulership over people to me is like polluted water with a putrid stench
or like a morsel that suffocates the throat. Ali refrained from paying
allegiance to Abu Bakr for a period. But his generous forgiving nature
made him to pay allegiance.”!**[3]**

In the last narration, it appears that the author of the article is
prone to believe that Caliphate is separate from rulership. In
accordance with this belief, he argues the worthlessness of Caliphate.
He then stresses on this point that both (Caliphate and rulership) are
undisputed rights of Ali. As he proceeds, he shows the worthlessness of
this position before the high spirit of Ali. However in any  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdul Kareem Bi-Aazaar Shirazi: *Seemai Imam-e-Muttaqeen,*
(Portrait of the Imam of the Pious), Vol. 6, Pg. 8  
 **[2]** Ibid. *Seemai Imam-e-Muttaqeen,* (Portrait of the Imam of the
Pious), Vol. 6, Pg. 12  
 **[3]** Ibid. *Mashal-e-Ittehaad* (Torch of Unity), Pg. 20

case, it does not mean that Ali overlooked the crime of usurpation of
his right or forgave the usurper, finally, there did not last peace
between him and transgressors of his right.**[1]** It is an obvious fact
that such a type of outlook towards rulership will result once more in
wrong conclusions. Such as, he willingly paid allegiance to Caliphs!

**A)** Caliphs are shown as if they were not transgressors of Ali’s
right, or they did not usurp Ali’s right to Caliphate.

**B)** Ali too did not carry any rancor against them.

**C)** He further says that peace and good terms lasted between the Imam
and Caliphs.

“He wanted rulership to serve religion and establish justice. Otherwise
he regarded rulership far lesser than the worth of his old worn-out
shoes.”!**[2]**

Criticism and Analysis
----------------------

As could be noted:

“He has brought down Imamate to rulership and administration either
deliberately or unintentionally. It should not be forgotten that such a
discussion results in scientific negligence, which cannot be accepted
besides its entailing corruption in drawing conclusions. The outcome can
be only an imaginative unity. The statement says that Imamate and
Wilayat are two aspects – one moral and the other rulership. Then
assertions are made that the first one cannot be usurped**[3]** while
the second is not so important. In the narration of the word of Ali, a
word is changed; that is Guardianship instead of rulership.
Intentionally it is changed to create a short cut towards unity.”**[4]**

Another point that should be made here is:

Caliphate and rulership are positions given by God. This furnishes a
suitable ground for guidance and perfection and prosperity of this world
and the next. It  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [He who entertains this outlook has termed the bitterness as a
enmity Ali had against the Caliph. This term is not suitable concerning
the personality of Ali. Bitterness is possible to have, but he could not
be implacable because it is not a good quality. (We shall dwell on this
subject in more detail)]  
 **[2]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Ittelaat Daily, Issue no. 26
Khordad 1379  
 **[3]** [It should not be forgotten that this is occasion for denial]  
 **[4]** Dr. Jawad Muhaddaseen: Jam-e-Jam Daily, Issue 8, Bahman 1379

drives the society towards resurrection. Such a type of rulership cannot
be worthless for Ali. If it be so, it means: Ali paid little or no
attention to his duties because it is coherent with the position God has
installed Ali in.

The office of Guardianship does not necessarily depend on rulership,
which too must be in possession. The Imam under responsibility of
Guardianship discharges his duty of guidance to people. But the fact
should be noted that rulership provides an easier ground to achieve the
goal of Guardianship to the extent of perfection that is expected by the
appearance of the present Imam.

Rulership, which they usurped from Ali, was on the ground of their
denial of Imamate and *Wilayat* of Ali. This denial gives birth to a
denial that stretches in the whole Ummah and totally forgets its turning
away from the Imam who is a door of guidance and resurrection in the
next world.

The world from the viewpoint of Ali is worthless. Likewise is rulership
that aims world. Sunnis have said thus about Caliphate. Rulership gives
meaning to Ali when he can serve the truth and justice and enable him to
eradicate wrong.

In other words, Caliphate and rulership lose their attraction to Ali
when they serve selfish motives or go astray from God’s will. Throughout
the period of three Caliphs, this type of rulership had imprinted a
sketch in the minds of people.

In fact they took rulership for granted to hoard worldly and material
gain.

It was exactly on this wrong outlook that the Ummah got tired of
injustice and partialities of Uthman. They saw no way but to turn to
Ali. So they returned to Ali.

They returned not because Ali was the person whom the Prophet had
introduced as one appointed by God to the leadership of Islamic society.
They returned because Ali was selected by companions who wanted to
establish justice. This clearly shows that they had already forgotten
the divine verse for Ali’s leadership.

The government, which Ali was called upon to form was a display of Ali’s
wisdom in executing divine orders. At the same time, the previous three
regimes also were a demonstration of their denial of Ali’s right of
Guardianship and Imamate and usurpation of his rights.

Therefore it is clear that rulership founded on such base has no value
to Ali. However Ali exerted his efforts and tried repeatedly to take
back his usurped right. This was silenced by an attack on Fatima’s
house, the only daughter of the Prophet.
