Third Alteration Aim of Eschewing Shia Teachings[1]
===================================================

Introduction
============

In Islamic literature, *Baraat* (i.e. seeking distance from the enemies
of Infallible Ahle Bayt) is side by side with *Tawalla* (i.e. being
friends with friends of Ahle Bayt). It is in the row of Imamate and
*Wilayat* of Ahle Bayt (a.s.).

*Baraat* from enemies of Ahle Bayt (a.s.) stands side by side with
Guardianship. These two depend on each other. It is a need and
necessity. *Tawalla* is in meaning of belief in Imamate and Guardianship
of Ahle Bayt (a.s.). It is a basic pillar of piety. It contains very
important and great substance in it. In the issue of *Baraat*, to be
religious or faithful cannot be possible without this.

**The foundation and root of *Tabarra* is: To entertain no good terms at
heart although at tongue you may agree with them. Who are they? They are
deviated, perverted and astray in relation to Ahle Bayt of Prophet –
adversaries of them. In conversation to show you are displeased with
them. In deed and action to be distant with them or to seek distance
from their customs, meetings, taste and religion.**

By existing or in presence of such a fundamental in faith how can it be
said with regard to Godly figures or those who are so close to God and
loved by God that they had friendly differences or had intimate conduct.
How can they be friendly though in differences or intimate with enemies
of religion of God?**[2]** On the ground that a ranking implacability
the Godly men do not have we cannot set aside or repudiate totally
*Baraat* which is one of the pillars and fundamentals. It is not a
personal matter or on personal interest. It is a God’s command, which
should be obeyed as His other obligations. In *Baraat,* there is no
selfish motive nor are there any personal tendencies. This obligation is
based on divine decree. Its pivot is enmity and love with religion of
God. We cannot  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Note: The contents in the above introduction are taken from two
valuable books: 1. *Dar Justujoo-e-Ilm-e-Deen* (In search of religious
knowledge) by Ustad Sayyid Muhammad Dhiyabaadi and 2.
*Marefat-e-Imam-e-Asr (a.t.f.s.)*, (Knowing the Imam of the Age) by Dr.
Sayyid Muhammad Bani Hashimi.  
 **[2]** Hatred and enmity is not a good quality for believers but it is
not so towards enemies of faith.

be friendly with enemies of God. Likewise, we cannot be enemies with
friends of God.

*Baraat* in no way is like worldly love and hatred. It is neither
material nor personal. It cannot be compared with human psychological
conditions, which occur daily in life of individuals.

It is only an effort to invalidate this fundamental of *Baraat* by using
unsuitable words. As it is said, the word of truth is established by
what is not true. Anyway, this fundamental is based on God’s order. From
the other side, being a religious one is possible by knowing the
guidance. To attain guidance compulsorily one should know the astray
too. One should know those who created innovations in religion.

It is also necessary to know what those innovations in religion are.
Then only can we separate faith from that which is not faith.

If we want to attain correct faith, to get a correct way of worship to
God, we should know enemies of faith. We must know their role in
deviating people from religion. And we should convey our knowledge in
this regard to others too.

In fact it is necessary to know the astray-going and perversions from
real faith. To know leaders of misguidance is necessary. Then we must
introduce them to Islamic society. By so doing we can rescue ourselves
from going wrong. We can be aloof from them, which is necessary.

Designing such discussions is a need towards researching knowledge of
religion and understanding Islamic truths. It cannot be called as an
insult, an abuse or foul language. This has been made an excuse so that
an advantage could be drawn therefrom and which is to close such
discussions once and for all. The results of such discussion are
beneficial. They want to deprive others of it.

A question that arises in the mind is that:
-------------------------------------------

Unity-seekers have stepped far beyond frontiers of political unity.
Practically they have plunged into Sunni beliefs. They have done this
for sake of Islamic Unity; and they are moving fast in that direction.
Now what are those conjectures left for them to convey or propagate that
they try to delete and rescind this fundamental of *Baraat* from Shia
teachings?

In reply it can be said:

So far whatever is said toward trend of knowledge and civilization for
creating Islamic unity and put before criticism and analysis and
evaluation, five main

pivots can be found in the thought and view of extremists among
unity-seekers. And these five pivots in the end either directly or
indirectly contradict fundamentals of *Baraat.* These five pivots are:

### A – Taking benefit of a deviated thought, silence, an excuse to maintain Islamic demeanor?

It is thus said that:

“Is it possible to insult sanctities of one milliard Muslims and at the
same time claim unity of Islam?”!**[1]**

“No logic gives way nor allows reason in our being free to insult heads
of Sunni sect using our public media and taking into service writers and
speakers.

If we aim for oneness and unity of hearts we must abolish our practice
from radio, television, meetings and gatherings and pulpits; whatever
from these platforms is said and which wounds and injures feelings of
Sunnis. Such a thing should be prohibited.”!**[2]**

“To make insults, to be brazen faced and to fabricate statements or
traditions which later can be attributed to the Prophet in vilification
of leaders of Islam and breach sanctities of Islamic personalities
respected by a milliard Muslims – is it a principle of Shia
faith?”!**[3]**

“Scolding, abusing and using foul language against those who have a
position of respect and reverence among Muslims is against decorum and
demeanor. It is an undesired, impolite and an indecent act and Imams of
Ahle Bayt (a.s.) have prohibited it.”!**[4]**

### B – To show differences between Ali and Caliphs as friendly

They say:

“Whatever passed in the early of days of Islam and whatever passed after
passing away of Prophet between Ali and reputed companions (of the
Prophet) it was certainly kind of friendly differences…”**[5]**

“What I oppose is …changing in a statement, friendly differences that
existed between Hazrat Ali (a.s.) and companions of Prophet into  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Jam-e-Jam Daily, Issue No. 10,
Bahman 1379  
 **[2]** Ibid. Interview published in Nida-e-Islam Magazine, Issue 4,
Winter 79, Pgs. 62-64  
 **[3]** Ibid. Jam-e-Jam Daily, Issue No. 8, Bahman 1379  
 **[4]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: *Payaam-e-Wahdat* (Message of
Unity), Pg. 274  
 **[5]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Jam-e-Jam Daily, Issue No. 10,
Bahman 1379

inimical differences.”!**[1]**

### C – Denial of Enmity in a sense of blame, to show relations were intimate between Ali and Caliph

Thus it is said:

“If be it compelling that our outer and inner phases should be different
and our account in relation to early days of Islam is not clear before
ourselves and God and we wish to stress on unity for the sake of
interests and we think as if there existed enmity between Ali and
Caliphs, we achieve nothing…”!**[2]**

“As far as it concerns Ali and the three Caliphs particularly to Ali, he
never behaved with his competitors inimically.”!**[3]**

“Our elders and leaders, Ali, Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman were not enemies
of each other.”!**[4]**

### D – To Show Rulership Worthless from Ali’s Viewpoint

They say:

“Ali regarded power (executive) far below a worn-out shoe; on this score
he cannot harbor avarice against Muslims.”!**[5]**

“Ali was so high that he could not entertain hatred against any on
account of an unworthy matter.”!**[6]**

“The spirit of Ali was so high that he could not yield to hate a Muslim
on ground of a worldly position.”!**[7]**

### E – Mending the Method of Shia Propaganda

They say:

“Our difficulty is in the method of our propaganda. The method that we
have to describe Shiaism is in the first place a curse to Caliphs and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Jam-e-Jam Daily, Issue No. 12, Bahman 1379  
 **[2]** Ibid. Interview published in Nida-e-Islam Magazine, Issue 4,
Winter 79, Pg. 62  
 **[3]** Ibid. Jam-e-Jam Daily, Issue No. 10, Bahman 1379  
 **[4]** Ibid. Jam-e-Jam Daily, Issue No. 12, Bahman 1379  
 **[5]** Ibid. Jam-e-Jam Daily, Issue No. 12, Bahman 1379  
 **[6]** Abdul Kareem Bi-Aazaar Shirazi: *Mashal-e-Ittehaad* (Torch of
Unity), Pg. 22  
 **[7]** Ibid. *Hambastigi-e-Mazaahib-e-Islami* (Unity of Islamic
Sects), (Preface to the 3<sup>rd</sup> Edition) Pg. 11

companions. Therefore we can never make any progress”!**[1]**

Closing Reminder
----------------

Ustad Sayyid Muhammad Dhiyabaadi writes:

“We know since the Ummah attributed by Islam and Quran, faces a joint
enemy who wants to destroy the very foundation of religion reason
dictates that the whole Ummah together with Shia and Sunni should
campaign united in one row to defend existence of religion and
themselves.

However this does not necessitate Shias to withdraw issue of Tawalla and
Baraat. These two fundamentals are like life and death of Islam with
Shias. It does not mean showing leniency to adversaries. At the stage of
argument and research, or at the stage of preaching and propaganda in
public meetings and common medias, or in position of teaching in
educational centre and training of children and youths it must be
maintained that belief of the other side should be respected. Unity must
be preserved from getting injured. True belief could be kept untold.
These are the stations where frankness and openness in speech could
prove hurtful. Hence could be refrained. The next generation regarding
the belief will remain in suspect and surmise.”**[2]**

“Very seriously, we must be mindful and closely advertent of Satan to
not mislead us. There might appear many titles such as unity,
co-ordination, respect to Islamic brotherhood and so forth. To take up
common issues and leave singular elements, which are attractive of
appearance but should not spoil the glitter of the pearl of our faith.
Special care should be taken to see that pillars of faith among young
generation might not be shaken or even destroyed. The matter of
political unity may not be turned into a unity of beliefs. And by
sorting, they could easily project the real, original and correct Islam
in two wings – Shia and Sunni – in the minds of plain-hearted people who
have no real information in the field. And both those wings are not real
and although they would introduce to them as correct and original Islam
of true and right path. Ultimately and consequently, the two main
pillars of *Baraat* and *Tawalla* will fade out and decay totally. As
such, the real Islam of Prophet Muhammad will vanish from the minds of
Shias. Islam will fall down when these basic  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Interview in ‘Haft Aasmaan’ (Seven
Skies) Magazine, Issues 9 & 10, Spring & Summer 80, Pg. 26  
 **[2]** Ustad Sayyid Muhammad Dhiyabaadi: *Dar Justujoo-e-Ilm-e-Deen*
(In search of religious knowledge), Pgs. 154-158

pillars have fallen. The eternal life of man will be exchanged at a very
low cost that is the expansion of Islam and a long stretch of its
government and political advances. All this is only fancy and
imagination.”**[1]**

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Pg. 157
