Discourse Six Deviation in the Meaning of Divinely-granted Caliphate of Ali
===========================================================================

Introduction
============

It is a sad and painful incident of deviation in Shia belief. The
purpose was Islamic unity. Political and social movement of Sayyid
Jamaluddin Asadabadi was the impetus and it was his idea that gave
beginning to utterances like:

“The difference of the names of Ali and Umar should be set aside and
attention must be directed to Caliphate.”**[1]**

Vast endeavors and extensive efforts of pupils and followers of School
of Sayyid Jamal for putting into practice his aspirations have been
silenced. It was a desire for an extensive Islamic Caliphate. Today
there is no word of it except that:

“…The system of Caliphate with Sunni sect can be a ground for oneness of
Muslims and all Muslim countries…”**[2]**

From one side followers of this thought and belief for attaining Islamic
unity under a title of only way for pacifying and appeasing Shia-Sunni
differences met with a hot welcome. This has been continuing since the
time of Mashrota until today.

With attention to Sunni School in subject of Imamate and Caliphate in
its prime stage, elements present in this school had to undergo a total
purge. The very same thoughts of Sunni School in this ground among Shias
were not common and were under a heavy criticism.

The purging elements related to this system of thought provide room for
pro-Sunni elements to creep in the folds of Shia beliefs. The
sensitiveness of Shias with regard to argument of Imamate and Caliphate
gave a hand too.

However this erroneous thought with a productive faculty of errors had
one fruit. And that was an influence of deviation in belief of Imamate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nazim-ul-Islam Kermani: *Tarikh-e-Bedaari-e-Iraniaan* (History
of Iranian Awakening), Vol. 1, Pgs. 114-115  
 **[2]** Sayyid Ahmad Mawassaqi: *Istiratazi-e-Wahdat* (Strategy of
Unity), Vol. 2, Pg. 106

This deviation gradually progressed to the extent of overturning the
meaning and sense of Imamate during the presence of infallible Imams.
Its black, dark shadow was cast on the Sun of Ghadeer and Caliphate of
Ali. It took to itself various tendencies to an extent that even today
we witness its deviation and wrong thinking in new molds and new models.

Criticism and Analysis
----------------------

A walk into the park of thought of this group of continuing ‘Imamate and
Caliphate’ and then a comparison of it with institute of Sunni
thought**[1]** in this subject takes us to elements common in the
outlooks of unity-seekers and Sunni beliefs**[2]** which are as follows:

First Conjecture: Imamate and Guardianship in Islam are only for the sake of Rulership!
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In this respect, they say:

“In the pure and noble faith of Islam the subject of Imamate is not
regarded as a part of the business to impart duties of administration,
government, political and social affairs in the administration.”!**[3]**

“Imamate is the same authority and the run of political affairs of
Islamic Ummah.”!**[4]**

“In Islam Imam means head of the government. His duties are repeatedly
mentioned.”!**[5]**

“The dispute between Shia and Sunni which has been continuing since
centuries is on the issue of rulership.”!**[6]**

“The holder of order (or the head) and the Islamic ruler means the
executors of these two verses of Quran which is the duty on the part of
Islamic governor…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** In order to learn about Sunni outlook especially regarding
Imamate and Caliphate, refer to the books *Peshwai az Nazar-e-Islam* and
*Rahbari-e-Ummat* by Ustad Ja’far Subhani.  
 **[2]** Refer: Ali Labbaf, *A Victim Lost in Saqifah*, Vol. 4, Section
2  
 **[3]** Haider Ali Qalamdaran: *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in
Islam), Vol. 1, Pg. 52  
 **[4]** Ibid. *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in Islam), Vol. 1, Pg.
51  
 **[5]** Mustafa Husaini Tabatabai: *Hukumat-e-Deeni O
Hukumat-e-Mardumi* (Government of religion and Government of people),
Pg. 2  
 **[6]** Ibid. *Hukumat-eDeeni O Hukumat-e-Mardumi* (Government of
religion and Government of people), Pg. 2

If the Islamic Governor executes an Islamic order, the title ‘the head
of affairs’ (Wali-e-Amr) can be applied to him.”!**[1]**

“The executor of Islamic rules is called ‘head of affairs
(Wali-e-Amr).”!**[2]**

Second Conjecture: Rulership in Islam is an Elected post!
---------------------------------------------------------

They say:

“The choice of appointing the ruler after passing away of Prophet is in
the hands of people. It is not even in the hand of the Prophet.”!**[3]**

“The choice of the ruler is an acknowledged right of the Ummah.”!**[4]**

“To select an Imam is a special right of the people.”!**[5]**

“The chief executive of Muslims is electoral. The qualities of this post
are specified in Quran. Muslim in each term should select one according
to these specifications.”!**[6]**

“To select ‘the head of affairs’ (Wali-e-Amr) is a fixed right of the
people. According to specifications, his duties are subsidiary. It
remains as long as Quran exists.”!**[7]**

“To maintain a Quranic government is a responsibility on all Muslims.
The ruler of Muslims is selected among them with opinion of
masses.”!**[8]**

“The issue of Caliphate is a national issue. To fix a ruler is in the
hands of the people.”!**[9]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sayyid Asadullah Meer Islami Kharqani: *Raah-e-Tajdeed-e-Azmat O
Qudrat-e-Islami* (Way to renovate the glory and power of Islam) (Preface
by Sayyid Mahmood Taliqani), Pg. 101  
 **[2]** Ibid. *Raah-e-Tajdeed-e-Azmat O Qudrat-e-Islami* (Way to
renovate the glory and power of Islam) (Preface by Sayyid Mahmood
Taliqani), Pg. 38  
 **[3]** Haider Ali Qalamdaran: *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in
Islam), Vol. 1, Pg. 129  
 **[4]** Ibid. *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in Islam), Vol. 1, Pg.
77  
 **[5]** Ibid. *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in Islam), Vol. 1, Pg.
128  
 **[6]** Sayyid Asadullah Meer Islami Kharqani: *Raah-e-Tajdeed-e-Azmat
O Qudrat-e-Islami* (Way to renovate the glory and power of Islam)
(Preface by Sayyid Mahmood Taliqani), Pg. 38  
 **[7]** Ibid. *Raah-e-Tajdeed-e-Azmat O Qudrat-e-Islami* (Way to
renovate the glory and power of Islam) (Preface by Sayyid Mahmood
Taliqani), Pg. 290  
 **[8]** Mustafa Husaini Tabatabai: Article quoted in the book
*Deen-O-Hukumat* (Religion and Rulership), Pg. 547  
 **[9]** Husain Ali Montazeri: *Mubaani-e-Fiqhi Hukumat-e-Islami*
(Translated by Mahmood

“The public opinion in an Islamic government is a basic element for
appointing the ruler.”!**[1]**

“People have a right to appoint a person who possesses conditions
befitting a ruler to the post of a guardian and vest him with
rulership.”!**[2]**

How to utilize these Conjectures to Create Deviation in the Meaning of Divinely-given Caliphate of Ali
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

So far we came to know how unity-seekers borrowed the thought from Sunni
school and how they exerted efforts toward dissipating Sunni outlook
about Imamate, Guardianship and Caliphate. We also came to know their
basic idea, which runs as follows:

“To bring down the high station of Imamate to the level of social status
of rulership and to believe it to be electoral.”!

It is obvious that this outlook is useful for creating Islamic unity and
to create a sort of coherence between the two. This idea avoids the
contrast as it overruns the right of Ali to Caliphate.

From one side we witness deviation in the sense of Caliphate, which by
the Quranic text is attributed to Ali; a deviation, which has found a
place among Shias besides giving a covering to wrong and impure idea.

This deviation has started from two conjectures, which are:

Conjecture A: Deviation in the Sense of Guardianship by Separating Imamate and Rulership
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

They say:

“We in very foundation consider infallible Imams as authority of God. We
believe them as a guide to the people. We believe them as true narrators
of God’s commandments and orders. We have faith in them as protectors of
religion from any deviation or perversion. Besides, we trust them as
true and correct interpreters of divine decrees and Quranic text and
traditions of Prophet. As such, this position is far higher than Imamate
in the sense of rulership. Of course in their presence it becomes
obligatory on the Ummah to regard them as Caliphs and rulers and to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Salawati) (Sources of Islamic jurisprudence in Islamic Government), Vol.
2, Section 4. Proof of occurrence of Caliphate by selection by people,
Pg. 299**  
 [1]** Nimatullah Salihi Najafabadi: *Hukumat-e-Salihaan* (Government of
the Righteous), Pg. 77  
 **[2]** Ibid. *Hukumat-e-Salihaan* (Government of the Righteous), Pg.
201

obey them. If they did not attain place or position of Imamate the high
office (of Imamate) is reserved and saved for them.”!**[1]**

“The position of leadership and guidance with the position of rulership
and Guardianship are two.”!**[2]**

“This matter has no relation to issue of rulership.”!**[3]**

“Prophethood and Guardianship differ from each other in their sense and
sum. Between Guardianship and Prophethood, difference is from earth to
the sky. Prophethood is in the climes of the angelic domain while
Guardianship is a social and democratic matter.”!**[4]**

Conjecture B: Deviation in the Sense of Text following Deviation in the Meaning of Imamate
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

They say:

“The manifest religion of Islam has specified certain conditions for
Imam. These conditions are necessary for guidance of people and
executing divine rules by the ruler who in the religious terms is called
Imam. The Islamic ruler should possess these conditions.

Knowledge, piety, decorum, courage, bravery and generosity are main
conditions. The Prophet, from the very start, wanted that his religion
should be established on a foundation, which could last as long the
world exists. Ali whom friends and foes acknowledged as a perfect and
most befitting person in the Ummah was introduced by the Prophet as
Imam, ruler and a model. The Prophet asked Muslims to obey him. There
are many tributes. A few can be referred here. The last of them is
Ghadeer Khumm. The Prophet declared him (Ali) as his successor and
Caliph after his death.”!**[5]**

“The biggest issue related to passing away of Prophet is his succession
as a leader of Muslims like the Prophet. This matter is very much
important particularly for people of thought and contemplation. Also it
comes much in discussion. But more than people the Prophet himself, the
great leader of Muslims, attaches much importance to it. To him it is a
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Haider Ali Qalamdaran: *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in
Islam), Vol. 1, Pg. 92  
 **[2]** Ibid. *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in Islam), Vol. 1, Pg.
156  
 **[3]** Ibid. *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in Islam), Vol. 1, Pg.
159  
 **[4]** Nimatullah Salihi Najafabadi: *Hukumat-e-Salihaan* (Government
of the Righteous), Pg. 141  
 **[5]** Haider Ali Qalamdaran: *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in
Islam), Vol. 1, Pg. 123

matter of life and death. In the matter of Caliphate, there are two very
important things. One: Whose personality could be suitable and befitting
to occupy the place of the Prophet?

The leader of Islam (the Prophet) has witnessed in the spirit of his
cousin greatness and seraphic decorum. This quality he did not see in
any of his companions whether related to him or otherwise. The genius
and extraordinary capability and the holy wars fought sincerely became
the ground for the Prophet to express his admiration for Ali in most
brilliant words and appreciating language on many occasions. He praised
Ali and showed his position to the people more magnified.”!**[1]**

“Although after passing away of Prophet, Muslims had a right to form a
consulting council. However it was also a demanding matter to give
consideration to his will in principle. If the purpose of forming a
consulting council was to fulfill God’s decree who could be other than
the Prophet himself who founded the school and brought the Message. He
had named the candidate nominated by God.

The consulting body is to execute the will. When an issue is recommended
by Prophet the task of consulting body becomes easy. The way too is
shown to the body.”!**[2]**

Result of this Manipulation
---------------------------

The divine Caliphate and the right of Ali according to the text of Quran
and rightful belief of Shia in this respect is so interpreted, on the
basis of opinion, that the right is overridden by wrong. The truth
vanished in elected Caliphate. It is reduced to a rulership fabricated
by wrong conclusions.

They say:

“There are several kinds of peoples’ governments. The leader loved by
people is the tongue of the people. Whatever he says is the word of the
heart of people and deserves to be appointed for succession. In such a
case, the will of the people is acted upon. The pleasure and
satisfaction of the people is gained. Such a selection secures peoples’
desire. The appointment of Ali in Ghadeer was such.”!**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nimatullah Salihi Najafabadi: *Majmua Maqaalaat* (Collected
Essays), Pgs. 106-110  
 **[2]** Abdul Ali Bazargan: *Shura-O-Bayat* (Consultation and
Allegiance), Pg. 82-83  
 **[3]** Nimatullah Salihi Najafabadi: *Hukumat-e-Salihaan* (Government
of the Righteous), Pg. 137
