Deviated Repercussion of These Conjectures[1]
=============================================

First Wrong Result
------------------

### Caliphate is not a Monopoly of Amirul Momineen (a.s.)!**[2]**

So they have said:

“Conditions laid down in Islam for head of affairs (Wali-e-Amr) are
briefed in this sentence. The most suitable and befitting person for the
post of a ruler must be selected.”!**[3]**

“The infallible Imams have two positions. Most important of all is they
are guides, leaders and authorities from God. They are chosen ones to
interpret and explain God’s rulings, decrees and what descended on the
Prophet.

The other one is rulership and Guardianship. It is compulsory upon the
Ummah to pay allegiance to and obey them. Since they are superior in
knowledge than all others, people must choose and obey them.”!**[4]**

“In this fact there is no doubt that Ali was the most deserving person
to succeed the Prophet. Neither Shia nor Sunni have any doubt in this
regard.”!**[5]**

“The person of Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.) was more deserving than others
for rulership. It is not in the sense that Caliphate is his belonging
nor in the sense that Caliphate is prohibited for others. But the sense
here is eligibility and the qualities – in which he stands first and
above all.”!**[6]**

Second Wrong Result
-------------------

### Caliph cannot be Exclusively Ali after the Prophet

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Attention in this regard shows why unity-seekers place their
real idea in the argument of Imamate and Caliphate (elected
government).  
 **[2]** Roots of this perverted outlook can be found in the conjecture
of ‘Obtained Imamate’ in writings of people like Dr. Ali Shariati.  
 **[3]** Nimatullah Salihi Najafabadi: *Hukumat-e-Salihaan* (Government
of the Righteous), Pg. 97  
 **[4]** Haider Ali Qalamdaran: *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in
Islam), Vol. 1, Pg. 124  
 **[5]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Aftaab-e-Yazd Daily, Issue No.
8, Khordad 1381  
 **[6]** Haider Ali Qalamdaran: *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in
Islam), Vol. 1, Pg. 146

They say:

“Rulership and Caliphate in the sense of administration, as it is said,
is his (Ali’s) right. Inspite of his acceptance it is prohibited to
others. However it is not such an important post.

Rather Caliphate and rulership is among his (Ali’s) positions. When he
is not present or he did not become Caliph another one can be made a
candidate or can be appointed.”!**[1]**

“In such a case the second obligation becomes mandatory. The formation
of Caliphate at consensus of Muhajireen and Ansaar becomes final and
legitimate.”!**[2]**

Third Wrong Result
------------------

### Usurpation of Ali’s Caliphate is no more in Question!

It is said:

“Although he (Ali) rightfully considered himself more suitable and
deserving, he did not consider others’ Caliphate infidelity or
usurpation.”!**[3]**

Fourth Wrong Result
-------------------

### Caliphate of Caliphs is not illegitimate!

Such is said:

“In selecting the Caliph through consultation, companions of Prophet
maintained rules of God and carried out Islamic regulations.”!**[4]**

“After passing away of Prophet immediately, companions of Prophet
thought about Caliphate and formed a government of religion. Thus
Caliphate of Caliphs came into being.”!**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in Islam), Vol. 1, Pg.
125  
 **[2]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Nahjul Balagha Magazine, Issues
4-5, Pg. 176  
 **[3]** Sayyid Abul Fazl Barqayi: Preface to the book
*Sharaha-e-Ittehaad* (Roads to Unity), Pg. D  
 **[4]** Haider Ali Qalamdaran: *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in
Islam),Vol. 1, Pg. 112  
 **[5]** Mustafa Husaini Tabatabai: Article quoted in the book
*Deen-O-Hukumat* (Religion and Rulership), Pg. 545

Warning:
--------

### Propagation of these Conjectures in the Name of Open-mindedness

The attraction of the name of election of the people and its resemblance
to Western democracy – the foregone conjectures have found a place in
attention of open-minded persons of the society.

Such is said:

“In accordance with sense and contents of Quranic verses and traditions
and according to words of Ali himself (which are in plenty) the owner of
rulership and the executors are people themselves. Islamic government is
a democratic or public government.”!**[1]**

“The appointment or dismissal of an Imam or head of government must take
place with choice and consultation of people…!”

According to clear texts, repeated statements and practice of Prophet
and other four personages of the cloak, government of Muslims is
government of people themselves. It is formed by their consultation. So
the Sunni brothers will have no objection.”!**[2]**

### Relation of Imamate and Caliphate from Shia Viewpoint

Ustad Murtuza Mutahhari writes in this respect:

“…an issue in the chapter of Imamate is government. In other words, what
is the status of government after the Prophet?

Is it on shoulders of people; and is it for people themselves to appoint
a government for themselves or is it on the Prophet? Whether he
appointed a ruler when he is no more?

Since recently, they design the issue in a way that it strikes to mind
the idea of Sunni sect to the effect that it appears normal and
naturally common.

The wrong framing of the issue:
-------------------------------

They frame the subject in a way as if we have a problem by name of
government. We want to see in the name of government as to what is the
government in the view of Islam?...**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Engineer Mahdi Bazargan: *Besat-O-Idiolozy* (Proclamation and
Ideology), Pg. 115  
 **[2]** Ibid. *Besat-O-Idiolozy* (Proclamation and Ideology), Pg. 148  
 **[3]** Ustad Murtuza Mutahhari: *Imamat-o-Rahbari* (Imamate and
Leadership), Pg. 67

If we pose Imamate in a plain way at the level of a government and say,
it means government, we shall see the attraction exceeds what Sunni say
and goes beyond what Shias say…**[1]**

We should not commit such a mistake to imagine a government at the very
name of Imamate. As a result the issue, let it be however plain, this
branch that has come into being should not lace it. This might occur to
us as to who should take over the charge of government. He who wants to
be a governor should he be superior to all others? Probably he who
becomes a governor could be relatively superior and not absolutely. This
is because we have treated this issue as of little importance. This is a
mistake.

Today this mistake is often repeated.

As Imamate is mentioned, our mind goes to the meaning of government.
Government is a branch – a very little side of Imamate.**[2]**

We say there is some other issue among Shias. If we fix that issue, the
question of government too is settled. We believe in a position or
office, which is immediately after prophethood or its subordination. In
the presence or existence of that office, the issue of government comes
into its fold. In other words issue of government is encompassed in
existence of Prophet. Similarly in the presence of Imam – in the sense,
which Shia says – the issue of government is itself in existence.**[3]**

The subject of Imamate itself entails prophethood. But it does not mean
that its position is far below something close to prophethood – in its
similarity. The great prophets in addition to their prophethood they had
this office of Imamate too.**[4]**

Imamate is a phenomenon of prophethood exactly to the level of
prophethood at its highest grades. It is such among Shias.**[5]**

Prophethood itself is an entity wherein exist thousands of things. The
Prophet’s existence makes Muslims needless of a ruler because he is the
ruler. Government was one of the affairs of prophethood…**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Pg. 69  
 **[2]** Ibid. Pgs. 70-71  
 **[3]** Ibid. Pg. 113  
 **[4]** Ibid. Pg. 186  
 **[5]** Ibid. Pg. 163  
 **[6]** Ibid. Pg. 162

But it was not bestowed upon him by the people. This was a right given
him by God, because he was a superior human being.

Since he was the interpreter of God’s commandments and a moral link with
the unseen world he had rulership too over the people…**[1]**

When we accept such a fact there arises no question of a ruler as long
as the Prophet exists. He has a dimension beyond a human being.
Likewise, as long as exists the Imam there arises no question as to who
is to rule…**[2]**

From Shia viewpoint, question of government is same as it was in
lifetime of Prophet. He has an exceptional government.

As the question of government does not rise in lifetime of Prophet, so
it is in lifetime of Imam. The meaning of Imam as it is in belief of
Shia, rescinds the issue of government. The issue of government is a
branch issue and a dependent one…**[3]**

Therefore we must not regard issue of Imamate simple. We should not
treat it as a worldly position.

Among Shias, Imamate is a living issue. In presence of Imam, there is no
room for other as in the case of lifetime of Prophet.

And the Prophet had appointed Ali for Imamate. He who is Imam
necessarily governs too. The Prophet has mentioned ‘rulership’ in
addition to ‘he is the Imam after me.’”**[4]**

He writes under the heading: ‘In presence of infallible there is no room
for selection’ thus:

“The subject of Imamate with regard to leadership and government is: Now
like the days of Prophet there exists an infallible. The Prophet had
appointed his successor who was not to the level of other persons
because his level was too high. And with regard to his capabilities and
standards he was exceptional like the Prophet himself. Therefore there
arises no question of consultation and selection.

In the days of the Prophet, no one said that the Prophet was a Messenger
and a recipient of divine revelation. So the government must be framed
by consultation. People should come and cast their opinion whether to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Pg. 112  
 **[2]** Ibid. Pg. 163  
 **[3]** Ibid. Pg. 147  
 **[4]** Ibid. Pg. 81

select someone else or the Prophet himself for the post of ruler. But
people thought that the Prophet is above ordinary persons and that he
has links with the world of revelation. Now after the Prophet there is
no place for these sayings. But one thing is undeniable. Having had an
infallible person purged from mistakes and perfect in earthly and
heavenly knowledge, should we go to another one instead?

Besides, Ali was an Imam. So the worldly post of leadership too will be
his lot all by itself. The Prophet has explained this aspect too. The
Prophet referred this position to Ali because Ali had the other position
also.”**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Pg. 80
