Deviation in Criticism of Ali About Caliphs
===========================================

Introduction
============

Some supporters of Islamic unity have produced a feeble analysis. They
claim thereupon that no political difference existed between Ali and
Caliphs. However in this respect they face a difficulty. This difficulty
is the strong and harsh criticism of Caliphs from Ali.**[1]** The
criticism is so strong that it rescinds all possibilities of naming it
peace or good terms or friendship.

Therefore unity-seekers attribute this attitude and criticism of Ali to
his higher morals and decorum in comparison to ability of Caliphs in
administration of government. By this analysis and their own, they have
gone so far as to forget the holy text in this respect. All these
endeavors at whatever cost, are to give credit to the plot of Saqifah.
They think that the only shortcoming of Saqifah was absence of
Ali.**[2]** To propagate this conjecture they do not refrain from laying
hands on whatever comes handy to them. Here is one:

“Is it right to say that there existed interest and opinion in the mind
of Ali which concerned him? But the fact is that he saw himself stronger
to Caliphate because he held himself and members of his family stronger
than others in running affairs of government.”!**[3]**

In fact, such an outlook acknowledges independence of one from the other
between Imamate and rulership. The outlook confirms each a separate
entity from the other.

Then on the basis of this separation, he dwells on the error of Saqifah
to select an Islamic ruler with the required qualities. In the end he
sees Ali as the deserving person for the post. Then from here Ali is
ignored and forgotten.

Therefore criticism of Ali becomes too light. It takes up a level of
complaint to the effect that one says: How this one was selected when
there was a more  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** For more information about these matters refer to book *Sahaba
Az Deedgaah-e-Nahjul Balagha* (Companions in the view of *Nahjul
Balagha*) By Dawood Ilhaami.  
 **[2]** After the death of the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) Saqifah was arranged
without consulting Ali and Abu Bakr was made the caliph. (Abdul Kareem
Bi-Aazaar Shirazi: *Mashal-e-Ittehaad* (Torch of Unity), Pg. 20  
 **[3]** Ibid. *Mashal-e-Ittehaad* (Torch of Unity), Pg. 22

deserving one?

So in this regard it is said:

“If words or opinions were exchanged in this regard it was baseless and
outside the fundamentals of these two positions. In my opinion, it is
better not to call them difference. It was only a complaint as to why
the Caliph was selected without taking his opinion or consulting
him.”!**[1]**

Criticism and Scrutiny
----------------------

Ustad Ja’far Subhani writes in this regard:

“Sunni scholars and researchers have written explanations of Nahjul
Balagha. They have scrutinized the statements of Imam Ali (a.s.) about
Caliphate one after another. They have derived this conclusion from the
whole data: The aim of Imam from his statements is to show his
eligibility, ability, quality and qualification for Caliphate without
any gap from the Prophet. With regard to relationship: the Imam enjoyed
very close ties with Prophet. With regard to learning and knowledge, the
Imam was superior to all. With regard to principles of justice,
information and principles of policies and politics: the Imam had no
peer. Likewise in matters of running a country also he was above all
companions of Prophet. For this reason, he was the befitting candidate
for Caliphate. Because elders of the Ummah had decided to choose good
instead of best. So they selected other than him; an inferior. Therefore
Imam pointed out the tyranny that took place in this respect. He had a
right to say that he was more suitable and befitting for the job.

The right which the Imam refers to goes thus: Since the day the Prophet
passed away my right was taken away from me. And I was deprived of my
own right. This is not a religious right that should have been given to
him by head of religion. But it is meant to be a natural right, which
binds each one to not give priority to an inferior when there is a
superior. In other words, in the presence of a better choice it must not
go to an inferior. The affairs or a task should rest on shoulders of one
who is more able and befitting one. Whenever if the opposite happens,
that is inspite of presence of one with more qualifications, abilities
and knowledge he is ignored and another one with less abilities and more
ignorance is chosen, it will be a natural right of his to complain about
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Salih Haeri Mazandarani: Article quoted in
*Hambastigi-e-Mazaahib-e-Islami* (Unity of Islamic Sects), Translation:
Abdul Kareem Bi-Aazaar Shirazi: Pg. 220

the tyranny done to him…”**[1]**

This matter is regarded as a research but it is not more than a thought.
We cannot translate all words of the Imam into his personal ability. And
such a personal decorum of Imam cannot be a pivot of harsh attacks on
Caliphs. Whenever the problem of leadership in Islam should be solved by
means of referendum, consultation or negotiation, one who surpasses in
all qualities the others and yet is ignored and not elected he cannot
regard himself as a rightful one or the post is his right. To withdraw
to him is a tyranny. He cannot attack bitterly those who have taken his
place. But such is not the case. We do not see such a tone in Imam’s
speeches. He considers himself the true rightful one to belong to the
post. He regards it a tyranny in him if he were to withdraw from the
arena. He considers Quraish tyrants to him and trespassers and
transgressors on his rights, can such harsh words be justified because
of his self-decorum? It is never correct to represent the criticism of
Caliphate of Caliphs as his personal demeanor. These words of the Imam
go a great deal to prove that Caliphate was his established right. The
Imam regarded deviation in behavior towards him as deviation in truth.
Such a firmness in his belief towards Caliphate cannot be but by the
text of Quran or a divine decree. Else, there is no other reason, which
could make one sure and certain to such an extent.

Such interpretations cannot be translated into a priority. Those who
interpret statements of Imam in this way are judging in advance. Their
belief rests in elected Caliphate, which is a setback to them to
evaluate words of Imam.”**[2]**

Taking into consideration such harsh criticism of Imam to Caliphs, which
was right of Imam and rightful to him – a right vested to him directly
from God, can we accept that:

“The Imam had not abused Caliphs in a fashion common among masses, but
on the contrary, he had on many occasions even praised them.”!**[3]**

Such vague and hallow claims cannot be encouraging factors to eradicate
the principle of *Baraat* and put into practice praising Caliphs?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ustad Ja’far Subhani: *Peshwayi az Nazar-e-Islam* (Leadership in
the view of Islam), Pgs. 264-265  
 **[2]** Ibid. Pgs. 265-268  
 **[3]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Ittelaat Daily, Issue No. 29,
Khordad 1379

“It will certainly be so because it crawls and creeps on a belief that
by doing so we are following Ali’s practice.”!**[1]**

Is it reasonable that the conduct of Imam which must be a model, will
praise, that too on several occasions, those who enacted Saqifah to
deprive him of God-bestowed right of Caliphate? Besides, they attacked
Zahra’s house. Beyond this they set fire to its door. As a result, his
wife miscarried and she herself later died – a death of martyrdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Ittelaat Daily, Issue No. 29, Khordad 1379
