Discourse Eight To Acknowledge the Legitimacy of Caliphs’ Government
====================================================================

Introduction
============

Ultimately, an outlook comes into being which is much pitiable. Abu
Bakr’s Caliphate is freed from the circle of usurpation of Ali that has
surrounded it for so long. Further, we give to it a total legitimacy.
Therefore we draw in red the mark of cancellation over differences
sprung from argument of Imamate and Caliphate and dispatched wholesomely
to be forgotten! Why all this? Because we do not care nor do we see
ourselves bound to maintain standard of originality and sincerity of the
idea for sake of Islamic unity.

They say:

“The issue of being a Caliph has two stages and priorities:

First priority: Adherence to holy text that embraces Caliphate and
Imamate of Ali and his family…

Second Priority: In exceptional cases or conditions such as absence of
social ground to get first priority or insurgency of masses or majority
of the people due to any reason. This gains legitimacy and comes into
effect.”!**[1]**

In other words, this wrong thinking acknowledges that:

They discarded and sidelined Caliphate, which was based on foundation of
holy texts and appointment from the side of God. Leaving this authentic
Caliphate, they go after a fake one and immediately a Caliph is chosen
by people and consultants of Emigrants and Helpers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Interview with Nahjul Balagha
Magazine, Issue No. 4-5 Pg. 176  
 (It is surprising the men in charge of Nahjul Balagha have given room
to perverted outlook of Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani in their Issues No
4 & 5 of Nahjul Balagha Magazine. We read in the beginning of essay on
Pg. 7:  
 “We shall dwell on the outlook of *Nahjul Balagha* about rulership and
leadership. We shall avoid indulging in verbal arguments and only depend
on analysis, personal conclusions and real picture.”

Therefore appointment of Caliph by Ummah takes legitimacy to itself and
becomes Islamic and gains religious dimension. As such, the elected
Caliphate becomes legitimate.

It is said:

“Certainly this very priority became effective after passing away of
Prophet…”!**[1]**

This perverted outlook tries to create Islamic unity under its
attractive heading: The Second Priority and it takes to defend Abu
Bakr’s Caliphate. They say:

“In this long argument, acceptance of two priorities in the issue of
Caliphate brings forth two outlooks. The first outlook suffices on first
priority and repudiates the second. This enfolds and enwraps repudiation
of legitimacy of Caliphate of Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman. We must admit
here that Shia mentality too is the same.

But the second outlook obliges to acknowledge legitimacy of Caliphate of
Caliphs. I insist that we in our time itself must scrutinize the matter
from this outlook.”!**[2]**

Designers of this perverted outlook are followers of the route of
Islamic unity. They invite to follow this outlook. It means acceptance
of getting effective Caliphate of consultation and its legitimacy
immediately after passing away of Prophet. They invite to this thought
and say:

“Those who are supporters of Islamic unity, closeness of sects and
inviters of nearness should know that in these days it is a necessity.
In such a circumstance as this we should follow the width and length of
this very same outlook…

If this group wants to reach by means of persistence over the first
outlook to unity, it appears impossible…”!**[3]**

Scrutiny and Criticism
----------------------

Such an attitude tries to give to the plot of hypocrite emigrants**[4]**
in Saqifah Bani  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Interview with Nahjul Balagha Magazine, Issues 4-5, Pg.
178  
 **[2]** Ibid. Interview with Nahjul Balagha Magazine, Issues 4-5, Pg.
181  
 **[3]** Ibid. Interview with Nahjul Balagha Magazine, Issues 4-5, Pg.
181  
 **[4]** Refer: Sayyid Hasan Fatemi: *Danish Nama Imam Ali* (Scholarship
of Imam Ali), Vol. 8, Article: Saqifah, Mustafa Dilshaad Tehrani.
*Miraas Raboodah,* Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Saqifah*, Yusuf Gholami: *Pas
az Ghuroob.*

Saada a reactionary feature committed in relation to second priority
about Islamic Caliphate. By so doing they could provide and furnish to
Abu Bakr a religious ground to the rulership he captured.

It was on the basis of this theory all these things took place after
disobedience of society from Caliphate of Ali, in addition to absence of
social grounds for establishment of Alawi government. In other words, it
took place after effectiveness and getting legitimacy of the second.

To justify this perverted idea we must first acknowledge the gathering
of Ansaar in Saqifah as a most distinguished factor**[1]** that wipes
out and eliminates conditions necessary to establishment of Alawi
government.

They say thus:

“The initiators in this matter are Ansaar. They (Helpers) without
pre-knowledge or any consultation gathered in Saqifah Saad Bani Saada.
In that gathering no one mentioned the name of Ali or Bani
Hashim.”!**[2]**

“In the meeting name of Ali or Bani Hashim was not mentioned. The matter
of Quranic verse or text that confirms Caliphate of Ali was overlooked
and ignored which was first priority and even ground for second priority
was prepared.”!**[3]**

Then to pretend that Emigrants present in Saqifah did not have any plan
to lay hand upon Caliphate. They witnessed the ground that was made to
usurp the right of Ali – that is Caliphate. They witnessed that Helpers
and Emigrants extended validity and legality to election of Caliph. Here
the second priority got accomplished. They took step for a legitimate
endeavor to push Abu Bakr to the seat of Caliphate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** By the same argument can be rejected the analysis of gathering
of Ansaar in Saqifah that:  
 “Ansaar were supporters of Ali (a.s.) and their aim in conglomerating
in Saqifah was to take Caliphate from Muhajireen through Saad bin Ubadah
and then transfer it to Ali (a.s.). This is not at all acceptable”!  
 **[2]** Ibid. Interview with Nahjul Balagha Magazine, Issues 4-5, Pg.
183  
 **[3]** Ibid. Interview with Nahjul Balagha Magazine, Issues 4-5, Pg.
183

They say thus:

“Paying allegiance to Abu Bakr was not a pre-prepared plot as they say
or claim.”!**[1]**

Yes, in this oblique thinking the Caliph and his supporters were
introduced as believers and committed to religious rulings and
regulations and to Islamic teachings. They were obedient to first
priority – that is they were believers in Holy Text and divine decree
about appointment of Caliph prior to the meeting.

They got the news of meeting in Saqifah Bani Saada. There the gathering
became opposed to Caliphate of Ali. Besides, there was no pre-prepared
ground necessary to get hold of Caliphate of category of the first
priority.

He participated because of his corruption to religion and his obligation
to faith. It was a gathering of mischief and corruption. He acted upon
God’s rulings and Islamic teachings and on the second priority. As such,
Abu Bakr was chosen to Caliphate.

They say:

“Abu Bakr with his past had a position among companions of Prophet that
people went to him when they turned away from Ali.”!**[2]**

Therefore the designer of this wrong thinking believes:

“Ali was deprived of grounds available to Abu Bakr.”!**[3]**

On this perverted outlook, it must be said:

Proceedings of Abu Bakr and his supporters were not a tyranny to Ali.
Abu Bakr’s Caliphate too was not illegitimate nor was it usurpation. It
took place after second priority become effective!

Thus it is said:

“Inspite of the conditions Ali has accepted its validity.”!**[4]**

“Certainly this priority was in effect after passing away of Prophet.
Ali finally agreed and paid allegiance to Caliphs. He sincerely
co-operated with them.”!**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Interview with Nahjul Balagha Magazine, Issues 4-5, Pg.
183  
 **[2]** Ibid. Interview with Nahjul Balagha Magazine, Issues 4-5, Pg.
187  
 **[3]** Ibid. Interview with Nahjul Balagha Magazine, Issues 4-5, Pg.
183  
 **[4]** Ibid. Interview with Nahjul Balagha Magazine, Issues 4-5, Pg.
176  
 **[5]** Ibid. Interview with Nahjul Balagha Magazine, Issues 4-5, Pg.
178

“Ali paid allegiance to Abu Bakr by his will. There was no compulsion
upon him. He co-operated with him in all events. Later he continued the
same with Umar. He had also praised the two.”!**[1]**

Unanswered Questions
--------------------

Designers of this theory (believers of second priority in Caliphate)
invite all unity-seekers to:

“Follow the same broad outlook; and for its evidences search in Quran or
tradition, or within lines of history.”!**[2]**

Therefore at the end of this analysis all scholars and researchers are
invited to find out scientific and committed answers to the queries as
hereunder. The answers are applied to outcome of above theory.

In fact, if the second priority in Caliphate be a religious factor or
that of faith or Islamic one; and Caliphate takes shape in event of that
getting activated, Caliphate becomes legitimate. From the other side, we
believe that both Ali and Zahra were infallible and sincerely obedient
to God. So:

**Question 1:** What was the reason in attacking Zahra’s house by the
gang of Abu Bakr? Why the sanctity of Zahra’s privacy was trespassed and
transgressed?

**Question 2:** What was the reason in the attack on the person of Zahra
and hitting and beating her physically which resulted in her miscarriage
ending in the martyrdom of Mohsin?

**Question 3:** What was the reason in tying rope around the neck of Ali
and dragging him by force to the mosque?

**Question 4:** What was the reason in Ali’s firm and strong refusal to
pay allegiance to Abu Bakr?

**Question 5:** What was the reason in Ali’s invitation to Muhajireen
and Ansaar for an armed uprising against Abu Bakr?

**Question 6:** What was the reason of bloody defense of Zahra in the
matter of extracting Ali’s allegiance for Abu Bakr?

**Question 7:** What was the reason for such heavy wrath and anguish of
Zahra against the Caliph and his associates?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Interview with Nahjul Balagha Magazine, Issues 4-5, Pg.
181  
 **[2]** Ibid. Interview with Nahjul Balagha Magazine, Issues 4-5, Pg.
181

**Question 8:** What was the reason in the early and untimely death of
Zahra in the early days of Abu Bakr’s Caliphate?

**Question 9:** What was the reason in Zahra being buried at night? What
was the reason for Caliph and his colleagues not participating in burial
ceremonies?

We leave the judgment to you; and find the conclusions yourself with the
help of impartiality, sagacity and true information and justice.

We want all interested readers to answer these questions based on
historical documents from Shia and Sunni sources. We invite them to
refer to the following sources:

*Calamities of Zahra (Vol. 2)* by Allamah Ja’far Murtuza Amili.

*The Agonies of Zahra* translation of the above book by Muhammad Sepehri

*Attack on Fatima’s house* by Shaykh Abdul Zahra Mahdi

*The Manifest proof of Zahra’s martyrdom* by Ustad Ja’far Subhani

*Disappointment in Fire* translation of the above book by Sayyid Abdul
Hasan Imrani

*Darkness of Fatima Zahra* by Shaykh Abdul Kareem Aqeeli

*Mohsin bin Fatima Zahra* by Shaykh Abdul Mohsin Qataifi

*Where is Justice? Mohsin son of the Chief of Believers* by Wafiq Saad
Amali

*Pains of Fatima* by Shaykh Abdullah Nasir

*Burning of Fatima’s house* by Shaykh Husain Ghaib Gholami

*Fire on the House of Revelation* by Sayyid Muhammad Husain Sajjad

*House on fire* by Masoodpur Aghayee

*What happened to Fatima’s house?* by Sayyid Abdul Hasan Husaini

*Martyrdom of my Mother Zahra* by Ghulam Reza Ali Khan
