Addendum Solution of Shia To Create Islamic Unity
=================================================

One of the questions that arises after criticism and analysis of
theories of Islamic unity is the query about a sincere solution and
action towards unity between Muslims of the world.

Particularly what is claimed by the movement in way of Islamic unity
together with belief in refusing legitimacy of Caliphs’ government and
showing it as usurpation. This generally seems impossible.

They say:

“This group if it wants insistence on first priority to attain unity,
generally it seems impossible.”!**[1]**

Therefore this addendum is written in such a circumstance taking into
consideration necessity of preserving every faith’s position and
refraining from disturbance to fundamentals of each faith of Islam. It
has always had been ground of confirmation on part of those who wear the
glitter of Islamic unity:

The aim by writing this short addendum is to remind about two points: It
seems that attention to these points was a key to arguments relating to
closeness. It has made the theory designers of unity needless from
coining so many other issues to maintain original discipline and
sincerity in this intellectual awakening.

So we are hopeful that these two reminders will come under the care of
those who exert efforts for Islamic unity particularly those who to
achieve this aim see themselves lenient towards beliefs and fundamentals
of Shiaism.

First Point
-----------

Whenever there arises a word about unity and its factors or setback, it
entails different views of Infallible Ahle Bayt (a.s.) of the Prophet
and those of Sunni schools in field of Imamate and Caliphate. Both
appear concomitant:

Perhaps one of the main reasons for this association could be existence
of deep distance between issues of fundamentals of thought of these two
schools. Besides, the social clash that is anticipated to come into
being by these discussions. It has drawn the attention of revivalists of
unity to subside the differences.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Interview with Nahjul Balagha
Magazine, Nos. 4-5, Pg. 181

Of course to decrease differences entails showing fundamentals of Shia
belief upside down in argument of Imamate and Caliphate! It creates a
question mark over ideas of closeness while maintaining original
standards of reality.

As is seen the worry and anxiety of this group of unity-seekers is to
raise full set of fundamentals of jurisprudence of Shia school in this
fundamental discussion so that analysis of Sunni outlook will subside
totally. There will remain no room for any anxiety or setback in the way
of unity.

We draw the attention of revivalists who sacrifice standards of
sincerity and originality for finding a way of attaining Islamic unity
to this point. Difference between fundamentals of principles of School
of Infallible Ahle Bayt and School of Caliphs in the field of Imamate
and Caliphate is basic from Shia viewpoint. It constitutes the basic
pillar of Islamic faith. But this difference according to Sunni belief
is only a side and partial difference. It comes beneath the structure to
a level of branch in practical chapter of enjoining good. They do not
regard it so important. For them it does not demand tolerating the view
of other party. Because of their belief, Shias may not become object of
attack.

This kind of Sunni outlook in relation to this issue in Islamic
teachings brings satisfaction to unity-seekers. Due to reason of a
special conception of this type of discussions, that Sunnis have there
is no ground to worry about matters that Shias produce will not disturb
unity and will not create a dispute between faiths of Islam.

Had Sunnis been adherent to their own school’s theoretical fundamentals
in this discussion, they would not have a negative outlook towards Shias
because of these differences. On the other hand some activities of
unity-seekers have become lenient to Shia fundamentals.

Therefore it can be proposed that Shias may invite to Islamic unity but
at the same time the subject of Imamate and Caliphate too should be on
agenda along with Sunni belief and thought. At the same time, they
should be committed to not show any undesired reaction or unwanted
sensitivity at any difference of beliefs. They should practically show
constraint.

In other words, one of the active and energetic ways of revival of unity
among Muslims Ummah is to make Sunnis committed to calm at argument of
Imamate and Caliphate.

As you know, there are some evidences, which we shall refer to later.
Difference in the issue of Imamate and Caliphate from Sunni viewpoint is
like

difference in jurisprudence among four faiths. They consider it at the
level of jurisprudents in comparing authority in grasping the religious
rulings or like jurisprudents of Hanafi and Shafei faiths on
authoritative grounds.

Therefore existence of such type of differences in jurisprudence among
jurisprudents of Sunni sect (all of them are in branches of faith
outside principles of their religion) gulf in unity would not occur. The
subject of Imamate and Caliphate should not meet negative reaction.
According to Sunni belief in practice too, the same attitude should be
maintained. Imamate and Caliphate too is like other subjects as one of
the side rulings and a jurisprudence branch. The differences therein
however deep should not be a pretext to create disturbance in unity. In
such a case, Sunnis from a practical commitment to their fundamentals of
thought should be open to objections in belief and behavior.

In the end, to prove that Imamate and Caliphate is a branch and side
issue from Sunni outlook we refer hereunder to few documents from Sunni
sources.

Ghazzali in his book, *Iqtisaad fil Itiqaad* (Pg. 234) says:

“Beware that viewpoint in Imamate is not among important matters and it
is not a part of sciences of reason. But it is one of the
jurisprudential issues.”

Amadi in his book, *Ghayatul Maram Fi Ilmul Kalam* (Pg. 363) says:

“Beware! To talk about Imamate is not of religious faith and not from
necessary matters unless it is an exceptional matter. Ignorance about it
is not any religious shortcoming.”

Eji in the book *Al-Mawaafiq* (Pg. 395) says:

“We regard Imamate as a branch issue. If we mention it in our book of
belief we do it by way of following our predecessors.”

Taftazani in his book, *Sharh Maqasid* (Vol. 2, Pg. 271) says:

“There is no doubt that Imamate is more suitable to be a branch of faith
because appointment of an Imam with specified qualities is *Wajib Kifai*
(an obligation sufficient if one performs it – others are
exempted).”**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** All these narrations are taken from the book, *Dar Sar
Zameen-e-Khatiraha*, (Which is text of the lecture of Ustad Ja’far
Subhani in Yarmok college).

Second Point
------------

Another argument launched by some unity-seekers, which they consider as
a block on way of Islamic unity is the Shia outlook regarding practical
application and type of executing the main element of *Baraat* in life
of faith and belief of a Shia regarding the “lack of justice of some
Prophetic companions” under the title of effects and fruits of
discussion about “Imamate and Caliphate” in Islam.

On the other hand it was supposed that such type of views would bring
forth negative reactions of Sunni sect. Therefore we witness reverse
efforts of Shia in this chapter of Shia belief.

Whatever negative stand towards Islamic unity comes into being in this
field from side of Sunni sect is against their fundamental belief in the
issue of ‘excused and paid’ of the status of a jurisprudent that is a
matter of acceptance and attention of unity-seekers.**[1]**

According to this outlook, Shia belief in argument of justice of
Prophet’s companions and *Baraat* has Quranic backing. It follows a
particular line of thought in this subject. In fact it is regarded as a
salient application of jurisprudence. Suppose if Shia might have gone
astray in this jurisprudence it should, from the Sunni viewpoint,
embrace the formula of a jurisprudent being excused.

By this way, one obstacle in way of Islamic unity is simply removed.
Therefore there is no need to reverse Shia fundamentals of neither
belief nor necessity to make Shia refrain to act on his own
jurisprudence.

In other words, one of the practical solutions for Islamic unity is to
make Sunni sect committed to honor their own belief regarding error in
jurisprudence in the face of Shia outlooks opposing their thoughts.

This solution is several times more transparent and effective than
efforts for creating a change in Shia fundamentals in these subjects.

However Imamiyah belief in these subjects is very much alive on pillars
of logic and proof of their own jurisprudence taking in view the Sunni
idea that results of jurisprudence must be respected in way of Islamic
unity. So the discussion of error in jurisprudence and a mistaken
jurisprudence is excused and is from settled principles agreeable to
School of Caliphate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: Waizzaada Khorasani: *Nida-e-Wahdat* (Call for Unity),
Pgs. 178- 180 & Pgs. 3, 27, 28, 101

Historical evidences indicate that the very first person who founded
this formula is Abu Bakr bin Abi Qahafa.

About the criminal conduct of Khalid towards Malik bin Nuwairah and his
family members he said: **‘He did Ijtihaad and made a mistake’** or
**‘He concluded and erred.’[1]**

This belief took hold among Sunni scholars and entailed the following:

Ibne Hazm (456 year) introduced Abul Ghadia who had killed Ammar Yasir
as a jurisprudent and one deserving reward from God.

Ibne Turkamani Hanafi (750 Year) became a follower of Ibne Hazm. Both of
them (Ibne Hazm and Ibne Turkamani) extolled Ibne Muljim Muradi for Imam
Ali’s (a.s.) assassination and introduced him as a jurisprudent.

Ibne Hajar (852 year) considers all opponents, adversaries and enemies
of Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.) in battles of Siffeen, Jamal and Nahrawan
as men of jurisprudence and described them as jurisprudents who erred
and ones who have one reward from God.**[2]**

Similarly, Ibne Hajar believes with regard to Muawiyah and Amr Aas about
the bloodshed that they were jurisprudents.

As *Muftis* reach their personal conclusion (i.e. *Ijtihaad*) and
sometimes two *Muftis* differ in their judgments – one says a magician
must be killed while the other does not accept it. The deeds of Muawiyah
and Amr Aas were also like this.**[3]**

If it is so the Sunni sect must look upon Shia in their judgment and
belief regarding justice of some companions and *Baraat* under formula
of *Ijtihaad;* at least they maybe regarded as erring jurisprudents that
are excused and rewarded.

Anyway, an advantage must be drawn to the benefit of avoiding reaction
and creating calm. This formula must be used towards creating nearness.
There remains no need to create a change in principles of Shia belief
and in fundamentals of Shia thought.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: Allamah Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar Afsaane*
(Abdullah Bin Saba and other legends), Vol. 1, Pg. 199 onwards  
 **[2]** Refer: Ibid. *Doo Maktab Dar Islam* (Two Schools of Islam) Vol.
2 (Outlooks of two schools about sources of Islamic legislation) Pg.
92  
 **[3]** Refer: Ibid. Pg. 105

As long as Sunnis are committed to their belief about excuse of a
jurisprudent they should not act otherwise. This will not create any
distance in Islamic unity.

Therefore as long as the Sunni sect, as a party in the differences,
believes discussions about Imamate and Caliphate as branch matters and
their belief in a jurisprudent being excused one, they accept the
mistake in jurisprudence. We must not witness their impoliteness about
treating Shia beliefs.

On the other hand Ja’fari jurisprudence is acted upon only by Shias and
it respects the sanctity of life and property of everyone who
acknowledges the oneness of God and Muhammad’s Prophethood. He is
supposed to enjoy all rights by Islam. It honors even an outward
appearance of Islam. So this peace cannot be shattered.

In Ja’fari jurisprudence, the outward appearance of Islam has validity.
It embraces all faiths of Islam under its own ruling:

Respect to life, property and conjugal ties of every Muslim though he
may be only so outwardly, are guaranteed. The meat he has slaughtered is
allowed to be eaten. Marriage with him or her is permitted. Transactions
are permitted with him. All civil rights are reserved to him such as
applying to court of law or carrying out sentence for or against him.
Details of all such ruling are present in books of religious laws. Shias
regard his judgments with respect for safety of unity.
