End Reflection On Shia Ideal of Islamic Unity in the Zahra’s Speech (s.a.)
==========================================================================

In the end we refer to some extracts of Zahra’s speech, which is famous
by the name of Fadak speech, and close our criticism and analysis:

As we all know this great lady of Islam went to the mosque to demand the
usurped rights of Ali. In the presence of Helpers and Emigrants the lady
addressed Abu Bakr and made him the target of her complaints and
anguish. She demanded Fadak from him to make his usurpation public.

Therefore she delivered a long sermon in which she sketched the only way
of avoiding differences; such as:

**“Almighty God had made following us system for community[1] (cause of
co-operation) and our leadership a barrier to disunity.” [2]**

Disturbance in outlooks of seekers of Islamic unity and their daily
increased insistence in belittling the position of Shia arguments about
Imamate and Caliphate do not carry any fruitful result to them. But it
results in forgetting the Holy text and God’s decree and deviation in
rightful Shia beliefs. To them it will give no benefit except suspicion
among Shias and a distinction to Sunnis. It is a self-indication that
the only way left open to real Islamic unity and waiving off separation
is to return to original principle and to place trust in it. Turning
back on it has brought forth disunity.

Indeed this real principle is the same Imamate and *Wilayat* of
Infallible Ahle Bayt (a.s.) of the Prophet. Ghadeer is forgotten amidst
the din of devils and the Ummah has plunged into disunity.

**Therefore Imamate of the Infallible Proof is the only pivot of
unity.**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Community is in the meaning of custom or system.  
 **[2]** Mahdi Ja’fari: *Mastoora Aaftaab-e-Sarmad,* Pgs. 158-159
quoting from Ibne Teefoor, *Balaghatun Nisa* (Eloquence of Women), Pg.
12; Jauhari: *Saqifah wa Fadak,* Pg. 98; Ibn Abi Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul
Balagha,* Vol. 16, Pg. 211  
 For the text of this sermon refer to the book of *Sadaai Fatimi Fadak,*
written by Muhammad Baqir Ansaari and Sayyid Husain Rajai
