Introduction Fundamentals of Evaluation and Criticism of Writings On Islamic Unity
==================================================================================

First Introduction:  
 Necessity of thought for Islamic unity
=======================================

We are impelled to notice a particular sort of religious thinking named
‘revival’ as we go back a recent century and look into schools of
Islamic thought.

These days revivalism is a term applied to opinions and views of many
Muslims thinkers.

Most of us are acquainted with this term without having full knowledge
of it.

If we want to simply describe this term on the basis of existing
writings in this field, we must say that contemporary tendency of
thought among Muslims aims at revival of religious system, which they
consider either of these two: Comprehension of faith or practice of
faith.

Revivalists consider revivalism a necessity towards preserving religion
in this new world.

As such, it could be said that all religious revivalists in the
beginning intellectually endeavor leaning on the belief that religion is
workable in present society. It can attend or mend basic human
difficulties, of whatever depth it be, in various dimensions. Therefore
we can depend on it or desire it since it is a need.

But how?!

An immediate question that strikes the mind is how to prove it in
practice and display worth and capability.

The real issue, from this stage onward, for this category of new
thinkers of religion shall be to reply this query:

How it is possible to raise the issue of faith once more in these days
of competition that has gripped human thought? Besides, how to face
other schools fraught with consummate ability and respond to all other
important ones of the day in a useful analysis. And this is the need.

Hence it is befitting to say that the most important efforts of new
religious thinkers can be summed up in one sentence – in the present
age, religion renovated by themselves is returned to appear on the
social stage in a status of a powerful and energetic school.

Thought of Islamic unity is related to the same category of revivalist
thoughts. Such can be understood from what in brief is told about the
endeavors of revivalists.

Therefore it has always been the point of focus of those who desire to
tread the path of revival in a way to provide a variety to the outlook.

This group of revivalists is mindful of the extent of influence of faith
in individual and social life. Dispute and the fight of religious people
and coming into being of divisions among Muslims has become a cause to
move towards Islamic unity. This practical revival guarantees a kind of
revisal in fundamentals of Muslim thought or in the outlook of Islamic
theory towards creating a change in social relations of Muslims.

It depends upon the activity of a revivalist as to its kind towards
achieving Islamic unity whether by means of a social or cultural
movement. Fundamentals of its theory shall differ accordingly.

Basically, a revivalist is a political and social activist. However he
is also an intellectual and cultural activist. He spends his revivalist
life in changing the beliefs of individuals of the society by way of
presenting theatrical views and spreading them among public.

Of course a seeker of unity too can adjust himself among various
subjects of this group and at the same time exert his efforts in society
through propaganda activities.
