a Victim Lost in Saqifah
========================

Vol. 2
======

Discourse One  
 Criticism and Investigation about Propaganda of Silence of Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
==================================================================================

Doubts Created Regarding Silence of Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
----------------------------------------------------------

Deviated analyses regarding the silence of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) can be
divided into three categories:

### First Category: Conjectures that claim ‘Letting go of Caliphate linked with consent’

One of the most important deviated consequences of this conjecture is
release of Abu Bakr’s regime from the circle of usurpation and granting
legitimacy to his Caliphate.

This partiality in the sources of Ahle Sunnat has succeeded in giving
false coverings based on ‘immediate *Bay’at*’ of His Eminence, to Abu
Bakr.

By the same argument, sometimes instead of ‘Letting go of Caliphate
linked with consent’ they talk about ‘Willful *Bay’at* of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) to Abu Bakr’ and that also in the initial period of his
Caliphate!

### Style of criticizing the first category of conjectures**[1]**

Absurd claims of ‘Willing renouncement of Caliphate’ can be reviewed on
the basis of two kinds of authentic documents:

A)  Documents indicating ‘efforts of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) in bringing
down the usurped caliphate of Abu Bakr’.

B) Documents indicating ‘Forced demand of *Bay’at’* and ‘severe
opposition of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) from accepting it’.

[Documents and sources of siege on the house of Fatima (s.a.)]

### Second Category: Conjectures that claim ‘Detachment of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) from Caliphate and overlooking it, after six months of Abu Bakr’ Caliphate’

One of the most important evil results of these doubts is forgetting the
historical documents regarding attack on the house of Fatima (s.a.).

Because in this deviated partiality that talks of the allegiance of
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) to Abu Bakr after some months they have very
cleverly put a lid on the oppressions and plots that were the highlights
of the initial period of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: Ali Labbaf: *A Victim Lost in Saqifah,* Vol. 4, Section
1, Discourse 1 and 2cc

Abu Bakr’s rule.

In the same way among the other deviated repercussions of this
conjecture is that it becomes the basis to subsequent claims of ‘good
relations of Ali and Caliphs’. This also goes a long way in making all
forget the terrible crimes committed by usurpers of Caliphate in the
initial period.

### Style of criticizing the second category of conjectures

Absurd claim of ‘gradual withdrawal of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) from
Caliphate and overlooking it’ although after passing of some months in
the Caliphate of Abu Bakr can be evaluated in the following two ways:

A)
--

Criticism and analysis of ‘False narrations about the willful allegiance
of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) to Abu Bakr after six months’.**[1]**

B)
--

Criticism and analysis of ‘Conjectures regarding the co-operation of
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) with Caliphs’.**[2]**

Third Category: Conjectures that claim ‘Absence of plan of right of Caliphate and not proving the School of Imamate’.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

These conjectures, sometimes are posed in an indirect way and under the
‘conjectures of two previous categories’ and sometimes also regarding
‘refusal to prove the Alawi Imamate and *Wilayat’*.

The aim of posing such types doubts is ‘To invite Shias to observe
silence from planning discussions related to Caliphate and Successorship
of Amirul Momineen (a.s.)’.

### Style of criticizing the third category of conjectures

Absurd claims of ‘Refusal of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) from plan of the
right of Caliphate and his remaining silent from explaining the School
of Imamate’ can be criticized on the basis of ‘debates of Amirul
Momineen Ali (a.s.)’ with support of ‘statements of His Eminence (a.s.)
in the matter of his severe struggle of having his claim recorded in
History’.**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: Ali Labbaf: *A Victim Lost in Saqifah,* Vol. 4, Section
1, Discourse 4  
 **[2]** In the discussions after this writing, we shall criticize and
investigate these objections.  
 **[3]** In addition to criticism of the conjecture “Absence of
demanding the right of Caliphate” related to the conjectures of first
type we will also refute the supposition of “Lack of

### Did Amirul Momineen (a.s.) Leave Caliphate and Overlook his Rights?

Analyses of unity-seekers regarding the political and social stances of
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) after passing away of Prophet are quite untrue
and far from reality because they have compared it to ‘silence’.

The prime aim of those who inject this suspicion about the silence is to
interpret it to effect of foregoing his right and overlooking to demand
it. They sketch in a way that the reader concludes that His Eminence
(a.s.) did not take any action against usurpation of his right. He also
impeded others to take any action in this respect.

The scope of these conjectures has spread to such an extent that they
claim:

“Caliphate was the very first issue on which Imam Ali (a.s.) maintained
silence in his attitude towards it. He did not allow anyone to make
Caliphate a ground for difference in the Ummah or utilize the situation
to their own benefit.”!**[1]**

To check and scrutinize this suspicion first it is necessary to see that
the conjecture-coiner has so misused events of history that he has
reached to this deviation:

“He did not allow anyone to make Caliphate a ground for difference”!

Study of historical events that occurred after Saqifah Bani Saada show
that:

“When Abu Sufyan became aware of the event of Saqifah. He voiced
national and racial motives and said to Ali: Extend your hand so that I
may pay allegiance to you. I swear by God if you want I will fill up
Medina with warriors and horses…Ali rejected the offer. By this he
showed that in his political school it was not correct to take advantage
of everything for the sake of aim. Ali had no doubt that the right was
his. But to reach it he did not see proper to use whatever means
possible. So understanding Abu Sufyan’s intention, he refused him. The
aim of Abu Sufyan was to create differences, corruption and battle among
Muslims. Therefore Ali terms this act of Abu Sufyan as malefic and
mischievous.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

explanation of the position of Imamate and Wilayat by Amirul Momineen
(a.s.)”**  
 [1]** Muhammad Ali Tashkhiri: Article quoted in Kayhan Farhangi, Issue
No. 184, Bahman 80, Pg. 34  
 **[2]** Jalal Darikhsha: *Mawaaze Siyasi Hazrat Ali Dar Qibal
Mukhalifeen* (Political stands of Ali against opponents), Pg. 42

This is the only case where Ali has shown his disagreement with support
expressed to him. So it seems that the suspect has based his suspicion
thereat; and makes it a proof to support the idea. In fact the reaction
of Ali was against military support of Abu Sufyan. It also was to defeat
his intention of seizing complete power or taking share for Bani
Umayyah.**[1]**

According to this analysis, the reaction of Ali cannot be attributed to
his agreement to usurpation of Caliphate.

### Correct Analysis about Ali’s reaction to Usurpation of Caliphate

Why Ali did not show negative reaction (similar to one referred) to his
friends’ support, had his purpose been silence against usurpation of his
right? If the aim of Imam Ali (a.s.) was silence what about the program
that accompanied his claim to take back his right; what would it mean?

“Ali did not accept allegiance of Abu Sufyan. On the other hand he
strongly refrained from paying allegiance to the new authority of Abu
Bakr. So he showed his rejection.”**[2]**

“Acquisition of power and uniting his friends, were his other steps.
When Bay’at of Abu Bakr took place, Ali (a.s.) began to mobilize his
friends, and in this matter he was morally and personally supported by
his wife, Fatima, the daughter of Prophet (s.a.w.s.).”**[3]**

“From this stage onwards the campaign of Ali appears more serious and
ardent. It takes to itself a special feature against the new regime. The
house of Prophet’s daughter defended him; Fatima herself came out as a
powerful support to Ali. On some cases, she takes the initiative to
express her opposition to the extent of physical brawl.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** For deeper understanding of the stance of Abu Sufyan and his
aims in this regard refer to the book, *Tahleel Neem Qarn Siayasathai
Tableeghi Amawiyaan dar Shaam,* Pgs. 48-50, by Faheema Farhamandpoor; or
the last part of the article: ‘Realism in the biography of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) and the attitude of enemies’ by Abdur Reza Khalili
printed in Jam-e-Jam Daily, Issue no. 4, Azar 1381.  
 **[2]** Jalal Darikhsha: *Mawaaze Siyasi Hazrat Ali Dar Qibal
Mukhalifeen* (Political stands of Ali against opponents), Pg. 43  
 **[3]** Asghar Qaidan: *Tahleeli Bar Mawaze Siyasi Ali Ibne Abi Talib
(a.s.)* [Research on political stands of Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.)], Pg.
83  
 **[4]** Jalal Darikhsha: *Mawaaze Siyasi Hazrat Ali Dar Qibal
Mukhalifeen* (Political stands of Ali against opponents), Pg. 44

“In order to take back his lost right Ali even invited people to pay
allegiance to him.”

Among the actions that Imam Ali (a.s.) undertook was that he and wife
kept visiting the gatherings of Ansaar and asking for their
support.”**[1]**

In order to finalize his argument on Muslim and not to leave any room to
posterity to interpret wrongly his silence as concurrence with new order
and his withdrawal willingly from his right to lead Islamic Mission, he
kept visiting the houses of Muslims in Medina. He reminded them about
the words and recommendations of Prophet concerning succession after
him. He insisted on them to give him a hand in returning Caliphate to
its real and correct tract.”**[2]**

“In the very early days when the Ummah had gone astray and perverted he
took his sons, Hasan and Husain and his wife, Fatima and kept knocking
door after door of Ansaar (Helpers). It is remarkable to mention here
that he was blamed for being too greedy for Caliphate because of his
persistence on his right, which he wanted history to record.”**[3]**

“Therefore from each step he took, it becomes evident that his uprising
was against backward movement to days of ignorance prior to
Islam.”**[4]**

“If actions of Imam (a.s.) had not been there in this regard it might
have happened that people would have doubted in his being immediate
Caliph of Prophet and the possibility would have strengthened that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) has abrogated his insistence on Caliphate
of Amirul Momineen (a.s.).”**[5]**

“He knew very well that his silence might cause the people, under the
influence of false propaganda of usurpers, to think that he was
supporting the Saqifah matter hence in order to put into record his
actual stance he broke his silence.”**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Pg. 45  
 **[2]** Ali Muhammad Meer Jalili: *Imam Ali (a.s.) wa Zamaamdaaraan*
(Imam Ali and the Rulers), Pgs. 79-80  
 **[3]** Rasool Ja’faryan: *Tarikh wa Seerah Siyasi Amir-e-Mominaan Ali
Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.)* [History and political biography of Ali (a.s.)],
Pg. 18  
 **[4]** Mustafa Dilshad Tehrani: *Meeras Rabooda* (Usurped
inheritance), Pg. 89  
 **[5]** Sayyid Hasan Fatimi: Article: Saqifah quoted in *Danish Nama
Imam Ali (a.s.),* Vol. 8, Pg. 446  
 **[6]** Hashmatullah Qambari Hamadani: *Asraar wa Asaar Saqifah Bani
Saada* (Secrets and

“In this matter the close friends of His Eminence (a.s.) cooperated with
him. And the close companions of Prophet like Abu Zar, Salman, Khalid
bin Saeed, Abu Ayyub Ansaari, Uthman bin Haneef, Baraa bin Azib – all
these gathered in the mosque. They sincerely declared their support to
Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.).”**[1]**

“They launched arguments and put forth such reasoning advocating the
right of Ali that Abu Bakr could not dare to come out of his house for
three days. Till on the third day his colleagues went to his house with
naked swords and brought him out at the point of sword. They seated him
at the pulpit of the Prophet. They threatened others by sword that no
one had a right to talk about the subject. In modern terms a censorship
was imposed.

From this point no one moved or spoke.”**[2]**

All these historical evidences show that the Imam did not leave any
stone unturned in defending Alawi School and Imamate. According to
conditions of those times, he did whatever was possible to him. He did
not sit idle to see his right usurped. But Muslims had gone somnolent
and sluggish. They stooped to wrong but did not erect their backs to
support the truth.

Historical evidences regarding his sharp debates prove this point:

“Abu Bakr in the early days of Caliphate sent the following message to
the Imam: Do comply with request of Caliph of the Prophet of Allah and
pay allegiance to him. Imam told the messenger: How soon you attribute a
lie to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.). He and his supporters know
well that Allah and His Messenger has not installed as Caliph anyone
except me.**[3]**

When they took the Imam to the Mosque he began the dialogue and asked
Abu Bakr: Did you not pay allegiance to me yesterday at the command of
the Prophet of Allah?**[4]**

Then the Imam addressed the audience in the mosque reminding them of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

relics of Saqifah Bani Saada), Pg. 85**  
 [1]** Jalal Darikhsha: *Mawaaze Siyasi Hazrat Ali Dar Qibal
Mukhalifeen* (Political stands of Ali against opponents), Pgs. 43-44  
 **[2]** Sayyid Hasan Fatimi: Article: Saqifah quoted in *Danish Nama
Imam Ali (a.s.),* Vol. 8, Pg. 458; quoted from: *Ihtijaaj Tabarsi:* Vol.
1, Pgs. 186-199  
 **[3]** Quoted from: *Kitab Sulaym Ibne Qays,* Vol. 2, Pg. 583  
 **[4]** Quoted from: Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 865

all that the Prophet had said about him. He also reminded them of the
event of Ghadeer and the Prophet’s words regarding him on that occasion.

All agreed and acknowledged Ali’s veracity. Even Abu Bakr acknowledged
having had paid allegiance to Ali.**[1]**

Zaid bin Arqam says that twelve tribal chiefs were present there who
attested the words of Imam Ali (a.s.). Gradually the argument got hotter
and a row and din arose in the Masjid. Umar feared that people will go
to Ali’s side. So he upset the gathering and people left the
mosque.**[2]**”**[3]**

These historical documents show that His Eminence (a.s.) in the most
severe conditions; that is in the time when they demanded him to pledge
allegiance to Abu Bakr under threat to his life, argued the validity of
his Caliphate and spoke in support of the School of Imamate and Alawi
Caliphate. He tried to regain his usurped position in every way.

“Ali (a.s.) always during the Caliphate of Caliphs never refrained from
expressing the matter that Caliphate was a right linked to him.”**[4]**

Ali (a.s.) did not refrain from expressing and demanding his rights and
complaining against those who had usurped it. He was very vocal about
his demands and he did not consider it to be an impediment to Muslim
unity.”**[5]**

“To think that Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) did not mention anything about
his rightfulness is a view opposed to historical reality.”**[6]**

Careful scrutiny of recorded narrations clearly shows that His Eminence
never abandoned his rights and did not overlook them at all and he never
left them to the discretion of the Caliphs and he was not at all silent
about them. Although it is a matter of regret that they have altered the
public debates of His Eminence (a.s.) that took place among the Muslims.
Thus it is said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Quoted from: Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 589  
 **[2]** Quoted from: *Ihtijaaj Tabarsi:* Vol. 1, Pgs. 185  
 **[3]** Sayyid Hasan Fatimi: Article: Saqifah quoted in *Danish Nama
Imam Ali (a.s.),* Vol. 8, Pg. 456  
 **[4]** Ustad Murtuza Mutahhari: *Seeri Dar Seerah Aimmah-e-Athaar* (A
Glance at the Life of Purified Imams), Pg. 22  
 **[5]** Ibid. Pg. 20  
 **[6]** Yusuf Gholami: *Pas az Ghuroob* (After Sunset), Pg. 191

“Indeed during the period of Caliphs, in the consultant committees and
among the special companions he debated about his rights, but he did not
do so among the general populace of Muslims! Because he feared sedition
and movement against the machinery of Caliphate and due to this in my
personal view and confessions of some researchers of the story of
Ghadeer, he remained silent about the divine right of the Wilayat of
Ahle Bayt.”!**[1]**

On the basis of this conjecture, firstly:

Obvious steps and repeated public debates of His Eminence (a.s.) are
shown to be special and private discussions; as if His Eminence (a.s.)
did not lay the foundation of awakening of the people!

Absence of an open and widespread revolt of the Imam (a.s.) and his
refraining from a large scale attack on the regime is interpreted to be
an effort for keeping the Caliphs safe!

Yes, this conjecture creates such a picture in the mind of readers that
Imam (a.s.) was never vocal in public about the divine right of his
Imamate and *Wilayat*.

Now that if continuous and repeated efforts of the Imam in creating
awareness had not been witnessed its evidence would have needed to be
obtained from somewhere else (other than silence before the usurpation
of Caliphate).

Certainly, it must be asked:

“Did the people of that time forget all that the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) had told about his cousin, Ali (a.s.)? And they were waiting
for Ali (a.s.) to remind and awaken them to honor his rights?

They detachment from Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) was not due to their
complete ignorance about the moral status of His Eminence so that on
hearing about his victimization they would wake up and rise up in his
support.

His mission was not like the proclamation of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) in the beginning that he should be in search for supporters
in his mission of spreading Islam.

In the days following the demise of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) those
who wanted made Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) their leader. They knew him as
was  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Article quoted in Kitab Naqd
Magazine, Issue No. 19, (Vol. 2), Summer 80, Pg. 21

necessary and those who followed others were not such that with a single
call of Ali for help they would rise up in his support and harness the
motives of his opposition.”

### CONCLUSION

Interpretation of silence of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) by the partiality
regarding ‘overlooking Caliphate and abandoning willingly and also
absence of his expression of his right of Caliphate’ is against
historical evidences and realities and evidences for protecting Islamic
unity cannot conceal these types of deviations in analysis of historical
events. Yet they claim:

“The Imam according to his own account held his hand and kindly let go
of his right! Because the wellbeing and benefit of the religion
necessitated his painful silence and abandoning! A right whose
eligibility was confirmed in his own view as well by others”!

“When some people usurped the absolute right of Ali Ibne Abi Talib
(a.s.), he could have risen up against them in an armed uprising, but
only for the sake of complete wellbeing of Islam and guarding the unity
and integration of Muslims and that the fresh converts do not go back to
their infidelity and the enemies of Islam may not get a chance to
benefit from the situation and that the new faith of Islam may not be
destroyed in the nascent stage, he overlooked his absolute right”!

“Ali (a.s.) for the sake of Islamic unity abandoned his own right and
that of his wife! He bore failures and hardships but in all his dealings
preferred unity and oneness of Muslims and also made his wife and sons
observe this.”!

“And in this way he renounced divine text (Nass) of his successorship,
which his friends and relatives use as proof.”!

“Inspite of being obdurate on their rights till that time, they
overlooked it.”!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Article quoted in Kitab Naqd
Magazine, Issue No. 19, (Vol. 2), Summer 80, Pg. 21
