Are Shias Obliged To Avoid Discussion On Caliphate…?
====================================================

One of the conjectures indirectly related to the conjecture of silence
is that Shias urged silence. They must restrain to debate and discuss
the subject of Caliphate and Imamate of Ali. They are expected to not
reveal usurpation of Caliphate by preceding Caliphs. Their crimes have
sought cover under a false obligation of their being secrets of progeny
of Muhammad.

As we pointed out in the first volume of this book, these conjectures
are in fact new statements of invitation to silence (and always
overlooking differences of knowledge between two schools). Answers too
in this respect are dealt with. In short, it is contradiction between
secrets of knowledge and political secrets of Ahle Bayt (a.s.).

What we want to explain here is a new point towards answering this
conjecture.

A thing, reality of which is hidden from people, is called a secret.
Accuracy or keen attention in understanding a subject results in giving
it entity of secrecy. Or foreign hands could have been at work that
resulted in pushing it into secrecy.

In any case, a reality which can be exposed is hidden from public
knowledge. When it is hidden with all proofs it becomes a secret.

In these circumstances there is no need if subjects of all proofs
(personal, external or exigency) remain concealed from the people, it is
always necessary to maintain its link with the subject matter and it
must never be separated from it.

In other words, the responsibility of maintaining this link is a subject
that is not only applicable to a secret. Because anything hidden from
people and having characteristic of a secret is not always under
necessity of remaining behind a curtain.

In fact, between to be concealed or to continue to remain concealed is
an issue that does not have a requirement. Except that there be a
necessity for it.

On the basis of this if something is secret it does not imply that it is
prohibited, therefore it is not that a secret should always continue to
be a secret.

There are many things which should be known to all, but the obstacle…!
The tyrant governments or tyrants that hold power first spread dread and
fear among people to hold them from reaching to facts. These very facts
change to secrets with passage of time.

It is obvious that not only concealing of these facts is not necessary,
rather if they could be useful in securing prosperity in the next world,
or its knowledge is a necessity for happiness in that world to keep them
secret would be fatal to us. Especially if there is a direct relation
between these facts and matters of faith or these facts help us to
separate guidance from misguidance. Therefore it is prohibited.

Now we return to matters called secrets of progeny of Muhammad. This
term is actually used for traditions in book of Sulaym Ibne Qays Hilali
and connected to incidents that occurred in the early stages of Islam
and usurpation of Caliphate and seizing of rulership after the Prophet.

Now the question is: why these facts are called secrets?

Did these incidents automatically became secrets or they were made into
secrets? Was there a special aim in keeping them secret?

In reply we say:

Those events occurred or better to say were committed in broad daylight
– seen by all, at the surface of society. Now such an open thing is
changed into a secret to protect usurpation of usurpers and to protect
their government. After every revolution, endeavors are made to hide the
tyranny that led to its success and continuity. It is treated as a crime
for the coming generations.

That this type of information is called secret is in itself proof that
it is told in tyrannical conditions and had remained far from knowledge
of common people due to pressing circumstances that dominated the
society. Besides, the narration of events had not gone from a generation
to next. So now after a lapse of so many years it would be impossible to
know those facts.

So the contents of the book of Sulaym called secrets are facts in their
reality and originality.**[1]** The tyrants that grasped Caliphate laid
hands upon these facts making them confidential so that they could reach
to anyone’s knowledge. The reader of the book of Sulaym comes across
information about Caliphs, their attitudes and their life by its root.
And it contains information that is not available anywhere else.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Referring to dictionaries like *Taj al-Uroos* and *Qamoos* it
would be known that ‘Sirr’ is not only ‘that which he hides’ it also
conveys things like ‘purity of all things’ ‘fear of all things’ etc.

Such type of confidentiality cannot be a correct interpretation of the
word ‘secrets’. Because secondly today the past tyranny is no more.

Of course there are certain points in Sulaym’s Book, which should not be
told openly because they relate to particular time and place? It will be
detrimental to make them public. The matter is such that it needs
special precaution and care. But not all matters in the book are such.

Therefore the word of ‘secrets’ should not be interpreted to keep all
the matters of the book of Sulaym confidential.

Suffocating circumstances some centuries ago ruled society and therein
were a few particular persons instrumental in this. Those restrictions
were effective at that time but how it can now be a ruling for this
present generation?

This question must be asked from those who claim:

 “This writer on the basis of all he has learnt of the biographies of
Ahle Bayt (a.s.) has narrated most narrations that caused mischief and
unrest and gives advantage to the enemies. They caused scuffles between
Shia and Sunni and Muslim bloodshed entailed. Things took the worst
turn. Dissimulation became necessary. The Impeccable Imams had to
prohibit revealing the secrets of Muhammad’s House.”**[1]**

It is thus said that only because only calling some historical
narrations as secrets does not mean that Imams have prohibited them. It
must be seen what the obligation of a Shia is? To narrate events or not,
should be decided by independent arguments. Can the word, secrets be
applied or not? The answer must be found in Islamic rulings.

Although some correct applications of it indicate the same conjecture.
However, careful attention must be paid because if secrets do not have
any detrimental consequences, it is not necessary to keep them
unrevealed.

In jurisprudence also revealing secrets has a bearing on condition of
time and place. Some conditions could be fixed and unchangeable. Some
may alter with change of time and place. Therefore decision depends upon
their nature.

Propagator of this conjecture regards every secret confidential. To him
detrimental consequences are enough to prove a secret as confidential.
Within these milestones, he is groping his way between a secret and
confidential matter. It is only to escape from narration of events which
are shameful due to their criminal characteristics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Jam-e-Jam Daily, Issue No. 10,
Bahman 1379

Even if we accept some information in early stages of Islam concerning
events of Caliphate and division of the nation thereat are secrets.
Still there remains a question if these events in their width and
breadth found in books of Sunni sect or found in documents, are they
still secrets or confidential?

There are libraries where historical books are collected, through them
bitter events that occurred in the early period of Islam can easily be
traced, hence these events can no more be secrets.

In the same way in the present age, analysis of events had become a
science. Scholars and historians trace the track of past nations. How
can Muslim historians be prohibited and restricted from reaching to root
of the causes?

If it is claimed that it is an insult to the Prophet’s House where
divine revelation descended, then what to say about the train of events
that ensued, such as setting fire to the door of the House, miscarriage
of Mohsin, threat of killing to Ali and a series of events? Should these
events not be told or recorded in history?

In reply we say: None of these events can be considered as secrets as
all are mentioned in Sunni books.

We invite our readers to the book, *Attack on Fatima’s house* by Abdul
Zahra Mahdi. He has mentioned the event in detail with documentary
proofs. The scholar has presented the events following Saqifah for
public scrutiny and judgment.

Again, oriental scholars like Wilfred Madelung have written with courage
recorded every bit of events of that early period of Islam and describes
in detail the plot of Helpers and Emigrants. (Companions of the accursed
scroll). All this is supported by documentary proofs and evidences.

“Wilfred Madelung, German orientialist, in his book,**[1]** first puts
forward the theory of Lammens**[2]** i.e. the triumvirate of power (Abu
Bakr, Umar and Abu Ubaidah Jarrah). Then he explains according to the
analysis of Caetani**[3]** that in this triangle, the inspiring element
was Umar. According to Madelung, Abu Bakr had aspired power and
undoubtedly, prior to the Prophet’s demise he had decided to be his
caliph…Therefore he was  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [Succession of His Eminence, Muhammad]  
 **[2]** [Belgian orientalist]  
 **[3]** [Italian orientalist]

determined to destroy his opponents who were Ahle Bayt of Prophet and
was waiting for an opportunity.

Further, Madelung stresses on existence of a pre-planned and
well-decided design of Abu Bakr for obtaining Caliphate. However he
thinks it was fortuitous, a matter of chance that the plot took shape in
Saqifah. Besides, he considers the help of a few from the people of
Quraish was very much efficacious which led to public
allegiance…”**[1]**

The Second caliph has admitted most confidential matters quoted in
Sulaym’s Book:

“During journey to Syria, when Umar reached the district of Shura he was
informed of an epidemic in Damascus. Umar said: If I die and Abu Ubaidah
were left alive, I would have appointed him to Caliphate. If he (Abu
Ubaidah) is dead I will make Maaz bin Jabal**[2]** a caliph.

If we keep this statement in line with episode of Saqifah it appears too
congruous with its very spirit. Because the most important persons who
supported candidacy of Abu Bakr were themselves: Umar, Abu Ubaidah
Jarrah, Salim and Maaz bin Jabal.”**[3]**

“Not only Maaz he also preferred Salim for leadership and he said: If
Salim**[4]** were alive, I would have appointed him.”**[5]**

On the basis of this except for the issues specified by Ja’fari
jurisprudence every topic that in the view of unity-seekers is to be
kept secret must be propagated if those things are mentioned in Sunni
sources or they can be traced in Sunni books. Unity-seekers cannot
prohibit making them public.

All these matters, that is about Caliphs, their identities, intentions
etc. that exist only in Shia books and records are such that their
refutation is nowhere to be  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Allamah Askari: *Saqifah,* Pgs. 11-13, Preface by Dr. Mahdi
Dashti  
 **[2]** [He was from the Ansaar - emigrants]  
 **[3]** Ali Muhammad Meer Jalili: *Imam Ali (a.s.) wa Zamaamdaaraan*
(Imam Ali and the Rulers), Pg. 58; quoting from: *Tarikh Tabari,* Vol.
4, Pg. 227  
 **[4]** [He was a Persian]  
 **[5]** Ali Muhammad Meer Jalili: *Imam Ali (a.s.) wa Zamaamdaaraan*
(Imam Ali and the Rulers), Pg. 59; quoting from: *Tarikh Tabari,* Vol.
4, Pg. 227 [The point to be noted is that the Caliph is talking of
conditions of successorship of Maaz and Salim but before that in Saqifah
he had argued on the basis of Caliphate for Quraish and overpowered the
Ansaar.]

seen in Sunni books and according to the authority of these books they
are not disproved.

Now we should see as to where dissimulation stands in our days:

In every sense, silence of Ali in having intellectual discussions based
on proofs was not to create differences nor did it carry any motive to
foment disunity. Still they say:

“Imam Sadiq recommends unity. He advises dissimulation against tyrants
in order to avoid divisions. It is especially for Shia and Sunni
brothers that they should say that Muslims must have piety, they must
practice dissimulation and refrain from creating any type of
difference.”!**[1]**

Anyway, analysis of events of early Islamic days is an urgent need for
Islamic society and our present young generation. It is also a valid
foundation of creating unity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdul Kareem Bi-Aazaar Shirazi: *Payaam-e-Taqreeb,* (Message of
Unity) Pg. 80
