Are Shias Obliged Not To Debate On Imamate?
===========================================

A you have seen, unity-seekers have always made efforts so that events
may be forgotten. They prefer that all records of deeds of usurper
Caliphs should be forgotten. Recently they have also invited to maintain
silence under the excuse of maintaining secrets and it also includes
discussions related to Imamate and *Wilayat* (Guardianship) of Ahle Bayt
(a.s.). In short, their endeavors are far reaching beyond past
conjectures. Their aim is to distort face of Imamiyah school and
extinguish lamp of Shiaism by perverting and deviating facts and
fundamentals of Alawi Guardianship i.e. *Wilayat.* They even say:

“I do not deny that there were secrets in Ali’s heart. He did not reveal
them because he did not see fit. We too should not reveal them in
emulating our Chief, Ali. He even did not tell the nearest ones. We too
must do the same.”!**[1]**

To analyze this we must first see what those secrets were, which Imam
Ali (a.s.) did not see fit to be revealed.

A glance at the article: Imam Ali (a.s.) and Unity,**[2]** shows that
these secrets, which according to this claim must not be revealed, ‘The
moral stations of the Imams; that is the splendor of their *Wilayat,*
Imamate and guidance’. Thus they say:

“To acknowledge moral stations of Imams needs time. One should cross
stages of learning and knowledge to know their position. Ali, prior and
after Caliphate, used to speak regarding it. But he did not see among
people required maturity and preparedness to reveal the secret of
Guardianship. Later he settled in Kufa. His friends and companions too
gathered there around him. Then he spoke some matters to them. Such
matters that he told were most probably for Shias. Earlier to this, no
one knew the facts except Salman, Abu Zar, Miqdad and Ammar. Before
Caliphate, a few persons knew the secrets. They were under mandate to
keep them confidential.”!**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Article quoted in Kitab Naqd
Magazine, Issue No. 19, (Vol. 2), Summer 80, Pg. 24  
 **[2]** Ibid. Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Article quoted in Kitab
Naqd Magazine, Issue No. 19, (Vol. 2), Summer 80, Pgs. 2-31  
 **[3]** Ibid. Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Article quoted in Kitab
Naqd Magazine, Issue No. 19, (Vol. 2), Summer 80, Pgs. 22-23

This claim is being made at the time when all this can be found with
evidences in Sunni books. The superiority of morals, exalted tributes
and divinely bestowed qualities of Imam Ali (a.s.) glare from pages of
Sunni books. What is so open now, is called a secret.

In the same way divine text (*Nass*) that supports the *Wilayat*
(Guardianship) and Imamate of Ali can also be found in historical
sources because history of the Message of Prophet cannot be separated
from history of propagation of his teachings.

Allamah Abdul Husain Amini; his literacy endeavors in compiling the book
of *Al-Ghadeer* are too worthy and valuable and very much useful.
Likewise, the valuable research of Indian scholar, Hamid Husain, in his
book *Abaqaat al-Anwaar* is too beneficial to a reader. Another scholar
in this field, Qadi Nurullah Shushtari has also exerted efforts in
compiling realities in his book *Ihqaaq al-Haqq.* Later on Allamah
Sayyid Abdul Husain Sharafuddin compiled a book titled *Al-Murajaat.*
The documentary evidences and facts collected and compiled in these
books clearly establish rights and moral stations of Ali and the Imams.
That which makes these books more trustworthy is that all sources are
from opponents of Shia School. Books of those who do not see eye to eye
with Shia School are full of material, which stands a ground to defend
Shia belief. As such this material is and never was confidential.

If Imam Ali (a.s.) did not reveal the matter, it was because he was not
under a mandate to do so. Taking into consideration twenty-three years
of Prophet’s labor from the day of announcement of his Mission to
Ghadeer, Ali was mandated to preserve the message. Muslim society had
attained maturity to the extent of sufficiency.

Therefore the Imam only exhausted the argument on the deniers and warned
the negligent ones and he had no other purpose. Because secondly, in
this matter, the Islamic Ummah is one that has the responsibility to
refer to the Imam and Divine Proof (Hujjat).

There is thus no reason to argue its being confidential. This itself is
enough proof of existence of pressure, which had crushed liberties in
society. Imam Ali (a.s.) could have done more had he been free. He did
not tell because he could not. That Caliphs ruled with tyranny can well
be understood by the very behavior of Imam Ali (a.s.).

The Prophet had conveyed to the nation all aspects of guidance and
attributes of Ali. What Ali should and could have said when the Prophet
had told everything?

If the moral position of Ali be regarded as a secret, does it not crawl
into oblivion? Will it not put the Message of Prophet to question?

There remains nothing unknown to Muslim society, which Shia cannot find
in Sunni books.

### Another point

Inspite of clear contradictions in the above-mentioned claim they make
another:

“Imam instead of stressing on the Caliphate of Ahle Bayt, has emphasized
on their knowledge, intelligence and their scientific and spiritual
centrality.”!**[1]**

And the emphasis of this view of unity-seekers to continue this
attitude. Thus it is said:

“Difference between the issue of Caliphate and Imamate is a strong
pillar of nearness.”**[2]**

The question is:

What is the motive of these contradictory statements?

The reply can be:

According to their thinking, the moral stations of Ahle Bayt (a.s.) are
such that they can make their audiences conclude that the personal right
of Imam Ali (a.s.) was usurped and pillaged by three Caliphs. The Imam
was deprived of right of Caliphate that God had bestowed on him.
Caliphate was his heritage.

In the view of these people, whenever there was discussion of the moral
stations of Ahle Bayt (a.s.), invariably there was also mention of the
usurpation of personal rights of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) through the
Caliphs, secondly these issues should be considered as the hidden
secrets?!

Therefore they treat it a secret in order not to talk about it. The
word, secret is a good excuse and a covering on crimes of Caliphs. Their
Caliphate loses its  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Article quoted in Kitab Naqd
Magazine, Issue No. 19, (Vol. 2), Summer 80, Pg. 22  
 **[2]** Ibid. Article quoted in *Kitab-e-Wahdat*, Pg. 256

validity and credibility if facts were broached that it was Ali’s right.
There is no way to conceal except to maintain silence. Secrets are not
to be revealed. Hence such things should be ignored and gradually they
would disappear from the root.

“These statements should not be considered as defense of personal
rights…”**[1]**

They say:

“As for issues related to Caliphate there is much material in history
and tradition on behalf of Ali in addition to narrations of Ali. This
has not been evaluated from literary standard or according to Imam’s
standard or motive. If evaluated they will not correspond with the
attitude of Ali or Caliphs.

If we keep this as a base to judge the authenticity of these statements
we will see, mostly they are from the book of Sulaym bin Qays. Hence
they do not carry any authenticity”!**[2]**

Now it should be asked: Let us see how the Imam’s conduct towards
Caliphs was. And from where this should commence?

To make a correct judgment about any historical personality is there any
other way except that the facts must be drawn from history or a reliable
source?

Please pay attention: For a personality like Imam Ali (a.s.), regarding
his relations with Caliphate and Caliphs we must refer to narrations and
information recorded in books of History.**[3]**

Therefore it will not be logical that without referring to historical
sources we only base our analysis on personal whims as far as the Imam’s
attitude is concerned. And then make it the base and standard of
correctness or incorrectness of historical evidences and narrations
regarding the attitudes of His Eminence (a.s.) towards the Caliphs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Article quoted in Kitab Naqd Magazine, Issue No. 19, (Vol.
2), Summer 80, Pg. 21  
 **[2]** Ibid. Article quoted in Kitab Naqd Magazine, Issue No. 19,
(Vol. 2), Summer 80, Pg. 23  
 **[3]** Although that which confirms the correctness of these
traditions is the special tenor of these narrations mentioned in books
related to this subject but it shall be applicable to these narrations
only.

In other words, exposing the biographical details of Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) with regard to his relationship with Caliphate or Caliphs is
possible from analysis of captioned issues in history and traditions and
in consequence of referring to these narration reports and sayings. Now
how can these fruits and results be falsified on the basis of a standard
drawn from some other sources?

This standard is invalid and its application is not aimed except to put
a lid on the misdeeds of the usurpers of the rights of Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) and abuses against the Caliphs. Because every investigation has
demonstrated that understanding the attitude of Ali by referring to
History and narration reports related to their behavior has referred to
these sources, so talking about the behavior of Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
in every matter will be meaningless.

From where have they arrived at the claim that Imam (a.s.) refrained
from emphasis on the usurpation of his rights at the hands of Caliphs
that they should make it a reliable standard and scientific aspect to
question the information contained in Shia History and hadith books?!

There is no other aim in this except to make interpretations based on
ones personal whims to support their own claims and to refute what is in
opposition to their views.

In fact in such a manner one is not in pursuit of finding the reality;
one only endeavors to present that which one has accepted to be reality
and which one has preferred through some selected evidences and
rejection of all other sources.
