Was Ali Given a Governmental Responsibility During the Tenure of the Caliphs?
=============================================================================

After this investigation the only thing that is in need of analysis and
interpretation is the claim that:

“During the period of Umar’s Caliphate whenever he left Medina, Ali was
his deputy. He took the charge of affairs until his return.”**[1]**

Reply to this conjecture can be divided into two parts:

Part A: Analysis of Acceptance of Responsibility for Some Particular Instances
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

“According to Sunni sources there are only three occasions when Ali was
appointed in place of Umar in Medina. He took the office and ran the
affairs as he administered the country. Indeed, it does not seem
probable that Ali should have accepted. How can he accept from one who
had usurped Caliphate from him and he (Ali) had repeatedly stressed upon
his superiority and competency to the job?

Such claims need to be investigated first. Why such a case is not
referred to by any Shia historian?

It could be possible that Ali could have taken charge of judicial
affairs not political or administrative ones…”**[2]**

“Shia books do not stress upon Ali’s deputation by Umar.

It appears that Ali, during the office of Umar, could have attended
affairs of people and handled matters of justice.”**[3]**

“However the fundamental question is: Why at all Ali should accept to be
deputy of Umar or his substitute? On the other hand Ali never agreed or
saw any legality in Umar’s Caliphate. It was a thing that never belonged
to him (Umar). Then he undergoes to be his deputy, to be his substitute.
Why?

The answer lies in Tabari’s and Ibne Athir’s comments, which are
congruous with Shia beliefs. As the very Caliphate of Umar from the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Barfi: *Seemai Ali Az Manzar Ahle Sunnat* (Portrait of
Ali from the Sunni point of view), [1<sup>st</sup> Edition 1380], Pg.
110  
 **[2]** Asghar Qaidan: *Tahleeli Bar Mawaze Siyasi Ali Ibne Abi Talib
(a.s.)* [Research on political stands of Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.)],
Pgs. 123-124  
 **[3]** Yusuf Gholami: *Pas az Ghuroob* (After Sunset), Pg. 282

viewpoint of Ali was short of legitimacy and lacked legal status the
posts (if) given to others would also be illegal.

Thus on the basis of this acceptance of these responsibilities in fact
would be hindering the qualified ones to get them. Because if in case
posts are given to non-qualified persons it would be against divine will
and Islamic values and Ali knew better than to have the power to oppose
these illegalities to do thus; thus His Eminence (a.s.) is not someone
who sees illegal matters and does nothing about it.”**[1]**

Part B: Surrendering Responsibility to Ali in Some Particular Items
-------------------------------------------------------------------

“During this period Ali was isolated from political arena. He did not
occupy any post in Abu Bakr’s Caliphate. In Umar’s Caliphate, also he
did the same. He did not even accept the post of commander for invading
Iran.

The only exceptional case was when Umar had to leave for Palestine and
he took with him senior companions of Prophet to help him in
requirements of victory and success, while Ali’s had the responsibility
of administration of Medina.

Although it is worth mention that Umar was strongly against Bani Hashim
leaving Medina. He feared they would form groups in other areas and
stage an uprising against his Caliphate.”**[2]**

The output of the policy of Second Caliph is surprising. He appointed
Ali on three occasions in his place as his successor and does not
appoint him in the six-person committee?!!

What was his aim in surrendering this responsibility to Amirul Momineen?

To comprehend the nature of relations of Caliphs’ government with Ali we
refer to one more case:

“When Muhammad son of Abu Bakr wrote to Muawiyah censuring him for his
disobedience to Imam Ali (a.s.). Muawiyah in reply wrote to him that he
had only followed the first two rulers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdullah Khanaqli Hamadani: *Siyasat Imam Ali-o-Hasnain Dar
Raabita Ba Hukoomat-o-Futuhaat Kholafa,* Pg. 101  
 **[2]** Jalal Darikhsha: *Mawaaze Siyasi Hazrat Ali Dar Qibal
Mukhalifeen* (Political stands of Ali against opponents), Pg. 54

Muawiyah added that those two persons did not intimate him in their
confidential matters nor did they open way to him to share with them in
affairs…”**[1]**

This shows that Caliphs did not want Ali to take any part in their
affairs. Likewise they were not desirous of his advice. Whenever they
sought his advice there was some other motive in it. Their motive in
anyway was not in the interest of Islam or Islamic unity.

While they claim:

“Mutual relations between Ali and three Caliphs were towards preserving
Islamic unity and the very seed of Islam itself.”**[2]**

Our endeavors in analysis of the relations are with the motive to
understand the aim of Ali and the aim of Caliphs. Especially with regard
to co-operation of His Eminence (a.s.) in administrative and
governmental affairs, which shall be explained and interpreted, so that
the respected readers will see the difference between the aims of two
sides. The outlook of Imam Ali (a.s.) leads the reader to the root of
the policy Caliphs held according to the demand of the occasion. But
they overlook it and say:

“Until Muawiyah came to power, the successor of Prophet of God, Ali,
adopted a policy of patience, tolerance, vigilance. His attitude with
three Caliphs was friendly and co-operative. This resulted in good
manners, good behavior and good conduct among Muslims. Inspite of
criticism and censure expressed by Imam Ali (a.s.) which were due to
honesty, good manners and Islamic promise.”!**[3]**

Yes! Good demeanor and decorum, Islamic commitments and good manners
formed the ground of cooperation of Imam Ali (a.s.) with the three
Caliphs. Whether the requests of Caliphs and their proposals too were
based on same ground?

Let History answer:

“Caliphs’ government was very much in anticipation from Imam Ali (a.s.).
For instance, as he finally paid allegiance**[4]** to Abu Bakr he was  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Yusuf Gholami: *Pas az Ghuroob* (After Sunset), Pgs. 136-137;
quoting from: *Muruj az-Zahab,* Vol. 3, Pgs. 21-22; *Ansaab al-Ashraaf,*
Vol. 2, Pg. 31 & Pgs. 393-397  
 **[2]** Sayyid Ahmad Mawassaqi: *Istiratazi-e-Wahdat* (Strategy of
Unity), Vol. 1, Pg. 120  
 **[3]** Ibid. *Istiratazi-e-Wahdat* (Strategy of Unity), Vol. 1, Pg.
120  
 **[4]** [Regarding *Bayyat,* Refer: Ali Labbaf: *A Victim Lost in
Saqifah,* Vol. 4, Section 1]

expected to give up or forego the demand for his right to Caliphate.
Moreover, he was expected to be seen with sword in his hand to fight
whoever opposed the Caliphs.

But the Imam rejected this request. Such an attitude and position of
Imam was natural to impel the government to make him more humiliated in
the view of people. This policy was able to isolate the Imam more and
more.”**[1]**

In the same way:

“Among the complaints of Imam about the Caliphs was that they led a
campaign to belittle the personality of Imam, which was highest and most
respected one in the view of people during the days of Prophet.”**[2]**

Now when such is the case how can it be claimed that:

“That which this writer has claimed and proved is that there existed
friendly relations between Hazrat Ali (a.s.) and the Caliphs.”!**[3]**

Some examples of politics of belittling Amirul Momineen (a.s.) are as
follows:

“Umar in order to belittle Ali accorded more respect to Ibne Abbas. It
was a policy so that Ibne Abbas may narrate traditions and give Tafseer
of Quran.”**[4]**

“When Umar appointed the six-person committee he blamed each of them
with a defect. He blamed Ali that he was a man having excess
humor.”**[5]**

In short:

“The two Caliphs had assassinated the character of Ali among people and
assassinated his personality.”**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The author of *Pas az-Ghuroob* writes: Even though the *Bayyat* of Ali
Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) was effective in mobilizing forces it is also not
unlikely that the Caliph made the attack a pretext to obtain the support
of His Eminence.” (Yusuf Gholami: *Pas az Ghuroob*, Pg. 171)**  
 [1]** Rasool Ja’faryan: *Hayat-e-Fikri O Siyasi-e-Imamaan-e-Shia*
(Intellectual and Political Life of Shia Imams), Pg. 53  
 **[2]** Ali Muhammad Meer Jalili: *Imam Ali (a.s.) wa Zamaamdaaraan*
(Imam Ali and the Rulers), Pgs. 105-106  
 **[3]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Aftaab-e-Yazd Daily, Issue No.
8, Khordad 1381  
 **[4]** Allamah Askari: *Saqifah,* Pg. 73  
 **[5]** Rasool Ja’faryan: *Tarikh wa Seerah Siyasi Amir-e-Mominaan Ali
Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.)* [History and political biography of Ali (a.s.)],
Pg. 14  
 **[6]** Ibid. Pg. 15

“Jundab bin Abdullah says: After swearing allegiance to Uthman I went to
Iraq. There I used to narrate the attributes of Ali to people. The best
reply that I got from the people was this: Leave these words. Think of
something that may benefit you.

I answered them: These things are beneficial to both you and me. But the
people on hearing this got up and dispersed.”**[1]**

“In a society of Muslims, Imam was forgotten. Therefore it was for this
reason that Imam during his Caliphate reminded people of his station,
services and the battles he fought and won for the sake of Islam, his
nearness and relationship with Prophet.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Pgs. 14-15  
 **[2]** Ibid. Pg. 16
