Second Introduction: Valuable Standards of Worksheet of the Thought of Islamic Unity
====================================================================================

A perusal of various indicators of Islamic unity shows that advocates of
this theory have utilized different methods for its achievement. Several
methods, including occasionally contradictory ones, have found room in
the worksheet of revivalists.

Exact knowledge of each of these methods is very much important. Type of
practice in behavior and action is more useful than directing the belief
of individuals and more important than seeking unity.

As we said, thought of Islamic unity is similar to that of revivalism.
Therefore it follows the governing principles.

Hence it seems natural that we too, as a Shia analysts, should consider
Islamic unity subordinate to principles and regulations pertaining to
revivalism and standards of critical evaluation. Accordingly we must be
able to evaluate these values.

In a critical evaluation of Islamic unity, we must treat each indicator
independently. We must take the grounds of evaluation of worksheet of
revivalism into consideration and set it for evaluation.

From here onward, we shall try to comment in brief about these standards
and state our position.

Revivalists in their intellectual endeavors should maintain two
important and fundamental rules because of their claim in this respect.
A revivalist in the run of his activities is liable to observe:

***First rule: ability and forwardness***

***Second rule: originality and sincerity***

Though these two rules form the whole, yet through this whole itself
difference is apt to appear. This makes the trend of criticism rather
difficult. On the other hand it can be said that through Shia viewpoint
in the whole history of revivalism these two real bases give ground to
criticism and explanation. A revivalist cannot overlook the deep peeping
eye of a critic of Shia society nor be indifferent towards the inquiry
regarding the extent of consideration of the rule touching originality.

Because every religious thinker at least in a position of claim is
willing to show that his religious thought is pristine and based on
original teachings of religion and pure from irreligious conjectures or
unauthentic additions. And on the other hand he wishes to attain a
strong platform among religions and a stronghold enabling him to answer
problems.

Therefore in the trend of revivalism these two distinguishing indicators
should be pursued and sought.

In this analysis whatever we Shias employ under the title of standard of
scaling originality and sincerity it is either in accordance with
teachings of Quran or Prophet’s Ahle Bayt; in other words beliefs that
govern the Shiite school; because the real and true Islam is reflected
in teachings of this school alone.

We, Shias, believe on the basis of teachings of the Prophet.

Whoever wants to lay his hand on religious literature or know about
teachings of Islam must refer to Ahle Bayt (a.s.) after the Prophet.
There is no source at all to focus the light of truth of this religion
except by direct contact with Prophet’s progeny through their teachings.

Any knowledge by name of religion of Islam, or on the whole any thought
not supported by teachings of Prophet’s Ahle Bayt, in the end is doomed
to deviation and destined to go astray. Ahle Bayt of Prophet are the
only origins to obtain therefrom true knowledge of Islam. Besides, they
are the only source to know a thought or a theory as to its being a
religious one or in line with teachings of Shia school.**[1]** This is
the only way of obtaining religious knowledge, which is knowledge of
guidance. This is the only way to trust in correctness of thoughts on
display in the name of religion.

Without any doubt, the very root of learnings of true religion is
contained in teachings of Ahle Bayt of Prophet. If any knowledge or
information with the label of Islam does not happen to be in line with
their teachings, every certitude of it is wrong; it is a waste and
rescinded.

Accordingly if a word about Islamic unity is put in, it should be based
on very religion itself. In other words, it should originate from real
teachers of religion; that is Ahle Bayt of Prophet. It must be so
according to Shia belief. When this stage is still in dispute and the
standard of sincerity and rule towards its  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Shia school stands for the same teachings of Quran and Prophet’s
progeny. It does necessarily include all the views of Shia thinkers.

achievement is yet unsettled, to enter into another theory; that is
activities of revivalism, seems out of place and to no end.

In this criticism and analysis, the standard of truth is the wholesome
and absolute application of thoughts without least leniency or a bent
towards Shiaism or beliefs contained therein though this school is
absolute truth.

The smallest slip or an overlook in application of thoughts of unity
with fundamentals of Ja’fari Shiaism of twelve Imams has brought forward
the ground that renders short the standard of originality and sincerity.
This has further rendered the thought irreligious and without backing of
Islam. No saying goes if there had been any deliberate amendment or
departure from the basis of this school.

Although we have great respect for those who possess opinion and have
moral duty towards critics and analysts, we never give sanction to
ourselves to overlook truth or ignore the right being trespassed. In no
condition and in no case we shall fall short. We have no right to do so.
It does not serve as a platform to reach agreements thereupon for the
sake of our or others’ interests.

The absolute truth belongs to Ahle Bayt of Prophet. It is found in their
persons and rests with them. Therefore if we entertain any kind of
thought or conjecture in the name of religion, which is not in
accordance with this school, it is as though we have trampled truth and
rightfulness, which is their concern and tribute, belonging to them
alone.

Shias are after originality and sincerity of thought when they confront
Muslim revivalism. They are also after the ability or strength in this
regard. They believe if they sacrifice one for the sake of other, it
will certainly result in shortage. One will lack the other. It will be
an incomplete and unconsummated thought. In other words, we are taking
refuge in an irreligious conjecture.

Ability or strength alone is not the concern of Shias. Sincerity in
religious intention too is necessary. The excessive desire, on the part
of newcomers to this thought, to exhibit strength could spoil sincerity
and diminish its originality. Likewise, to create strength they might
commit some additions to religion, which the true Islam is pure and
purged of. As such, the brushstrokes they would apply could reduce
elegance of real Islam or effect unwanted and undesired additions
thereon making ugly the beautiful. Wrong feeding in a long run will
result in the school losing its very entity. Such will be the
consequence of revivalism taking to itself the twists and turns of
deviation of belief.

Creating ability without sincerity and pristine originality shall result
into a constant fear – not only in issue of Islamic unity but throughout
the varieties of revivalism.

The output of revivalists must be a faith. Under pretext of revivalism,
faith or religion should not be substituted by some other thought or
conjecture.

First and foremost, sincerity and originality must be safeguarded in
revivalism. Therefore the basic difficulty in confronting any type of
revivalist thought is the religion to support these thoughts. Without
purity and originality there will be confusion. This will be the case
with all aspects of revivalism beyond Islamic unity.

To what extent these outlooks have been able to protect the real pillars
of religion, remains to be seen. Further, originality of religion must
be in association with it so that Shias could take it in account of
religious values and call it Religious Thought.

Contemporary revivalists have taken great steps from the position of
strength. The originality and purity of religious thought remains
uncertain. There are great many questions, which still need to be
answered reasonably.

Islamic unity too is not exempted from this rule.
