Criticism and Scrutiny of Ali’s Positive Outlook To Battles[1]
==============================================================

A brief review of discussions that we have mentioned so far will prove
the weakness and irrelevance of their arguments and that too with the
claim:

*“The positive outlook of Imams towards the battles”!*

Because such types of conclusions depend on the introduction that we
have criticized and scrutinized in the preceding chapters.

If our readers ponder on the results obtained by consultations of
Caliphs with Ali and look back to its statistics the number of items or
occasions will indicate that there is no such a thing except few
occasions mentioned. Else, it is not a historical reality. Similarly,
such guidance and connecting it to battles is a thing lacking sense as
it is short of reason. It is only a product of their imagination and has
no historical reality.

In the same way to say that since the Caliphs consulted Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) and he gave his advice and support it shows that he had a
positive outlook for battles is wrong. Because to connect the instances
of consultation with the battles is not proof enough that Ali (a.s.)
also was happy with their battles. Both the things are not having any
connection at all.

Because even if it is proved that giving consultation to the Caliphs is
proof of positive outlook of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) to the battles as at
that time they were rulers, before everything else it also included
their usurpation of Caliphate of His Eminence (a.s.) because at the time
of seeking consultation also the Caliphs were rulers!

Similarly the same scrutinies show that there were only three instances
of consultation in military matters and if we pay close attention it
will clearly show the motives behind them that none of them had any
connection with person of the Caliph or the actual battle.

The important thing to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was his anxiety that
mistake must not be committed in those battles that could lead to total
annihilation of Islam and complete domination of infidelity over
Muslims.

Therefore from this aspect consultations had no connection with the
person of the Caliph of the philosophy of wars in the view of His
Eminence (a.s.) that we should  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Criticism and scrutiny of Point 1, Conjecture 4

conclude from it that it shows positive outlook of Imams (a.s.) to the
battles.

When conditions demand vigilance because of war in which Islam has
indulged itself the dire necessity becomes protection and safety of
Islam. In such a case Imam would have an immediate and direct contact
with the Caliph besides his advice for saving Muslims. But conditions
differ. In reality, Umar had started war all by himself without
consulting the Imam or taking his advice. The Caliph had done it by his
own stubbornness.

In such conditions wherein there is no alternative but to send troops
necessity dictates some provisionary measures to minimize danger which
is certain or to avert uprooting blow from hitting Muslims and Islam.
Therefore we see the Imam anxious and worried. Else he has no other
reason. It was not and cannot be his approval of battles.

In other words, the wrong, rather insane decisions in military issues
cause the Caliph’s life to be in the mortgage of Islam, i.e. protection
of Islam. In such an event, there is no way out but to dispense the best
advice for the sake of avoiding reversion to infidelity and saving
religion from being wiped out completely. Imam Ali (a.s.) did not pay
any importance to Caliph’s life if that life was to bring back past
ignorant days of idol worship. Ali had warned Umar: If the Caliph does
not repent and does not give up the design to revert masses to the old
days of infidelity and idol worship I will cut off his head.**[1]**

There is a great difference between the two attitudes of Imam Ali
(a.s.). According to his behavior we come to know that the life of
Caliph in ordinary circumstances is not of any extra value or worth. Its
value comes to worth only in case of its having an immediate link to
Islam’s safety or that its end spells Islam’s end too. The dread of
returning to infidelity of Muslim society or a likelihood of grip of
idol worship upon the society makes a Caliph’s life worthy or attaches a
corresponding worth to it.

Therefore consultation of Ali (a.s.) in military affairs is not a sign
of good relations. It does not establish any good terms on either side.
So how can it be drawn in the sense of his approval of their Caliphate,
or his acknowledgement of their government?

Thus it is said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: Najmuddin Askari: *Ali wal Khulafa,* Pg. 120; quoted from
*Manaqib Khwarizmi,* Pg. 59

“A correct peep into events and a correct circumspection of Ali’s stand
during 25 years of three Caliphs’ period and about 5 years of his own
Caliphate leads us to conclude that Ali tried towards strengthening
power of Muslims and pillars of Islam. And he did not fall short of
efforts in this ground...”!**[1]**

However the battles – if Ali had a positive outlook towards them and had
considered them holy, why he did not take part therein and beyond this
why he rejected the office of commander that was proposed to him?

As for public deceiving claims that Ali was Umar’s deputy in Medina in
itself is enough evidence to show their design to give a legal weight to
their unlawful gain achieved at Saqifah. If we revise again what we
analyzed earlier it would show clearly the motive of the writer of this
article.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Aftaab-e-Yazd Daily, Issue No.
9, Khordad 1381
