Participation of Hasan and Husain (a.s.) in Battles of Caliphs[1]
=================================================================

In this respect Allamah Ja’far Murtuza has given a detailed sketch of
events in his book *Analysis of political life of Imam Hasan Mujtaba,*
New Edition, that is translated (into Persian). While we recommend this
book and stress on the necessity of its perusal we draw your attention
to some points:

Introduction {align="center" style="text-align:center"}
------------

“Before entering into the theme, we point to the matters in relation to
the outlook of Imam Hasan and Husain to government and battles of
Caliphs.

1 – No researcher has a right to deny or accept before and after
applying historical sources and divine texts. The reason is some books
are written with bigotry, which results in deviation, perversion and
allegations. This is not our word. Shaykh Shaltut, the last Mufti
(jurisprudent) of Egypt and chancellor of Al-Azhar University, who
himself by faith, was like author of Al-Milal wan-Nihal, says:

Most of those who have written books on Islamic sects and faiths were
influenced by a profane spirit of bigotry. Therefore their writing have
always added fuel to existing fire among sons of Ummah. These writers
have only one point of view as though other angles are closed to them.
They see their adversaries from one point. Opinion of a religion, which
they oppose and belief of opposite side, which they do not concur with,
is belittled and vilified by them. They attribute blames, which could
result in mischief and enhance animosity. Neither any good nor any
advantage has ever been in contents of their pages. A man of moderation
or little justice should not form an opinion about faith on ground of
their books. For every sect it is better that he obtains relative
literature to be acquainted with the truth concerned.**[2]** How
deplorable it is that in our colleges etc. such books are standard
sources. By this they teach the youth students of various lands, who are
supposed to learn about true Shiaism without studying their books that
are criticisms of such books like the third volume of Al-Ghadeer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Investigation of Point 5  
 **[2]** Quoted from: Asad Haider: *Al-Imam as-Sadiq wa Mazahib-e-Arba,*
Vol. 6, Pgs. 391-392

2 – As a matter of principle, attention must be paid that historical
words are like a raw material in our hand. Historian here has nothing
other than to cater or feed information. Now the thing that matters is
reason. When performing scrutiny we should place the bits side by side
to complete a form picture. So the consistency, coherence, and
concordance should constitute a sense not a sense distorted. Its
ugliness could incite disdain while its comeliness would encourage love.
If not so how right could be distinguished from wrong?**[1]**”**[2]**

Criticism and Analysis
----------------------

Similarly as we know, in no Shia or Sunni source there exists a single
case to show the presence of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) in Caliphs’ battles.
In the same way no Shia source mentions that Imams Hasan and Husain
(a.s.) participated in territorial expansion of period of Caliphs, which
itself is a matter worth contemplation.

But some Sunni historians have mentioned the presence of Imams Hasan and
Husain (a.s.) in these battles. This has gradually resulted in renown of
this matter and historians and even some contemporary Shia
scholars**[3]** and jurisprudents**[4]** have put it in their writings.

Most Sunni writers, like Ibne Athir and Ibne Katheer have quoted Tabari
(d. 310) and made him basis of their writing and used the material in
their work – Similar to words of Tabari. We dwell here on a few of them:

Tabari in his *Tarikh-e-Umam wal Mulook* (History of Nations and Kings)
writes:

“In the year 30, Saeed bin Aas along with few companions like Hasan and
Husain and some soldiers left Kufa for Khorasan.”**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** And also if an analysis is not logical we cannot accept it.  
**[2]** Abdullah Khanaqli Hamadani: *Siyasat Imam Ali-o-Hasnain Dar
Raabita Ba Hukoomat-o-Futuhaat Kholafa,* Pgs. 121-122  
**[3]** Refer: Baqir Sharif Qarashi, *Hayat Imam Hasan bin Ali* [Life of
Imam Hasan (a.s.)], Vol. 1, Pgs. 201-202Hashim Maroof Hasani: *Seeratul
Aaimma Ithna Ashar,* Vol. 1, Pgs. 282-283 & Vol. 2, Pgs. 15-16  
**[4]** Refer: Hasan Modarresi Tabatabai: *Zameen Dar Fiqh-e-Islami*  
 **[5]** Tabari: *Tarikh al-Umam wal-Mulook,* Vol. 3, Pg. 323

The above quote is the first thing that Tabari has written. In addition
to the lack of narrators’ credibility**[1]** it is also fraught with
more significant aspect which makes it difficult to accept the presence
of Hasan and Husain in the battles.

Tabari continues the narration about the victory of a town of Tabristan
named Tamisa:

“Saeed bin Aas**[2]** assured the inhabitants of town that not one of
them would be killed but when the gates of the town opened, except for
one he killed all the people.”**[3]**

In addition to this the second narration of also Tabari is also related
from the same narrators with the difference that in repeating the names
of those who took part in the victory of Tabristan the names of Hasan
and Husain are missing.

Another point worth nothing is the year. Sunni sources mention it 30
Hijra. This year coincides with Uthman’s Caliphate. So the presence is
during Uthman’s Caliphate while the event has taken place in Umar’s
Caliphate.

In other words, it is a period when Ali refused to even give any
consultation for the battles. It is impossible that Ali should have
agreed to send his sons in a bloody campaign of Bani Umayyah in
Tabristan.

More interesting is that Ali restricted the presence of Hasan and Husain
in battle of Siffeen because he was much anxious about their
safety.**[4]**

So how could he send the two reminders of Fatima (s.a.) to fight in
Tabristan under the command of Bani Umayyah?!

On the basis of this and the analysis of Allamah Ja’far Murtuza it is
not possible to accept the presence of Hasan and Husain (a.s.) in the
battles of Caliphs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** For example: Books of Rijaal of Ahle Sunnat by Ali bin Mujahid
(a narrator of this report) has mentioned him to be a liar and a
forger.Refer: Midhi: *Tahzeeb al-Kamaal,* Pgs. 118-119; Dhahabi: *Mizan
al-Etedaal,* Vol. 4, Pg. 72  
**[2]** [That is the commander of this army under whom were Imams Hasan
and Husain (a.s.)]  
 **[3]** Tabari: *Tarikh al-Umam wal-Mulook,* Vol. 3, Pg. 324  
**[4]** Tabari: *Tarikh al-Umam wal-Mulook,* Vol. 4, Pg. 44
