Scrutiny of Participation of Ali’s Companions in Battles and Government of Caliphs[1]
=====================================================================================

It is surprising that the writer of the article has no knowledge of
companions with regard to facts and reality of matters and opinion of
Imams about battles. This analysis is not based on authentic information
but on probability and likelihood of participation of companions. This
point is not noted.

Therefore if this probability is not accepted, it cannot be a
confirmation of battles. Supposing if companions of Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) attended on approval of Ali himself and were under no pressure,
it is still not a ground to prove Imam Ali’s (a.s.) positive outlook.

While it can be said that they might have taken part on ground of other
productive reasons so this cannot be a proof of their approval. It could
be that the presence of Imam’s friends could be a restriction for
Caliph’s soldiers from plundering and pillaging conquered regions.

Now we would like to ask: what is the reason that all co-operations are
confined to supporting their battles. Why they have simply passed by all
reasons and causes?

If we accept positive outlook of Ali to battles, it will contradict his
statement:

“A Muslim should not go to a holy war in company of one who has no
belief in God’s command and does not carry God’s orders with regard to
spoils of war.

If at all he goes and is killed, he has helped him in usurping our
rights and shedding our blood. His death is a pagan’s death.”**[2]**

### Are Battles of Caliphs Worth Defending?

He who foments this conjecture while defending battles of Caliphs raises
a question and reminds us the presence of Khalid bin Waleed among
commanders of combat:

“What can you say about the appointment of this same Khalid bin  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Scrutiny of objections 6-7  
**[2]** Shaykh Hurr Amili: *Wasaelush Shia,* Vol. 11, Pg. 34

Waleed by the Prophet himself?”**[1]**

Then he gives examples of his command in the days of Prophet**[2]** by
way of defending the record of Islamic army and Caliph’s battles. He
writes:

“Actions of Muslims in battles and victories are well worth defending
and their trifle mistakes can be overlooked. Such things are common in
other places too. So instead of justifying piece by piece we should
defend them as a whole.”!**[3]**

He continues:

“In wars of Prophet, Ali and Hasan also considerable shortcomings were
seen on the part of the soldiers and men under their command.”!**[4]**

By quoting some examples of this he derives following conclusions:

“A group of eight or twelve men under command of Prophet’s cousin went
on a campaign. They committed crimes such as killing two men in a sacred
month without orders of the chief command…

The commander himself did not obey orders of Prophet. He killed a number
of innocent men, probably Muslims;

When soldiers under the command of the likes of Ali (a.s.) showed
disobedience and looted the public treasury…

What can you expect from soldiers and commanders of Muslim armies that
sometimes numbered 60,000?

…after all this can it still be said:

The fact is that the style of the battles of the Prophet was absolutely
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sayyid Muhammad Reza Tabatabai: Article quoted in Haft Aasmaan
Magazine, Issue Nos. 12-13, Winter 80 & Spring 81, Pg. 229  
 **[2]** Even supposing if this commandership is proved we can say:The
appointment of Khalid bin Waleed (who led forces against Islam in the
battles of Uhad) shows the submission of Quraish to the power and
domination of Islam.This appointment has a deep effect on subduing the
tribes who sided with the Meccans in their opposition to Islam.  
**[3]** Ibid. Article quoted in Haft Aasmaan Magazine, Issue Nos. 12-13,
Winter 80 & Spring 81, Pg. 235  
**[4]** Ibid. Article quoted in Haft Aasmaan Magazine, Issue Nos. 12-13,
Winter 80 & Spring 81, Pg. 241

different from these territorial expansions of the Caliphs?**[1]**

As shall be seen in this section we shall try to prove that the style of
battles of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) was different from the battles of
Caliphs and the attitude of their system. There does not exist any
similarity between them. Because if men like Khalid bin Waleed were sent
in Caliph’s wars, of course the Prophet too had sent Khalid to command
the battles. But their wrongs were not overlooked and justified in
Prophet’s days. The same person in the time of Caliphs wronged openly.

There is one main difference between battles of Caliphs and those of
Prophet. It was divine permission. Caliphs did not have this. The
Prophet, Ali and Hasan did not take a step without first getting God’s
permission.

“On the basis of this those who have no permission from God regard
themselves successors of Prophet. They are from viewpoint of Quran liars
and most tyrannical of human beings. They deserve hardest punishments.
Even if they stand at the Mihraab or sit on a pulpit inviting people to
virtue, piety and God-worship. Or they might have fought pagans and
expanded Islamic borders and brought territories under the banner of
Quran.”**[2]**

Secondly:

Another thing that is overlooked in these exaggerations is that they
have omitted to say anything about the reaction of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) and the Holy Imams (a.s.) as what action they took when such
heinous crimes were committed by their men. While in the case of the
Caliphs we see that they took no action at all in response to the
tyrannies committed by their men.

They have nicely quoted the incident of Khalid bin Waleed during the
time of the Prophet how he wrought havoc on the Bani Jazima tribe**[3]**
but the writer has conveniently forgotten to mention what the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.s.) did in response to the misdoings of Khalid.

While historical testimonies show that when:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Article quoted in Haft Aasmaan Magazine, Issue Nos. 12-13,
Winter 80 & Spring 81, Pgs. 225-226  
**[2]** Refer: Ustad Sayyid Muhammad Dhiyabaadi: *Dar
Justujoo-e-Ilm-e-Deen* (In search of religious knowledge), Pgs.
170-171  
**[3]** Refer: Sayyid Muhammad Reza Tabatabai: Article quoted in Haft
Aasmaan Magazine, Issue Nos. 12-13, Winter 80 & Spring 81, Pg. 244

“News of Khalid’s crimes reached the Prophet, His Eminence was very
angry and shocked. He raised his hands to the sky and said:

O, God! What Khalid has committed, I hate it and seek refuge with You
from his doings. Khalid went to the Prophet and the Prophet was
infuriated with him.

The Prophet immediately sent Ali to the tribe (victimized by Khalid) of
Bani Jazima to compensate them their losses and pay blood money whatever
they say to their satisfaction.

Prophet told Ali (a.s.): Go to Bani Jazima, make amends for acts of
ignorance and compensate for what Khalid has committed.

Ali paid their blood money and compensated for what Khalid had destroyed
or drawn from them by force. Then finally Ali asked them whether there
was anything left uncompensated or any blood unpaid. They said no. But
for sake of correctness, whatever money was left with Ali he gave it to
them telling them that perhaps something might have been forgotten.

Then he returned to the Prophet and reported all he had done. The
Prophet appreciated his performance much and said: I had not given the
command to Khalid. I had sent him only to invite them to Islam.

Some narrations say that the Prophet raised his hand toward the sky and
said three times:

O, God! I seek immunity with You from whatever Khalid has done.”**[1]**

Regretfully not only have they omitted this reaction of the Prophet we
don’t understand why the writer has not mentioned all these details? The
writer does not miss to mention any wrongs or crimes committed by cousin
of the Prophet or soldiers of Ali. But he so easily missed to write
about the reactions of Prophet or Ali to these criminal actions, or what
they did to redress and make amend for their crimes. Whether he mentions
or misses, the truth finally does appear. The facts cannot be hidden for
long as the clouds cannot hide the sun. He is only anxious to hold one
dimension as if no other dimension exists. Only battles matter to him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mustafa Dilshad Tehrani: *Meeras Rabooda* (Usurped inheritance),
Pgs. 171-172; quoting from: *Al-Maghazi,* Vol. 2, Pgs. 875-881; *Sirah
Ibne Hisham,* Vol. 4, Pgs. 53-55; *Tabaqat al-Kubra,* Vol. 2, Pgs.
147-148; *Tarikh Tabari,* Vol. 3, Pgs. 66-68; *Al-Kamil Fit Tarikh,*
Pgs. 255-256; *Sirah Ibne Kathir,* Vol. 2, Pgs. 201-202.

In the same way when he writes about the disobedience of soldiers under
the command of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and their plunder of treasury, he
has not mentioned that this took place in the absence of His Eminence
(a.s.). When Amirul Momineen (a.s.) learnt of this he was shocked and
punished the wrongdoers and announced his dissociation with this act of
theirs. But the writer had not mentioned all this.**[1]**

Anyway he does not see such a big blunder committed by Khalid bin Waleed
so he does not mention it. Let us remind him about Malik bin Nuwairah
and his tribe which was the only quarter which did not acknowledge Abu
Bakr’s rule as legitimate. So what did Khalid do?

When:

“Khalid killed Malik while he was saying that he was a Muslim. He kept
Malik’s severed head under the cooking pot and the same night he slept
with his widow...”**[2]**

After this terrible crime was committed by Khalid – commander and
messenger of the First Caliph;

Abu Bakr said: “I will not stone him. He did Ijtihaad and made a
mistake…I shall not sheathe the sword that God has drawn
out.**[3]**”**[4]**

Although the reaction of the First Caliph in this regard was not limited
to this, but as Tabari writes:

“Abu Bakr never punished any of his officers and soldiers. As if in his
policy he did not believe in imposing any penalties on his officers and
soldiers.”**[5]**

The Second Caliph also adopted the same policy with regard to his
courtiers, friends, servants, associates and those who were around him.
Umar too never punished any religious transgression. One instance is
that of Mughaira bin Shoba whom Umar had appointed as governor of Basrah
province in Iraq. He  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: Sayyid Muhammad Reza Tabatabai: Article quoted in Haft
Aasmaan Magazine, Issue Nos. 12-13, Winter 80 & Spring 81, Pg. 244  
 **[2]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Naqsh-e-Aaimma Dar Ahya-e-Deen*
(Role of Imams in the Revival of Religion), Vol. 16, Pg. 44  
**[3]** [Refer: *Al-Bidaya wan Nihaya,* Vol. 6, Pg. 322]  
**[4]** Ibid. Vol. 16, Pg. 45  
 **[5]** Yusuf Gholami: *Pas az Ghuroob* (After Sunset), Pg. 229

committed adultery, which makes one liable for stoning according to
Islamic legislation. Umar did not obey God’s order in punishing
Mughaira; but did a most interesting thing.

Not only the Second Caliph arrested the fourth witness in the case of
Mughaira he also subjected the remaining three witnesses to religious
punishment at the hands of Mughaira himself. The punishment, which he
was supposed to execute against Mughaira because he was the criminal in
question.**[1]**

After these two cases how can we expect the Caliphs to punish their men
who had been instrumental in earning such important victories?!

Perhaps the article writer regards as trifle and frivolous and worth
being overlooked even the crime that Khalid committed in the name of
Islam and Islamic government with regard to Malik bin Nuwairah and his
wife!**[2]**

But the Prophet never defended his relatives or staff or anyone
associated to him in event of their being wrong or having done a wrong.
He held them responsible for their mistakes; and imposed upon them
punishment relative to that crime or crimes. But did the First and
Second Caliph who were sitting in place of Prophet and were supposed to
be in track of Prophet and tread the very path of the Prophet also do
this? No. Rather they tried all means to cover the mistakes of their men
and it also seen that:

Such crimes flourished because of support of Caliphs. If government
officials become criminals and government was to turn a blind eye upon
their crimes who remains there to check them?! Though these men had
committed the most horrible crimes!!

### Forced Participations of Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.) in Caliphs’ Government

The last point worth noting at the end of the discussion regarding
participation of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) in the government of the Caliphs
is that in some instances the policy of the Caliphal regime was such
that it should in any way compel His Eminence (a.s.) to take some steps;
for example one case of applying force to enable strengthening of the
foundation of Caliphate was as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: Sayyid Abdul Husain Sharafuddin: *Ijtihaad Dar
Maqabil-e-Nass* (Translated by Ali Dawani), Pgs. 340-345  
 **[2]** Refer: Ali Gholami Dahqi: *Janghai Irtdidat wa Bohran
Janasheeni-e-Payambar,* Section Six, Pgs. 81-94

“Giving importance to congregation prayers and denouncing and even
tagging those who do not attend their congregation as apostates.

Traditions censuring non-attendance of congregation leading to disunity
of Muslims were emphasized. Necessity of being in the congregation as a
right of the leadership of the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) or the Imam was
applied to themselves and even traditions in this regard were
fabricated...”**[1]**

In such circumstances, not only the absence of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) in
such customs would have given excuse to the regime to suppress him
further;**[2]** but more than that it would have destroyed all chances
of Imam’s intervention in affairs of the regime aimed at guarding the
religion of Islam.

While the Imam (a.s.) was not in pursuit of such a kind of seclusion
from Islamic society.

On the basis of this as has been proved so far there does not exist any
evidence that some instances of Imam’s help and advice denote similarity
of his aims with the Caliphs. Rather if we pay attention to the
narrations we find that there is a wide gulf of difference between the
policy aims of both the parties.

Such that they could be considered to be fundamental differences:

**Amirul Momineen (a.s.) never allowed that his attitudes be interpreted
to be in favor of Caliphate and behavior of the Caliphs or that they may
get an opportunity to take advantage of his attitude to help their
deviated aims.**

What the Imam (a.s.) was in pursuit of is completely different to what
the Caliphal regime aimed in obtaining his help and support.

In spite of the fact that wrong interpretations and analyses are
propagated to the contrary.

Thus they claim:

“Other notable example of co-operation of Ali (a.s.) is his
participation in congregational prayers led by Abu Bakr.”!**[3]**

“On the basis of statements of modern Shia scholars like Dr. Sayyid
Muhammad Baqir Hujjati, Amirul Momineen (a.s.)…participated in their
congregation prayers so much that people never noticed his absence in  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Dr. Ali Akbar Hasani: *Tarikh Tahlili wa Siyasi Islam,* Vol. 1,
Pg. 354  
**[2]** Thus Saad bin Ubadah only because he did not give *Bayyat* to
the Caliph and did not participate in their gatherings he was first
exiled to Syria and then killed.  
**[3]** Sayyid Ahmad Mawassaqi: *Istiratazi-e-Wahdat* (Strategy of
Unity), Vol. 1, Pg. 124

the society. And never imagined that Amirul Momineen Ali was heading in
another direction! And that he had severed connection with the society
ruled by the Caliphs.”!**[1]**

Although there is another analysis regarding this that in no way talks
of any special meaning that could be derived from these actions of Imam
(a.s.) because it is believed that:

“In such circumstances going to the Masjid and being present there… was
ordinary matter.”**[2]**

This analysis also ultimately does not consider these steps to be
construed as support to the Caliphs and their behavior.

“Presence of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) in their gatherings was not
voluntary and willful. His Eminence spent most of his time in the
Prophet’s mosque and the same presence was followed by his presence in
their assemblies.

On the basis of this His Eminence did not go there especially to attend
their gatherings.”

Moreover, even if he attended their gatherings with intent it was with
the purpose of forbidding evil, because they used to refer to His
Eminence in many issues.**[3]**

On the basis of this a correct attitude and a firm connection with
affairs of religion were the factors of his presence in their
gatherings.”**[4]**

Historical documents and sources show that after Abu Bakr emerged from
three-day seclusion**[5]** there ensued another debate and discussion at
the end of which Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said in reply to another
invitation of his associates:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Barfi: *Seemai Ali Az Manzar Ahle Sunnat* (Portrait of
Ali from the Sunni viewpoint), [1<sup>st</sup> Edition 1380], Pg. 130  
**[2]** Rasool Ja’faryan: *Tarikh wa Seerah Siyasi Amir-e-Mominaan Ali
Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.)* [History and political biography of Ali (a.s.)],
Pg. 20  
**[3]** [Scrutinies of Discourse Two show that this was too less for the
period of 25 years of the Caliphs’ rule.]  
**[4]** Sayyid Murtuza Alamul Huda: *Tanziyaul Anbiya* (Translated by
Ameer Salmani Raheemi), Pg. 227  
**[5]** Sayyid Hasan Fatimi: Article: Saqifah quoted in *Danish Nama
Imam Ali (a.s.),* Vol. 8, Pg. 458

“Then by Allah I did not enter the Masjid except like brother Moosa and
Haroon when his companions said to him: go therefore you and your Lord,
then fight you both, surely we will here sit down.**[1]**

And by Allah I do not enter except for the Ziarat of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) or to decide a case…”**[2]**

This narration clearly shows the limited aims of the presence of His
Eminence (a.s.) in the Masjid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Maidah 5:24  
 **[2]** Tabarsi: *Ihtijaaj,* Vol. 1, Pg. 81; Majlisi: *Biharul Anwar,*
Vol. 28, Pg. 208
