Did Amirul Momineen (a.s.) Always Attend Caliphs’ Prayers?
==========================================================

Ustad Sayyid Ali Husaini Milani, in this respect has this to say:

“Regarding presence of Imam Ali (a.s.) in Prayers of Caliphs this much
can be said: Although it is well-rumored there is no basis to it. There
are many matters and subjects, sometimes new and interesting – but
without a root or a base to it. Although some have taken for granted
these things as sure and certain, but we inspite of our search do not
find any documentary proof to it. What document or evidence, valid or
otherwise exists to establish that Ali was always present in their
prayers?

The only thing that exists is the material written by Abu Saad Samani in
his book Al-Ansaab that can be regarded as a miracle of Ali with regard
to exposing scandals of opponents. We have narrated the case earlier.

The case in question might have occurred earlier to Ali’s acknowledgment
to Abu Bakr’s authority. Or his (Ali’s) dissidence with Caliphs should
have been already known to public. Else there seems no ground for their
decision to kill Imam Ali (a.s.).”**[1]**

The author in another place referring to the actual case says:

“So far we have not found any creditable source to bring this fact home
to us that Imam Ali (a.s.) was obliged to be present in Prayers of Abu
Bakr or someone else. On the basis of what Samani’s book**[2]** says:

Ali was present in Prayers of Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr had issued orders to
Khalid earlier to kill Ali. Abu Bakr was still in Prayers he spoke to
Khalid not to do what he had asked him to do.

Of course speaking during Prayer invalidates it, but Abu Bakr regardless
to this fact spoke. Because Samani’s is not a book of traditions to be
particular for creditability.

And it is the will of God that this case reached to our knowledge
although other authors tried to hide it.”**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ustad Sayyid Ali Husaini Milani: *Imamat-e-Bila Fasl* (Edit.
Muhammad Reza Kareemi), Pgs. 223-224  
**[2]** Samani: *Al-Ansaab,* Vol. 6, Pg. 170, Published by Muhammad Amin
Samaj, Beirut, 1400 A.H.  
**[3]** Sayyid Ali Husaini Milani: *Imamat-e-Bila Fasl* (Edit. Muhammad
Reza Kareemi), Pg.

Deviation in Narration from Shia Sources
----------------------------------------

It won’t be out of place to remind that in order to prove good relations
between Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and Caliphs they bring two narrations
from books of Shia scholars and present them under the title: ‘Prayers
with Caliphs’…

“Shaykh Hurr Amili writes in Wasaelush Shia, Kitabus Salaat, Pg. 534
that Imam (a.s.) says: The Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.s.) established
relation with the Caliphs and Ali (a.s.) performed Prayers behind them.

The great Shia scholar, Late Allamah Sayyid Abdul Husain Sharafuddin,
writes in Answers to issues of Moosa Jarulla:

Prayer of Ali behind Abu Bakr and Umar was not a dissimulation. An
Infallible Imam cannot worship Allah on a basis of dissimulation. On the
other hand a Shia can pray behind a Sunni. His Prayers is correct – not
wrong.”!**[1]**

In reply to this objection first we investigate the narration of
*Wasaelush Shia* and make three notable points:

### Point One

The statement that: The Prophet married two daughters of Caliphs and Ali
prayed behind them is silent about the cause and description of how this
was done. To find the conditions or circumstances governing these
attitudes it is enough to look at titles under which Shia scholars have
narrated the incidents.

Shaykh Hurr Amili has classified according to his own intelligence and
understanding. In fact, the titles chosen by him show his insight in
relation to contents of narrations.

It is interesting that the late Shaykh in his book mentions them under
the heading: ‘Chapter of appreciability of attending Congregation
Prayers in dissimulation behind one who is not qualified to lead prayers
and standing with him in the first row’.

In the same way this narration is mentioned in *Biharul Anwar**[2]***
and *Mustadrak*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

143**  
[1]** Abdul Kareem Bi-Aazaar Shirazi: Article: Nahjul Balagha and
Wahdat-e-Islami, quoted in *Mashal-e-Ittehaad* (Torch of Unity), Pg. 26;
Sayyid Ahmad Mawassaqi: *Istiratazi-e-Wahdat* (Strategy of Unity), Vol.
1, Pgs. 124-125  
**[2]** Allamah Majlisi: *Biharul Anwar,* Vol. 103, Pg. 375

*al-Wasael**[1]*** under following chapters:

**Chapter of marriage of polytheists, infidels and Ahle Bayt-haters.**

**Chapter of lawfulness of marrying the deprived, those who are doubtful
but show themselves to be Muslims and detestability of giving a Shia
lady to them in marriage.**

### Result drawn from contemplating on these headings:

**Firstly:** The Imam (leader) of prayers in these narrations is not
eligible to be followed, i.e. to pray behind him. Besides, from the
angle of jurisprudence too he is not fit to the office of leading
congregation prayers. He is neither a just man nor conditions in him
qualify him to lead prayers for a congregation – no matter, small or
large. In other words, the Imam of prayers is impaired with his
followers of prayers. As such, to pray behind such a man can only be
possible in dissimulation and the reward mentioned for this act is like
the value of dissimulation and it has no connection with the leader of
prayer.

**Secondly:** Narrators who have quoted these narrations in the section
related to ‘The Prophet married’ in the discussion of marriage, have
clearly kept veiled the entity and personality of wife and Imam of
prayers. This reflects the conditions prevalent in society, which
necessitated dissimulation.

### Point Two

To understand a part of a narration we cannot ignore the wordings ahead
or behind which would result in making the narration itself deficient.

Such a look would end in a contradictory comprehension in relation to
its real meaning. Therefore we write a full extract from, *Wasaelush
Shia* (the Aal al-Bait Print). The narration runs as follows:

“Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa, in his miscellaneous reports from Uthman
bin Isa from Samma that he said:**[2]** I asked him about their
marriages and prayers behind them. He said: This is a difficult thing.
You cannot do that. The Prophet married and Ali prayed behind
them.”**[3]**

In the first part we read the tradition:

“It is a difficult thing that you are asked to do and you cannot cut off
relations with them and are compelled to do it.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhaddith Noori: *Mustadrak al-Wasael,* Vol. 14, Pg. 440  
**[2]** *Mustadrak al-Wasael,* Vol. 14, Pg. 144  
**[3]** Shaykh Hurr Amili: *Wasaelush Shia,* Vol. 8, Pg. 301, Tr. 10

This shows there was compulsion and coercion. One is forced to maintain
relations with the opponents.

As if the main thing is to keep away but under compulsion one is to
remain with them.

### Point Three

If we ignore the beginning of this narration and suffice on the part, we
conclude that the narration is silent with regard to conditions. To
learn about the conditions prevailing at that time we have to seek some
other report similar to these narrations.

This tradition is known as the ninth tradition and exists in *Wasaelush
Shia* in the following wordings:

**“Ali bin Ja’far says in his book narrating from his brother, Moosa bin
Ja’far, that Hasan and Husain prayed behind Marwan and we prayed along
with them.”[1]**

Attention is required here. In the contents it is not clear whether
Hasan and Husain, although praying in a group, prayed individually or
prayed following the leader of prayers; i.e. Marwan. The contents do not
disclose whether Ali too prayed with them. Also not obvious in the
contents is whether Hasan and Husain prayed in dissimulation or what the
conditions were for their praying. However in the contents there arise
great many questions.

Therefore we must search for narrations, which could open doors for us
to see prayers, which our Imams performed with opponents and
adversaries.

A salient difference exists between congregation prayers of Shias and
other than Shia. The leaders of prayers (Imam of congregation) in Shia
must be a just man, i.e. a man of probity and piety, virtue and having
justice. This clearly proves that if a Shia prays behind an opponent of
Shia faith, it does not mean that he has paid allegiance to him, his
opinion, his school or his belief, because in this instance the
condition of justice is cancelled.

Alongside this group of narrations, there are also traditions that
clarify the matter further as follows:

**“Ja’far bin Muhammad narrates from his father that Hasan and Husain
used to recite the opening chapter and other chapter when they prayed
behind Imam of prayers.”[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Vol. 8, Pg. 301, Tr. 9  
 **[2]** Allamah Majlisi: *Biharul Anwar,* Vol. 88, Pg. 47, Tr. 5;
quoting from: *Qurbul Asnaad*

This narration in fact tells us how the Infallible Imams prayed behind
their opponents. This not only explains the method of prayers of Hasan
and Husain (a.s.) in the narration about congregation prayer under the
leadership of Marwan, it also tells us about the way Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) prayed behind the Caliphs.

On the other hand Allamah Majlisi has this to say under the explanation
of these narrations, which is worth nothing:

“When Imams prayed behind the leaders of tyranny they used to pray under
dissimulation and they did not make an intention of following them. They
used to recite as if independently; reciting the Surah Hamd and another
Surah themselves.

On the other hand it has been much stressed to attend congregation
prayers. There are also traditions in this respect. It becomes
compulsory in time of dissimulation.

But it is recommended that if possible one should pray at home and then
join them in congregation and pray with them. And if not then it is
obligatory to recite the opening chapter and another Surah oneself. And
according to well known view in their leadership Qiraat is not
cancelled. Rather in the book of *Muntaha* it is mentioned that: We do
not have an opposing view in this matter, and in these prayers it is not
required to recite the Hamd and Surah loudly and even if it is not
possible to recite the Surah only Hamd is sufficient; although in my
view it is obligatory to recite the Surah also and apparently in this
matter there is no difference of opinions. If the Imam of congregation
goes into Ruku (kneeling) before finishing the chapter he can finish the
chapter in Ruku. Some say that reciting the Hamd and Surah is exempted
in helplessness. In the same way in *Tahzeeb* this absolute view is
mentioned and that this same prayer is valid. It is even said that: If
one could not catch them in reciting the chapter, he can leave it
altogether and join them in Ruku, and his prayer will be correct but it
is precautionary to later repeat even the Prayer in which one has
recited Hamd and Surah in his heart, under dissimulation.”

The message of this outlook means to say the view of all jurisprudents
of Imamiyah sect is at parity. From many aspects it is in the category
of response given by Allamah Sharafuddin in his *Answer to the Problems
of Jarallah.* We quote the actual text from his book. In the meantime we
must point out that Bi-Aazaar Shirazi has clearly and openly distorted
the text. The facts and realities are sacrificed for the sake of
so-called unity. It reflects a criminal tendency to

distort authentic texts of well-known scholars of Imamiyah sect for
their own benefits and ends.

According to the extract taken from his book of *Answer to the Problems
of Jarallah,* Allamah Sharafuddin believes:

“Dissimulation in worship acts is that the Imam performs an action
without intention that it be for proximity to God. It is only based on
fear of a tyrant ruler.

And dissimulation in propagation of religion is that the Imam attributes
a verdict to the Prophet while in fact, it is not from him. Although it
is clear that dissimulation is never practiced by an Infallible Imam.
And to consider narrations and worship acts of Imam as being
dissimulation is to ridicule his infallibility and honesty.”**[1]**

In other words, Moosa Jarullah from this statement intends to inject the
readers mind with belief that dissimulation is a possibility for an Imam
that enables him the performance of a thing not for God’s sake but to
find a scapegoat from detrimental surrounding imposed by a tyrant. In
fact, it does not befit the Imam to stoop to such a category. If we
accept this we have to deny his status of being infallible, which is
irrecusable.

Jarallah after this marginal introduction in which he sets dissimulation
to face infallibility of Imam prepares the minds of the readers to
accept Imam’s actions on the basis of dissimulation proceeds further to
say:

Allamah Sayyid Abdul Husain Sharafuddin (q.s.) says in response to these
claims:

“Ali, peace be upon him and his sons, was punctual to perform prayers in
their early hours. He was particular to perform prayers in congregation
following the three Caliphs. He did this for the sake of God. He also
prayed Friday prayers behind all three Caliphs seeking God’s
satisfaction. His prayers were on the ground of his virtue and
piety.”**[2]**

By this Jarallah aims to secure credibility and validity for Caliphs. He
wants to establish legitimacy of their Caliphate because Ali prayed
behind them. So they were men of justice and moral.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Allamah Sharafuddin: *Ajooba Masail-e-Jarullah* (Matbatul Irfan
– Saida – 1953 A.D., 1373 A.H. 2<sup>nd</sup> Edition), Pg. 84  
 **[2]** Ibid. Pg. 86

Jarallah represents dissimulation as an act of show and a trick. So
considers prayers of Imam outside circle of worship and bereft of
sincere intention to seek nearness to God. On the other hand he refers
to prayers of Ali, which he performed behind three Caliphs as remote
from dissimulation to establish his own motives and aims.

Allamah Sayyid Abdul Husain Sharafuddin against such propaganda says:

“I said: No, never. Ali prayed only to seek nearness with God. He prayed
to impart what God has obliged him to do. His prayer behind them was
only with aim to please God. We prayed following prayers of Imam and we
sought nearness with God. We too have prayed several times behind Sunni
Imam of prayers being too sincere to God. This is allowed in faith of
Ahle Bayt. The worshiper, though behind a Sunni, obtains the reward as
he does while praying behind a Shia. One who knows our faith, is aware
of the condition of justice for the leader of prayers. On the basis of
this following a sinner and ignorant Shia was not allowed while these
conditions do not exist for the leader of congregation in Sunni sect and
they are allowed to follow anyone.”**[1]**

From the comments of Sharafuddin, we discover that he has corrected the
specifications of dissimulation given by Jarallah. In the second place
he (Sharafuddin) has explained dissimulation within domain of worship –
and not as Jarallah describes it.

According to Sharafuddin, the act of dissimulation represents God’s
command within teaching of faith. Sharafuddin regards dissimulation a
means of proximity to God. As such he totally rejects the opinion of
Jarallah with regard to dissimulation.

Finally, Sharafuddin impedes the way paved by Jarallah to benefit from
dissimulation to gain legitimacy and legality for Caliphs. The man who
leads prayers in Shia school must be just and of good reputation. This
condition invalidates the endeavor of Jarallah. The leader of Prayer
must not be profane or a man of no respect among the people. We shall
deal with this subject in detail as “**Justice is not a condition for a
man who leads prayers in other than Shia sect.”**

He has clearly displayed the worth of prayer behind a Shia and behind a
Sunni individual (or Caliphs). The justice of Caliphs or they being men
of justice and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Pg. 87

piety he puts to question and repudiates this quality in them. In the
light of this description the reader becomes attentive that the act of
Imam Ali (a.s.) and his followers, Shias, does not give any support to
them nor do they agree with them. Their dissidence is already concealed
in their behavior.

In any case, firstly the response of Sharafuddin to the query of
Jarallah is not personal inclination. It reflects the conditions
prevalent in society. The direction of thought is an element at a zenith
that cannot be neglected but necessarily to conceive the entailing
developments.

Secondly: This answer of Sharafuddin refutes the conjecture, which
Jarallah disseminates and not that it is to censure deviation of a
tradition or taking a part of it for own benefit as it does not need an
answer because later the truth is bound to become known.

Because such arrangement of texts is bound to put doubts in the minds of
readers with regard to the behavior of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) this group
is more dangerous than that of unity-seekers. It is thus said:

“…His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) was always with our chief, Abu Bakr and was
present in all prayers behind him.”**[1]**

“Ali (a.s.) himself also joined in Prayer with the Righteous
Caliphs.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdul Qadir Dahqaan Siraawaani: Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 15, Autumn 82, Pg. 11  
**[2]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Interview in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 4, Summer 79, Pg. 60
