Aim of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) in Taking Over the Guardianship of Muhammad Bin Abu Bakr?
=======================================================================================

Another conjecture concerns relations between the First Caliph and Ali
with regard to Guardianship of the widow and his son Muhammad, after the
death of Caliph. Their claim goes like this:

“His Eminence (a.s.) showed close affection to Abu Bakr and after his
death married his widow and brought up his son, Muhammad Ibne Abu Bakr
in his house…”!**[1]**

“Muhammad Ibne Abu Bakr was very dear to Ali. He was brought up along
with his own sons. During Caliphate of Ali, he was appointed as a
governor of Egypt.”!**[2]**

Now to check this conjecture we must go to Asma Binte Umais, the widow
of Abu Bakr and speak about her:

“Asma was Abu Bakr’s wife, but she mostly spent her time at the house of
the son-in-law of the Prophet and the brother of her husband (Ali Ibne
Abi Talib a.s.) and in the service of Fatima”**[3]**

In this regard it can be said:

“The lady, Asma Binte Umais was a good and virtuous lady. Her early life
was as prosperous as the evening of her life. She was the wife of
(brother of Ali) Ja’far bin Abi Talib. Finally, she became wife of Ali
bin Abi Talib. In the middle for a few years, she was Abu Bakr’s wife.
She gave birth to Muhammad son of Abu Bakr. But this great lady brought
up Muhammad so purely that the impure sperm turned out a man adhering to
the right path of Ali enriched by the love of Ahle Bayt. This lady made
Muhammad son of Ali though he was son of Abu Bakr. Indeed, beyond
appreciations it is that when she witnesses Caliphate – the right of Ali
– is usurped by her husband and the track perverted, she deserts the
house of usurpation and comes to Fatima’s House of Divine Revelation. By
this act, she displays her scorn to tyranny to Ali and Fatima and her
fidelity and devotion to the Wilayat of Ali and Ahle Bayt…”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Barfi: *Seemai Ali Az Manzar Ahle Sunnat* (Portrait of
Ali from the Sunni point of view), [1<sup>st</sup> Edition 1380], Pg.
80  
**[2]** Abdul Kareem Bi-Aazaar Shirazi: *Mashal-e-Ittehaad* (Torch of
Unity), Pg. 27  
**[3]** Yusuf Gholami: *Pas az Ghuroob* (After Sunset), Pg. 201  
**[4]** Ahmad Rahmani Hamadani: *Fatima Zahra Shadmani Dil-e-Payambar;*
Translator’s

On the basis of this, marriage of Asma to Abu Bakr is worth pondering
upon as:

“Cause and motive of this marriage – inspite of such a wide gulf between
wife and husband in thoughts and moral tendencies – from the historical
view has put this in the circle of ambiguity.”**[1]**

Therefore the arguments of marriage of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) with Asma
and his Guardianship of her son, Muhammad should be sought in the
personal excellence restricted to Asma herself – her support for the
sanctity of Alawite *Wilayat* and Imamate can be nicely seen in the
following steps of Asma:

“Abu Bakr, Umar and their advisory board were so much harassed and
disturbed in their thoughts by the campaign of Ali that they were at a
loss what to do. Their minds hurried this way and that and made hasty
decisions only to be rescinded and made again. In a quandary, they
dismissed what was determined. Finally, their thoughts collectively
relaxed at one decision – to assassinate Ali. Abu Bakr’s wife Asma
learnt of this plot. She immediately sent her maid to Fatima’s House and
told her to recite the following verse as soon as she entered the house:

That is these people are plotting (conspiring) against you to kill you.
So get out, I advise you.**[2]**

Similarly Asma told the maid: If they do not take the cue repeat the
verse…”**[3]**

Likewise, the level of Muhammad (Asma’s son) with the family of his
father, Abu Bakr can be judged very well by his stand in the battle of
Jamal against his own sister, Ayesha. In this battle in support of his
Imam, Muhammad drew his sword against his sister, Ayesha binte Abu Bakr.
At the end of the battle Muhammad addressed Ayesha and introduced
himself as follows:

“I am nearest in relation to you and at the same time your most ardent
enemy…”**[4]**

Therefore Ali’s marriage with Asma after the death of Abu Bakr and
guardianship of her son, Muhammad Ibne Abu Bakr has no bearing on
relations of His Eminence (a.s.) with Abu Bakr. It is related to the
moral quality of Asma  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Footnote: Dr. Sayyid Hasan Iftikharzadeh Sabzawari, Pg. 773**  
[1]** Yusuf Gholami: *Pas az Ghuroob* (After Sunset), Pg. 201  
**[2]** Surah Qasas 28:20  
 **[3]** Muhammad Baqir Ansari: - Sayyid Hasan Rajai: *Asrar-e-Fadak,*
Pgs. 59-60  
 **[4]** Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Naqsh-e-Ayesha Dar Tarikh-e-Islam,*
Vol. 2, Pg. 210

herself as was a lady with belief in the *Wilayat* of Ali (a.s.) and was
blessed with affection for the House of the Prophet. Imam Ali (a.s.) not
only married her, he even took her son under his own training. Later
this Muhammad – the son of Abu Bakr becomes a model among Shias to
brighten the Shia school. His (Muhammad’s) son became a special
associate of Imam Sajjad (a.s.).**[1]** His (Muhammad’s) daughter became
the wife of Imam Baqir (a.s.) and mother of Imam Sadiq (a.s.).**[2]**

Now let us ask the reader himself – do these attributes of Asma binte
Umais have any bearing on Abu Bakr, or do they bestow any virtue on Abu
Bakr?

In spite of these facts they still claim:

“But Imam Sajjad married the granddaughter of the First Caliph. The
grand children of Imam Baqir’s mother were in fact the progeny of Abu
Bakr. So such relation cannot be created or formed with an
enemy.”!**[3]**

“Our Imams from Imam Baqir (a.s.) onwards are the off springs of Abu
Bakr’s daughter. Our Imams are closely related to the Caliphs.”!**[4]**

On the basis of what you have seen no scope remains for the claim that:

“Besides the co-operation of our chief, Ali with Hazrat Abu Bakr…these
two pupils of the Prophet (Abu Bakr and Ali), like members of one
family, were friendly and loving to each other.”!**[5]**

### Part B) Relations of the Second Caliph with the Family of Revelation (a.s.)

A complete claim exists in this field:

“The policy of Hazrat Umar in relation to Ahle Bayt was composed of love
and reverence.”!**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Allamah Majlisi: *Jila al-Uyoon,* Pg. 870  
**[2]** Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: “My mother was from those who had
brought faith and were pious and righteous and Allah loves who are
righteous.” (Allamah Majlisi: *Jila al-Uyoon,* Pg. 870)  
**[3]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Jam-e-Jam Daily, Issue No. 12,
Bahman 1379  
**[4]** Ibid. Interview in Nida-e-Islam Magazine, Issue No. 4, Summer
79, Pg. 62  
**[5]** Abdul Qadir Dahqaan Siraawaani: Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 15, Autumn 82, Pg. 12  
**[6]** Muhammad Barfi: *Seemai Ali Az Manzar Ahle Sunnat* (Portrait of
Ali from the Sunni point of view), [1<sup>st</sup> Edition 1380], Pg.
110

“Umar’s look to Ali was full of love, concomitant with respect and
honor.”!**[1]**

We must go back to the conduct and behavior of Umar towards the family
of the Prophet. This will enable us to scrutinize the foregone claims.
His looking to Ali with love accompanied by greatness and honor and the
scale of his affection, reverence and his own humility towards the House
of the Prophet can be epitomized within a few historical documents to
see whether there is any veracity in it or this too is full of
mendacity:

### A glance at historical documents

“Balazari writes in his book Al-Ansaab Al-Ashraaf:

Umar went towards Fatima’s house holding a burning torch.

Fatima came behind the door (of her house) and said: O, son of Khattab!
Is it you? Do you want to set the door of the house on fire over me?

Umar replied: Yes, this act will strengthen what your father has
brought.

In Tarikh Tabari it is mentioned:

Umar said: I swear by God! I shall burn the house upon you; or you
should come out of the house to pay allegiance to the Caliph.

Ibne Abde Rabb narrates in Al-Iqd Al-Fareed:

…Umar holding the burning torch proceeded towards Fatima’s house with an
intention to set it on fire.

Fatima asked: O, son of Khattab! Have you brought fire to burn my house?

Umar answered: Yes. You too should join that which the Ummah has entered
into (paying allegiance to Abu Bakr)…”**[2]**

Historical documents to prove Umar’s rough behavior and harsh attitude
towards the House of Divine Revelation to obtain Ali’s allegiance to Abu
Bakr’s Caliphate can be found in these three books: *Attack on Fatima’s
house, The Burning of Fatima’s house, Clear proof on Zahra’s martyrdom.*
Details mentioned in these books are all from Sunni sources of repute,
which can well establish for you whether these claims are true or false.
You can judge how far  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. *Seemai Ali Az Manzar Ahle Sunnat* (Portrait of Ali from
the Sunni point of view), [1<sup>st</sup> Edition 1380], Pg. 87  
**[2]** Engineer Jawad Husaini Tabatabai: *Dar
Pasukh-e-Afsana-e-Shahadat,* Pgs. 109-110

these words are correct. For instance,

“Umar always used to call Ali, light of the eyes.”!**[1]**

Similarly we have seen claims that:

“Companions of Saqifah, Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman and their supporters
formed the government. Ali also cooperated with them to the end.
Although he had difference of opinion with them, but he did not
entertain enmity with them.”!**[2]**

“Inspite of his thinking that it was his right usurped as it is obvious
in his speech known by the title of Shiqshiqya, he took shelter in
fortitude. His fortitude was not just a show. He sincerely did not
launch on enmity with companions of Prophet.”!**[3]**

“The relations of those great men (Caliphs) were brotherly and Islamic
towards preserving the worth and regard of Islam. They were never at
enmity.”!**[4]**

“Does this meaningful silence not reflect that His Eminence (a.s.) did
not want such a thing to be repeated?**[5]** And that the fire of enmity
should keep burning forever between him and the Caliphs. Especially
during the reign of Second Caliph which was that of battles; that it
should be overshadowed by personal feelings?”!**[6]**

Great many efforts are exerted to sketch the behavior of Ali with
Caliphs under the friendly strokes of brush to paint a rosy picture of
friendship and love. But a bird’s view on the events immediately after
passing away of Prophet proves that there existed deep rancor and
animosity between the Caliphs and Ahle Bayt. Let us get acquainted with
the behavior of Ali with Umar through these historical confessions of
Umar himself.

The first example is a tradition mentioned in *Sahih Muslim* and
*History of Medina* by Ibne Shubbeh:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Farooq Safizaada: Article quoted in Kayhan Farhangi, Issue 170,
Azar 79, Pg. 81  
**[2]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Interview in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 4, Summer 79, Pg. 62  
**[3]** Ibid. Jam-e-Jam Daily, Issue No. 12, Bahman 1379  
**[4]** Ibid. Ittelaat Daily, Issue No. 30, Bahman 1379  
**[5]** [It is the events that unfolded after the passing away of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)]  
**[6]** Ibid. Aftaab-e-Yazd Daily, Issue No. 9, Khordad 1381

“In these traditions the Second Caliph blames Ali and Abbas for calling
the first and second Caliphs liars, sinners, pact-breakers, tricksters
or tyrants and transgressors.”**[1]**

In the narration of *Sahih Muslim* it reads:

The Second Caliph addressed Ali and Abbas and said:

…When the Prophet passed away from the world, Abu Bakr said: After the
Prophet I am the guardian of Muslims; you two (pointing to Ali and
Abbas) came and demanded your inheritance. You (Abbas) for the heritage
from the son of your brother and this Ali for the heritage of his wife
from her father. Then Abu Bakr said: The Prophet had said: We are not
inherited, what we leave is a charity, but you regarded him a liar, a
sinner, a pact breaker, a betrayer and a cheater…”**[2]**

This is the text of Umar’s words regarding Ali’s view about Abu Bakr and
himself:

“You both looked upon him as a liar, a sinner, usurper and a
betrayer…and I…am associate of Abu Bakr. You two consider me a liar, a
sinner, usurper and a betrayer…”

Similarly Ibne Shubbeh in his *History of Medina*, instead of liar,
sinner, betrayer and cheat; has mentioned: oppressor and
transgressor.”**[3]**

The actual text in his book is as follows:

“In this you considered Abu Bakr an oppressor a transgressor … and you
two considered me an oppressor a transgressor…”

In summary it can be concluded:

“In this current discussion, there is one evidence, which cannot be
irrecusable. Umar bin Khattab openly says that Ali bin Abi Talib and
Abbas, the uncle of the Prophet, regardless of their being Hashimi were
considered prominent companions, regard Abu Bakr and Umar tyrants and
cheats? Then how is it possible for one to claim that between Ahle Bayt
(a.s.) and the Caliphs there existed love and friendship? On the other
hand the enemy himself acknowledges that the Ahle Bayt had such a
negative view of them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Reza Salmani: *Rawabit Mutaqabil Kholafa Ba
Khandaan-e-Payambar,* Pg. 42  
 **[2]** Ibid. Pg. 41, quoting from: *Sahih Muslim,* Vol. 4, Kitabul
Jihad was Sayr, Bab Hukmul Fee, Pg. 27, Tr. 49 (3302),
Mausisa-e-Izuddin  
**[3]** Ibid. Pgs. 41-42; quoting from: *Tarikhul Madina,* Vol. 1, Pgs.
202-204, Daar al-Fikr

These texts clearly show that Ali bin Abi Talib and Abbas considered Abu
Bakr and Umar to be tyrants, betrayers, liars, sinners and usurpers.

So how can there be friendship and love between Ahle Bayt (a.s.) and the
Caliphs after the passing away of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)?

Thus if under the excuse of some fabricated narrations and those
reported by other than Ahle Bayt (a.s.) someone is spreading love of
enemies of Ahle Bayt among the weak people, it should be known that the
correctness of these traditions is lacking credibility.

With these texts please pay attention…a brief translation of these
reports is that Ali bin Abi Talib and Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib during
the reign of Umar demanded the property of the Prophet pertaining to
Khaiber and Fadak. Umar replies:

You claimed these properties from Abu Bakr too while you regarded him a
liar, a sinner, a tyrant and a betrayer. Now I am the Caliph. You are
making the same demand from me. Regarding me too, you have the same
opinion – a liar, a sinner, a tyrant, a betrayer.

This statement, which contains a confession of the Caliph, is
irrecusable because it is present in two most reputed Sunni books and
their credibility cannot be doubted.**[1]** So it is unlikely that one
who is remote from bigotry and partiality would accept what the view of
Bani Hashim and Ahle Bayt was regarding the Caliphs.”**[2]**

Even though they claim:

“His Eminence (a.s.) himself never insulted the Caliphs. On the
contrary, on many occasions he has praised them.”**[3]**

But there is another historical document which says:

“In the incident of Umar’s travel to Syria he asked the Imam to
accompany him in the journey but Imam (a.s.) did not accept. Umar went
to Ibne Abbas and complained: I have a complaint against your cousin,
Ali. I asked him to come with me to Syria but he did not agree. I always
see him unhappy. Why is he so?

Ibne Abbas replied: It is evident. You also know that. Umar said: Yes,
it is because he could not get Caliphate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Sahih Muslim,* No. 3302  
**[2]** Husain Ghaib Gholami: *Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) wa
Rumuz-e-Hadith-e-Fadak,* Pgs. 52-59  
**[3]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Ittelaat Daily, Issue No. 29,
Khordad 1379

Thus Imam (a.s.) displayed to others his objection and anger for
usurpation of Caliphate till the Caliph and the people became aware of
it.”**[1]**

The exact words of Umar’s statement about Ali’s attitude towards him are
these:

“I always find him angry towards me. What in your view is the cause of
his anger?”

In view of these two reliable documents taken from Sunni source of
repute and mentioned in a prestigious Sunni book, we leave the reader to
himself judge the creditability of the claim. Such claims are in rife.
But their creditability cannot stand before historical grounds that
reflect a contradictory picture to us. For instance, a few more we quote
here:

“Behavior and talk of Ali, according to contents of reliable books of
both sects show that there never existed enmity etc. between him and
Caliphs.”!**[2]**

“I challenge and even prove that Ali was not an enemy of the three
Caliphs.”!**[3]**

“He had a mild behavior with this Caliph too. He kept behind his claim
against this new Caliph.”!**[4]**

“So doubt vanished from both sides. The distance was reduced between the
two. Trust came in with a new title in a new stage.”!**[5]**

“In the era of Caliphs, Ahle Bayt of Prophet did what they could for the
expansion of Islam and strength of Islamic government. They sacrificed
money and life. This itself is proof and indication of their
satisfaction and love.”!**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ali Muhammad Meer Jalili: *Imam Ali (a.s.) wa Zamaamdaaraan*
(Imam Ali and the Rulers), Pgs. 227; quoting from *Sharh Nahjul Balagha*
of Ibne Abil Hadeed, Vol. 12, Pgs. 78-79  
 **[2]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Aftaab-e-Yazd Daily, Issue No.
9, Khordad 1381  
**[3]** Ibid. Aftaab-e-Yazd Daily, Issue No. 9, Khordad 1381  
**[4]** Ibrahim Baizoon (Translated by Ali Asghar Muhammadi Seejaani):
*Rafataar Shinashi Imam Ali (a.s.) Dar Aaina-e-Tareekh* (Understanding
the stand of Imam Ali in the Mirror of History) (1<sup>st</sup>
Edition), 1379], Pg. 40  
 **[5]** Ibid. *Rafataar Shinashi Imam Ali (a.s.) Dar Aaina-e-Tareekh*
(Understanding the stand of Imam Ali in the Mirror of History)
(1<sup>st</sup> Edition), 1379], Pg. 42  
 **[6]** Abdul Hameed Ismail Zahi: Appeal quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 9, Spring 81, Pg. 71

“When Hazrat Umar died, his body was laid under a shroud. I was present
there. Imam Ali (a.s.) came. He removed the shroud from his body. He
said: Abu Hafs! May God immerse you in His Mercy. I swear by God, after
the Prophet of God, there is no one except you that I was friend of. How
I wish that the scroll of your deeds were mine. I could have met God
with the scroll of your deeds.”!**[1]**

“Ali behaved mildly and politely with Caliphs’ government.”!**[2]**

“On the basis of this those who think that since they follow Ali they
must declare immunity from Caliphs should prove whether he also did
Tabarra with them, so that we must also do so.”!**[3]**

At the end of this chapter we draw your attention to another historical
document:

“When Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) returned home after [from six-member
Shura committee] he told the family of Abdul Muttalib:

“O family of Abdul Muttalib! Your relatives are at animosity with you
after passing away of Prophet like their enmity with the Prophet in his
life. If your people attain power they will never take you into
consultation.

By God, they will not turn to the Truth but by sword.”

The narrator says: Abdullah Ibne Umar was also present there and he
heard all what His Eminence said as he was entering. Then he entered and
said: “O Abal Hasan, do you want to create enmity between your relatives
and them?

Ali said: “Woe be on you! Keep Quiet! By God, if your father had not
been there and he had not behaved with me in this manner all his life,
the son of Affan (Uthman) and son of Auf (Abdur Rahman) would never have
challenged me.

At that moment Abdullah bin Umar got up and went away.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdullah Futuhi: Article in Nida-e-Islam Magazine, Issue No. 10,
Summer 81, Pg. 78  
**[2]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Aftaab-e-Yazd Daily, Issue No.
8, Khordad 1381  
**[3]** Ibid. Aftaab-e-Yazd Daily, Issue No. 9, Khordad 1381  
**[4]** Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 9, Pg. 54

### Conclusion

It is an established fact of history and an acknowledged reality that
relations between Ali and Umar were so dark and clouded that it became a
useful element to create false narrations within its folds to deviate
from reality and pervert the trend to irrigate the farm of their
benefits and harvest the crop to their advantage.

For instance: Dishonest historians, pretending to be in pursuit of
truth, have fabricated various narrations concerning the second *Bay’at*
of Ali to Abu Bakr. They have tried to instill in the minds of readers a
false concept that Ali paid allegiance to Abu Bakr with utmost
willingness and desire after the death of his wife, Zahra.**[1]**

Great Sunni scholars like Muhammad bin Ismail Bukhari has acknowledged
the hatred and disdain that existed between Ali and Umar. He narrates
that Ali sent a message to Abu Bakr telling him:

“Come to me but another person should not come with you - Umar too tried
to evade meeting Ali…”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: *A Victim Lost in Saqifah,* Vol. 4, Section 1  
**[2]** Muhammad Ismail Bukhari: *Sahih Bukhari,* Vol. 3, Pg. 253,
Kitabul Maghazi, Chap. 155, Ghazwa-e-Khaiber, Tradition no. 704 (3913)
