Discourse Fivepublicized Analyses About the Relation of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) With Caliphs
===========================================================================================

A) Ali’s criticism of Caliphs
-----------------------------

The sermon of Shiqshiqya and his other stands prove Caliphs’ deviations
and perversions from the right path.

“Whenever Ali witnessed any wrong from Caliphs or any of their
colleagues, he openly criticized them.”**[1]**

Here it must be asked how they can claim:

“History does not mention that His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) uttered a
sentence or a word against the other Caliphs.”!**[2]**

That which is worth noting in this debate are the social conditions so
blindly and ignorantly prevailing on the people in those days that made
totally impossible for any voice of criticism to rise against Caliphs.
So to criticize was neither easy nor tolerable to the people. Such an
environment gave a free hand to Caliphs without fearing any opposition.

As a result, the silence of Imam Ali (a.s.) was due to the conditions
prevailing then. It should not be attributed to fear; or seeing
eye-to-eye from the side of Imam Ali (a.s.).

Ibne Abil Hadeed writes in this regard:

“Ali had very painful matters at heart as regards the Caliphate. But the
tyranny of Umar restrained him from expression to his feelings during
the periods of Abu Bakr and Umar.”**[3]**

This was the reason for Ali’s silence, which was too hard and heavy to
him. He saw the Caliphs going astray and deviated from the right path
but the conditions forced him to keep quiet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ali Muhammad Meer Jalili: *Imam Ali (a.s.) wa Zamaamdaaraan*
(Imam Ali and the Rulers), Pg. 101  
**[2]** Farooq Safizaada: Article quoted in Kayhan Farhangi, Issue 170,
Azar 79, Pg. 80  
**[3]** Yusuf Gholami: *Pas az Ghuroob* (After Sunset), Pg. 193, quoting
from *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 9, Pg. 25

In any case:

“To oppose the government was not easy for Imam Ali (a.s.). In the early
years, it was very hard to Ali. So he tried to take refuge in isolation
to avoid face-to-face situation.

The fate of Saad bin Ubadah was a very painful example.

He did not give Bay’at to Abu Bakr. In the period of Abu Bakr or Umar
news came that Jinns have killed him in Damascus.

Some sources**[1]** indicate that his murder was political.”**[2]**

In the same way:

“Opinion of Imam about Caliphate of the three Caliphs remained confined
to himself. The stringent conditions deprived him of any freedom of
expression. Caliphate of the first two (Abu Bakr and Umar) receded into
the annals of history. As for the third (Uthman) again Ali did not find
an opportunity to express his judgment.

The handicap was Imam’s soldiers in Kufa were those who had acknowledged
the authority of Abu Bakr and Umar. So in their presence Imam could not
speak freely. Only once he got the opportunity. He gave expression to
his agonies suffered at the hands of those two. Then all of a sudden he
stopped and shifted to some other subject.”**[3]**

Because:

“Although he had a multitude of political supporters during his own
Caliphate mostly they had belief in competency of Abu Bakr and Umar. So
it was difficult for him state the facts about them or do anything
contrary to their attitude as it would have created difficulties for
him.”**[4]**

In short it can be said that:

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) had to face insurmountable difficult conditions.

“Any change in political trend from the past two Caliphs was, for Ali, a
change from a norm to which the people had become familiar and
habituated for a quarter of a century. A multitude of people had come  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Ibne Abil Hadeed, Vol. 17, Pg.
223  
 **[2]** Rasool Ja’faryan: *Tarikh wa Seerah Siyasi Amir-e-Mominaan Ali
Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.)* [History and political biography of Ali (a.s.)],
Pg. 17  
**[3]** Ibid. Pg. 18  
 **[4]** Yusuf Gholami: *Pas az Ghuroob* (After Sunset), Pg. 239

under Ali’s banner because they were critics of Uthman as to why he was
not following in the footsteps of Abu Bakr and Umar. (It shows how hard
it would have been for Ali himself.)”**[1]**

Therefore before dwelling on analysis of Imam Ali’s (a.s.) speeches, it
would be interesting to see the trend of the people:

“People of those days…came after Ali to persuade him to become Caliph.
But they expected him to follow the track of Umar.”**[2]**

“Some people clearly told the Imam (a.s.) that he must act on the
practice of the past Caliphs.”**[3]**

“Ezzat-al-Din Abu Hamid Motazalli has gone a step forward and says:
People’s getting accustomed to Umar was the main reason for their
opposition to Ali bin Abi Talib. Ebb and flow of their opposition kept
playing for long, Sometimes it caused Ali’s anger and anguish. He used
to ask whether the tradition of the Prophet was better or that of
Umar?!...**[4]**

Ali himself says that innovation in religion had taken a deep and strong
root. If I were to disclose the real ruling or decree of faith in such
regard, people would have left me and dispersed from around me.

Imam Ali (a.s.) further says: I told the people that in the month of
Ramadan except for daily prayers they must not come for any other
congregation prayer and announced that praying collectively in
recommended prayers is innovation.

Some soldiers who had fought under my command shouted: O, Muslims! Look,
the tradition of Umar is altered. Ali wants us to give up recommended
prayers of Ramadan.

So with such mentality of the people, Ali says that he feared
mutiny.**[5]**”**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Pg. 240  
**[2]** Rasool Ja’faryan: *Tarikh wa Seerah Siyasi Amir-e-Mominaan Ali
Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.)* [History and political biography of Ali (a.s.)],
Pg. 230  
**[3]** Ibid. Pg. 232  
**[4]** Quoting from: *Daimul Islam,* Vol. 1, Pg. 384, *Nahjus Saada,*
Vol. 1, Pg. 229  
**[5]** Quoting from: *Rauza Kafi,* Pgs. 58-63; *Tarikhul Khulafa,* Pg.
136  
 **[6]** Yusuf Gholami: *Pas az Ghuroob* (After Sunset), Pg. 240

Circumstances such as these also did not allow Ali to restore Fadak
during his own rule.**[1]**

Anyway, from time to time at an opportunity whether short or long, Ali
utilized to express his victimization and the tyranny done against him.
Ibne al-Hadeed writes:

“Narrations that have reached us in continuity inform us about the
situation of Ali. He has told something like this:

I have been oppressed since passing away of Prophet right till this
day.”**[2]**

Historical documents show that the people were also exercising a severe
force on Ali. When such an opinion prevails generally Imam Ali (a.s.)
refers to them (Abu Bakr and Umar) with great circumspection. This
widely disseminated opinion snatched from him the possibility of
criticizing them openly.

To be acquainted with the necessity that forced Ali to accept the past
as it preceded him refer to the third volume of this series.

A little attention to historical documents indicates the elements that
existed during Ali’s Caliphate which impeded him to criticize or censure
his predecessors, particularly Umar.

The following document, for example, shows the stringent conditions that
ruled over Ali. From this, we can grasp the tight and narrow
possibilities that were at Ali’s disposal:

Muawiyah in his letter to Ali writes:

“I have heard the news of your remembering them (Caliphs preceding Ali)
with mercy and kindness. This could be either of the two reasons – to
which there is no third. This might be due to dissimulation because you
are afraid that your soldiers with whom you fight against me would
desert you. And the second reason is what you say is false and wrong.

Also I have come to know that you have told your Shias who have gone
perverted and astray: I have named my three sons: Abu Bakr, Umar and
Uthman. So whenever you hear me send blessings on Imams of perversion
you should know that I mean my sons.”**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Ibne Abil Hadeed, Vol. 16, Pg.
231  
 **[2]** Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 9, Pg. 306  
**[3]** Muhammad Ismail Ansari Zanjani: Translation of *Asraar Aale
Muhammad,* Pg. 435

B) Why Ali named his sons after Caliphs?
----------------------------------------

What Muawiyah says in his letter so openly and frankly shows that Ali
was obliged to maintain some outward symptoms of affection towards the
three Caliphs. This will also refute another conjecture that is claimed:

“Another sign of his affection for the three Caliphs is that He named
his sons Abu Bakr bin Ali, Umar bin Ali and Uthman bin Ali.”!**[1]**

“The leader of Friday prayers of Zahidan (Iran) who is a Sunni spoke to
his audience that three brothers of Imam Husain were martyred in
Kerbala, as they fought along with their brothers. This shows the ties
of affection between the family of Ali and the Caliphs (Abu Bakr, Umar
and Uthman).”!**[2]**

Anyway, it should be noted that:

“Such arguments from early Islamic days and in the run of historical
events have played a part and given a trend to the political status of
the Prophet’s House. Further, these events just give a deluding face to
the actual facts that existed behind the events. There is nothing
tangible in it – except a public-deceiving device. In other words, to
use the common term we should say that they are far from being real.
Therefore they are nothing more than a guise to provide a show to
public.

Those who have a little information about history, Islamic civilization,
culture and something regarding Arabs they certainly know that names
such as Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman were already current among the people
prior and later to Islam. People were called by these names. They have
no bearing on the personalities. Nor these names came into being because
of the personalities.

In a social culture, no matter whichever society, inimical or intimate
relations do not cause one to be named or not named after the names of
either friends or enemies. Names have nothing to do with mutual
relations. Names cannot be prohibited.

In the norm of today’s society, too expression of love or hatred cannot
be based on a name. Because of name of one family there exists enmity,
which ends in a murder of another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sayyid Ahmad Mawassaqi: *Istiratazi-e-Wahdat* (Strategy of
Unity), Vol. 1, Pg. 135  
**[2]** Abdul Hameed Ismail Zahi: Appeal quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 9, Spring 81, Pg. 71

If the name of the murderer happens to be Abdullah the family of victim
could be angry or demand compensation etc. to assuage its hurt and
grievance. But its hatred with the name Abdullah is not justifiable.

Far beyond this, there is no one who does not know the enmity and its
extent between Muawiyah and Bani Umayyah with the Prophet’s House and
its Shias.

But a brief look at History and biographical books will show that the
Bani Hashim and Shias**[1]** continued to name their children Muawiyah
and even Yazid for centuries. Here we present a few examples:**[2]**

### Name of Muawiyah in use

– Muawiyah bin Abdullah bin Ja’far bin Abi Talib (from Bani Hashim)

– Muawiyah bin Harith and Muawiyah bin Sasaye from Shias and companions
of Ali.

– Muawiyah bin Ammar, Muawiyah bin Wahab (among Shias and companions of
Imam Baqir (a.s.);

– Muawiyah bin Saeed, Muawiyah bin Salma, Muawiyah bin Sawade, Muawiyah
bin Sahl, Muawiyah bin Tareef, Muawiyah bin Abdullah, Muawiyah bin
al-Ala, Muawiyah bin Kulaib, Muawiyah bin Maisarah. All of them were
Shia and among companions of Imam Sadiq.

Muawiyah Ja’fari was a Shia and among companions of Imam Moosa Kazim
(a.s.).

– Muawiyah bin Hakam and Muawiyah bin Yahya were among companions of
Imam Reza (a.s.) and…

### Name of Yazid in use

– Yazid bin Muawiyah bin Abu Bakr bin Ja’far (his mother was Fatima
Binte Husain bin Hasan bin Ail);**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Arabic speaking  
**[2]** [For more information most books of Shia Rijaal can be referred
like: *Rijaal Toosi, Rijaal Barqi, Rijaal Kishi, Mojamur Rijaal
al-Hadith* of Ayatullah Khui.  
**[3]** [Father and son, both from Bani Hashim were named Yazid after
the tragedy of Kerbala.Yazid bin Muawiyah bin Abdullah bin Ja’far bin
Abi Talib had two more brothers named Hasan and Salih. All three were
from the same mother and they participated in the uprising of
Nafs-e-Zakiyyah(Refer: Abul Faraj Isfahani: *Maqatil at-Talibiyyin*)]

– Yazid bin Ahnaf, Yazid bin Jibelleh, Yazid bin Tomeh, Yazid bin Qays,
Yazid bin Nowaise, Yazid bin Hani. All these were Shias and companions
of Ali (a.s.).

– Yazid bin Laheet, Yazid bin Haseen, Yazid bin Ziyad. All these three
were Shias companions of Imam Husain. All these three were among the
martyrs of Kerbala.

– Yazid bin Hatim was among companions of Imam Zainul Aabideen (a.s.).

– Yazid al-Kannasi, Yazid bin Khyam, Yazid bin Ziyad, Yazid bin
Abdullah, Yazid bin Abdul Malik Jofi, Yazid bin Muhammad Nishapuri,
Yazid bin Abdul Malik Nofekhi. All these were Shias and companions of
Imam Baqir (a.s.).

– Yazid bin Awar, Yazid al-Qamat, Yazid bin Esbaat, Yazid bin Ishaq,
Yazid bin Khalid, Yazid bin Khaleel, Yazid bin Umar bin Talha, Yazid bin
Farkhad, Yazid bin Haroon al-wasti. All of them were Shias and companion
of Imam Sadiq.

– Yazid bin Hasan, Yazid bin Khalifa, Yazid bin Saleh. All of them were
Shias and companions of Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.).

– Yazid bin Uthman, Yazid bin Umar. Both of them were Shias and
companions of Imam Reza (a.s.).

It can be noted how this name was common among Shias.

On the basis this can we conclude that relations between Muawiyah bin
Abi Sufyan and Ali bin Abi Talib and Bani Hashim and Shias were very
close and good? Who can even for a moment think that Yazid bin Muawiyah
did not commit any wrong or did not kill Imam Husain and his family?

What is certain is that names do not reflect the kind of relations that
exist between the bearers of those names.

In every society names come into fashion and later get out of date by
losing attraction or text of its contents. Besides they depend on
personal taste or cultural vicissitude. Even in Sunni societies names of
Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman are less in circulation because they are
selected. For instance, I have myself searched among the writers of
Nida-e-Islam but I did not find one bearing any of these three names.
However in the early centuries of Islam, this was not the case. These
names were familiar and customary.

However getting these names out of norm particularly from Shia circles
must be due to general will and intention of the people during the past
centuries.

Besides the wars that took place between Ottomans and Safavid rulers (of
Iran) took a religious pretext to itself. This too could be the cause
for the names receding into oblivion.

During the centuries – not too remote, Shias**[1]** created a
far-reaching and widely embracing cultural movement, which ultimately
covered all aspects and angles. This movement rather winnowed and sifted
the names leaving only those of Infallible Imams. Shias began to use
names of Imams. Therefore Shias completely eschewed the names, which
remind them of enemies of Ahle Bayt (a.s.). Little by little this Shia
practice took to itself a look of ‘enemy to the enemies’ and ‘friend to
the friends’ of the Prophet’s House. In other words to hate the enemy
and befriend the friend of Ahle Bayt of Prophet. In the earlier
centuries, such an understanding in selecting the names did not exist.

According to the foregone details now in this present age after lapse of
fourteen centuries, names cannot be the gauge of relations between two
sides. Other grounds should be searched to find the reason of enmity or
friendship.**[2]**

In that age too there was not any proof of good relation by means of the
name. These names perhaps were common among Arabs in those days.

In other words:

According to their taste or choice they used to select a name for their
newborns. There was nothing bad in these names. We do not find in any
books of opponents even in recent times; that is since fifty years
onward, that through the commonality of these they have argued that the
Imams were at good terms with the Caliphs.**[3]**

In the same way it is narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said
regarding the naming of his son, Uthman: I have named him after my
brother Uthman bin Ma’zoon.**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [Especially non-Arabic-speaking]  
**[2]** Engineer Jawad Husaini Tabatabai: *Dar
Pasukh-e-Afsana-e-Shahadat,* Pgs. 181-184  
**[3]** Ustad Sayyid Ali Husaini Milani: *Imamat-e-Bila Fasl* (Edit.
Muhammad Reza Kareemi), Pg. 237  
**[4]** Abul Faraj Isfahani: *Maqatil at-Talibiyyin,* (Translated by
Rasooli Mahallati), Pg. 80

### Another outlook about these namings

“Naming the children itself, is an issue of irrecusable importance. Such
it has been since ancient times. The magnitude of this issue depends
upon social status of the person. More serious the issue if greater the
position of the person. There are many incidents in history. After
having had named their children they have changed and chosen some other
names because the first names were not approved by the Prophet or did
not meet his taste. Or with regard to Imam Hasan, Imam Husain and
Mohsin, they were named first with names which were changed later.

There are cases that show the tyrant rulers, Caliphs, from social and
political aspects, dictated the names for the persons they liked. In
those prevailing conditions, no one could oppose the chosen name.

With regard to son of Ali whose name was Umar, Sunni sources have
explained:

“Hafiz Midhi,**[1]** Ibne Hajar Asqalani**[2]** and other writers have
written:

When Saha Binte Rabiya wife of Imam Ali (a.s.) gave birth to a male
child, Umar bin Khattab named the child after himself!!

In our opinion, this too should be the same ground as the issue of
marriage with the daughter of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) under
compulsion.”**[3]**

C) Are narrations attributed to Ali about his praise of Caliphs correct?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Answer to this question can be on two divisions:

### Part A: Narrations in Sunni books

“In books of people opposed to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) it is attributed
that: Ali (a.s.) has praised the two Caliphs in different words. Like:

“The best of the men after the Prophet is Abu Bakr and after him it is
Umar.’”**[4]**

Rather Ibne Taimmiyah writes in his book Minhaj al-Sunnah: Ali often
used to say: If a man comes to me and says I am superior to Abu Bakr and
Umar I would carry God’s decree against him for lying and lash him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tahdhib al-Kamal:* Vol. 21, Pg. 467  
**[2]** *Tahdhib at-Tahdhib:* Vol. 7, Pg. 411  
 **[3]** Ustad Sayyid Ali Husaini Milani: *Imamat-e-Bila Fasl* (Edit.
Muhammad Reza Kareemi), Pgs. 235-236  
**[4]** *Sharh al-Mawafiq:* Vol. 8, Pg. 367

We have spoken in the past regarding this subject referring to the words
of Ibne Abdul Barr.**[1]** Now we wish to dwell on details.

First: Such matters attributed to Imam Ali (a.s.) are mostly and only
mentioned in the books of Sunnis; such things are never found in Shia
books. The logic of argument is lame here. They always trod over norms
and trespass the standard formulas whenever Amirul Momineen (a.s.) comes
into question.

Second: No books of repute among Sunni authorities have mentioned these
things. If at all anything is mentioned, it is mentioned not as an
established fact. They mention under a guise of: It is told of Ali or:
Having had told of Ali…Such a tone of narration eschews responsibility.
It does not establish the narrated matter as solid truth. Such type of
narration either in history or by any authority in itself loses
credibility. They are deprived of any strength that a document or a
reality should have.

Third: Existence of words and plenitude of narrations besides the
multitude of narrators about superiority of Ali and about the best
qualities in his person, in addition to the constant sayings of Prophet
regarding the worth and highly dignified status of Ali repudiate praise
for Caliphs. There remains no room to any praise for any Caliphs. It is
invented to bedim the widespread glitter of Prophet’s praise of Ali:
There was no need for Ali to praise Caliphs.

Fourth: There are evidences in excess that prove attributions such as
these as false and absolutely lie. We suffice with one:

Ibne Abdul Barr in his book Al-Istiab Fil Marefat-al-Ashaab writes on
the authority of reputed personalities such as Salman, Miqdad, Abu Zar,
Habbab, Jabir bin Abdullah al-Ansaari, Abu Saeed Khudri and Zaid bin
Arqam:

Ali bin Abi Talib is the first one to embrace Islam. After that he
writes: They all gave Ali priority over others.**[2]**

Here it is necessary to point out that those who had such a belief in
Ali or they viewed Ali at such a station, were in all twenty persons.
They were themselves companions and enjoyed a good reputation in
society.

The author of *Al-Istiab* has avoided many others and only refers to
these  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [This statement will be repeated further in this text.]  
**[2]** *Al-Istiab:* Vol. 3, Pg. 109, Edit. Bajawi

twenty persons that he deems fit. The question who was the first to
become Muslim has a great bearing on worth or reputation in Sunni books.
Its answer is Ali. Therefore this very element singly brings much credit
and worth to Ali. Sunni sources have narrated that Abu Bakr embraced
Islam after fifty persons**[1]** had become Muslims. Therefore they
created such baseless stories to stain Ali’s reputation because of the
realities of his personality, which cannot be denied. More strange is
that they have created stories to say that it was Abu Bakr who embraced
Islam first though they have no evidence to prove it. There are several
such false stories but don’t have to argue their worth. The theme of our
argument is the saying of a highly reputed scholar among adversaries of
Shia. He is Ibne Abdul Barr Qurtubi. He says in his book that many among
the Prophet’s companions have acknowledged Ali’s superiority over Abu
Bakr. We all know this but Ali during all the periods, including when he
was in power did not punish any for this matter.

Here we see Ibne Hajar Asqalani helpless and seeking to rescue himself.
On the other hand they attributed Ali having told that he would punish
those who say Ali was better than Abu Bakr and Umar. If it was true why
Ali did not punish anyone? Ibne Abdul Barr adds: And they preferred him
upon others. So contradiction is quite obvious in his saying.

We have evidences that say similar things attributing it to the past
scholars and some to recent ones – each trying to establish his
claim.”**[2]**

In the end it is noted that Caliphs themselves have admitted superiority
of Ali in learning and knowledge. In many cases, Ali went to their help.
He solved their problems and clarified many issues. This aspect of
knowledge is very important for a Caliph. This itself is enough to
refute what Ibne Taimmiyah has claimed.

### Part B: Narrations mentioned in *Nahjul Balagha* and *Al-Gharaat*

They say:

“As Umar loved Ali and showed his deep affection to him, Ali also
reciprocated. Ali helped him as much as he could. When Umar was
martyred, Ali used to remember him saying: May God bestow good on him as
he straightened the crooked.”!**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tarikh Tabari:* Vol. 2, Pg. 316  
**[2]** Ustad Sayyid Ali Husaini Milani: *Imamat-e-Bila Fasl* (Edit.
Muhammad Reza Kareemi), Pgs. 237-241  
**[3]** Muhammad Barfi: *Seemai Ali Az Manzar Ahle Sunnat* (Portrait of
Ali from the Sunni

“On many occasions Ali has praised them. Among such utterance is his
statement about the Second Caliph in Nahjul Balagha…”!**[1]**

### Dr. Muhammad Asadi Garmarudi says in reply:

“It is said that in Sermon 228 of Nahjul Balagha**[2]** the Second
Caliph is referred with admiration and appreciation.

In this respect we should know that:

First: Does this sermon contradict matters of other sources, even
Shiqshiqya sermon and letters of His Eminence in criticism and
objections against the Caliphs or not?

Second: If we pay attention to moderation, preference and accuracy in
principle not in hearsay, with this attitude if we glance at the lecture
in question, can we still say it is in praise of the Caliph? Mr. Hujjati
Kermani claims that there is a reasoning weakness.

Third: Whether by principle this lecture is attributed to Ali. Is it not
doubtful to researchers?

In Tarikh Tabari – a reputed book among Sunnis – it is mentioned:

When Umar died, daughter of Abi Khathima wept and said: Ah! Umar!
Straightened the crooked; and cured the sick.

Mughaira Ibne Shoba said: When Umar was buried, I came to Ali. He had
just taken the bath. His head and beard were still wet. He was wrapped
in a wide towel. He was sure that Caliphate would reach to him. He said:
May God send His mercies on him. Daughter of Abi Khathima spoke the
truth. He gained the good and is saved from the evil of the world. By
God! She did not say these words. But she was told to say these words
…**[3]**

The foregone text in lecture No.228 (219 Faizul Islam) runs:

May God bestow on him the good. He made straight the sinuous and cured
the ill. He attained good of the world and is rescued from its evil.

There is a similarity in both.

Now, Tabari narrates the incident of the year 23 A.H. The text too is
said  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

point of view), [1<sup>st</sup> Edition 1380], Pg. 115**  
[1]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Ittelaat Daily, Issue No. 29,
Khordad 1379  
 **[2]** Sermon 219, Faid al-Islam Edition.  
**[3]** *Tarikh Tabari:* Vol. 3, Pg. 285, Account of Year 23 A.H.

by Ali in the same year. Its reason is also obvious. Ali says the words
do not belong to the daughter of Abi Khathima but were dictated to
her.**[1]** Ali might have repeated those words out of astonishment.

On the other hand the principle of accuracy obliges one to be attentive
of Mughaira bin Shoba. He is not trustworthy. Narrations from him are
bereft of credibility. Therefore how can this narration be worthy to
accept its authenticity? When the narrator is Mughaira how can we accept
it as saying of Ali?

Besides, in the lecture of Ali where is that part that compels us to
believe that he means the Second Caliph?

Ibne Abil Hadeed Motazalli in Vol. 12 of Sharh Nahjul Balagha while
explaining the sermon 228 refers to this subject too. Hajj Mirza
Habeebullah Hashimi Khoei the famous commentator of Nahjul Balagha says
in Vol. 14 Pg. 371 onward of Minhaj al-Baraya fee Sharh Nahjul Balagha
that after such a criticism against Caliphs how could he have said so?
We can ignore all these things.

The Late Ustad Mutahhari in his essay Sairi Dar Nahjul Balagha says:

“Ibne Abil Hadeed believes the story that there are sentences in Nahjul
Balagha in praise of Umar.

But there are some contemporaries who have narrated in different form.
It runs thus: Ali came out of his house and saw Mughaira. In a tone of
interrogation, he asked Mughaira whether was it true what the daughter
of Abi Khathima said in praise of Umar?

Therefore as such this cannot be confirmed that it was Ali’s saying or
Ali’s acceptance of the words of the speaker that Sayyid Razi included
in the text of Nahjul Balagha by mistake.**[2]**

Of course through careful attention, study of the text of Tabari’s
saying Abi Khathima’s daughter and text of the sermon 228 we can
distinguish the subject matter.”**[3]**

Thus it seems Imam Ali (a.s.) has repeated the words of the girl by way
of surprise. There is another point to be paid attention to:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** That is there were such people who publicized such things and
introduced the Caliphs as such.  
**[2]** *Seeri Dar Nahjul Balagha,* Pg. 164  
**[3]** Dr. Muhammad Asadi Garmarudi: *Haqeeqat Sookhte,* Pgs. 49-54

In the closing sentences, Ali says:

“The astrayed cannot be guided and the guided one cannot retain
certainty nor could he rest assured.”

### The Researcher Shushtari’s outlook

Perhaps in the end it would still be hard to believe the mistake
committed by Sayyid Razi. Because it is said:

“Shias accept Nahjul Balagha and whatever is in its text. The relation
between Ali and Caliphs as indicated in the text is acceptable to a Shia
because it is the most creditable book among Shias. If any narration any
book happens to be in contrast with Nahjul Balagha they (Shia) prefer
Nahjul Balagha.”!**[1]**

But it must be said:

“The past commentators because of extraordinary reputation of Nahjul
Balagha were fond of Sayyid Razi and took it for granted to be perfect
and without any error since it was the work rendered by Sayyid Razi.

Therefore no one dared to criticize or venture thereat. All considered
it the saying of Ali.

But the researcher Shushtari has shown in his other works such as Qamoos
ar-Rijaal and Al-Akhbaar ad-Dakheela that he is a skilled commentator; a
traditionist and a narrator. Likewise, he is daring to the extent of
getting appreciation in literary circles and has gained worldwide
reputation. In the town of Shushtar in a corner, he retired from
propaganda and was mindful of his own work. He has thoroughly
scrutinized the work of Sayyid Razi in compiling Nahjul Balagha. As he
appreciates his labor so he criticizes too. He does not see the compiler
who is Sayyid Razi but he sees into the quality of his work. In his
view, knowledge is more important than the person who holds it.

Now we dwell on some of his criticisms:

One:

Statements under the title of ‘Book 62’ are only a letter of Imam Ali
(a.s.) to Malik Ashtar in Egypt. It is the text of the speech delivered
after the martyrdom of Muhammad bin Abu Bakr. Martyrdom of Malik Ashtar
was before Muhammad bin Abu Bakr. The letter was read in Kufa. Imam Ali
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sayyid Jawad Mustafawi: Article quoted in *Kitab-e-Wahdat,* Pg.
139; article quoted in Mashkoot Magazine, Issue No. 2, Spring 62, Pg. 58

(a.s.) had written it and wanted it to be read out to the people.**[1]**

Two:

The sentence ‘do not kill the Khawarij after me’, itself says that it is
not of Ali. We do not find any proof by Sayyid Razi. Had Imam issued
such an order his followers would have not killed them. On the other
hand we see followers of Ali, at their head Sa’sa bin Sauhan, then
Ma’qel bin Qays and Adi bin Hatim and Shareek bin Awar and Shia of Kufa
and Basrah all of them exerted their efforts to kill them.**[2]**

Three:

Sermon 168: The statement ‘…O brothers! I do not ignore that you know.
But how can I be powerful when the people draw their greatness upon us
to possess us and we don’t.’ This is not of Ali. It is composed by
Muawiyah in imitation to Ali.**[3]**

Four:

Letter 58: Shushtari does not consider it to be of Ali. This letter is
also invented. Sayyid Ali Razi has included it unknowingly. Anyway, it
is attributed to Ali wrongly.**[4]**

Fifth:

Sermon 228: According to research, which Shushtari has carried, it is
impossible to be of Imam.**[5]** Ibne Abil-Hadid and his followers are
wrong who consider it to be of Imam.

Sixth:

Sermon 8: According to Shaykh Mufeed, Sayyid Razi attributes this to
Imam Hasan.**[6]**

Seventh:

Sermon 92: ‘Leave me alone and request other than me. If you leave me I
will be one like you…’ is not from Imam Ali (a.s.). This too is invented
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Bahjus Sibagha:* Vol. 4, Pgs. 369-373  
 **[2]** Ibid. Vol. 5, Pg. 473  
**[3]** Ibid. Vol. 9, Pgs. 448-465, especially Pgs. 428 & 449  
**[4]** Ibid. Vol. 9, Pgs. 466-480  
 **[5]** Ibid. Vol. 9, Pgs. 480-509  
**[6]** Ibid. Vol. 9, Pg. 536; quoting from: *Al-Jamal,* Pgs. 322-327

and inserted into the contents**[1]**.**[2]**

Eighth:

Sermon 169: ‘God has sent a Prophet…’ too is a creation of others. It
does not belong to Ali, or its contents are distorted.**[3]**

Ninth:

In Sermon 27: There is difference in one sentence.**[4]**

Tenth:

Saying 289: ‘To me in the past was a brother in way of God.’ This saying
is of Imam Hasan and not of Ali.

Eleventh:

Saying 22: ‘He who is detained by his work…’ Sayyid Razi attributed this
sentence to the Prophet in another book of his**[5]** but now he is
attributing it to Ali.**[6]**

Twelfth:

Saying 296: Is among the saying fabricated and presented by Saif.**[7]**

We suffice here only with these twelve items. There are several other
items also that we refer as follows according to *Bahjus Sibagha:*

Vol. 4 / Pg. 67, 401, 519

Vol. 6 / 369, 371, 401, 443

Vol. 7 / 334, 598

Vol. 8 / 82

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Vol. 9, Pg. 564  
 **[2]** [It is necessary to mention that this statement of *Nahjul
Balagha* is used to show separation between Imamate and Caliphate and in
the end to make rulership of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) valueless.(Abdul
Kareem Bi-Aazaar Shirazi: *Seemai Imam-e-Muttaqeen,* (Portrait of the
Imam of the Pious), Vol. 7, Pg. 17)]  
**[3]** *Bahjus Sibagha:* Vol. 10, Pgs. 40-44  
**[4]** Ibid. Vol. 12, Pgs. 90-91  
 **[5]** Sayyid Razi: *Al-Majazaatun Nabawiyyah,* Pg. 401, Tr. 317  
**[6]** *Bahjus Sibagha:* Vol. 14, Vol. 477  
**[7]** Ibid. Vol. 14, Pg. 573

Vol. 9 / 59, 360, 362, 423

Vol. 10 / 339, 562, 577

Vol. 11 / 526

Vol. 12 / 59-60, 94-95, 217, 541, 574

Vol. 13 / 23, 355, 361

Vol. 14 / 330, 552, 595

These are the examples we came across while turning the pages of Bahjul
Sibagha. Each one of it might seem trifle and trivial, but it attains
magnitude while explaining, commenting, translating and researching
Nahjul Balagha.

It goes without saying that Shushtari appreciates the work of Sayyid
Razi.

He has dwelled more on preface in which he has made a research in the
work of Sayyid Razi. This is not repeated in his other works.**[1]**

In the same way the claim that Ali has praised Umar is reflected in this
text:

“Ibrahim bin Muhammad Thaqafi in his book Al-Gharaat, Pg. 307 has
mentioned that Ali said about Umar: “We heard and we obeyed. He was our
advisor. He took over the charge. His conduct was satisfactory…”!**[2]**

We can investigate and analyze this in the following points:

### Point One:

The matter taken from the text of *Al-Gharaat* is a portion from letter
of Ali to his followers. This is mentioned in the book also beneath the
heading.

It should be reminded here that the letter exists in other sources
too.**[3]** Likewise, in *Al-Mustarshid fil Imamah**[4]*** by Muhammad
bin Jurair Tabari Imami Kabeer (died around year 310 A.H.) Reference to
the text makes clear the matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Sahati Sardarudi: Article quoted in the book,
*Mashal-e-Javed,* Dalil Publishers  
 **[2]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Article quoted in Kitab Naqd
Magazine, Issue No. 19, (Vol. 2), Summer 80, Pg. 31  
**[3]** Refer: Ali Akbar Zakiri: *Hukoomat O Siyasat* (Letter of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) to Shias about Caliphs), Pgs. 29-36  
**[4]** Research: Ahmad Mahmoodi: Mausisa Thaqafatul Islamiya, Pgs.
409-427

### Point Two:

What Ali has mentioned in the letter is in connection to his previous
sayings about Abu Bakr. This should be read after studying the
conditions prevalent in society in those times.

On the same page of *Al-Gharaat,* following sentences of Ali are
mentioned regarding Abu Bakr:

“…He obeyed God…”**[1]** Then he repeats about Umar “…We obeyed him.”

Imam Ali’s (a.s.) obedience is to God not to Caliphs. He obeyed where
obedience to God was necessary.

### Point Three:

Whatever Ali has said about Caliphs, depends on the same circumstances
and conditions, which we dwelt in the chapter concerned.

There is an obvious contradiction in *Al-Mustarshid* page 415 in the
text. This confirms an idea that whatever said or done was with an aim
to protect Islam and hold the people at it. Else, there was a strong
likelihood of people’s reverting to ignorance, i.e. the pre-Islamic days
– to idol-worship. The words impart such a sense.

### Point Four:

The text: a desired conduct and a blessed soul had a great influence on
the people of that time which has a bearing on Caliphate. Imam Ali
(a.s.), in fact, has sketched a general picture of people’s outlook
concerning the Caliphs.

A little attention to the norm and nature of Ali’s statement clearly
confirms the said conjecture. In reverting to *Al-Gharaat*, which is
newly printed with a commentary and correction of Mir Jalaluddin Husaini
known as Traditionist Armavi.

On the same page of the book in Footnote No. 5 he mentioned Allamah
Majlisi’s words that the Imam’s words are in keeping with the delicate
situation.

Similarly in Footnote no. 6 of the same page he points out the location
of some words, which are ahead and some behind. Imam was then speaking
about the general condition of the society.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This statement is also mentioned in *Kashful Muhajja* of Sayyid
bin Tawoos, *al-Mustarshid* of Tabarai Imami Kabir and *Al-Imamah was
Siyasah* of Ibne Qutaibah

This also applies to the letter of Ali for Egyptians.**[1]**

Late Mirza Habeebullah Hashimi Khoei in his commentary on *Nahjul
Balagha* says:

“It seems so with the people and possibly it could be by persuasion of
adversaries”**[2]**

Of the indications that attest Khoei’s viewpoint is the difference
between text of *Al-Gharaat**[3]*** and *Al-Darajaat Ar-Rafia.**[4]***
Although late Sayyid Ali Khan Madani has copied the letter from
*Al-Gharaat,* the text is short of some words of praise, which exist, in
the present text of *Al-Gharaat*. This in itself is a proof that the
text is altered and added thereon some words.**[5]**

Another thing that confirms the views of Allamah Majlisi and Allamah
Khoei is that the Imam had reflected people’s outlook. Therefore his
words mirror people’s view about the two Caliphs. The letter is
addressed to the people of Madayn. In the end, he adds:

“Then some among Muslims rose and accepted two persons and were pleased
to be guided by them and the conduct of the two pleased
them.**[6]**”**[7]**

### Final Point:

The attitude of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) in the six-person Shura committee
to appoint a Caliph is quite clear**[8]** as Imam rejects the proposal
of Abdur Rahman bin Auf to follow the tracks of two preceding Caliphs.
This proves the falsehood of their claims. When he is not willing to
follow the policies of the first two Caliphs how can he praise them?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sayyid Abul Fazl Barqai in his Preface to the book,
*Shahira-e-Ittihaad* has based his view on this document about good
relations of Amirul Momineen (a.s.).  
**[2]** Hashimi Khoei: *Minhaaj al-Bara-a,* Vol. 6, Pg. 106  
**[3]** Thaqafi Kufi: *Al-Ghaaraat,* Vol. 1, Pg. 210  
 **[4]** Sayyid Ali Khan Madani: *Ad-Darajaat ar-Rafia* (Elevated
Positions), Pg. 336  
**[5]** This possibility is also applicable to the book of *Ad-Darajaat
ar-Raafia* as it also contains many praises of the Caliphs.  
**[6]** [For more information refer to Section One of the 4<sup>th</sup>
volume of this book.]  
**[7]** Muhammad Baqir Mahmoodi: *Nahjus Saada Fee Mustadrak Nahjul
Balagha,* Vol. 4, Pg. 23  
**[8]** Refer: Ibne Qutaibah: *Al-Imamah was-Siyasah,* Vol. 1, Pg. 26,
Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 1, Pg. 188, Yaqoobi:
*Tarikh Yaqoobi,* Vol. 2, Pg. 162, Balazari: *Ansaab al-Ashraaf,* Vol.
5, Pg. 22

The denial of Ali to the proposal of Abdur Rahman in itself establishes
the illegitimacy of Caliphate of the two.

D) Had Ali accepted the legitimacy of Caliphs’ Government?
----------------------------------------------------------

A wrong interpretation of Letter No. 6 of Ali (a.s.) in *Nahjul Balagha*
addressed to Muawiyah has led to creation of a conjecture in propagating
the legitimacy of Caliphate of Saqifah besides separating Imamate from
Caliphate. Thus they allege:

“If people had selected a person of authority in consultation with
Imam**[1]** he would have administered better under Imam’s
guidance.**[2]** There would neither have been civil wars nor any
differences resulting in separation of the Ummah. After the Prophet’s
passing away Ali was, during the three Caliphs’ rule, a pivot of Islam
and its revolution…”**[3]**

### Ustad Ja’far Subhani in reply to this conjecture writes:

“Imam Ali (a.s.) was the only Caliph elected by one and all. Muhajireen
and Ansaar (Helper) both sides equally agreed on this. In the history of
Caliphate, such unanimity was unprecedented. Such a thing never happened
again.

In the meantime, Muawiyah had founded his empire in Syria. He had a
hidden enmity that was deeply rooted. He was very much upset and worried
with Ahle Bayt (a.s.) of the Prophet. When he learned that Muhajireen
and Ansaar had chosen Ali to be the Caliph he refused to acknowledge
Ali’s authority and instead accused him of Uthman’s murder and his
support to murderers of Uthman.

Imam Ali (a.s.), to silence Muawiyah and close all doors of excuse wrote
to him: The same persons who had paid allegiance to Abu Bakr, Umar and
Uthman have acknowledged my authority and me. Since the Ansaar’s and
Muhajireen’s opinion was acceptable to you, they have paid allegiance to
me now.

This is the text of Imam’s letter:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The interesting point is that these people forget their own
claims that after the passing away of the Prophet they selected Abu Bakr
as Caliph without consulting Ali (a.s.) – Refer: *Mashal-e-Ittehad,* Pg.
20  
**[2]** [Which of the three Caliphs was selected on the choice of the
people? Abu Bakr got the *Bayyat* of just five of his associates in
Saqifah, Umar was appointed by Abu Bakr and Uthman was chosen through
the trick of Shura.]  
 **[3]** Abdul Kareem Bi-Aazaar Shirazi: *Seemai Imam-e-Muttaqeen,*
(Portrait of the Imam of the Pious), Vol. 7, Pg. 18

‘Verily, those who took the oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr, Umar and
Uthman have sworn allegiance to me. Now those who were present at the
election have no right to go back against their oaths of allegiance and
those who were not present on the occasion have no right to oppose me.
And so far as Shura was concerned it was supposed to be limited to
Muhajirs and Ansars and it was also supposed that whomsoever they
selected, became caliph as per approval and pleasure of Allah.’**[1]**

The motive of Ali was to exhaust argument on Muawiyah. Imam wanted to
wipe out all grounds of mischief from and before Muawiyah.

Muawiyah was Umar’s governor in Syria. Then he maintained his post in
the same office in Uthman’s Caliphate. He maintained them in the public
as Caliphs of the Prophet of God and himself as their representative.

Imam Ali (a.s.) reminded him because Ansaar and Muhajireen had chosen
the past Caliphs. So in his own case also happened the same without any
deficiency. Therefore there was no ground to honor their opinion in one
case and reject it in another.

Ali adopted the way of argument as Quran also enjoins that. He proceeded
with the argument thus:

Those who had given Bay’at to Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman have given
Bay’at to me. So why then did you not pay allegiance to my Caliphate?
The reality of argument is not other than this. The opposite side should
be convinced on its own terms. What it thinks sacred should be brought
against it.

Anyway, the letter does not mean that Ali preferred the method of
Islamic government on the basis of consultation. Or he preferred the
appointment of Caliph by way of elections. The inner belief of Ali was
that the Caliph must be elected by absolute majority or public
unanimity. But the issue of Imamate is not of election but by divine
appointment.

This cannot be Ali’s view. Had it been so he should have not started his
letter from the past three Caliphs in this way:

Muhajireen and Ansaar have paid allegiance to me. Whomever they paid
allegiance to will be the leader of Muslims.

Imam Ali (a.s.) in his subsequent sentences says: And they gathered
around a man and named him Imam. In it is God’s pleasure. This is a
protest against the belief of opposite side. The word ‘Allah’ does not
exist  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Nahjul Balagha* (Abduh), Letter 6

in the original texts of Nahjul Balagha. This discrepancy creates doubt.

In fact, Imam’s opinion seems to be this: Whenever Muslims agree for a
man to be their leader, it attains satisfaction and acceptance.
Therefore such a thing has taken place in my case too. Why you remain
stubborn?

The first to argue this statement of Imam Ali (a.s.) from a Sunni angle
is Ibne Abil Hadeed. He has ignored the letter and other speeches of the
Imam to establish it as a fixed opinion of Imam.**[1]**

Whenever Shia scholars have considered this speech and its
interpretation they too have raised our point.”**[2]**

### The text of the Imam’s letter to Muawiyah copied from *Waqatus Siffeen*

“Another attestation to prove that the letter was a protest is existence
of sentences, which Sayyid Razi has deleted. But those sentences exist
in other books. The method of Sayyid Razi is that he has deleted text or
any part, which he deems not serious or sensitive. He mostly pays
attention to the elegance of sentences. In other words, the literary
aspect enchants him more.

The letter in question is mentioned by Nasr bin Muzahim Minqari (d. 412)
that is 147 years before the birth of Sayyid Razi**[3]** in his famous
book, Waqatus Siffeen page 48. We refer to some of its deleted parts:

1 – Ali starts the letter like this:

“They paid allegiance to me in Medina. You are in Syria. I have
completed and exhausted my argument on you. The absent has no right to
object to the decision of the present ones.”

2 – In the end of the letter is this text:

“Talha and Zubair paid allegiance to me but afterwards they both reneged
and broke their oath. By so doing, they returned to their initial status
and I waged a holy war against them. This did not hurt my Caliphate.
Anyway, the truth appeared and rested at its place. God’s command
succeeded while they were not pleased. So you too enter where Muslims
have entered.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Ibne Abil Hadeed, Vol. 14, Pg. 36  
**[2]** Ustad Ja’far Subhani: *Rahbari-e-Ummat* (Leadership of the
nation), Pgs. 64-66  
**[3]** Sayyid Razi was born in 359 A.H. and passed away in year 406
A.H.

3 – Note the following sentence also:

“And you much said about murderers of Uthman. As Muslims have entered,
you too do the same. I guide you and them to the Book of God. But the
thing you want is a trick by which a milk feeding baby is deceived.”

What did Muawiyah want from the Imam?

Muawiyah wanted that Imam should surrender the murderers of Uthman.
According to Sulaym bin Qays in his book Asl**[1]** Muawiyah wanted the
Imam to take revenge from Uthman’s murderers and then he will pay
allegiance to Ali with his followers. On the other hand Ali was seeing a
plot and a trick in Muawiyah’s proposal.

The letter from its beginning to the end clearly seems to be a letter of
protest against a stubborn party. Imam knew that his adversary is not a
man of truth. He was a tricky person. Therefore Imam must base his
letter on reason and logic not on what he himself believes. This letter
does not reflect the real belief of Imam.”**[2]**

However keeping aside Shia belief and attachment to Imamate and
*Wilayat* of Ali, we dwell on the letter itself as it is claimed:

“Liberty of people in choosing Imam and leader of God’s command is
acceptable. This makes compulsory on all to obey.” !**[3]**

“Consultation is the right of Muhajireen and Ansaar. God is pleased with
this if they collectively give their opinion to one as their Imam.”
!**[4]**

“In the foregone statement, consultation and consensus with a majority
of opinion of competent men who were Muhajireen and Ansaar in those days
give legitimacy to their choice.”! **[5]**

“In this letter, Imam agrees to the legality of Muhajireen and
Ansaar.”!**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** These letters exchanged between Imam (a.s.) and Muawiyah are
quoted in *Asl Sulaym bin Qais,* Najaf, Pgs. 159-176  
**[2]** Ustad Ja’far Subhani: Article ‘Mushawera Dar Quran O *Nahjul
Balagha*’ quoted in the book *Kawish Dar Nahjul Balagha*, Pgs. 195-197  
**[3]** Abdul Ali Bazargan: *Shura O Bayyat,* Pg. 71  
**[4]** Ibid. *Shura O Bayyat,* Pg. 86  
**[5]** Ibid. *Shura O Bayyat,* Pg. 88  
**[6]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Interview with Nahjul Balagha
Magazine, Issue No. 4-5 Pg. 177

### Conclusion

According to what is said above there remains no doubt that Imam Ali
(a.s.) referred to the acknowledgment of Muhajireen and Ansaar to
silence his staunch enemy and a strong opponent, Muawiyah and to oblige
him to surrender to the Alawi government. We refer to another letter of
Ali to Muawiyah to enable the readers to understand the case deeply and
thoroughly. Allamah Majlisi in volume 33 of *Biharul Anwar* has opened
an independent chapter under the title: ‘His letter to Muawiyah, his
protestations and addresses to him and his companions.’ He mentions
beneath it under No. 421. In the battle of Siffeen, Muawiyah called for
Abu Darda and Abu Huraira. He sent them to Ali with a letter which the
Imam read and replied. Some of his statements in reply are as follows:

“The first thing necessary for Muslims is to choose one to be their Imam
to administer their affairs. They have to obey him and follow him. In
case if it be their right to choose an Imam.

However in this case – to choose an Imam – be a divine right and the
right of His Prophet, then the choice of the people is enough. God has
ordered them to follow the Imam.

After the assassination of Uthman, Muhajireen and Ansaar after
consultations that lasted three days paid allegiance to me. These same
had earlier paid allegiance to Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman; and had
confirmed their leadership. The people of Badr and those of the advance
rows have paid allegiance to me – among Muhajireen and Ansaar. Earlier
they had paid allegiance to Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman without public
consensus. However in my case, they paid allegiance to me with a public
consensus.

If God has deposited to the people the right of choosing an Imam for
themselves, then they have paid allegiance to guidance. Their Imam is
for them an obligation to obey and support. So it is they who have
chosen me. They have done so at a consensus and chosen me as their Imam.

If this were only the divine right to appoint an Imam then God has
chosen me to be the Imam of the Ummah. He has appointed me as their
Caliph. He had enjoined them in His Book to obey me. Traditions of the
Prophet also ordered them to obey and support me. This is the strongest
proof for my Caliphate. It clearly reflects my right upon the
people.”**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Allamah Majlisi: *Biharul Anwar,* Vol. 33, Pg. 144

This message of Ali confirms Shia outlook about Imamate being a divine
office and its appointment directly by God Himself. In this respect,
people have no part to play. If people take this matter in their hands,
it creates several questions and loses its glitter of originality and
falls short of legitimacy that embraces dispute in each and every age as
seen in history. Divine Authority needs no human consultation or plot.
Muawiyah was confused and confounded and stood in a quandary. He had no
way but to surrender to reality and resign to truth.

He had no answer to Ali’s argument that it is the people who have chosen
him if God be disputable to Muawiyah. Again on the ground of Quran and
traditions, Ali was the Caliph; so each of the two is
irrefutable.**[1]** What excuse remains for Muawiyah except obduracy?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muawiyah considered himself to be appointed by the past Caliphs
as the governor of Syria and therefore could not object to the validity
of their Caliphate.
