Final Conclusionzahra’s Martyrdom Is Not Fiction
================================================

Some have tried to question the reality of Zahra’s martyrdom. They have
written:

“Some knowingly or otherwise raise the matter of Zahra’s martyrdom.
Their motive is to establish victimization of Ahle Bayt of Prophet.

This subject is thoroughly searched. We concluded that there existed
friendly relations between Ali and Umar. For instance, Umar married Umme
Kulthum, daughter of Ali. Ali named his sons: Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman.
Besides, Umar used to consult Ali in most important matters. This shows
that there existed intimate and close relations between the two.”**[1]**

“Imam (the leader) of Friday prayers of Zahidan, Sunni, said in the
lecture before prayers that there are many matters written in bigotry to
increase hatred.

Whatever is said or written is not acceptable to us. According to our
belief, Zahra died in her bed a natural death. No one martyred her.

The Friday prayers leader referred to the affection and friendly
relation between Caliphs and Ali and Zahra. He refers to the marriage of
Umme Kulthum, daughter of Ali, to Umar. He further said that it is a
proof of love that existed between Ahle Bayt of Prophet and Umar.**[2]**

Leader of the Friday prayers of Zahidan in Friday prayer sermon on 16th
Murdad 1383 in Zahidan said on the occasion of the death of Abu Bakr and
Zahra and the beginning of Umar’s Caliphate about Caliphs and their
superiorities. He said more and more about the good relations they had
with the Prophet’s family and the respect they had for them.

He said our lord Ali, our lord Abu Bakr, our lord Umar and our lord
Uthman had good relations among themselves and helped each other. He
added there was no gulf between them. He said Abu Bakr and Umar gave
priority to the family members of the Prophet to their own family
members.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdul Aziz Nomani: Article ‘Fatima Zahra az Wiladat Ta
Afsana-e-Shahadat’ quoted in Nida-e-Islam Magazine (under supervision of
Hauzatul Ilmiya Darul Uloom, Zahidan), Issue No. 3, Autumn 79, Pg. 68  
**[2]** Abdul Hameed Ismail Zahi: Nida-e-Islam Magazine, Issue No. 6,
Summer 80, Pg. 70

Sunni Friday speaker of Zahidan says regarding Zahra that she died a
natural death. Her martyrdom is only a propaganda started in recent
years.

Such a propaganda is neither to the benefit of Islam nor to advantage of
sects – Sunni and Shia.

This is not my personal view alone. The open-minded Shia scholars also
are of the same mind.

Such a thing never existed before recent years.”!**[1]**

While researches on these matters have proved their falsehood beyond any
doubt.

### Warning:

This is a device to invent things like existence of good terms between
Caliphs and Ahle Bayt (a.s.) – the House – the descending spot of angels
and revelation from heaven. They go on making claims like:

“The writer has claimed and proved that Ali was on good terms with the
three Caliphs…”**[2]**

“Tabarra (immunity) from enemies of Prophet’s House is a principle with
Shias. But it does not imply those with whom Ali had very close
relations for 25 years.”**[3]**

This will gradually lead to the situation that even in Shia circles the
questions:

“What was the cause of Zahra’s death? Was it a natural death?”**[4]**

Will be answered through statements like:

“After the death of her father, she was very much sad and depressed for
many days that told upon her health. She wept day and night and in a few
days became weak and feeble. She became seriously ill and passed away in
a few days…”!**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Nida-e-Islam Magazine, Issue No. 18, Summer 83, Pg. 8  
**[2]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Aftaab-e-Yazd Daily, Issue No.
8, Khordad 1381  
**[3]** Ibid. Aftaab-e-Yazd Daily, Issue No. 8, Khordad 1381  
**[4]** Dr. Jawad Muhaddaseen: Article quoted in Jam-e-Jam Daily, Issue
3, Shariwar 1380[This article is in reply to the objections of Muhammad
Jawad Hujjati Kermani and it has challenged him to reply to these
questions.]  
**[5]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Aftaab-e-Yazd Daily, Issue No.
8, Khordad 1381

Or with regard to congregational gatherings and meetings to commemorate
the tragedy of Hazrat Zahra (s.a.) as we will explain in the deviated
analysis like:

“The British Embassy was indirectly responsible of establishing meeting
each day in the mosques after the night prayers in which the
side-breaking of Zahra was lamented in excess.”!**[1]**

**We close this book with the verdict of Ayatullah Tabrizi about whoever
doubts the martyrdom of Zahra (s.a.):**

This is the text of the verdict is as follows:

In this exalted Name. It is not allowed to support one who doubts
Zahra’s martyrdom. We do not believe such a man to be learned. Had he
been so he would have been aware of narration reports about her
martyrdom which are obvious and evident and other narrations about the
cause of her martyrdom.

May Allah guide to the straight way.**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdul Kareem Bi-Aazaar Shirazi: *Hambastigi-e-Mazahib-e-Islami*
(Preface to the 3<sup>rd</sup> Edition), Pg. 20  
 **[2]** Ayatullah Al-Uzma Mirza Jawad Tabrizi: *Zulmaat-e-Fatima Zahra*
(Markaz al-Bahoos al-Aqaidiya, Darus Siddiqatus Shaheeda), Pg. 30
