A Victim Lost in Saqifah
========================

A Glance at thirteen years of Caliphs’  
 reign since Saqifah {style="text-align: center"}
----------------------------------------

Vol. 3
======

Motive of this Research
=======================

Analysis of the method and type of His Eminence, Amirul Momineen Ali’s
(a.s.) government was one of the subjects for a thorough research in
recent years, that is two years (Solar) were named after Imam Ali
(a.s.). This resulted in an abundant output in this field, either in
books or in shape of articles written on this matter.

Our main aim of writing this is to gauge the originality of these
endeavors by means of criticism and analysis into claims such as:

“His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) was not a governor or an administrator in an
ordinary sense. He was not a Caliph as those of Umayyad and Abbasid
dynasties. But he was a Caliph at parity with Abu Bakr and Umar!

The pivot around which policies of our Lord and Master Ali rotated was
the spirit that protected Caliphate of the prophets and the way of the
Righteous Caliphs.”!**[1]**

“And this statement is not correct that Caliphate of the preceding
Caliphs and the four members, altogether, differed from one another in
thought, policy and aims. Each of these four Caliphs was a mirror
reflecting one image. They together reflected and represented Caliphate
of the Prophet. One spirit ran between the four. These four collectively
completed one image, one system and one aim.”!**[2]**

“Salient here is conduct and true faith of Caliphs in Islam and divine
teachings. Humility of Caliphs, their unanimity in word and deed, their
moderation and honesty is worth appreciating. Scrutiny into their life
shows that they collectively had one and same moral and manner.”!**[3]**

“When Islam was subject of conversation and Islamic teachings and law,
Ali did not discriminate between the learned and ignorant. In the same
way was Umar.”!**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdul Qadir Dahqaan Siraawaani: Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 17, (9000 copies), Spring 83, Pg. 14  
 **[2]** Ibid. Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam Magazine, Issue No. 2,
(copies not mentioned), Summer 79, Pg. 30; *Bani Khatam wa Deen-e-Kamil*
(1<sup>st</sup> Edition 1379), Pgs. 102-103  
 **[3]** Fawad Farooqi: *Beest-o-panj Saal Sukoot-e-Ali* (2<sup>nd</sup>
Edition 1379), Pgs. 49-50  
 **[4]** Ibid. *Beest-o-panj Saal Sukoot-e-Ali* (2<sup>nd</sup> Edition
1379), Pg. 101

“Ali was like Umar in piety of a poor life.”!**[1]**

“Ali was strict and hard like Umar. He acted as per laws of
religion.”**[2]**

In order to answer these claims and conjectures we have tried to
scrutinize the praises rendered to Caliphs and their rule. We have tried
to display contrasts and contradictions in narrations based on documents
of Sunni sources. This will assist the reader to conclude for himself in
the light of proofs and reach a judgment about the claims made in this
regard.

### Reminder

Perhaps after reading the above statements our reader might ask why in
this analysis of thirteen years of the rule of two Caliphs nothing is
mentioned about usurpation of Ali’s Caliphate which is followed by
denial of his Imamate and *Wilayat,* attack on Zahra’s house which
resulted in the martyrdom of Zahra (s.a.) and Mohsin Ibne Ali (a.s.),
usurpation of Fadak, denial of Khums and inheritance etc. and all the
other crimes committed with regard to Ahle Bayt (a.s.)?

Because these events themselves are self-explanatory about the behaviors
and moral of Caliphs and their tyrant rule.

In the same way some of you might think that if the analysis done so far
had been compared with the method of administration of Imam Ali (a.s.)
the result would have been more beneficial and satisfactory.

In reply, we should say that the thing which impeded us to write these
points is that extensive influence of the outlook of open-minded people
who urge us to avoid criticizing this period of thirteen years. They
insist to not compare this period with Ali’s government. Else, the
reader would see the simplicity and matchlessness of Ali’s government in
those days. The reader would see the status of freedom and liberty. Thus
they say:

“Had there not been shed the pure blood of these men of liberty,
equality and justice; and had there not been the self gleaming path of
God and its devotees, today we would have thought Islam and the spirit
of Quran and Prophet’s traditions to be in the royal court of Uthman,
sycophant courtiers, deceptive people, the Green palace of Muawiyah and
his murder agents, the ignorant days’ arrogance and Arab bigotry. Not in
the astonishing life of Ali and not in the simplicity, equality and
freedom of the government of Abu Bakr and Umar.”!**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. *Beest-o-panj Saal Sukoot-e-Ali* (2<sup>nd</sup> Edition
1379), Pg. 139  
 **[2]** Ibid. *Beest-o-panj Saal Sukoot-e-Ali* (2<sup>nd</sup> Edition
1379), Pg. 244  
 **[3]** Dr. Ali Shariati: *Husain Warith-e-Adam* (Collected Writings
19), 1<sup>st</sup> Edition Pg. 356

In continuation of this same text written as preface to the book of
*Hujr bin Adi,* we read in the footnote:

“Here the criticism of Shia narrated from Ali’s tongue that personifies
the spirit of Islam, is accurate and detailed. But no historian having a
least information about world politics will ever judge the government of
these two renowned companions of Prophet at the scale of Choesroe’s and
Caesar’s governments. He cannot resist admiring these governments. The
only misfortune of these two, Abu Bakr and Umar, was that their rival
was Ali an extraordinary man. Historians judge them at the level of Ali
and hence condemn them.

If there were no Ali the rule of Abu Bakr and Umar would have been
recognized as the best government in the world and a model.”!**[1]**

Regarding the analysis of the question why Iran displayed its weakness
when the soldiers entered, we read:

“It is quite obvious as to why: Umar was then the Caliph and advisors
and commanders were close companions of Prophet. (continuation of the
footnote). Indeed, in comparison to Ali they did have shortcomings and
weakness. However comparing to Sassanides and Rome they were paragons of
freedom and justice in the eyes of non-Muslims.”!**[2]**

Therefore it seems necessary to scrutinize the system current in those
days in order to provide information to our Shia youths. It is a dire
necessity of the day that they, our youths, should become strong and
powerful with knowledge to be able to answer such conjectures or not
fall a prey to these conjectures. They should be acquainted with
relative historical documents to make their answers weighty with reason
and evidence. We will to try to prove here to our youths that Caliphs
within themselves were not bound to any teaching of Islam. They wanted
Islam only to the extent of their interests to have a ground to put
their foot. They needed Islam as much as they needed power because Islam
gave them a ground to establish their power. Therefore when necessary to
their own interests they did not hesitate to crush under their feet
principles and fundamentals of freedom and justice. On most occasions,
they too acted as Romans and Sassanides. The only difference was that
their rule was in a guise and name of Islam. From one side the name of
Islam covered their real horrible  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. *Husain Warith-e-Adam* (Collected Writings 19), Pg. 356  
 **[2]** Dr. Ali Shariati: *Tarikh O Shanakht-e-Adyan* (Collected
Writings 15), Vol. 2, (8<sup>th</sup> Edition 1381), Pg. 18

designs and from the other side dishonest historians did not record the
truth. Therefore it vanished from the history also. The record of
thirteen years’ tyrant rule was wiped out from the annals. Therefore we
face a great many difficulties on way of research; we face many
shortages and lack of documents. For instance:

“Ahmad bin Hanbal in his book Al Ilal (The Causes) says: Abu
Awana**[1]** in his book had recorded the defects of the companions of
Prophet of God. Salam bin Abi Mutee came to him and said: Give this book
to me. Abu Awana gave to him the book. Salam took and burnt it.**[2]**

Ahmad bin Hanbal in the same book has narrated from Abdur Rahman bin
Mahdi that: I seek forgiveness of Allah for having seen the book of Abu
Awana.**[3]**

He seeks God’s forgiveness for having seen the book. And another one
takes the book and burns it without the owner’s permission.

In the biography of Abdul Rahman bin Kharash is written that he had
recorded the defects of Abu Bakr and Umar in two volumes.

In the biography of Husain bin Hasan Ashqar it is mentioned: Ahmad bin
Hanbal has narrated traditions from him and said that no one has called
him a liar.

Someone told Ahmad bin Hanbal that Husain bin Hasan Ashqar narrated
traditions against Abu Bakr and Umar and that he had a separate chapter
in his book in this regard.

Ahmad bin Hanbal said that he (Ashqar) was no more competent and
trustworthy to be quoted traditions from.**[4]**

Where are those two parts or chapters about defects of Abu Bakr and
Umar?

Why nothing from its contents is narrated and reached us?

As soon as Ahmad bin Hanbal understood that Husain bin Hasan Ashqar has
narrated traditions against Abu Bakr and Umar he changes his opinion.
Ashqar, all of a sudden becomes a liar, unreliable and untrustworthy. He
is not worth relating from. Why? But why!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abu Awana was a prominent Hafiz and scholar of Ahle Sunnat  
 **[2]** Quoted from: *Al-Ilal war-Rijaal,* Vol. 1, Pg. 60  
 **[3]** Quoted from: *Al-Ilal war-Rijaal,* Vol. 3, Pg. 92 (New
Edition)  
 **[4]** Quoted from: *Tahdhib at-Tahdhib,* Vol. 2, Pg. 291

In the biography of many great tradition scholars except the authors of
Sihah Sitta it is mentioned:

They used to abuse Abu Bakr and Umar. For instance, see the biographies
of Ismail bin Abdur Rahman,**[1]** Taleed bin Sulaiman,**[2]** and
Ja’far Ibn Sulaiman al-Zabyee**[3]** and others.**[4]**

In the middle of third century curse and abuse of Abu Bakr and Umar was
a common practice. Zaid bin Qadama who lived in that period
(3<sup>rd</sup> Century) writes:

What a time has come! People abuse Abu Bakr and Umar.**[5]** This matter
spread till in the Sixth Century prominent hadith scholar of Ahle Sunnat
Abdul Mughees bin Zuhair bin Harb Hanbali Baghdadi wrote a book in
praise of Yazid bin Muawiyah. He defended Yazid and prohibited cursing
him (Yazid). The author of the book was asked why he had written it. He
replied: To prevent the people from cursing the Caliphs.**[6]**

At the end of the eighth century we come across Taftazani. In Sharh
al-Maqasid (Explanation of Purposes) he says:

If it is asked why some religious scholars consider Yazid eligible for
curse but still consider it impermissible to curse him? In reply we say:
It is so because that they may prevent cursing of persons beyond Yazid
(Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and Muawiyah etc.)**[7]**…”**[8]**

“In view of what we said, after necessary search in sources we first
conclude that there are many scholars and writers of Sunni school who
have written about the impolite and indecent behavior and conduct of
companions of Prophet either during his lifetime or after his death. But
these narrations are missing mostly due to various reasons. Or these
narrations are distorted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Quoted from: *Tahdhib at-Tahdhib,* Vol. 1, Pg. 274  
 **[2]** Quoted from: *Tahdhib al-Kamal,* Vol. 4, Pg. 322  
 **[3]** Quoted from: *Tahdhib at-Tahdhib,* Vol. 2, Pgs. 82-83  
 **[4]** Ustad Sayyid Ali Husaini Milani: *Guftaarhai-e-Peeramoon
Mazloomiyat-e-Bartareen Banu* (Translation: Masood Shikohi), Pgs.
38-40  
 **[5]** Quoted from: *Tahdhib at-Tahdhib,* Vol. 3, Pg. 264 [From his
statement it seems that talking about the defects of Caliphs was a
common practice in those days]  
 **[6]** Quoted from: *Seer Alaamun Nubla,* Vol. 21, Pg. 161  
 **[7]** Quoted from: *Sharh Maqasid,* Vol. 5, Pg. 311  
 **[8]** Ibid. Pgs. 41-42

Ibn Adi, died 365 Hijra, writes about Ibn Kharash:

He wrote two volumes containing defects and shameful actions of Abu Bakr
and Umar.

Then Ibn Adi regards it most reliable.**[1]**

In the biography of Abdul Razzaq bin Hamaam he writes after praising him
very much:

He has many things by way of defects of some companions and Caliphs
which I shall not mention in my book. He has mentioned excellences of
the Prophet’s Household and shameful behavior of companions and Caliphs,
which is hard to accept.

Ibn Adi considers this also reliable.**[2]**

Zahabi (d. 798 A.H.) in the biographies of Abu Sult Haravi**[3]** and
Rawajini**[4]** and similarly Ibn Hajar (d. 852 A.H.) in the biography
of Ja’far bin Sulaiman**[5]** have mentioned the defects of Caliphs.
According to them it is a weakness to mention the defects of companions
and Caliphs.

In his Sahih, Muslim has mentioned:

Abdullah bin Mubarak used to say in public: Do not narrate anything from
the tongue of Umar bin Thabit because he speaks ill of
companions.**[6]**

In this regard we can refer to biographies of Ahmad bin Muhammad Ibn
Saeed bin Uqda,**[7]** Ismail bin Abdur Rahman,**[8]** Taleed bin
Sulaiman,**[9]** Qadasi,**[10]** Amr bin Shimr,**[11]** Muhammad bin
Abdullah Shaibani,**[12]** Ziyad  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Quoted from: *Al-Kamil fee Zo’fa ar-Rijaal,* Vol. 5, Pg. 519  
 **[2]** Quoted from same source, Vol. 6, Pg. 545  
 **[3]** Quoted from: *Seer Alaamun Nubla,* Vol. 11, Pgs. 447-448  
 **[4]** Quoted from same source, Vol. 11, Pgs. 537-538  
 **[5]** Quoted from: *Tahdhib at-Tahdhib,* Vol. 2, Pg. 83  
 **[6]** Quoted from: *Sahih Muslim,* Vol. 1, Pg. 12  
 **[7]** Quoted from: *Al-Kashful Hadith,* Pg. 70  
 **[8]** Quoted from: *Tahdhib at-Tahdhib,* Vol. 1, Pgs. 273-274  
 **[9]** Quoted from same source, Vol. 1, Pg. 447  
 **[10]** Quoted from: *Seer Alaamun Nubla,* Vol. 18, Pg. 12  
 **[11]** Quoted from: *Lisanul Mizan,,* Vol. 4, Pg. 366  
 **[12]** Quoted from same source, Vol. 5, Pg. 231

bin Mundhir**[1]** and others.**[2]**

Why did they curse Abu Bakr and Umar?

Did a narration or narrations reach them that encouraged them to curse
them and themselves gave permission to curse the First and Second
Caliph? Now where have those narrations and matters gone?”**[3]**

“The information certainly was within books. So what happened to those
books?

Did they meet some other fate? Ahmad bin Hanbal says that the books were
burnt. Whether all that information is locked in boxes of bigotry and
obduracy? Or it is concealed in obstinacy and stubbornness? It is
another tyranny that made such rare information inaccessible.

Zahabi writes:

Though writings and books are full of texts that convey disputes, brawls
and skirmishes among companions, however at the same time some stories
are short of documents and proofs. We must hide them. We must destroy
them. This will pave way to make the people to love companions. People
must be made pleased with them.

Concealing such matters is compulsory on all generally and on the
scholars especially…**[4]**”**[5]**

This reflects to our readers how difficult has become the job of
scrutiny or research into history of the thirteen years since passing
away of Prophet. Therefore it must be said:

Discussions in this book have limited scope and from the whole it is
very little. This clearly shows that Islam served their own interest and
was a tool to them to do what they wanted. They had no belief in its
teachings. The enthusiastic reader will shift from plain thinking
towards Caliphs’ government under the title of Islam to the depths of
thought. If one performs a postmortem of those  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Quoted from: *Al-Majrooheen* (By Ibne Hibban), Vol. 1, Pg. 302;
Refer: *Tahdhib al-Kamal,* Vol. 10, Pg. 136 & Vol. 21, Pg. 594  
 **[2]** Shaykh Abduz Zahra Mahdi: Bibliography of *Al-Hujoom Alaa
Bait-e-Fatima,* Pgs. 186-188  
 **[3]** Ustad Sayyid Ali Husaini Milani: *Guftaarhai-e-Peeramoon
Mazloomiyat-e-Bartareen Banu* (Translation: Masood Shikohi), Pg. 40  
 **[4]** Quoted from: *Seer Alaamun Nubla,* Vol. 10, Pgs. 92-93  
 **[5]** Shaykh Abduz Zahra Mahdi: Bibliography of *Al-Hujoom Alaa
Bait-e-Fatima,* Pg. 190

days one will see the cause of illness of Islam and the reason for its
decline. Then he will be able to reach a correct and accurate judgment.

### Analysis of Honorable Ustad Sayyid Muhammad Dhiyabaadi about the reign of Caliphs**[1]**

“It might not be out of place here to remind them by way of
admonishment. We mean the simple-minded people.

Sometimes we hear and read appreciations of deeds of the first category
hypocrites of early days of Islam. They made wars and expanded
territories of Islam. They extended far and wide the rule of Quran and
laws of Islam. They lived a simple life. They were humble and were not
worldly men. They hated the world and its enchantments. Such a show
demonstrated by those hypocrites, indeed, has gone a long way to deceive
many simple-minded people. They believe that it was a service to Islam
and Muslims. It was propaganda in name of Islam disseminated by them.
Therefore they consider those hypocrites worthy of praise. These
simple-minded believe that a good deed should be praised and a bad one
censured.

We have this to comment to tell them in reply to such thinking and such
conclusions:

First you must know the wrong or sin in usurping something which does
not belong to one. The office of Caliphate was already made known by the
Prophet as to whom it belongs. But this was snatched away in a plot
designed since long and in secrecy. The infallible Imam was set aside.
In other words, he was discarded. Caliphate, which belonged to Ali by
Divine command, was against God’s orders taken from Ali. This action
ended in undesired consequences which contrast to God’s obvious orders
and His Prophet’s instructions and teachings. By so doing, they changed
the straight path of Islam shown by God and the Prophet. They indulged
the society into misfortune and perversion. Everything went wrong. The
direction, which was towards heaven, was changed to hell.

If you could understand this crime and reach into its depths then only
you can guess or at least imagine the dimensions resulted therefrom. You
can hear its agonies from the tongue of history of Islam. You will then
be able to see the real ugly faces of these betrayers hidden in the
guise of Islam. They concealed their face of paganhood behind a veil of
false Islam. There is no havoc that they did not bring to the Muslims.
There no  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This text is included with permission from the author.

calamity they did not bring for Islam.

They led the Ummah to a horrible valley of darkness. You will understand
that their good deeds too were not good. In those good actions were
hidden several crimes. Their good actions were their additional crimes,
harmful and hurtful to mankind.

Suppose: A cheater comes to you. By a trick, he occupies your house and
expels you from there. Then he behaves as if he is the real master of
everything. He expands the house and builds it in the way he wants. He
decorates and paints it after his own taste. This rogue got hold of your
house by force and fraud, by trick and tyranny. So his later actions
such as building and rebuilding and decorating the house would be
regarded by you as service to you? Would you be indebted to him? Would
you owe any gratitude to him? Of course not! It is usurpation. It is
immoral. It is a transgression. It is regarded a sin, a crime, a
tyranny.

In the same way we know that they forcibly occupied the seat and place
of the Prophet and laid hands on the Prophet’s pulpit and niche. Their
outward show was their good actions that they fought against pagans and
the tribes of Arabs and Ajam (non-Arab).

They also waged wars and occupied countries where they hoisted the
Islamic flag. They posed themselves as protectors of justice and guards
of Islamic territories. They showed themselves as executors of Divine
laws. In this respect, they even scourged their own son for his wrong or
sin. But any of their deeds, however admirable, was not to the pleasure
of God. From the root it was wrong. It originated from illegitimacy.
They first robbed and from usurpation, they spent on good things.
Therefore they did not deserve reward. They stand answerable for their
very first step – that is their occupation of the Prophet’s seat which
should have been occupied by his rightful successor, Ali. Their every
good deed shall be counted as a sin for them.

One who, without having the capability and divine permission claimed to
be Prophet’s successor, which is a divine office (caller towards Allah),
in the view of Quran he is the greatest liar and most unjust being and
will be liable to the most terrible punishments and most serious
chastisements; even though from the position of the usurped pulpit and
prayer niche in a show of piety delivers lectures of guidance calling
people to god-worship, truth, honesty, trustworthiness and fear of God.
And he makes war on the infidels and defeats them widening the
territories of Islam and bringing countries under the banner of Quran!

Possibly the simple-minded people on the basis of this outward show
could have accepted them as contributors to Islam and Quran. But their

real features with real identities are seen by those who have insight
and look deeply into issues. The lack of leadership of an infallible
Imam was the cause of these fatal results that the tyrant Caliphs
prepared ground for peoples’ negative thinking. They made people to
doubt about the divine religion. They posed Islam as a tool to expand
territories and to gain worldly purposes. Islam was looked upon not as a
religion but a reason to rule and govern.”**[1]**

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Extract from *Dar Justujoo-e-Ilm-e-Deen* (In search of religious
knowledge), Pgs. 165-182
