Discourse Onepiety and Simplicity Scrutinized
=============================================

Motive of Caliphs’ Piety
------------------------

“People contemporary to the Prophet had become familiar and habituated
to plain living. Besides, people were very much happy and gratified that
their leader was living a simple life. This had become a particularity,
a distinction and a standard of a leader.

If one in his worldly life used to adopt piety and keep himself from
extravagance, ate simple food and wore coarse clothes, even though he
did not have other qualifications of leadership, he was considered most
qualified for leadership.”**[1]**

Accordingly it was natural that Caliphs should have adopted this way of
life, which gives them a hand to deceive people and attain legitimacy to
their usurped Caliphate. This weak point in public opinion had been of
much benefit to Caliphs to draw from it as much advantage as they could
in political and social aspects. Whatever capacity they had, they
exerted efforts to abstain from worldly luxuries and comforts. This was
a tool to deceive people. By doing so they got the pleasure of governing
people – Arabs and non- Arabs.

The type of life they lived gave them required strength and needed
ability to cheat and deceive people to an extent, which provided them a
stand among them and brought the public opinion to their absolute favor.
Such a gain on their part went a long way to silence people when the
First Caliph confiscated Fadak and when the Second Caliph brought new
things into religion that had not existed in the Prophet’s lifetime.
Because:

“Abu Bakr and Umar did not very much take benefits from the Public
Treasury. On the basis of this, people thought that if the Caliph
confiscated one’s property or wealth it was not that he wanted to
increase his own wealth.

People like that their rulers not be strict towards them in collecting
taxes. And if the public pays taxes, the money should not be used for
personal expenditure.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Yusuf Gholami: *Pas az Ghuroob* (After Sunset), Pg. 173  
**[2]** Yusuf Gholami: *Pas az Ghuroob* (After Sunset), Pg. 239; quoting
from: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Ibne Abil Hadeed, Vol. 16, Pgs. 266-267;
*Ash-Shafi,* Pgs. 233-234

Ibn Abil Hadeed Motazalli narrates in his commentary of *Nahjul Balagha*
what his teacher. Abu Ja’far Naqeeb had told about the deep influence of
pious-looking politicians:

“The style that Abu Bakr and Umar had adopted in their political life
attracted peoples’ general admiration because they distanced themselves
from worldly riches and adopted piety, though a feign one.**[1]** They
eschewed worldly decorations and greatness. They showed as if they are
at a distance from worldly gains. They sufficed with a little of it. For
food, they sufficed on very simple food. In clothes, they chose very
coarse cloth. Whenever they got any worldly profit they divided it among
the people. They did not corrupt themselves with worldly riches. This
issue played a great part in attracting peoples’ hearts towards them.
Caliphs remained always in good books of people and in their good will.
Those who had a little doubt in their hearts said to themselves:

Had they been opponents of Prophet’s orders it would have been for their
personal benefit. Some or other attachment to world could have been seen
in them.

How they opposed the Prophet’s command and [at the same time] eschewed
worldly pleasures; so they spoiled for themselves both the worlds. Would
a man with a little sense do it?

It was this issue that left no doubt in anyone with regard to their
actions;**[2]** they trusted their rulership and approved their
character.

But people neglected one point in their calculations that is the
pleasure of being in power. Being at the helm of affairs and ruling
people and steering the government is itself a great luxury and a great
gain.**[3]** For this, everything is sacrificed. Food and other things
are of no importance for those who are after greater aims. Thus the poet
says:

Some ignored the pleasure of riches.

But they did not ignore the pleasure of commanding and prohibition.

Abu Ja’far Naqeeb says: The difference of the two Caliphs with the third
was the cause that the third was killed that way. People had deposed
him. Uthman thought that he and his family has a share in the public  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [To leave]  
**[2]** [It means the opposition of those two and their associates to
the customs of Prophet and laws of Shariah]  
**[3]** [This quality in the Caliphs was like cunning that is associated
with Amr Aas.]

belongings. Whatever does not belong to him and his family, he thought
that it should belong to him. When it belongs to him, it belongs to his
family too. If Uthman also had followed the system of his predecessors
and kept his family away from public treasury, people would have been at
his side. Even if he had changed the direction of prayers from Kaaba to
Jerusalem or if he had reduced the five-time prayers to four, people
would not have objected and none would have criticized him…”**[1]**

According to this analysis, we can understand the reason of peoples’
silence against innovations of the Second Caliph. Whatever wrong the
Caliph did, it was regarded within a religious framework even by the
Prophet’s Companions, even though it be against the Prophet’s practice.

Political Piety
---------------

Although it is claimed:

“He was so pious and God-fearing that he did not appoint Saeed bin Zaid
in the consulting (Shura) committee because he was his cousin.”!**[2]**

But it must be said: The fake piety that he had created around himself
brought him popularity among the people. Through this means, he gained
legitimacy for his Caliphate. He adopted the same policy in appointment
of government staff.

Both Abu Bakr and Umar avoided giving jobs in government at low or high
levels to their relatives and close ones – no matter how befitting or
qualified they be for that job. This trick reflected among the people
their piety and fear of God.**[3]**

Of course some exceptions were there:

**A)** Abu Moosa Ashari was an official of Umar in Basrah. Abdullah Ibn
Umar was his son-in-law.**[4]**

**B)** Qadama bin Maz’oon was Abdullah bin Umar’s maternal uncle. He was
Umar’s agent in Bahrain.**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ali Muhaddith (Bandar Regi): *Siyaah Tareen Hafta-e-Tarikh,*
Pgs. 142-144; quoting from: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Ibne Abil Hadeed,
Vol. 12, Pgs. 82-90  
**[2]** Abdul Qadir Dahqaan Siraawaani: Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 14, (9000 copies), Summer 82, Pg. 15  
**[3]** Refer: Najah Ata at-Tai: *Nazaryaat al-Khaleefatain,* Vol. 2,
Pgs. 210-211  
**[4]** Refer: Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Naqsh-e-Ayesha Dar
Tarikh-e-Islam,* Vol. 3, Pg. 103; he wanted his son-in-law to become the
Caliph through the arbitration.  
**[5]** Refer: Najah Ata at-Tai: *Nazaryaat al-Khaleefatain,* Vol. 2,
Pgs. 257-259; quoting from: *Al-Isabah,* Vol. 3, Pg. 228

Historical documents also show that Umar was well aware of the danger of
appointing family members in government affairs. Therefore he avoided
appointing his relatives and his dear ones.**[1]** Instead, he appointed
outsiders who had their tribal backings.

“It is said that Umar had predicted Uthman’s fate in the following
words: If Uthman becomes Caliph, sons of Abi Muit**[2]** and
Umayyah**[3]** will dominate people. He will place public revenue at
their disposal. I swear by God, if he reaches to Caliphate he will
certainly do what I have said. Arabs will riot against him such that
they will kill him in his own house.”**[4]**

How come Umar frame a committee of six persons and gave such powers to
Ibne Auf**[5]** so that it was sure that Uthman would become the Caliph?
This is a question that can only be answered by Umar himself.

Piety or Public Deception
-------------------------

The following document shows that it was Umar’s trick to deceive people
by the cloak of piety he had donned. It was to protect himself from
peoples’ objection. Because historical sources say:

“Hurmuzan**[6]** asked Umar: Do you allow me to cook food for Muslims?

Umar said: I am afraid you won’t be able to.

Hurmuzan: No. I can.

Umar: Then, the choice is yours.

Hurmuzan cooked food in various tastes of different varieties – sweet,
pinching, sore, mild and hot. He came to Umar and informed him that the
food was prepared. He invited Umar to come and eat the food.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [Perhaps he learnt this diplomacy from the First Caliph]  
**[2]** [It denotes the sons of Abu Muit bin Abu Amr bin Umayyah! Abu
Muit was the grandfather of Waleed bin Uqbah.]  
**[3]** [Sons of Umayyah means: Abul Ais, Abu Amr, Aas, Abul Aas
(grandfather of Uthman bin Affan and Marwan bin Hakam) and Harb (father
of Abu Sufyan).]  
**[4]** Ahmad al-Kubra: *Min Hayatul Khaleefah,* Pg. 435; quoting from
*Tarikh Yaqoobi,* Vol. 2, Pgs. 158-159  
**[5]** [Abdur Rahman bin Auf, brother-in-law of Uthman (husband of Umme
Kulthum binte Uqbah bin Abi Muit) (Balazari: *Ansaab al-Ashraaf,* Vol.
5, Pg. 19)]  
**[6]** [Hurmuzan, the former king of Shoos and Shustar had become a
Muslim who sketched conquest of Iranian towns for Umar.]

Umar stood in the middle of the mosque and said loudly:

O, Muslims! I am a messenger of Hurmuzan to you. Then Muslims followed
Umar. When Umar reached the house of Hurmuzan, he stopped at the door
and said:

Wait here. Then he entered the house alone. He asked: Bring the food
that is cooked. I like to see it. Then Umar asked to bring a huge plate
for him. The plate was given to him. He ordered to put the food from
each variety in it. Then Umar mixed it.

Hurmuzan shouted: What are you doing. You spoiled the food because some
is sweet and some is salty.

Umar answered: Do you want Muslims to change their opinion about me.
After doing this, he asked Muslims to enter the house and eat the
food.”**[1]**

Hypocritical Piety
------------------

One of the claims to prove the piety of Caliphs is this:

“To prove Abu Bakr’s piety in not utilizing the public funds and showing
his dislike to worldly luxuries these two examples are enough:

One day household members of Abu Bakr asked him get sweets for them.

His wife suggested that she would save some money from daily expenses
for a few days until it makes a sum. Abu Bakr accepted his wife’s
suggestion. After a few days, a small amount was saved. This amount was
given to Abu Bakr to buy sweets. Abu Bakr took the amount and
surrendered it to the Public Treasury. He said to the official of funds
that experience proved that the sum was more than domestic expenses. So
he ordered the treasury to reduce his monthly allowance by the same
amount. For the past months, he ordered to collect the sum from his
personal property he had before becoming Caliph.”!**[2]**

“Another case: Abu Bakr in his last days sold the land he had bought
during his Caliphate from the amount he had taken as his salary by
consent of Muslims**[3]** to be used by Caliph, and returned it to the
Public  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Najah Ata at-Tai: *Nazaryaat al-Khaleefatain,* Vol. 2, Pg. 36  
**[2]** Abdul Qadir Dahqaan Siraawaani: Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 10, (9000 copies), Summer 81, Pg. 20  
 **[3]** Consent: what is this consent? We very much come across this
word in the Sunni books. If they mean it is the consent of all the
Muslims, it is impossible to obtain from all. If they mean only those
around the caliph and if they are regarded as the representatives of
Muslims, they have no such authority because of the ruling of Umar

Treasury. He also made a will that all amenities utilized by him as
Caliph should be returned to treasury.”**[1]**

Before analysis, we would like to draw the attention of our readers to a
historical document in which you will see for yourself that Abu Bakr
himself has admitted that he cannot refrain from the world and its
attractions. Yet they claim:

“Abu Bakr was a man most indifferent to the world.”**[2]**

“It is mentioned in Mustadrak Sahihain Vol. 4, Pg. 309 that Zaid bin
Arqam narrated: We were with Abu Bakr when he asked for something to
drink.

Water mixed with honey was brought for him.

He took the glass close to his lips and wept for a long time then he
wiped his tears.

He was asked: O Caliph of Prophet of God, why are you weeping?

Abu Bakr: I was with the Prophet of God. I saw him driving away
something, but there was no one to be seen.

I asked: O the Messenger of Allah! What is it that you are warding off
from you?

He said: It was the world that came to me personified. I told it to go
away from me. She (the world) cried and returned and said: Even though  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

in the following case:Here is this historical document:Two men came to
Abu Bakr and demanded a piece of land for cultivation. Abu Bakr asked
the opinion of those who were around him that time. They agreed. So, Abu
Bakr gave them the relative documents of the land. The two men took the
document to Umar to attest it. Umar took the document and tore it up.
Umar was angry and came to Abu Bakr and asked: Is this land yours? Or,
is it of all Muslims? Abu Bakr said that it belonged to all Muslims. He
said that he had consulted his courtiers. Umar asked whether the few
persons were all Muslims. Whether all have agreed on this? Abu Bakr
said: I told at the beginning that you are more competent to be the
Caliph. But you did not agree and forced me to accept this post. (Ali
Muhammad Mir Jalili: *Imam Ali and the Rulers,* Pg. 61, narrated from
*Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Ibn Abil Hadid, Vol. 12, Pg. 58)**  
[1]** Abdul Qadir Dahqaan Siraawaani: Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 2, Summer 79, Pg. 31  
**[2]** Sayyid Abdur Raheem Khateeb: *Shaykhain* (6<sup>th</sup> Edition
1382), Pg. 29

you may flee from me but he that would come in your place after you
would not be able to leave me.

This same story Khateeb Baghdadi has written in the Tarikh Baghdad Vol.
10, Pg. 286 and Abu Naeem has written in Hilyat al-Awliya Vol. 1, Pg.
30. Both of them have mentioned this too that Abu Bakr told that he
feared that the world might occupy him in its pleasures. Muttaqi has
also written is Kanzul Ummal Vol. 4, Pg. 37 that Abu Bakr wept fearing
the world would entrap him…”**[1]**

Analysis of this quotation brings three points to the fore:

**A)** This story is narrated by Sunni sources in their reliable books.
If relation or mutual attachment between Abu Bakr and the world is
accepted, it would contradict the claim of his being pious.

**B)** If the claim of Abu Bakr of the talk of the world with the
Prophet were true then there comes the attachment of the world and Abu
Bakr, which contradicts the claim of his piety.

**C)** If this talk between Abu Bakr and Muslims is true, it seems that
the confession of Abu Bakr before Muslims and his companions in that
particular way was a salient quality with him and was a covering over
his extraordinary inclination towards the world. The Caliph (Abu Bakr)
here has invented the tradition to confirm his Caliphate and at the same
time his piety. He wants to establish his probity before the events of
Saqifah. He wants to prove by this invention of his, close familiarity
between him and the Prophet. This will give popularity to his Caliphate
and justification to him for that post. In the tradition invented by him
these worlds are very much meaningful “…he that will come in your place
after you.” How can it be believed when in order to justify the
usurpation of Caliphate of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) they claim that the
Prophet did not appoint anyone as his Caliph or successors?

The document leads us to a crossroad where one way leads to his
confession of being worldly and enchanted by the world and the other is
contrast in claim of his piety and fear of God, which compelled him to
return public funds he had used during his Caliphate.

Abdullah, grandson of Abu Bakr (from his daughter), requested Asma, wife
of Zubair, to recommend Abu Bakr. He was very much dear to Ayesha – his
aunt.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Husaini Firozabadi: *Shanasai-e-Haft Tan
Dar Sadr-e-Islam* (Translation of *As-Saba’ tu Min as-Salf;* written by
Abbas Rasikhi Najafi), Pgs. 81-82

His request from his grandfather Abu Bakr is interesting.

“When Abu Bakr became Caliph Abdullah was a youth. One day he came to
Abu Bakr (his grandfather) and asked him to give him a huge piece of
land. A hill too was in that land. Abu Bakr granted that big piece of
land to his grandson to please him.

In Tarikh Ibn Asakir this story of wholehearted generosity of Abu Bakr
to his own grandson, Abu Bakr bin Zubair is narrated as follows:

Abdullah requested his grandfather to give him a hill somewhere in
Medina. Abu Bakr asked him what he wanted the hill for?

Abdullah answered: We had such a hill in Mecca. So we want to have a
similar thing in Medina also. Abu Bakr spotted out a suitable location
and granted it to Abdullah. He built two bridges in that place but now
there is no sign of them.”**[1]**

Such irresponsible utilization of public funds is recorded in the annals
of history. On the other hand conjectures are invented to dress the
Caliph in a guise of piety.

“It is also said that when Abu Bakr was dying he said to his daughter
Ayesha: We had Muslim affairs in our hands. But you know that I did not
take even one Dinar or Dirham from public funds by way of
salary…”!**[2]**

In the same way we see the following claim repeated regarding the
deprivation of family members and children of Caliph from minimum
material needs through Abu Bakr:

“Abu Bakr adopted a life of piety since he became a Caliph. He took from
public treasury the minimum amount in salary. His salary was not enough
to purchase sweets for his wife and children. He lived such a stringent
life at a time when conditions were improved, Islamic territories were
stretched and expanded and the revenues too had increased.”**[3]**

On the other hand we hear this story from a girl grown and brought up in
the house of Abu Bakr:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Husain Ghaib Gholami: *Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) wa
Rumuz-e-Hadith-e-Fadak,* Pgs. 43-45; quoting from: *Tarikh Madeenatud
Damishq,* Vol. 28, Pg. 200  
**[2]** Fawad Farooqi: *Beest-o-panj Saal Sukoot-e-Ali* (2<sup>nd</sup>
Edition 1379), Pg. 35  
**[3]** Abdul Qadir Dahqaan Siraawaani: Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 2, Summer 79, Pg. 31

“Ayesha, in the days**[1]** of the Prophet, had several dresses and
cloaks of different designs and fashions while other wives of Prophet
had simple dresses of cheap quality.

Ayesha also wore gold and other jewellery.

Even in the days of Hajj when costly dresses and ornaments are ignored
and not used Mother of believers did not abstain.”**[2]**

Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari has shown documents in this respect, which
he has utilized in his analysis. We quote a few here:

A) The author of Tabaqaat writes on the basis of the narration from
Qasim bin Muhammad bin Abu Bakr (son of Ayesha’s brother): Ayesha wore
costly cloaks – mostly of yellow color. She had costly rings, which she
used to wear.

B) A Muslim woman named Shamsia narrates: One day I visited Ayesha and
found her wearing a yellow dress and a yellow headscarf.

C) Son of Ayesha’s sister, Urwah bin Zubair narrates: Ayesha had an
upper dress of silk. She used to wear it on occasions. Later she gave it
to Abdullah bin Zubair.

D) After passing away of Prophet, Muhammad bin Ashath brought a present
of a skin coat, which she used to wear in winter.

E) A Muslim lady named Amina says that she saw Ayesha wearing upper
dress of red color and headscarf of black color.**[3]**

F) Qasim bin Muhammad bin Abi Bakr says: Ayesha used to wear a yellow
Hajj dress (Ihraam). At the time of Hajj, she performed Hajj wearing her
gold ornaments and other costly things.**[4]**

The interesting thing is Ayesha wore such dresses and appreciated the
dress of the ladies of Ansaar as a model for a Muslim lady. She says:

“I have not seen women better than the women of Ansaar. When this verse
[verse of Hijab in Surah Noor] descended each one hurried to her  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [After the passing away of the Seal of the prophets and during
continuous wars there was excess of war booty and wealth.]  
**[2]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Naqsh-e-Ayesha Dar
Tarikh-e-Islam,* Vol. 3, Pg. 232  
**[3]** Ibid. Vol. 3, Pgs. 232-233; quoting from: *Tabaqat al-Kubra,*
Vol. 8, Pgs. 69-73  
**[4]** Ibid. Vol. 3, Pg. 233; quoting from: *Seer Alaamun Nubla,* Vol.
2, Pg. 132

woolen cloth, cut it and covered their heads with it as though a black
crow was sitting on their heads.”**[1]**

Personal use of Public Funds
----------------------------

In the same way it is said that Abu Bakr lived a simple life and was
very careful with public funds:

“Abu Bakr told his daughter, Ayesha, at the close of his death to
surrender the camel, which he was riding and the bowl of his food and
the gown he was wearing to the new Caliph who would succeed him. These
things are prohibited to others than the Caliph.”!**[2]**

In reply to this we have to rely on historical documents that show how
he lavished bribes from Muslims treasury on his opponents to obtain
their support. It is the worst type of advantage that puts the piety of
Caliph to question.

A)
--

As you know the Prophet delegated Abu Sufyan to a certain district to
collect Zakat. When Abu Sufyan returned to Medina the Caliphate of Ali
was hijacked in the Saqifah conspiracy.

Abu Sufyan at first because of communal feelings proposed to Imam Ali
(a.s.) of his acknowledgement to him as the Caliph but after

“He got disappointed from Ali towards his own personal gains. On the
other hand the government at that time was anxious for his campaign,
which was in anticipation of government. Umar went to Abu Bakr and told
him that Abu Sufyan had returned from his assignment. He warned Abu Bakr
that they would not be safe from his mischief. The Prophet of God too,
always treated him with care and affection for this very reason. Now he
has some amount collected by him in Zakat. Although the amount with him
belongs to the Public Treasury we should ignore the amount and give it
to him to please him. Abu Bakr agreed and did the same.

Abu Sufyan was pleased and he paid allegiance to Abu Bakr.**[3]**

According to the narration of Tabari, Abu Sufyan did not pay allegiance
to Abu Bakr until he got the post of commander for his son, Yazid bin
Abu Sufyan, to the army in Syria.**[4]**”**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Zamakhshari: *Al-Kashaf,* Vol. 3, Pg. 231, Under Verses 30-31 of
Surah Noor  
 **[2]** Abdul Qadir Dahqaan Siraawaani: Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 10, Summer 81, Pg. 20  
**[3]** Quoted from: *Al-Iqdul Fareed,* Vol. 3, Pg. 62  
**[4]** Quoted from: *Tarikh Tabari,* Vol. 2, Pg. 449  
**[5]** Allamah Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar Afsaane* (Abdullah
Bin Saba and other legends), Vol. 1, Pg. 157Allamah Askari: *Abdullah
Ibne Saba Wa Deegar Afsaane* (Abdullah Bin Saba and other legends), Vol.
1, Pg. 157

“Our readers are aware of the fact that among them and Bani Umayyah
chief (Abu Sufyan) there was no difference of views. I (the
author)**[1]** believe that contradictions in their behavior were a
strategy to create divisions in society. There was no motive at all of
any good among them.”**[2]**

B)
--

Although it must be noted that diversion of public funds in such a way
and bribing political adversaries was a common practice of Caliphs. Such
misappropriation was in excess. They did it freely without fearing God.
To prove this there are many historical documents but we quote here a
few:

“When Abu Bakr was established in office he fixed salaries from public
funds to Muhajireen and Ansaar women.

Share of a woman from Bani Adi bin al-Najjar was given to Zaid bin
Thabit to deliver to her. Zaid went to her and presented the stipend.
The woman asked him what it was for. Zaid told her that it was her share
fixed by Abu Bakr. The woman replied: Do you want to take away my faith
by this bribe? I swear by God, I will not accept anything from him.

The amount was returned to Abu Bakr.”**[3]**

This of course was not the first case and that woman, not the only woman
to be bribed though she rejected. Such cases of expenditures that told
on public funds are aplenty. Besides there are many cases of bribes
given to persons of their own choice secretly and which were not
recorded in books of treasury. For instance the Bani Aslam tribe got
free provision in return to their support to Abu Bakr’s rule.**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [Author of *Asraar wa Asaar Saqifah Bani Saada*]  
**[2]** Hashmatullah Qambari Hamadani: *Asraar wa Asaar Saqifah Bani
Saada* (Secrets and relics of Saqifah Bani Saada), Pg. 81  
**[3]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Saqifah* (Study about the
formation of government after the passing away of the Holy Prophet),
Edited by Mahdi Dashti, Pg. 58; quoting from: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,*
Ibne Abil Hadeed, Vol. 2, Pg. 133  
 **[4]** Refer: Shaykh Mufeed: *Al-Jamal,* Pg. 43

Anyway the policy of terror, fear, greed and bribe –was at the top of
the list that ran the administration of Abu Bakr’s rule. Such that he
said:

I hope your hearts by terror and your bellies by food have been
filled.**[1]**

At the end we would like to quote another case of misappropriation of
public funds by Caliphs for their personal benefit and benefit of their
families, particularly by Umar.

C)
--

“Zakwan a freed slave of Ayesha narrates: When Iraq was conquered,
spoils of the war were distributed among Muslims. A basket was sent to
Umar with a jewel. Umar showed the jewel to Muslims around him and asked
its worth. Nobody knew its worth. He then asked them to allow him to
send the jewel to Ayesha for the love the Prophet had towards
her.**[2]**

All agreed.

He sent the jewel to her.

Ayesha said: O, God! What a great victory You have bestowed on Umar
today...”**[3]**

Apparently Umar had forgotten what he himself had told Abu Bakr that
public property cannot be granted to anyone that the Caliph likes.
Acceptance of a few cohorts around the Caliph cannot be a sanction for
this generosity. It belongs to all Muslims. The courtiers of Caliph are
not peoples’ representatives. So their sanction does not carry any
credit.

More interesting is that Ayesha accepted the jewel as a present. She
immediately was pleased and praised Umar. She forgot her father’s will
in which he had advised her not to use anything from public property or
any sum from public funds because it belonged to Muslims. This shows
that in fact there was no such will.

Anyway, public funds were used for personal interests very openly and
freely. On the other hand they go on making claim after claim. For
instance:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Suyuti: *Jame al-Ahadith,* Vol. 13, Pg. 106  
**[2]** [On reading the first volume of *Naqsh-e-Ayesha Dar
Tarikh-e-Islam,* it is known how Ayesha coined traditions to strengthen
the foundation of Caliphate.]  
**[3]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Naqsh-e-Ayesha Dar
Tarikh-e-Islam,* Vol. 1, Pg. 118; quoting from: *Seer Alaamun Nubla,*
Vol. 2, Pg. 133 & *Mustadrak Hakim* & *Talkhis Dhahabi,* Vol. 4, Pg. 8

“Umar did not use his Caliphate for any personal benefit. He did not
allow himself any sum from public funds for his private ends. He did not
allow himself to lavish money on others from public funds.”**[1]**

D)
--

“Ibn Saad narrates from Saeed bin Aas Amawi**[2]** that he (Saeed) asked
Umar to give him a piece of land surrounding his house. He wanted the
land to expand his house.

He was encouraged to make such a request because Umar had given lands to
some of his close associates.

The Caliph told him: Come after the Morning Prayer so that I may do what
you want.

Saeed did accordingly. Then they both, Umar and Saeed, went to the spot
to see the land.

Umar drew a line by his foot over the land and said this too is yours.

Saeed bin Aas said to Umar to enlarge the land to some extent because he
had a large family.

In reply to this request, Umar said: This much is enough for you.
However I’ll tell you a secret, which you please don’t disclose to
anyone. After me, one will become Caliph that will give you what you
request. He will attend to family ties and relations.

Saeed waited the whole duration of Umar’s Caliphate. When Uthman became
a Caliph he did what Umar had predicted.”**[3]**

The interesting point is that Umar did not consult anyone in his charity
of lands, which belonged to all Muslims. He did not obtain permission of
any Muslim around him. He perhaps forgot the many times he had censured
and blamed Abu Bakr in his similar procedure and had even refused the
excuse that he (Abu Bakr) had consulted the people around him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ali Tantawi (Translated by Abu Bakr Hasanzadeh):
*Dastan-e-Zindagani-e-Umar,* (1<sup>st</sup> & 2<sup>nd</sup> Edition
1380), Pg. 46  
**[2]** [Saeed bin Aas bin Saeed bin Aas bin Umayyah]  
**[3]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Naqsh-e-Aaimma Dar Ahya-e-Deen*
(Role of Imams in the Revival of Religion, Vol. 14, Pgs. 25-26; quoting
from: *Tabaqat,* Vol. 5, Pgs. 20-22

Clandestine Luxury
------------------

Claims are made that:

“Umar was an emperor who used to sit over naked ground instead of a
throne embossed with jewels. He wore a coarse cloak – very ordinary and
cheap, which was quite in line with the dress of a poor ordinary
citizen. In his dress, there was no distinction as to differentiate him
from others. In those days there were very costly cloths and pieces in
the treasury that came from East and West as gifts and
presents.”!**[1]**

“Umar used to work from early morning to late at night and take wages
for his labor. This he made a source for his livelihood and did not
burden public funds.”!**[2]**

“He did not have leisure to eat in ease and comfort or to wash his
clothes. He did not go after luxury and pleasure.”!**[3]**

“When Umar left the world he was in debts. His conscience did not let
him to take a single Dirham from public funds.”!**[4]**

On the other hand historical document indicates something else:

A – “Umar borrowed a great sum from public funds. It amounted to 86000
Dirhams.**[5]**

Now if we suppose his fixed annual expenses were five thousand Dirhams
then such a loan as this would equal expenses of more than sixteen
years.”**[6]**

Other matters recorded in history say:

B) “Umar gave one thousand Dirhams to one of his relatives.”**[7]**

C) “He fixed a dowry to one of his wives as forty thousand
Dirhams.”**[8]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdul Qadir Dahqaan Siraawaani: Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 11, (9000 copies), Autumn 81, Pg. 7  
**[2]** Fawad Farooqi: *Beest-o-panj Saal Sukoot-e-Ali* (2<sup>nd</sup>
Edition 1379), Pg. 73  
**[3]** Ali Tantawi (Translated by Abu Bakr Hasanzadeh):
*Dastan-e-Zindagani-e-Umar,* (1<sup>st</sup> & 2<sup>nd</sup> Edition
1380), Pg. 90  
**[4]** Muhammad Kamil Hasan al-Hami (translated by Ghulam Haider
Farooqi): *Zindagi Naame Umar bin Khattab* (1<sup>st</sup> Edition
1382), Pg. 22  
**[5]** Quoted from: *Tarikh al-Khulafa,* Pg. 135  
**[6]** Najah Ata at-Tai: *Nazaryaat al-Khaleefatain,* Vol. 2, Pg. 7  
**[7]** Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 12, Pg. 62  
**[8]** Ustad Ja’far Murtuza Amili: *Tahlili Az Zindagi-e-Siyasi Imam
Hasan Mujtaba (a.s.)* (Translated by Muhammad Shahri, 2<sup>nd</sup>
Edition), Pg. 182; quoting from: *Al-Futuhaat al-Islamiya,* Vol. 2, Pg.
55; *At-Tarateeb al-Idariya,* Vol. 2, Pg. 405; *Al-Bahruz Zakhaar,* Vol.
4. Pg. 100It is said that they were 10000 in number (*Ansaab
al-Ashraaf,* Vol. 2, Pg. 109)

D) “He presented 10000 Dirhams to one of his sons-in-law who had come
from Mecca.”**[1]**

E) “One of the sons of Umar sold his share of inheritance to his
brother, Abdullah bin Umar to the amount of a hundred thousand
dirhams.**[2]**”**[3]**

Abu Yusuf confirms all these cases and adds:

F) “Umar had four thousand distinguished horses in the way of God.

Umar used to give one of these horses to one whose share from public
treasury was little and his needs more. Umar put this condition when he
gave the horse: If you tire the horse or do not feed it properly or make
it thin and lean, you will be held responsible. If you went to holy war
with it and it got wounded you will not be accountable.”**[4]**

Although the last part of the narration is praise to Umar in some way or
other, if the Sunni sect believes this praise they should also believe
that Umar owned four thousand horses in the first place. If it is so, it
will be in immediate contradiction with claims of his having had lived a
poor life because of his piety. On the whole, it can be said:

“His pious life does not mean that he had no wealth during his
Caliphate. According to sources Umar was among the rich ones of
Quraish.”**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Pg. 182; quoting from: *Tabaqat,* Vol. 3, Pg. 219;
*Al-Futuhaat al-Islamiya,* Vol. 2, Pg. 390; *Hayatus Sahaba,* Vol. 2,
quoting from: *Ibne Saad* and *Kanzul Ummal,* Vol. 2, Pg. 317 & Ibne
Jurair and Ibne Asakir; *Tarikh al-Khulafa,* Pg. 120  
**[2]** Ibid. Pg. 182; quoting from: *Jame Bayan al-Ilm,* Vol. 2, Pg.
17  
 **[3]** Extract from: Rasool Ja’faryan: *Tarikh Khulafa,* Pg. 705;
quoting from: *Tarikh Mukhtasar Damishq,* Vol. 10, Pg. 406]  
 **[4]** Ibid. Pg. 182; quoting from: *Al-Kharaij,* Pg. 51  
**[5]** Rasool Ja’faryan: *Tarikh Khulafa,* Pg. 70; quoting from:
*Hayatus Sahaba,* Vol. 1, Pg. 347

While it is said about him:

“Umar owned nothing and he did not desire to own anything.”**[1]**

Support to Royal life and Hoarding Wealth
-----------------------------------------

Even though in this regard their claim is:

“Hazrat Umar succeeded in his days to stand like an iron wall against
this tempest and hurricane and with all his power held it in
abeyance.”!**[2]**

But historical documents indicate opposite of this. Please note the
following:

### 1 – Support to Muawiyah

“The Second Caliph used to issue special orders with regard to Muawiyah
regardless of the fact that Muawiyah was one of the freed ones, yet Umar
was enthusiastic to prepare him for Caliphate. So he tried to prepare
ground for his (Muawiyah) coming to power.

It is enough to mention that:

A) Umar kept Muawiyah for years in the post of governor of Syria but did
not check his accounts as was routine. While every year he sent auditors
to check account books of his district collectors and provincial
governors which sometimes ended in insult to the governors.

B) Umar did not keep his collectors and governors in their posts for
more than two years. He either changed their locations or transferred
them to other places.**[3]**

C) Muawiyah asked Umar to furnish him with instructions so that he acts
thereupon accordingly. Umar said that he would neither issue any orders
to him nor would restrict him from doing anything.**[4]**

D) These were the things in addition to other wrongdoings of Muawiyah,
which Umar did know but overlooked. For instance he lent money on
interest but Umar did not take any action against him.**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Fawad Farooqi: *Beest-o-panj Saal Sukoot-e-Ali* (2<sup>nd</sup>
Edition 1379), Pg. 221  
**[2]** Abdul Qadir Dahqaan Siraawaani: Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 14, Summer 82, Pg. 20  
**[3]** Quoted from: *At-Tarateeb al-Idariya,* Vol. 1, Pg. 269  
**[4]** Quoted from: *Tabari,* Vol. 6, Pg. 184; *Al-Iqdul Fareed,* Vol.
1, Pg. 14  
**[5]** Quoted from: *Musnad Ahmad,* Vol. 5, Pg. 347; *Sharh Nahjul
Balagha,* Ibne Abil Hadeed, Vol. 4, Pg. 60

E) One day Muawiyah was censured and blamed in the presence of Umar.
Umar said to them: Don’t blame the brave man of Quraish before me. He is
so brave that he laughs even while he is angry.**[1]**

F) Umar paid as a salary of one thousand Dinars every month to Muawiyah
from public funds. This amount is mentioned as 10000 dinars yearly in
other narrations.**[2]**

G) Umar used to say about Muawiyah:

Beware of a man of Quraish – a man whose color is closer to black. Also
beware of his son. He is one who goes to slumber when he is pleased and
laughs when he is in rage.**[3]**

H) Once Umar saw Muawiyah and remarked: He is Choesroe of Arabs.**[4]**

I) One day Umar asked his companions: Will you speak about Choesroe and
Caesar and their policies in the presence of Muawiyah?!**[5]**”**[6]**

Such praises for Muawiyah and his royalty while it is that:

“Sometimes Umar too had called himself a king.**[7]**”**[8]**

It is interesting that in spite of these clear confessions of the Caliph
it is still claimed that:

 “Having had so much greatness and power he did not like to be counted
among kings and rulers.”!**[9]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Quoted from: *Al-Istiab,* (on the margins of *Al-Isabah*), Vol.
3, Pg. 397  
**[2]** Quoted from: *Uyun al- Akhbaar,* Vol. 1, Pg. 9  
**[3]** Quoted from: *Uyun al- Akhbaar,* Vol. 1, Pg. 9  
**[4]** Quoted from: *Al-Istiab,* (on the margins of *Al-Isabah*), Vol.
3, Pgs. 396-397[In this book it is mentioned:Whenever Umar came to Syria
or looked at Muawiyah he used to remark: This is the Choesroe of
Arabs.(*Al-Isabah,* Vol. 3, Pg. 434; *Usud al-Ghaba,* Vol. 5, Pg.
386)]  
**[5]** Allamah Ja’far Murtuza Amili: *Tahlili Az Zindagi-e-Siyasi Imam
Hasan Mujtaba (a.s.),* Pgs. 98-100  
**[6]** [The Caliph said before the people: By Allah! I don’t know
whether I am a Caliph or a king (Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul
Balagha,* Vol. 12, Pg. 66)]  
**[7]** Ibid. Pg. 181; quoting from: *Al-Futuhaat al-Islamiya,* Vol. 2,
Pg. 290; *Hayatus Sahaba,* Vol. 2, Pg. 256  
**[8]** Fareedoon Islamniya: *Ashra-e-Mubashira* (1<sup>st</sup> Edition
1380), Pg. 102  
**[9]** Fareedoon Islamniya: *Ashra-e-Mubashira* (1<sup>st</sup> Edition
1380), Pg. 102

“This great sacred man instead of becoming proud and arrogant because of
his battles – one of which was Jerusalem – became humble.”**[1]**

### 2 – Support to Tameem**[2]**

Historical documents show that:

“In this period the Caliph made Tameem equal to the people of Badr and
elevated him to the rows of great men of Islam. He was allotted a
monthly salary of five thousand Dirhams.”**[3]**

Yes, this Caliph is reputed for piety and God-fearing nature.

“Umar had great reverence and respect with regard to Tameem. He used to
attribute him as the best among the people of Medina.”**[4]**

While:

“About Tameem, it is said that he bought a dress for himself for one
thousand Dirhams to wear it on the night of Power.**[5]** This amount
was sufficient to buy two hundred sheep. By this amount, he could have
fed hundreds of hungry men.”**[6]**

### 3 – Support to Zaid bin Thabit**[7]**

Historical documents show that:

“Umar had a special affection towards Zaid bin Thabit. Abu Bakr during
his reign asked Umar to appoint Zaid (who was a youth then) in Finance
Department. When Umar became Caliph, Zaid came to him with money he had
from the Treasury but Umar told him to keep it for himself.”**[8]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sayyid Abdur Raheem Khateeb: *Shaykhain* (6<sup>th</sup> Edition
1382), Pg. 417  
**[2]** [Tameem bin Aws bin Kharija was a Christian monk who had
converted to Islam in 9<sup>th</sup> year of Hijra, that is a year
before the passing away of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)]  
**[3]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Naqsh-e-Aaimma Dar Ahya-e-Deen*
(Role of Imams in the Revival of Religion, Vol. 6, Pg. 88; quoting from:
*Futuh al-Buldan,* Pg. 556  
**[4]** Ibid. Vol. 6, Pg. 87; quoting from: *Al-Isabah,* Vol. 3, Pg.
473; *Seer Alaamun Nubla,* Vol. 2, Pg. 446  
**[5]** Quoted from: *Seer Alaamun Nubla,* Vol. 2, Pg. 445  
**[6]** Ustad Ali Koorani: *Tadween-e-Quran,* Pg. 186  
**[7]** [A young Jew who had recently converted to Islam]  
**[8]** Rasool Ja’faryan: *Tarikh Khulafa,* Pg. 76; quoting from:
*Tarikh Madinatul Munawwara,* Vol. 3, Pgs. 854-855; *Al-Isabah,* Vol. 1,
Pg. 85

### 4 – Support to Qunfudh

This happened in one of the years when Umar was checking the financial
status of his personnel. Qunfudh was having twenty thousand dirhams of
the treasury. Umar did not check the account and gave the money for his
personal use even though that year he had confiscated half the property
of all his officers.**[1]**

Properties of Staff Members
---------------------------

“Abdur Rahman bin Auf went to see Abu Bakr who was seriously sick. Abu
Bakr spoke to him. One of his statements was:

Whoever among you I appointed as officer collected the revenue for
himself.”**[2]**

“Umar bin Khattab [also] time to time used to call his officers to
Medina. His officers had openly hoarded wealth from public funds. Umar
checked their financial position and interrogated them. He used to take
half of their money for public funds and the other half he left for
themselves.**[3]** He neither changed their position nor transferred
them.**[4]**

Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) did not like this policy. He told Umar:

If you think they are wrongdoers, why you take half of their wealth
obtained by them illegitimately and return the other half? Why you keep
them in their posts?

One day one of the interrogated officers asked the Caliph:

If this money is God’s why don’t you take all of it? If it is mine why
you take half of it?**[5]**”**[6]**

More interesting is that:

### A)

Persons like Abu Huraira, governor of Bahrain was accused of
misappropriation of public funds and the Caliph was notified of this
accordingly.**[7]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Balazari: *Futuh al-Buldan,* Pgs. 90, 226 & 392  
**[2]** Mustafa Iskandari: *Baazkhwani Andisha-e-Taqreeb,* Pg. 247;
quoting from *Tarikh Yaqoobi,* Vol. 2, Pg. 137  
**[3]** [This shows misappropriation, and the action of Caliph proves
that he did not consider his officers trustworthy]  
**[4]** Quoted from: *Al-Iqdul Fareed,* Vol. 1, Pg. 46  
**[5]** Quoted from: *Al-Iqdul Fareed,* Vol. 1, Pg. 46  
**[6]** Yusuf Gholami: *Pas az Ghuroob* (After Sunset), Pg. 285  
**[7]** Najah Ata at-Tai: *Nazaryaat al-Khaleefatain,* Vol. 2, Pg. 205;
quoting from: *Sharh*

### B)

“The Caliph confiscated the property of Abu Moosa Ashari,**[1]**
governor of Basrah, but he was not dismissed from his job.”**[2]**

In other words, one whose property is confiscated because he
misappropriated public funds is allowed to continue in his job!

There are further documents that show:

“A man named Zabbat bin Mohsin Anzai quarreled with Abu Moosa Ashari for
spoils of war. Abu Moosa sent him to Umar. Umar, without asking him for
the reason of his quarrel with Abu Musa, punished him. Zabbat was
enraged and wanted to leave the place. At that time, Umar asked him the
reason of the quarrel.

He replied: Abu Moosa has seventy Iranian slaves and a maid by name
Aqeela. He said that Abu Moosa lives in such and such way. Then the man
counted to Umar the spoils Abu Moosa had taken for himself.**[3]** In
spite of this information about Abu Moosa, the Caliph did not dismiss
him. The only thing Umar did was that he purchased Aqeela from Abu Moosa
for himself!”**[4]**

Keeping in mind his partiality with freed slave like Muawiyah, Zaid bin
Thabit and Tameen you can yourself judge the following claim about him:

“Umar was so astute and shrewd that he sensed the slightest change in
the life of his personnel while they were in the hurricane of victories
and spoils of war. He had a watch over all of them. He interrogated them
without exemption to check their honesty and trustworthiness towards
government and Muslims.”**[5]**

“Umar throughout the years of his Caliphate paid due care and attention
to the work of his personnel and proceedings of his governors.”**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Nahjul Balagha,* Ibne Abil Hadeed, Vol. 3, Pg. 113**  
[1]** [Abdullah bin Qais, also called as Abu Musa; Abdullah bin Umar was
his son-in-law]  
**[2]** Najah Ata at-Tai: *Nazaryaat al-Khaleefatain,* Vol. 2, Pg. 222;
quoting from: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 12, Pg. 43  
 **[3]** Quoted from: *Al-Futuh,* Vol. 2, Pgs. 288-289  
**[4]** Mustafa Iskandari: *Baazkhwani Andisha-e-Taqreeb,* Pg. 248  
 **[5]** Abdul Qadir Dahqaan Siraawaani: Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 11, Autumn 81, Pg. 6  
**[6]** Fareedoon Islamniya: *Ashra-e-Mubashira* (1<sup>st</sup> Edition
1380), Pg. 102

Selection of officers
---------------------

The Second Caliph strongly believed that competency and astuteness in
carrying out responsibility of government and military affairs was more
important than faith and justice of his men.

### A) Selection of Mughaira bin Shoba

Ibn Abde Rabb writes in the beginning of his book *Iqdul Fareed* under
the topic of ‘Discretion of the ruler for those competent for the
job’:**[1]**

“When the Caliph decided to appoint a new governor for Kufa in place of
Ammar Yasir**[2]** he was confused because if he sent a man of probity
he would be regarded as weak**[3]** and if he sent a man of ability, he
would be considered a tyrant. At this juncture, Mughaira interfered and
put the suggestion:

A man of probity if considered weak the weakness will be his own – not
yours. But his inability is counted on you because it will have an
immediate bearing on you. On the other hand a strong man will be to your
advantage while the sins will be his alone!

The Caliph said: You are right! That man is yourself, because at the
same time you are a tyrant also. This was the ground for his appointment
and he was sent to Kufa.**[4]**”**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Najah Ata at-Tai: *Nazaryaat al-Khaleefatain,* Vol. 2, Pg. 199  
**[2]** [In the original text it is mentioned that this happened at the
time of dismissal of Saad bin Abi Waqqas and appointment of Mughaira in
his place, while the fact is that Mughaira was not immediately appointed
after Saad, in between Ammar Yasir occupied the post of governorship of
Kufa for a brief period.  
“After Saad bin Abi Waqqas for a short period Abdullah bin Utban and
then Ammar bin Yasir became the governor of Kufa. Since the people of
Kufa found him lenient they asked Umar to appoint someone else and he
sent Mughaira bin Shoba to Kufa.” (Yusuf Gholami: *Pas az Ghuroob*, Pg.
283)]  
**[3]** [Umar is said to have expressed his view in this sentence: “They
weakened him – their pious governor! The pronoun used by him refers to
Ammar Yasir and not Saad bin Abi Waqqas. As such, the man who was
considered able one and at the same time a tyrant and profligate was
Saad bin Abi Waqqas.  
It should be remarked here because the name of Salman Farsi too is
referred to. The historical document shows that Umar appointed Salman
Farsi governor of Madayn. The motive of Umar was that Salman would
commit some or other wrong. This would provide Umar with an excuse to
destroy Salman and discard him from society.  
According to this, one can conclude that such a plot could have been
there for Ammar to enmesh him. So, quite possibly Ammar must have been
the victim of such intrigues.]  
**[4]** Quoted from: *Al-Istiab,* Vol. 3, Pg. 472 & Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg.
204; quoting from *Al-Iqdul*

In this way the Caliph preferred a profane man who had committed great
many sins and crimes in Basrah when he was the governor there, but he
(Mughaira) was never punished or dismissed. Now he was appointed
governor of Kufa.

Historical annals say that Abu Bakr too had the same policy.

### B) Selection of Khalid bin Waleed

Abu Bakr acted in the same way with Khalid bin Waleed and in spite of
the wicked crimes Khalid perpetrated he made him commander of Syrian
army.**[2]** In the meantime, Abu Bakr left a will**[3]** in which he
had enjoined to send Khalid with governorship to Iraq as soon as he
returns from Syria.**[4]**

### C) Selection of Amr bin Aas

Similarly Abu Bakr surrendered Palestine and its affairs to Amr bin Aas.
When Umar became Caliph, he transferred him to Egypt as a governor while
he (Umar) himself had written a letter to Amr bin Aas addressing him as
disobedient, son of disobedient (Al-Aasi ibnal Aasi).**[5]**

More interesting is the fact that Sunni scholars have themselves written
that Umar bin Khattab said:

“One who appoints a transgressor to a job knowing that he is such, is
like him only.”**[6]**

Anyway, in spite of all these historical records still they claim:

“Umar bin Khattab himself was epitome of justice. Therefore he wanted
his district collectors and provincial governors to be like him – men of
justice in all respects.”**[7]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Fareed,* Vol. 1, Pg. 35**  
[1]** Najah Ata at-Tai: *Nazaryaat al-Khaleefatain,* Vol. 2, Pg. 200**  
[2]** Refer: Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 189; quoting from: *Tarikh Yaqoobi,* Vol.
2, Pg. 138; *Tarikh Tabari,* Vol. 2, Pg. 617  
**[3]** Refer: Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 189; quoting from: *Tarikh Tabari,*
Vol. 2, Pg. 603  
 **[4]** [Regarding the attitude of Mughaira and Khalid we will be
giving more sources and documents in the following pages.]  
**[5]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 200; quoting from: *Abqariya Umar,* Pg. 28  
**[6]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 200; quoting from: *Tarikh Umar bin Khattab,*
Pg. 56  
**[7]** Sayyid Abdur Raheem Khateeb: *Shaykhain* (6<sup>th</sup> Edition
1382), Pg. 204

Piety without a Holy war
------------------------

It is commonly known that the Prophet used to take the responsibility of
the command of the army in important and key battles. In battles like
Badr, Uhad, Khandaq, Khaiber, Conquest of Mecca, Hunain and Tabuk the
Prophet himself was present. On the other hand historical annals show
that neither Abu Bakr nor Umar were present in any of the battles or
invasions for expanding Islamic territories though these battles took
place during their Caliphate. Besides, these battles were called ‘Holy
War’ that is war in the way of God. Neither Abu Bakr nor Umar took the
command of the army nor directed military movements.

“Historians have unanimously narrated that Abu Bakr only once left
Medina to wage a war. After Usamah returned from Mutah, he moved towards
Zilqissa. There he prepared a well-equipped army. He gave the command of
this army to Khalid bin Waleed while command of Ansaar group was
responsibility of Thabit bin Qais. Earlier it was under command of
Khalid. He issued orders to them to destroy Tolaiha and those who were
from tribes of Asad and Fuzara and had gathered around Tolaiha under his
command. So they had to move towards Buzakha. There are some historians
who have mentioned the surprise attack launched by Bani Fuzara and that
one man from them was killed. This happened in Zilqissa.”**[1]**

“Balazari and Muqaddasi have also mentioned the story of Zilqissa and
the event of the attack of Bani Fuzara.

Muqaddasi after narrating Abu Bakr’s journey to Zilqissa adds:

Then Khalid advanced towards the enemy with his army. Kharija bin Hisn
saw Muslims were in a limited number so he gathered courage and attacked
them with a few mounted warriors. As a result, Muslims fled and Abu Bakr
too fled with them. His age put him out of breath which failed his legs
so he took refuge by climbing up the nearest tree concealing himself in
the foliage to escape the enemy…”**[2]**

“It is interesting how they fabricate narrations**[3]** and create
stories to justify the Caliph’s absence in the field and the necessity
for his presence in the capital (Medina).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Allamah Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar Afsaane* (Abdullah
Bin Saba and other legends), Vol. 2, Pg. 43  
**[2]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 42  
 **[3]** For example: Refer: *Tarikh Khaleefatain bin Khayyat,* Pg. 51
(Darul Kutub al-Ilmiya, Beirut)

They in the same way have forged narrations attributed to Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) in which Ali (a.s.) restrained Abu Bakr and Umar not to
personally take part in battles for the safety of their lives.”**[1]**

While Amirul Momineen (a.s.) although having devoted and loyal warriors
around him like Malik Ashtar etc. himself commanded the Islamic forces
in three battles of Jamal, Siffeen and Nahrawan and took an active part
in them.

Pleasant Food
-------------

Let us see what food the Caliph used to eat and in this respect, what
claims have been launched.

“He (the Caliph) was so frugal in food that no one liked to eat even one
morsel of his food.”!**[2]**

“Sometimes he (the Caliph) remained hungry for long that his belly used
to impart sounds as an empty vessel does.”**[3]**

But what historical documents say is that:

A) “A man told Umar: You have put on weight.

Umar replied: Why should I not when I have women around me who have no
pursuit except to fill my stomach?…”**[4]**

More interesting is that the Caliph himself chastised those who grew
fat.

“The Caliph saw a man, who because of obesity walked huffing and
puffing.**[5]**

He asked: What’s wrong with you?

The man replied: This is a blessing from God.

Umar said: No, this is a punishment from God. He is punishing you in
this way.”**[6]**

B) The narrator says: “I was in Umar’s house at dinner time. He (Umar)
was eating bread with meat...”**[7]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Extract from: Najah Ata at-Tai: *Nazaryaat al-Khaleefatain,*
Vol. 1, Pgs. 313-314  
**[2]** Fareedoon Islamniya: *Ashra-e-Mubashira* (1<sup>st</sup> Edition
1380), Pg. 101  
**[3]** Ibid. *Ashra-e-Mubashira* (1<sup>st</sup> Edition 1380), Pg.
102  
 **[4]** Najah Ata at-Tai: *Nazaryaat al-Khaleefatain,* Vol. 2, Pg. 8;
quoting from: *Shaykhaan Balazari,* Pg. 237  
 **[5]** [Around 3 Kgs.]  
**[6]** Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 12, Pg. 165  
**[7]** Najah Ata at-Tai: *Nazaryaat al-Khaleefatain,* Vol. 1, Pg. 44;
quoting from: *Tabaqat,* Vol. 3, Pg. 318

C) “Ibn Abbas says that he visited Umar during his Caliphate. A vessel
full of dates was brought that he may taste them. It contained a
Saa-a**[1]** of dates.

He invited me to join and I only took one piece but he ate up all the
dates emptying the vessel, then drank water from a flask kept near him.
After that he put his head on a pillow, stretched his legs and
relaxed…”**[2]**

D) Abdullah bin Umar narrates: “I saw my father that his mouth was
watering. I asked him how he was feeling?

He said: I very much want to eat red shrimp**[3]**.”**[4]**

In the end, we leave to you to judge the truth of claims such as:

“Our lord Umar was a model and example to Muslims for his simple living,
not getting entrapped in worldly pleasures and his humble and submissive
nature.”!**[5]**

Rivalry to piety of Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
------------------------------------------

Truly inspite of the fact that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was at the
pinnacle of piety and at the highest degree of probity, how can others
gain a reputation among people as being models of piety just by
pretending to be simple and pious? Thus even in criticism of the
aristocratic attitude of the Second Caliph it is said:

“Umar inspite of his piety was the first to lay the foundation of Arab
aristocracy**[6]**.”!**[7]**

Reply to this claim should be searched in the spirituality of people who
witnessed the piety of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) during the period of his
rule.

“People want a leader who should not prefer his own family to the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [Around 3 Kgs.]  
**[2]** Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 12, Pg. 20  
**[3]** [A delicious Arabian dish]  
 **[4]** Ahmad al-Bakri: *Min Hayatul Khaleefa,* Pg. 76; quoting from:
*Tabaqat,* Vol. 3, Pgs. 229-230  
 **[5]** Abdul Qadir Dahqaan Siraawaani: Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 11, Autumn 81, Pg. 5  
**[6]** [Rule of nobles]  
 **[7]** Muhammad Hasan Mashayakh: Article quoted in Nahjul Balagha
Magazine, Issue Nos. 2-3, Summer 80 – Spring 81, Pgs. 70-71

people. He should live like them with them. He should try for their
well-being – not the well-being of his own circle. And Ali Ibne Abi
Talib (a.s.) was such.

People were well aware of virtues and other tributes of Ali and also
knew that he was not like Umar. To Ali there was no difference between
an Arab and non-Arab, he did not overlook least disobedience to God,
never cancelled the smallest penalty, never feared scolding anyone and
except for divine standards and distinctions did not care for anything.
It was all this that the people could not bear…”**[1]**

Caliphs had to maintain the show of simple living and poverty because
days of Prophet were still fresh in memories of people. The Prophet had
lived such and people had seen it. Therefore it became binding for Abu
Bakr and Umar, but both pursued the practice of ignorant days behind
this show of piety and poverty. They were partial to Arabs in relation
to others. They gave preference to Quraish over the people. They
satisfied their inner inclination**[2]** such as pride and self-lust. Of
course their victories in expanding Islamic territories also served a
shield to them. It silenced the people to a great extent. In the
meantime, they preceded little by little in bringing a gradual change in
the style of government. They distanced from the type of government the
Prophet had. At the same time they pleased the people so that even to
this day of ours they are pleased with them. Ali did not like any
trickery and hypocrisy.

For this the piety of Caliphs was propagated to shadow the piety of Imam
Ali (a.s.). Today they claim:

“The pious life of Ali was a shadow of the Prophet’s life and a ray of
light of Caliphate Abu Bakr and Umar.”**[3]**

“Ali was like Umar in his piety.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Yusuf Gholami: *Pas az Ghuroob* (After Sunset), Pg. 174; quoting
from *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 4, Pg. 78  
**[2]** Like in establishment of Taravih Prayer or with attention to the
recitation of Quran.Abu Moosa Ashari says: “The Caliph appointed me as
the governor of Basra and instructed me only to make the recitation of
Quran popular among the people.” (Ibne Kathir: *Al-Bidaya wan Nihaya,*
Vol. 8, Pg. 107)  
**[3]** Abdul Qadir Dahqaan Siraawaani: Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 2, Summer 79, Pg. 33  
**[4]** Fawad Farooqi: *Beest-o-panj Saal Sukoot-e-Ali* (2<sup>nd</sup>
Edition 1379), Pg. 139
