Discourse Fouranalysis of the Rights of Legal Opponents
=======================================================

Type of dealing with legal opponents
------------------------------------

### Iron-handed policy

When Muhajireen came out successful in Saqifah, they at once adopted the
policy of suppressing rival parties or adversaries. This they did to
establish Abu Bakr’s authority at any rate:

“Abu Bakr Jauhari has narrated from Baraa bin Azib: After the news of
allegiance to Abu Bakr in Saqifah spread, immediately Abu Bakr, Umar,
Abu Ubaidah and a group of associates of Saqifah set out in the town
roaming the streets. Whomever they met on way they held his hand and put
it on the hand of Abu Bakr without regard whether that man was in favor
or not.**[1]**

They dragged the people to give Bay’at to Abu Bakr in any way possible.
In this matter Umar was more rough than others and after him was Qunfudh
bin Umair.

The group that set out to take Bay’at from people was anxious to finish
the job as early as possible.”**[2]**

Umar started the job from Saqifah itself.

“Umar says: When they obtained Bay’at from people they attacked Saad bin
Ubadah. One person asked him whether he killed Saad. Umar replied that
God killed him!**[3]**

According to another narration after Umar said: Kill Saad! He shouted:
May God kill him. Then he went at the head of Saad and said:

I want to kick in such a way that you become invalid.**[4]**”**[5]**

“At the indication of Umar people kicked Habbab bin Mundhir,**[6]**
filled his mouth with mud**[7]** and broke his nose.**[8]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Quoted from: *Saqifah wa Fadak,* Pg. 4; *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,*
Vol. 1, Pg. 219  
**[2]** Mustafa Dilshad Tehrani: *Meeras Rabooda* (Usurped inheritance),
Pg. 83  
 **[3]** Quoted from: *Al-Kamil Fit Tarikh,* Vol. 2, Pg. 12  
**[4]** Quoted from: *Tarikh al-Umam wal Mulook,* Vol. 3, Pg. 222  
**[5]** Sayyid Hasan Fatimi: Article quoted in *Danish Nama Imam Ali
(a.s.),* Vol. 8, Pg. 433  
**[6]** [He was a respectable personality of Khazraj tribe]  
**[7]** Quoted from: *Tarikh al-Umam wal Mulook,* Vol. 3, Pg. 210  
**[8]** Quoted from: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 1, Pg. 174

After a short while another group came and kicked Miqdad.**[1]**

On the same spot Saad bin Ubadah was about to die because of the kicks
he had got.**[2]**

On that day whoever shouted against them his mouth was filled with
mud.**[3]** There was only one cry, one clamor and one shouting that was
constantly heard:

Kill so and so!**[4]** Kill them! We cut your throat…**[5]**

Umar set free whoever paid allegiance to Abu Bakr, pointing him the
direction to go. He did this to impress on the public that job was done
and finished.

Afterwards this group consisting of close associates and supporters
headed to the lanes and by lanes of the town. Whoever they came across
they held a grip on him and dragged him, whether he liked it or not to
Abu Bakr and taking his hand touched it to the hand of Abu Bakr. Then
they set him free.**[6]**”**[7]**

There are historical annals that show:

“A group of Arab nomads (Bani Aslam)**[8]** came to Medina to buy
rations. Umar sent word to them to see him. When they came Umar told
them that:

If they paid allegiance to Abu Bakr they would be paid the cost of
rations. He further suggested them to go in the lanes and streets and
invite people to pay allegiance to Abu Bakr. He encouraged them to break
the head and nose of those who refused.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Quoted from: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 1, Pg. 174  
**[2]** Quoted from: *Tarikh al-Umam wal Mulook,* Vol. 3, Pg. 210;
*Tarikh Khamees,* Vol. 2, Pgs. 187 & 188; *Musnad Ahmad,* Vol. 1, Pg.
56; *Sirah Halabiyya,* Vol. 3, Pg. 396  
**[3]** Quoted from: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 6, Pg. 40  
**[4]** Quoted from: *Musnad Ahmad,* Vol. 1, Pg. 56; *Tarikh al-Umam wal
Mulook,* Vol. 3, Pg. 210; *Al-Imamah was-Siyasah,* Vol. 1, Pg. 10  
**[5]** Quoted from: *Al-Iqdul Fareed,* Vol. 2, Pg. 253; *Tarikh Abul
Fida,* Vol. 1, Pg. 156  
**[6]** Quoted from: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 1, Pg. 219  
**[7]** Yusuf Gholami: *Pas az Ghuroob* (After Sunset), Pgs. 75-16  
**[8]** [With regards Bani Aslam, many traditions were fabricated to say
they were not nomads but Medinites. So that since they were first to pay
allegiance to Abu Bakr ahead of Ansaar and Muhajireen it would give them
credit and distinction and also block the way of those who object to Abu
Bakr’s Caliphate.]

The narrator says: By God! I saw those rough Arabs tied their waists
closely, cloth-pieces of Sanaa on their heads and faces as covering.
They took batons in their hands and set out like dogs and forced people
to pay allegiance to Abu Bakr’s Caliphate.”**[1]**

In the same way some orientalists have analyzed the act and behavior of
Bani Aslam Arabs thus:

“Bani Aslam was a branch of Khuzaaya. They were known to be loyal to
Prophet Muhammad. The Prophet valued their loyalty. He gave them the
status of Muhajireen. He ignored as to whether they had really migrated
to Medina or not. A considerable number of them resided close to Medina.
As such, they were always ready to help the Prophet. They were known as
enemies of Ansaar. Therefore it can be said that they with their huge
number proved a force that gave strength to Abu Bakr’s Bay’at. They at
once replied positively to the proposal of Umar. They also hit Saad bin
Ubadah as an insurgent.”**[2]**

Stamp of Apostasy
-----------------

“Apostasy was a great disgrace that supporters of Saqifah stamped on
their opponents to justify their tyrannies such as killings and forcibly
taking Bay’at from the people. These battles and suppressing those who
had falsely claimed prophethood went a long way in deceiving people. It
was a great help to them to establish their authority and gain people’s
confidence. It completed the designs and tricks of the Quraishi party
that had now attained the status of being a rightful one to be at
power.”**[3]**

In a short scrutiny on the basis of *Abdullah bin Saba,* battles that
occurred during Abu Bakr’s Caliphate and got a distinction for him
according to claim of Sunni sect can be divided into three parts.

**1 –** Battle with Musailaima and Tolaiha, who claimed prophethood.
Some groups too had gathered around them who were in fact, infidels –
not *Murtad*. But Saif bin Umar calls these battles the battles of
*Murtads* and shows its mischief to be widespread one.

In this respect, we should know that Abu Bakr had no other way but to
fight them to keep his Caliphate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mustafa Dilshad Tehrani: *Meeras Rabooda* (Usurped inheritance),
Pg. 74; quoting from: *Al-Jamal,* Pg. 199  
**[2]** Wilfred Madelung: *Succession to Muhammad,* Pg. 55  
 **[3]** Mustafa Iskandari: *Baazkhwani Andisha-e-Taqreeb,* Pg. 221

“Only two tribes among the tribes around Medina rose against Islam in
support of Tolaiha. One was the tribe of Tolaiha himself named Asad, the
other was a group of Fuzara, a branch of Ghatfan tribe. This tribe was
again a branch of the tribes of Qais Aelaan. Except these two, there
appears no other name that could have gathered around Tolaiha and fought
against Muslims.”**[1]**

“In the army of Tolaiha were a few men from Asad tribe, which was his
own; besides there were few more from the tribe of Fuzara under the
command of their own chief Ainat bin Hisn. There was no one from other
tribes.”**[2]**

Therefore their mischief was not as serious as claimed; that their
suppression should be a matter of pride for Abu Bakr and that also in
the way of service to Islam!

**2 –** The numerous battles, all of which are fabricated by Saif bin
Umar, have no reality at all.

“In this respect, we see battles of imagination in the history of Islam,
which are called battles with apostates during the Caliphate of Abu Bakr
like: the Battle of Abraq, attack of Zilqissa, apostasy and battle of
Tai tribe, apostasy and battle of Umme Zamal, apostasy of the people of
Mohra, apostasy of the people of Oman, the first battle with the
apostates of Yemen, apostasy and battle of Akhabas, the second battle of
apostates of Yemen.”**[3]**

“Yes, the only thing true and which other historians have also mentioned
is that Abu Bakr raised an army and gave the command of Ansaar to Thabit
bin Qais, making Khalid bin Waleed the commander of the forces and sent
them to confront those who had camped at Buzakha intending to attack the
Muslims. After this there was no other battle.

Yes, except for these two Abu Bakr did not appoint anyone else to the
command and except for this flag did not raise any flag. He also did not
send Khalid bin Saeed [bin Aas] as commander of army to fight apostates
of Hamaqtain at the outskirts of Syria. Actually Khalid bin Saeed [bin
Aas] was sent with soldiers to Syria.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar
Afsaane* (Abdullah Bin Saba and other legends), Vol. 2, Pg. 56  
**[2]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 61  
 **[3]** Ibid. Vol. 1, Pg. 338  
**[4]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 47

Accordingly on this basis battles with the *Murtads* in the time of Abu
Bakr and all other battles are short of credit, having no basis. They
are all inventions of Saif bin Umar.**[1]**

“According to a deep research and investigation in this matter it can be
said with certainty that: all the matters given in detail about the
battle of Abraq and story of Zilqissa, they are all mentioned only by
Saif bin Umar. No other historian has said anything about them. It is
nothing but fabrication of Saif. There was no apostasy of most of these
tribes Saif has blamed. No one camped at Abraq and Zilqissa and neither
is there any truth in the story that the apostates were about to attack
Medina. Similarly the report that Abu Bakr appointed some persons for
defense of Medina is also false. All the four battles of Abu Bakr
mentioned by Saif are imaginative ones. He has fabricated all incidents
about the victories, his praises, his domination and control over enemy
territories. In fact all the persons and places recorded by Saif have no
base in reality.”**[2]**

These stories are invented to give superiority and greatness to Abu
Bakr. To show that it was service to Islam and to uplift the Caliph in
people’s view.

According to the research of Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari in the
2<sup>nd</sup> volume of his book, *Abdullah bin Saba,* all the
narrations related to the battle of Abraq are forged and all the events
that show the serious problems the apostates posed that the Caliph had
to struggle hard to suppress them, are in fact all figments of the
imagination of Saif bin Umar.

In the same way except for some events related to Zilqissa all are
forgeries and unreliable.**[3]**

The whole story of apostasy of Umme Zamal, People of Oman and
Mohra,**[4]** people of Yemen and Akhabat are fabrications of Saif bin
Umar.**[5]** These stories were invented to give superiority to Abu Bakr
and show that it was service to Islam; thus exalting him in people’s
view.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: Ibid. Vol. 2, Pgs. 39-46  
**[2]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar
Afsaane* (Abdullah Bin Saba and other legends), Vol. 2, Pgs. 46-47
[Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari has launched a vast research. He has
written the outcome of his toil in the second volume of his book
*Abdullah bin Saba*]  
**[3]** Refer: Ibid. Vol. 2, Pgs. 43-47  
**[4]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 56; we have mentioned actual parts of this
incident in this book.  
**[5]** Refer: Ibid. Vol. 2, Pgs. 63-77

Similarly, the apostasy of Tai tribe and their insurgency being crushed
during Abu Bakr’s Caliphate is not true. According to historical
documents, the Tai tribe had not apostised; in fact they were staunch
supporters of Abu Bakr.**[1]**

On the basis of this all the battles of apostates supposed in the time
of Abu Bakr and other battles which are called as victories, are all
fabricated and have no historical basis.**[2]** They are all products of
the imagination of Saif Ibne Umar.<sup>(**[3]**)(**[4]**)</sup>

**3 –** The real reason for battle with Muslims was for their not
accepting Abu Bakr. They declared them *Murtad* (Apostates) only to
justify their suppression and bloodshed at the hands of officers of Abu
Bakr such as Khalid bin Waleed, Akrama bin Abi Jahl and Ziyad bin
Labeed.

“Some tribes revolted on the issue of Zakat. They did this because they
were against Abu Bakr and his rule. Their reasoning was: Just as Quraish
revolted against the will of Prophet, so too do not obey the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: Ibid. Vol. 2, Pgs. 56 & 61  
**[2]** There are many other battles in Islam like the wars of Ridda
which are also fabricated, like battle of Salasil, Ableh, Mazar, Walja,
Alees, Amghishia, Furat Badkhuli, battle of Haseed, battle of Masbagh,
battle of Thani, battle of Zameel and battle of Farez. etc.Refer:
Allamah Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar Afsaane* (Abdullah Bin
Saba and other legends), Vol. 1, Pg. 339  
**[3]** Refer: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar Afsaane,*Vol. 2, Pg. 46;
Pg. 79 & Vol. 1, Pg. 338  
**[4]** When Abu Bakr finished the Ridda issue he deemed it befitting to
send his soldiers to Syria. He wrote letters to the people of Mecca,
Taif and Yemen and all Arabs of Najd and Hijaz inviting them to Holy war
and the spoils that they would attain in Rome. People complied with his
invitation in greed of spoils. They started from all corners to meet in
Medina.Perusal of these pages clearly shows that the incidents or the
battles in the historical books of Sunni sect are only intended to
create some greatness for Khalid bin Waleed in a frame of his inhuman
behavior. We recommend the work of Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari
*Abdullah bin Saba and other historical stories* Vol. 1, Pg. 329. We
further recommend the same source Vol. 2, Pgs. 83-113 for the scrutiny
of these battles which the Sunni sect attach great importance to,
because in their opinion it is a collection of pride and glory for
Khalid bin Waleed – the Commander in the army of Abu Bakr, for the sake
of better acquaintance with a real part of the above said battles which
is the invention of Saif bin Umar we recommend Vol. 2 of ‘Historical
Stories’ Pgs. 88, 91, 100, 101, 112 and 113.

Quraishite regime of Abu Bakr and his party. The sign of their
disobedience was their not paying the tax to central government. By this
act they in fact challenged the legitimacy and legality of Abu Bakr’s
rule. It stamped a great question mark over it. From here started the
battles under name of Battles of Apostates which were actually the
battles to confirm their own seat of Caliphate, which had come into
being by means of revolt of Quraish immediately after passing away of
Prophet. They thought such a way of harsh dealing with the people would
blanket their rule by legitimacy.”**[1]**

Saif bin Umar continued to add imaginative wars and battles either under
name of *Murtads* or victories. In fact it was suppression of opponents
who refused to give *Bay’at* to Abu Bakr like the Kinda tribes that
lived outside Medina. They called *Murtad* whoever refused to give
*Bay’at* to Abu Bakr as Caliph. While the fact was that they were not
so.**[2]** But they found no other excuse. In the days of Abu Bakr it is
said:

“Associates of Saqifah wanted to show that refusal to accept Abu Bakr as
Caliph and not to pay Zakat to him was refusal of the very faith of
Islam. So it is infidelity. By so doing, they were making Abu Bakr
sacred.”**[3]**

“The logic of Saqifah people was that whoever opposes Abu Bakr and his
government was an infidel and the battles of Ridda against the nearby
tribes were based on this policy.”**[4]**

Some of these tribes were dealt with very harshly. The soldiers of Abu
Bakr killed them and destroyed their properties. Most of this bad
treatment was not necessary either. Therefore they refused to pay taxes
to the collectors of Abu Bakr. For this also they had to pay
heavily.**[5]**

We read the following claim in describing Abu Bakr’s stand in such
cases:

“In crushing insurgency and campaigning against the plot of Murtads and
the disunity in Islam our lord Abu Bakr followed the same policy which
the prophets of God had adopted in their age. Abu Bakr performed  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mustafa Iskandari: *Baazkhwani Andisha-e-Taqreeb,* Pg. 217  
 **[2]** Refer: Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa
Deegar Afsaane* (Abdullah Bin Saba and other legends), Vol. 1, Pg. 339  
**[3]** Mustafa Iskandari: *Baazkhwani Andisha-e-Taqreeb,* Pg. 218  
 **[4]** Ibid. Pg. 221  
**[5]** Refer: Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa
Deegar Afsaane* (Abdullah Bin Saba and other legends), Vol. 2, Pgs.
215-216

the true part of Caliphate. The gratitude and praises together with
thanks of Muslims go to him till the Day of Judgment.”!**[1]**

Let us scrutinize the behavior of Abu Bakr with those who opposed him;
how they were falsely declared as *Murtads* no matter however staunch
Muslims they were.

“The regime of that time started a bloody campaign against opponents of
Abu Bakr and killed them all so there remained no opponent.”**[2]**

“In historical books, it is endeavored to avoid mention of their
apostasy but several evidences prove they were not Murtads nor did they
refuse Zakat. They refused to pay Zakat only because they did not
recognize Abu Bakr a legitimate successor of Prophet.**[3]**

Some historians and researchers have also explained this matter:

Ibn Katheer says:

Various tribes of Arabs entered Medina in groups. They prayed. But they
did not pay Zakat.

Some only refused to pay Zakat to Abu Bakr.**[4]**

Yaqoobi narrates:

Some groups of Arabs declared their Prophethood. Some became Murtad,
some placed crown on their heads.

Some were although not Murtads yet they refused to pay Zakat to Abu
Bakr.**[5]**

Regarding the rules of Murtad (Apostates) Ibn Hazm says:

These men were Muslims. They never departed from faith of Islam. So they
were not Murtads. The only thing they did was they refused to pay tax to
the person of Abu Bakr. They were killed for this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdul Qadir Dahqaan Siraawaani: Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 10, Summer 81, Pg. 19  
**[2]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar
Afsaane* (Abdullah Bin Saba and other legends), Vol. 1, Pg. 188  
**[3]** For details about the types of apostasy in the view of
contemporary historians refer to: Ali Gholami Dahqi: *Janghai Irtdidat
wa Bohran Janasheeni-e-Payambar,* Pgs. 97-102.  
**[4]** Quoted from: *Al-Bidaya wan Nihaya,* Vol. 6, Pg. 311  
**[5]** Quoted from: *Tarikh Yaqoobi,* Vol. 2, Pg. 128

Ibn Hazm further adds: The Hanafi and Shafei sect too are in agreement
with belief that the decree of Murtad cannot be applied to them. They
all were Muslims – within the embrace of Islam. Therefore both these two
sects are against the ruling of Abu Bakr.**[1]**

Naubakhti and Saad bin Abdullah Ashari have the following comments:

They were a group unwilling to pay Zakat to Abu Bakr. They said they
would distribute that sum among poor and needy ones of their own tribe.
They said: We shall do this until a real and rightful successor of the
Prophet is known to them. This shows that they did not consider Abu Bakr
as a rightful successor to Prophet. So were they Murtad?**[2]**

Tabari also narrates from Abu Mikhnaf: The two tribes Asad and Fuzara
said: By God! We will never give Bay’at to Abu Bakr – the successor to
Prophet.**[3]**

In this regard, the well-known Egyptian writer Abbas Mahmood Uqqad
writes:

Another group was believer in the very principle of Zakat. But they did
not believe nor had any faith in one whom they were supposed to pay
Zakat.**[4]**

Shaykh Muhammad Aale Yasin has performed a scholarly analysis of all
narrations regarding Murtads mentioned in Tarikh Tabari surrounding the
whole period of Abu Bakr. He rejects all of them because of false
reports and lack of authenticity. He comments: There is no text in hand
that shows their rejection of the principle of Zakat. When it is thus,
there is no ground to prove their turning Murtad (apostates).**[5]**

 

He says: Behind the killings on pretext of being *Murtad* is concealed
some other reality. The fact is that the code of *Murtad* was the only
option to Abu Bakr. It gave him a pretext to destroy and kill them as
their presence was destructively detrimental to Abu Bakr. Their not
paying Zakat could have taken to itself a movement and a movement could
have  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Quoted from: *Al-Mahalli,* Vol. 11, Pg. 193  
**[2]** Quoted from: *Farq-e-Shia* (Translation and notes by Dr.
Muhammad Jawad Mashkoor), Pg. 7; *Al-Maqaalaat wal Farq* (Edited with
notes by Dr. Muhammad Jawad Mashkoor), Pg. 4.  
**[3]** Quoted from: *Tarikh Tabari,* Vol. 3, Pg. 255.  
**[4]** Quoted from: *Al-Majmua al-Kamila,* Vol. 1 (Abqarya Abu Bakr),
Pg. 306  
 **[5]** Quoted from: *Nusoos ar-Ridda fit Tarikh at-Tabari,* Pg. 91

spread far and wide. The consequence was still more dangerous because it
could have challenged his Caliphate – that is his occupation of the seat
of a Caliph of the Prophet of God. Therefore he had to kill them to
rescue himself. Of course the code of Murtad came to his aid.

Ali Abdul Razzaq (a contemporary Egyptian writer) says in frankness:
There no doubt at all that battles with Murtad was only a political
aspect. Abu Bakr had to crush it under the excuse of apostasy, which he
did.

They were only opponents of Abu Bakr like other Muslims who did not
desire to come under the yoke of Abu Bakr’s rule.

The writer says that the issue of apostasy is the darkest spot of the
ground of crimes in the history.**[1]**

Allamah Askari also in his documentary research has dealt with the sense
and the meaning of Murtad, that is denial of faith after having embraced
it and the difference how the Prophet looked at it and how he (Abu Bakr)
used it as a tool. Thus the Allamah comments:

From what we said so far it comes to light that those accused of being
Murtad were actually not apostates. They were only opposed to Abu Bakr’s
Caliphate therefore they refused to pay Zakat to him.**[2]**

The writer of History of Ridda**[3]** says that Malik bin Nuwairah, Qais
bin Asim and Aqra bin Habis collected Zakat and distributed it among
their own people.**[4]** This act of Qais was regarded as a great crime
and they said that he was the greatest criminal.**[5]**

More than this is Ibn Athim’s**[6]** saying and also Waqadi’s words:
They talk of apostasy of the people of Hadhramaut and tribes of Kinda:

Some among these tribes considered Caliphate the right of the Prophet’s
house members.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Quoted from: *Al-Islam wa Usool al-Hukm,* Pgs. 193-197  
**[2]** Quoted from: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar Afsaane,* Vol. 1, Pg.
141  
**[3]** [Clive Balansi, a Spanish scholar of 6<sup>th</sup> century]  
**[4]** Quoted from: *Tarikh ar-Ridda,* Pg. 10  
**[5]** Quoted from: *Majma al-Imthaal,* Vol. 2, Pg. 65  
**[6]** It is worthy of mention that at the beginning of his book he
says: We have not included these narrations as Shias will use them to
prove their stand.

Haritha bin Suraqa one of the chiefs of Kinda, said to Ziyad bin
Labeed**[1]** who had come to collect Zakat:

We obeyed the Prophet of God as long as he was alive. Now if one of his
House Members comes to power we will obey him. But as for Abu Bakr there
is no obligation on us to obey him and he has no commitment towards
us.**[2]**

…Harith bin Muawiyah, one of the chiefs of Bani Tameem, said to Ziyad
bin Labeed who had come to collect Zakat: You are asking us to obey one
regarding whom we have not pledge or covenant.

Ziyad said: But we have chosen him for us.

Then Harith asked: Just tell me why Caliphate was taken away from the
Prophet’s House? On the other hand Quran says that they are more
befitting than others to this job.

Zaid answered: Muhajireen and Ansaar know their own affairs better than
you.

Harith: No. By God, it is not so. Because of your envy you departed from
Household Members of Prophet. I can never accept that the Prophet passed
away without nominating anyone in his place.

Ziyad! Get up and go away from here because you are inviting us to a
thing, which enrages God.

In the meantime Arfaja bin Abdullah al-Zahali said: By God, Harith is
telling the truth. Avoid this man (Ziyad) as his friend, Abu Bakr has no
worth to sit in the seat of Caliph. Emigrants and Helpers also are not
wiser than the Prophet for the Ummah.

Then they dragged Ziyad from there. They wanted to kill him. Ziyad
forced the tribe whichever he visited to pay allegiance to Abu Bakr. But
they responded in a way that was unpleasant to Ziyad. They did not agree
with Ziyad’s logic. Therefore Ziyad’s mission failed in the tribes.
Finally, Ziyad returned to Medina and reported the results of his visits
to Abu Bakr.

Abu Bakr became extremely angry. He sent Ziyad again to the same tribes,
this time with a force of four thousand soldiers.

Ziyad went to the tribes with the soldiers and also with a concealed
motive of revenge. He massacred the tribes of Bani Hind, Bani Aqal, Bani
Hujar and Bani Himyar.**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [He was from Khazraj tribe from the clan of Bayaz]  
**[2]** Quoted from: *Al-Futuh,* Vol. 1, Pg. 58; *Kitab ar-Ridda,* Pgs.
171-172  
 **[3]** Quoted from: *Al-Futuh,* Vol. 1, Pgs. 65-66; *Kitab ar-Ridda,*
Pgs. 186 & 188 (Waqidi

Then he confronted other tribes of Kinda. After many battles and attacks
which resulted in bloodshed on a wide scale, help reached Ziyad when
soldiers of Akrama bin Abi Jahl came to his rescue. Ziyad defeated all
of them at Hadhramaut.**[1]**

Besides these tribes, there are other tribes whose men too were
massacred and their properties and belongings looted or destroyed. Their
children and womenfolk were made captives. When Yamama people heard that
Abu Bakr had become Caliph they refused to recognize him. Abu Bakr sent
troops there. Yamama people also refused to pay Zakat to Abu Bakr
because he was in their view not the legitimate Caliph. Abu Bakr found
no ground to kill them in order to take revenge of their rejecting his
authority. The only way open to him was to declare them apostates. The
soldiers massacred them all.**[2]**

The tribe of Bani Salim too was not safe from this killing, plunder,
pillage and other atrocities. Khalid bin Waleed under instructions of
Abu Bakr burned their menfolk alive. This was such a brutal tyranny that
even Umar objected and censured Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr in reply to
criticisms said: Khalid is the sword of God.**[3]**

The inhabitants of Daba, a district between Oman and Bahrain were also
massacred by the army of Akrama bin Abi Jahl. Abu Bakr had issued him
direct orders to not leave anyone alive. Their properties were
plundered. Their sons, daughters and widows were made captives.**[4]**

There are several other tribes and also groups who came under the
category of apostates.

Tabari gives us a list of the tribes in the third volume of his history
that apostised after passing away of Prophet.

For instance, he mentions Tai, Asad, Ghatfan, Hawazin, Bani Salim, Bani
Amir, people of Yamama, Najd, Bahrain, Amman, Tihama, Yemen, Hadhramaut
and Bani Tameem. It is interesting that Tabari has narrated  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

instead of Bani Aqal has written Bani Atik and instead of Bani Himyar he
has mentioned Bani Jamr)**  
[1]** Quoted from: *Al-Futuh,* Vol. 1, Pgs. 66-87  
**[2]** Quoted from: *Tarikh Tabari,* Vol. 3, Pg. 246; *Sawaiqul
Mohreqa,* Pg. 86; *Al-Jamal,* Pg. 118; *Al-Izaah,* Pg. 132  
**[3]** Quoted from: *Tabaqat,* Vol. 7, Pg. 396 (In the account of
Khalid bin Waleed); *Riyadh an-Nazarah,* Vol. 1, Pg. 100  
**[4]** Quoted from: *Tabaqat,* Vol. 7, Pgs. 101-102; *Al-Futuh,* Pgs.
73-74

most events from the greatest liar of history, Saif bin Umar.**[1]** His
source was the lies of Saif.**[2]** Because the sense and meaning of
Murtad is obscure and even its extent not known, most cases of apostasy
are doubtful and cannot be accepted.”**[3]**

In a way these cases of *Murtad* were fabricated, the battles against
them too were false. Some were only to provide a ground to crush
opponents of Abu Bakr.

It could be said that fabrication of cases of apostates and including
them in books like *Tarikh Tabari* was only to hide the crimes of Abu
Bakr’s rule towards Muslims who regard Abu Bakr’s regime illegitimate.

In other words, so many cases of apostates in the history of Abu Bakr’s
Caliphate were fabricated to suggest to the people what terrible harm
they would have caused to Muslim society, thus leading to the conclusion
that whatever done was necessary. So the readers will not go after
research and on the contrary even praise Abu Bakr and feel a sense of
indebtedness to him for his services to Islam. The reader would regard
him as a rescuer of Islam from apostasy.

“They were those who did not see Abu Bakr a deserving one to succeed the
Prophet as Caliph. Therefore they were not willing to pay tax to him
though they had no doubt in Zakat as an obligation.

…people who were massacred in those days had faith in God and His
Prophet. They prayed. They did not deny the obligation of Zakat. The
only thing was they hesitated to pay tax to Abu Bakr because Abu Bakr’s
becoming the Caliph to them was a matter of suspicion.

The Sunni sect too believes that Abu Bakr tried to justify the crimes of
Khalid. They refused to pay tax to Abu Bakr, but they did not refuse the
very Zakat itself.

In fact, they did a right thing. So they have a reward with their God.
Zakat of property should be calculated and paid. But to whom? Only to
him who has Guardianship (*Wilayat*) over them. Such a one can be only  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** For explanation about Saif bin Umar refer to: *Khamsoon wa Miya
Sahabi Mukhtaliq* of Allamah Askari and also *Nusoos ar-Ridda fee Tarikh
Tabari* of Shaykh Muhammad Hasan Aale Yasin, Pgs. 24-29  
**[2]** Whatever Tabari has quoted from people other than Saif (like Abi
Mikhnaf, Hisham Kalbi, Ibne Ishaq and Madaini) is very little because in
those there is no mention of apostasy.  
 **[3]** Masoodpur Sayyid Aaqaai: *Chashma dar Bistar,* Pgs. 89-97

Infallible – introduced by God and His Prophet. He must be the
legitimate successor of the Prophet. Was Abu Bakr so? He came to power
through a plot – Saqifah. But tyranny knows no reasoning. Its language
is of force, torture and atrocity.

On the other hand in reliable books of Sunni sect such as Sahih of
Muslim and Sahih of Bukhari it is mentioned that the blood of those who
refused to pay tax to Abu Bakr was not legal to be shed. Their bloodshed
was wrong because they were Muslims.

These numerous traditions are partly general and partly conditional.

Neither a battle with them nor killing them could be justified. Abu Bakr
has said that Zakat is from the property and it should be paid. But the
dispute here is the person or authority who can demand it. Only he can
demand who is a guardian of people. It is the Prophet only who can
appoint a guardian. Anyone who reaches the seat of Caliph by hook or by
crook cannot be a guardian. What is the legitimacy that gives authority
to him?

Even if they refused to pay, was it reasonable to wage a war against
them? Or kill them? Reason dictates to attend to the grievances and see
their reasoning instead of killing them.

Battle with them is against their right of protection of their blood.
Mere presumption of Abu Bakr cannot be a ground for their killing.

In the Sahihs of Bukhari and Muslim, it is narrated on the authority of
Usamah bin Zaid that: The Prophet sent us to Hirqa.**[1]** In the
morning we attacked the pagans there and defeated them. I and one of
Ansaar reached them. When we were among them, one shouted: There is no
god except Allah. The Ansaari who was with me left him unhurt, but I
killed him. When we returned and reported the event to the Prophet he
told me: Usamah! Did you kill him after he had uttered there is no god
except Allah?

I told the Prophet: I thought he meant refuge by uttering the name of
God.

The Prophet repeated his words so much, I wished I were not a Muslim
before that day.

Allamah Sharafuddin writes: Usamah wished thus because he thought that
all his deeds such as prayers, fasting, being in the company of the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** In Oman

Prophet, holy wars, paying Zakat and going to Hajj all have gone in
vain. They cannot wipe out the sin of killing a man who had just become
a Muslim. He knew that the sin of killing a Muslim had destroyed all his
virtuous deeds.

The feelings of Usamah represent his fear that he would not be forgiven
or redeemed. For this very reason, he wished that he were a Muslim after
that incident of killing as the Prophet has said that Islam washes all
sins preceding it.

We think it is enough for the reader to understand the worth of: ‘There
is no god but Allah’ and its sayer.

Reliable books by Sunni authors are full of such traditions that show
the dignity of Muslim blood.**[1]**

Accordingly the incident of Usamah clearly indicates that killing a
Muslim only because of his not paying Zakat is not allowed and the case
becomes more serious if the reason for non-payment is not rebellion but
a suspicion on his part about the truth or legitimacy of Caliph. They
doubted the right on the part of Abu Bakr to be Caliph. So they were in
hesitation to make the payment. Therefore they did not deserve to be
killed.”**[2]**

Allamah Sharafuddin has protested in a way that even the Sunni sect
concurs with it. He protested for the killing of Malik bin Nuwairah. He
writes:

“The crime of Malik bin Nuwairah was his refusal to pay Zakat to Abu
Bakr. It was at a time when he was occupied in investigation about
legality of Abu Bakr’s Caliphate to honor his own commitment to God and
His Prophet. It is obvious that the intention of Malik was not to create
difference among Muslims nor did he reject Zakat itself nor did he doubt
about Islam and its laws. Malik did not want to fight with the Caliph.
So it is better to determine the cause first for his non-payment and
then decide what to do. It is not so easy to kill a Muslim merely at a  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [Allamah Sharafuddin in his another book, *Al-Fusool al-Muhimma
fee Taleef al-Ummah* has mentioned another tradition about this:A person
asked the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) that if he were fighting with an
infidel who has cut off his hand and then hides behind a tree and says
that he has become a Muslim, is it allowed to kill him? The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) said that it is not allowed.]  
**[2]** Allamah Sayyid Abdul Husain Sharafuddin: *Ijtihaad Dar
Maqabil-e-Nass* (Translated by Ali Dawani), Pgs. 127-132

pretext. Malik bin Nuwairah in view of the position he had among his
people obviously saw it fit to investigate the situation whether the new
government that had come into being in Medina and was busy in crushing
its opponents and occupied in spotting and eliminating hidden
adversaries of Abu Bakr from the scene was really a legitimate
government.

That is the only reason why Malik bin Nuwairah abstained from paying
Zakat and began to investigate so that he pay to the proper person and
thus fulfill his duty properly.

So it was necessary that Abu Bakr and his officials should have given
time to Malik to make his decision in the light of his investigations
and act accordingly. They should not have dealt with him in such haste.

Because he was not a denier of Zakat, he did not differentiate between
Zakat and prayer and was not one that considered it necessary to fight
Abu Bakr or other Muslims.

This was the reality of Malik and his people’s refusal to pay Zakat.

Malik was not one to wage war among Muslims. Malik even advised his
tribe members to preserve their Islam.

He further advised them to disperse and not camp all together at one
place lest Khalid may think that they are planning an armed
confrontation.”**[1]**

Conclusively it can be said that:

“The fact is that there was no Murtad at all in the period of Abu Bakr.
Those whom Abu Bakr fought were within Islam and none had renounced
faith. A few could have been there who had not become Muslims since the
beginning itself. A few refused to pay Zakat to Abu Bakr. So how they
became Murtad?”**[2]**

“After Zahra’s martyrdom, the government sent troops to deal with those
who were outside Medina as they had not given Bay’at to Abu Bakr.**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Allamah Sharafuddin: *Ijtihaad Dar Maqabil-e-Nass* (Translated
by Ali Dawani), Pgs. 134-135  
**[2]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar
Afsaane* (Abdullah Bin Saba and other legends), Vol. 1, Pg. 191  
**[3]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Saqifah* (Study about the
formation of government after the passing away of the Holy Prophet),
Edited by Mahdi Dashti, Pgs. 113-114

Even though Abu Bakr’s regime tried to label all their opponents as
Murtads and under this excuse fight and kill them, they could not
identify all of them as apostates.

The accusation of being a Murtad was the best means to destroy the
enemy. So he used this means, which was to his own ends.

But analysis shows that a multitude of the people was not Murtad and did
not deserve such loss of life and property even though Caliph’s circular
reads:

Whoever does not submit to the government should be killed or burnt
alive and his women and children should be taken as
captives.**[1]**”**[2]**

Historical documents show that the plan of Abu Bakr was so harsh and
brutal against his opponents that it is said:

A) “Fight them even if they refuse to give a camel’s
tether.<sup>(**[3]**)(**[4]**)</sup>

B) The circular of the Caliph was thus:

I have given the assignment to this army to kill by sword those who have
departed from religion of Islam. Furthermore, they have a mandate to
burn them alive and make their widows and children captives…”**[5]**

Now the question is – after all these scrutinies and analyses can it
still be claimed:

“The stand of Abu Bakr was strong and he showed no weakness in his
motive of saving the religion of Islam. Where religion of Islam was
concerned, he was without any consideration. God had inspired him with
such strength. The religion is indebted to him.”**[6]**

Whenever we recall those strict stands of Abu Bakr towards those who  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Quoted from: *Tarikh al-Umam wal Mulook,* Vol. 3, Pgs. 226-227  
**[2]** Yusuf Gholami: *Pas az Ghuroob* (After Sunset), Pg. 222  
**[3]** Ibid. Pg. 224; quoting from: *Al-Bidaya wan Nihaya,* Vol. 6, Pg.
311 [Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 17, Pg. 209]  
**[4]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar
Afsaane* (Abdullah Bin Saba and other legends), Vol. 1, Pg. 196; quoting
from: *Al-Bidaya wan Nihaya,* Vol. 6, Pg. 311  
**[5]** Ibid. quoting from: *Tarikh al-Umam wal Mulook,* Vol. 3, Pgs.
226-227  
**[6]** Abdul Qadir Dahqaan Siraawaani: Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 10, Summer 81, Pg. 19

refused to pay Zakat we come to realize his honesty, truth,
trustworthiness and straight forwardness in carrying out the mandate
vested to him by God.”!**[1]**

“The right was with Abu Bakr in relation to those who did not pay
Zakat.”**[2]**

Please do pay attention to the following statement:

“Abu Bakr’s government did not observe any distinction between a Muslim
and an apostate. He dealt with all equally like Arabs of the age of
ignorance. When they waged a battle, the victor had a right to take the
widows as concubines and make their children captives and confiscate
their property.

On this ground, when the government suppressed so-called apostates they
propagated that they killed non-Muslims. Likewise, they attacked the
towns, killed and murdered whomever they liked, captured and arrested
some. Their children were enslaved, womenfolk made concubines and
belongings they took for themselves.

As a result, a considerable wealth found its way to Medina and was
hoarded there.

This process had no compatibility with teachings of Islam. That is why
it reflected an unhealthy and undesirable effect in the eyes of many.
People considered that the acts the Caliph committed, such as murder,
plunder, killing and pillage was part of Islamic teachings. This process
influenced to a great extent on the minds of the people to think –
rather to believe – that Islam is a religion of sword; and it spread by
force.”**[3]**

Although these crimes and inhumane acts, which are against Islamic
teachings and mankind, are recorded in history yet they claim:

“Whatever the Caliph did throughout the period of his Caliphate was in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Salah Abdul Fattah al-Khalidi (Translated by Abdul Aziz
Sulaimi): *Khulafa-e-Raashideen Az Khilafat Taa Shahadat*
(1<sup>st</sup> Edition 1382), Pg. 83  
**[2]** Ibid. *Khulafa-e-Raashideen Az Khilafat Taa Shahadat*
(1<sup>st</sup> Edition 1382), Pg. 82  
**[3]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Naqsh-e-Aaimma Dar Ahya-e-Deen*
(Role of Imams in the Revival of Religion, Vol. 14, Pgs. 40-41

accordance with traditions of Prophet and God’s commandments.”**[1]**

While the fact is that:

“From what we said it seems that Abu Bakr’s army fought with Muslims who
neither drew out swords nor announced a war. Rather they repeatedly
declared their Islam and prayed with Muslims in the same row.

Yes, Abu Bakr’s army fought against such men, made them captives, killed
them after accusing them of non-payment of Zakat. They did not even ask
them to pay the Zakat to see whether they would pay or not.

There are still several other motives in these battles. There are ends
and aims, hidden, which have no bearing on Zakat nor related to its
payment…”**[2]**

Examples of Caliphate facing its legal opponents
------------------------------------------------

### A – Malik bin Nuwairah

“All historians, Tabari, Ibn Athir, Ibn Kathir and Yaqoobi say: Abu Bakr
sent an army under Khalid bin Waleed to tribes that had not given Bay’at
to Abu Bakr after passing away of Prophet or did not pay Zakat to
collectors of Abu Bakr, so that they may be forced to make the
payment.”**[3]**

“Malik bin Nuwairah was a brave man, a poet and chief of a part of Bani
Tameem tribe. He was a companion of the Prophet and his agent. Malik did
not send to Medina, alms**[4]** he had collected after passing away of
Prophet. He returned the amounts to persons he had collected
from.**[5]**”**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Fareedoon Islamniya: *Ashra-e-Mubashira* (1<sup>st</sup> Edition
1380), Pg. 47  
**[2]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar
Afsaane* (Abdullah Bin Saba and other legends), Vol. 2, Pg. 240  
**[3]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Saqifah* (Study about the
formation of government after the passing away of the Holy Prophet),
Edited by Mahdi Dashti, Pgs. 65-66  
**[4]** [Today the term used is ‘Zakat’]  
**[5]** [According to records he distributed it among the poor people of
his clan, Allamah Sharafuddin in his book: *Ijtihad dar Maqabil-e-Nass,*
Pg. 154 has explained that Malik was famous for his kindness to the
orphans and poor women and he used to distribute Zakat among the poor
under approval of the Prophet.]  
**[6]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Saqifah,* Pg. 65; quoting from:
*Al-Isabah,* Vol. 3, Pg. 336

When Khalid bin Waleed arrived at Bitah**[1]** he gave an assignment to
Zirar bin Azwer and sent him with a few soldiers to attack the tribe of
Malik. Abu Qatadah**[2]** too was among them. They made a surprise
attack on Malik’s tribe. Abu Qatadah used to narrate after a long time
since this incident: We told them if you are telling the truth that you
are Muslims, keep your weapons on the ground. They agreed and placed
their weapons on the ground and stood to pray**[3]**.**[4]**

Ibn Abil Hadeed writes in his Sharh Nahjul Balagha: As soon as Malik and
his associates placed their weapons on the ground, Zirar and his friends
rushed up on them and tying them with ropes dragged them to Khalid bin
Waleed.**[5]**”**[6]**

“Khalid claims that Malik bin Nuwairah had renounced Islam. In other
words, he had become a Murtad. Khalid’s reasoning was that Malik uttered
some words which made him a Murtad.

On the other hand Malik denied having uttered any words at all. Malik
had this to say:

I am a Muslim. I have neither amended nor changed any of its
regulations. Abu Qatadah and Abdullah bin Umar also attested the
statements of Malik, but Khalid refused. He first killed Malik, then
ordered Zirar to behead him. After that, Khalid the same night, slept
with his widow**[7]**.”**[8]**

“In Isabah it is narrated from Zubair bin Bikkar on the authority of Ibn
Shuhab (Zuhri) that Malik bin Nuwairah had lavish hair. After having
killed Malik Khalid ordered that his severed head be placed under the
cooking pot. The fire consumed the hair and had not yet reached to the
skin that the food was cooked.”**[9]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [Center of Bani Yarbu]  
 **[2]** [He was a companion of the Prophet who took part in the Battle
of Uhad and battles after that.]  
**[3]** [On the basis of this they were really Muslims.]  
**[4]** Quoted from: *Tarikh Tabari* (European Edition), Vol. 1, Pgs.
1927-1928  
**[5]** [It is seen that they were told to arrange prayers so that they
would keep their weapons away.]  
**[6]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Doo Maktab Dar Islam* (Two
Schools of Islam) Vol. 2 (Outlooks of two schools about sources of
Islamic legislation) Pgs. 123-124  
 **[7]** [Umme Tameem binte Minhal]  
 **[8]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 125; quoting from: *Kanzul Ummal,* Vol. 3,
Pg. 132  
**[9]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar
Afsaane* (Abdullah

From this historical document we can conclude that Malik was a hairy
man. The soldiers placed the severed heads under cooking pots. Malik’s
head did not burn completely because the flames that rose up from the
hair cooked the food.**[1]**

Two Reminders
-------------

**One –** We draw your attention to two points raised by Allamah
Sharafuddin in his book, *Ijtihaad Dar Maqaabile Nass* with regard to
murder of Malik bin Nuwairah and his tribe:

“Bukhari with regard to delegating Ali and Khalid to Yemen writes in his
Sahih: A man stood and said: O Prophet! Fear God. The Prophet said: Woe
on you! Am I not the most deserving person in the world to be in refuge
of God and most befitting to be in piety?

Khalid said: O Prophet of God! Shall I cut his throat?

The Prophet said: No. Perhaps this man performs prayers.**[2]**

How nice it would have been if Khalid had remembered Prophet’s words. If
only Khalid had shown some respect to prayers. Did not Malik pray? Why
Khalid did not honor prayers of Malik? Khalid disobeyed the Prophet in
killing Malik. Abdullah bin Umar and Abu Qatadah Ansaari gave evidence
to Khalid that Malik had performed the Morning Prayer that day. Then on
what ground he killed him?”**[3]**

“According to Yaqubi’s statement in his history, Abu Qatadah went to Abu
Bakr and reported the case to him and said: By God, I shall not go
anywhere under the command of Khalid. He killed Malik inspite of his
being a Muslim.

Tabari too has mentioned that Abu Qatadah was among those who gave
evidence that Malik was a Muslim.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Bin Saba and other legends), Vol. 1, Pgs. 202-203; quoting from:
*Tabari,* Vol. 2, Pg. 503; *Al-Isabah,* Vol. 3, Pg. 337; *Tarikh Ibne
Kathir,* Vol. 6, Pg. 321; *Tarikh Abul Fida,* Pg. 158**  
[1]** For more details refer to Refer: Ali Gholami Dahqi: *Janghai
Irtdidat wa Bohran Janasheeni-e-Payambar,* Section Six, Pgs. 81-91  
**[2]** The author says: This tradition is also quoted by Ahmad bin
Hanbal from Abu Saeed Khudri on page 4 of the third part of *Musnad*.  
 **[3]** Allamah Sharafuddin: *Ijtihaad Dar Maqabil-e-Nass* (Translated
by Ali Dawani), Pgs. 130-131

In Tarikh Abil Fida it is mentioned that Abu Bakr and Umar got the news
and learnt of the events. Abu Bakr said: I will never execute him
(Khalid), because he has erred in his Ijtihaad. I will not sheath the
sword that Allah had pulled on them.”**[1]**

“It is mentioned in several sources such as Wafayaat al-Ayaan, Tarikh
Abul Fida and Kanzul Ayaan: When the news of Khalid’s killing Malik and
raping his widow reached Abu Bakr and Umar, Abu Bakr said that he would
not stone Khalid to death. He is a jurisprudent and has erred in his
jurisprudence.

Umar asked him to dismiss Khalid.**[2]**

Abu Bakr said: I will not sheath the sword God has pulled out.”**[3]**

“Ibn Abil Hadeed writes: Abu Bakr said: Shut up Umar! This is not our
first mistake. You better hold your tongue about Khalid.”**[4]**

We must remark here:

“Abu Bakr during his rule appointed Khalid as the commander of his army
in Syria.**[5]** Then he ordered him in advance to be the commander of
forces in Baghdad upon his return from Syria.”**[6]**

Khalid was stone-hearted. In the history of Abu Bakr’s Caliphate his
record was such:

“When Khalid bin Waleed moved to Buzakha he sent Akhasheh bin Mehsin and
Thabit bin Aqram as scouts ahead of the forces. They reached near a
place where Tolaiha with his brother had come to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar
Afsaane* (Abdullah Bin Saba and other legends), Vol. 1, Pgs. 204-205  
**[2]** [The different policy of Umar with regard to Khalid bin Waleed
was to remove Khalid from political power in order to settle personal
difference, since he was from Bani Adi and Waleed was from Bani
Makhzoom]  
**[3]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Doo Maktab Dar Islam* (Two
Schools of Islam) Vol. 2 (Outlooks of two schools about sources of
Islamic legislation) Pgs. 127-128; quoting from: *Kanzul Ummal,* Vol. 3,
Pg. 132, Tr. 227; *Wafayaat Ayaan,* Vol. 5, Pg. 67; *Tarikh Abul Fida,*
Pg. 158  
**[4]** Ahmad Asadnejad: *Wasi-e-Payambar Keest?* Pgs. 139-140; quoted
from: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Ibne Abil Hadeed, Vol. 1 Pg. 179  
**[5]** Refer: Najah Ata at-Tai: *Nazaryaat al-Khaleefatain,* Vol. 2,
Pgs. 189; quoting from *Tarikh Yaqoobi,* Vol. 2, Pg. 13; *Tarikh
Tabari,* Vol. 2, Pg. 617  
 **[6]** Refer: Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 189; quoting from *Tarikh Tabari,*
Vol. 2, Pg. 603

evaluate the army of Islam. They accidentally met Khalid’s scouts and
killed them.

Tabari narrates from Ibn Kalbi: Khalid with his army passed by the
corpse of Thabit and rode on it by mistake. They dead body got trampled
under the hooves of horses…”**[1]**

**Two –** it is interesting that inspite of these crimes committed by
Khalid and murder of Malik in that beastial way they still praise Abu
Bakr:

“Elasticity and leniency of Abu Bakr towards Khalid bin Waleed is
appreciable. In the view of Abu Bakr the mistake and error of Khalid was
ignorable.”**[2]**

In the end, they add:

“Anas bin Malik says that companions of Prophet were not willing to wage
a war against those who refused to pay Zakat. They said that they were
performers of prayers. But Abu Bakr pulled out the sword and set out
alone. People too followed him…**[3]**

According to the above narration, Abu Bakr was alone. He pulled the
sword himself only thus he went. People saw him going alone and were
compelled to trot behind him.

According to this report it seems that Abu Bakr himself fought Malik bin
Nuwairah. On the other hand all historians write (rather to exculpate
Abu Bakr), that Khalid ordered Zirar bin Azwar and he killed Malik
cutting off his head.”**[4]**

“The fact is that Malik was a man of reputation. He was chief of a
tribe. At that time Abu Bakr’s rule was still weak and they feared that
a little movement could easily topple their Caliphate.

The interior too was shaky. Groups like Bani Hashim and Ali at their
head, Khazrij under the leadership of Saad bin Ubadah and Quraish with
Abu Sufyan were still their opponents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar
Afsaane* (Abdullah Bin Saba and other legends), Vol. 2, Pgs. 56-57  
**[2]** Yusuf Karzai (Translated by Jalil Bahraminiya): *Weeshgihai
Kulli Islam* (1<sup>st</sup> Edition), Pgs. 373-374  
**[3]** Quoted from: Haqqi: *Tafseer Ruhul Bayan,* under the exegesis of
Verse 54, Surah Maidah  
**[4]** Ahmad Asadnejad: *Wasi-e-Payambar Keest?* Pgs. 34-35

So this courageous and honorable man of Bani Tameem regarded as real
danger a person who was a few miles from Medina and thought of some way
to be safe from him. So he should be by any means and at any pretext be
eliminated and the elimination should be such as to serve a lesson to
others.

As a result of all this scrutiny, we can say that the real cause of the
murder of Malik and one actually responsible of it was Abu Bakr himself
– not Khalid.”**[1]**

“Abu Bakr was very much enraged at Malik bin Nuwairah for not
considering him a lawful successor of the Prophet and had given orders
to Khalid bin Waleed to kill Malik wherever he was found.”**[2]**

### B – Saad bin Ubadah

Saad bin Ubadah Khazraji was the first to reach the meeting of Ansaar at
Saqifah Bani Saadah, and he was the most popular candidate. Muhajireen
joined a little later. They changed the course of discourse, which
resulted in Abu Bakr’s becoming Caliph. As a matter of fact, Muhajireen
made Abu Bakr the Caliph.

“They left Saad alone for a few days since the plot of Saqifah. Later he
was invited to pay allegiance to Abu Bakr as all his people and
relatives had paid allegiance to Abu Bakr.

Saad answered: By God! I will shoot all my arrows on you till they are
exhausted. I will color my lance with your blood. But I will not give
Bay’at to you. As long as I could, I will fight you, but I will not keep
my hand in yours.

When they heard these words of Saad, Umar told Abu Bakr not to let Saad
go unless he pays allegiance.

However Basheer bin Saad**[3]** said that he would not pay allegiance to
you because he has become stubborn to you. He added: It is not so easy
to kill him. If he is killed all his relatives, sons, associates and
family members too should be killed. If you let him go**[4]** he would
not harm you because he is only one.

They accepted the guidance of Basheer and left Saad.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Pg. 32  
 **[2]** Wilfred Madelung: *Succession to Muhammad,* Pgs. 75-76  
**[3]** [He was cousin of Saad bin Ubadah and the first one to give
*Bayyat* to Abu Bakr]  
 **[4]** Quoted from: *Tarikh Tabari,* Vol. 3, Pg. 459; *Tarikh Ibne
Athir,* Vol. 2, Pg. 126

Saad did not attend any of their meetings nor joined them in daily and
Friday prayers. During the Hajj season, he was not seen with
them.**[1]**

It continued like this until Abu Bakr died and Umar came to
power.**[2]**”**[3]**

One day Umar saw Saad in a lane of Medina. Umar called him: O, Saad!
Saad too replied at once: O, Umar!

The Caliph asked: Are you not the one who used to say such and such?
Saad said: Yes, I am that man. Now you have reached to power. By God, I
hate your company.

Umar said: One who hates his neighbor changes the place. Not much time
passed**[4]** but that Saad left Medina for Syria in the early days of
Umar’s Caliphate…**[5]**

Balazari writes in his book Ansaab al-Ashraaf:

Saad bin Ubadah did not pay allegiance to Abu Bakr and left for Syria.

Umar engaged a man, instructed him to go to Syria and persuade Saad to
pay allegiance by hook or crook. He asked him to play any trick he knew
to get Saad’s acknowledgement to Umar’s Caliphate. In case of failure he
asked him to kill Saad by the help of God. The hired man headed to
Syria, met Saad in Howaryeen and opened the subject of allegiance. He
tried to persuade him to acknowledge Umar’s Caliphate but when he got
disappointed he pulled out the arrow from the case that hung at his back
and shot him. It immediately cut the main vein and Saad died at
once.**[6]** In the book, *Tabsiratul Awaam* it is mentioned that Umar
had hired Muhammad bin Musailaima Ansaari**[7]** for this secret job.
Muhammad  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [Except for this there was no other display of opposition by
Saad, yet he was murdered.]  
**[2]** Quoted from: *Riyadh an-Nazarah,* Vol. 1, Pg. 168  
**[3]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Saqifah* (Study about the
formation of government after the passing away of the Holy Prophet),
Edited by Mahdi Dashti, Pgs. 63-64  
**[4]** [It is seen that on one hand since the early day of Caliphate of
Umar Khalid bin Waleed himself preferred to remain in Syria and after a
short period was found dead under suspicious circumstances on the other
hand there is mention in history that he also had a hand in the murder
of Saad, so the exile of Saad bin Ubadah must have taken place during
the period of Abu Bakr or the early part of the Caliphate of Umar.]  
**[5]** Quoted from: *Tabaqat,* Vol. 2, Pg. 145; *Tarikh Ibne Asakir,*
Vol. 6, Pg. 90  
**[6]** Quoted from: *Ansaab al-Ashraaf,* Vol. 1, Pg. 589; *Al-Iqdul
Fareed,* Vol. 3, Pgs. 64-65  
**[7]** [It is proved that he was among those who besieged the house of
His Eminence, Ali

accordingly went to Syria and shot Saad bin Ubadah with an arrow.**[1]**

It is also said that Khalid bin Waleed was also present in Syria at that
time and he assisted Muhammad bin Musailaima in eliminating Saad…**[2]**

Ibn Abde Rabb says: Saad bin Ubadah’s body was found with an arrow in
his heart. They spread a rumor that Jinns had killed Saad by two arrows
in his heart.**[3]**”**[4]**

### C – Umme Farwa**[5]**

“This lady named Umme Farwa announced her opposition to Abu Bakr when
she said: I recognize only Ali as a real and true successor of Prophet.
She was executed by the orders of Abu Bakr.”**[6]**

### Fujayat al-Salma was burnt

“There was a man of Bani Salim tribe named Fujayat**[7]** whose main
occupations were theft, murder, plunder and rowdism. At last he was
captured**[8]** and brought to Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr ordered them to make a
fire in the praying square of Medina. Then he ordered that he should be
thrown into it alive with hands and legs tied.

So it was done and he died in this way. While he was dying he was
calling out the testimonies of being a Muslim at the pitch of his
voice.”**[9]**

“Tabari and Ibn Athir have narrated the story thus:

“A man named Fujayat came to Abu Bakr from the tribe of Bani Salim  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

and Fatima (a.s.) (*Tarikh Tabari,* Vol. 2, Pgs. 443-444)]**  
[1]** [It is proved that he was among those who besieged the house of
His Eminence, Ali and Fatima (a.s.) (*Tarikh Tabari,* Vol. 2, Pgs.
443-444)]  
**[2]** Quoted from: *Tabsiratul Awaam,* Pg. 32  
**[3]** Quoted from: *Al-Iqdul Fareed,* Vol. 3, Pgs. 64-65  
**[4]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Saqifah* (Study about the
formation of government after the passing away of the Holy Prophet),
Edited by Mahdi Dashti, Pgs. 70-72  
**[5]** [An Ansari lady]  
 **[6]** Muhammad Baqir Ansari: *Jarfai Ghadeer,* Pg. 177; quoting from:
*Ath-Thaqib fil Manaqib,* Pg. 226  
 **[7]** [Ayaas bin Abdullah]  
 **[8]** [“He set out to fight the apostates from the side of Abu Bakr
and in the end became a highway robber in Najd.” Yusuf Gholami: *Pas az
Ghuroob* (After Sunset), Pg. 227]  
 **[9]** Sayyid Muhammad Hasan Jawahiri: *Abu Bakr,* Pg. 64; quoting
from: *Tarikh Tabari,* Vol. 2, Pg. 266 (Events of year 11); *Kamil Ibne
Athir,* Vol. 2, Pg. 211; *Al-Isabah,* Vol. 2, Pg. 322

and said: I am Muslim. I want to fight against the apostates, but I have
neither a horse nor a weapon. Give me a horse and a weapon. Abu Bakr
provided him what he was short of, but Fujayat instead of going on his
mission went to the highways and began to loot people or shoot them if
they resisted. He rode the horse looting and plundering. A man named
Najba bin Abi al-Mitha from Bani Shareed tribe helped him.

When news reached Abu Bakr he wrote to Tarifa bin Hajir: The enemy of
God, Fujayat, came to me and announced he was a Muslim. He asked me to
provide him with a horse and weapon so he can fight the apostates. I
provided him the same, but now I hear that this enemy of God is looting
Muslims and pagans alike.**[1]** So you with the help of Muslims under
your command arrest or kill him. If you arrest him, bring him to me.

Tarifa bin Hajir headed towards Fujayat. Both met and shooting without
aim or target took place. In the meantime, Najba bin Abi al-Mitha got
hurt and died. Fujayat understood that Muslims were determined to arrest
and execute him. He spoke to Tarifa: You have neither preference nor any
superiority over me. You have an assignment from Abu Bakr and I too have
orders from him.

Tarifa bin Abi Hajar said: If you are telling the truth put down the
weapon and come with me to Abu Bakr.

Fujayat agreed. They both (Fujayat and Tarifa) went to Abu Bakr.

As soon as he saw Fujayat he ordered Tarifa to take him to Baqi and burn
him alive.

In another narration Tabari says that Tarifa gathered fuel wood as much
as he could and ignited the fire. Then he tied up Fujayat and threw him
into the huge flames.

In this regard, Ibn Athir has this to say: Tarifa tied the hands of
Fujayat to his neck. Then he was tied by ropes round his body then he
threw him into the fire until he died.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [This was the same attitude that Ziyad bin Labeed, Akrama bin
Abu Jahl and Khalid bin Waleed practiced with the opponents of Abu Bakr.
On the basis of this it could be said that they must have been appointed
by Abu Bakr. But they have made the matter doubtful to exculpate the
Caliph.]  
**[2]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Doo Maktab Dar Islam* (Two
Schools of Islam) Vol. 2 (Outlooks of two schools about sources of
Islamic legislation) Pgs. 118-119; quoting from: *Tarikh Ibne Kathir,*
Vol. 9, Pg. 319; *Tarikh Tabari,* (1<sup>st</sup> Edition) Vol. 3, Pgs.
234-235; *Tarikh Ibne Athir*, Vol. 2, Pg. 146
