Discourse Fiveanalysis of Individual and Social Liberties
=========================================================

Dealing with youth
------------------

### A) Dealing with Zaid bin Muawiyah Qashari

Historical records show that the Caliph did not pay least regard to
request of a Muslim youth. For instance, the youth was fond of a
particular camel and thus another camel was presented by his people as
Zakat. But the Caliph’s men insisted that the former be given in Zakat.

We present here a historical document that indicates how the feelings of
a youth were crushed in Abu Bakr’s rule:

“In Yemen, Abu Bakr’s agent**[1]** was collecting Zakat**[2]** when his
choice fell on an infant camel, which belonged to a youth. The youth
requested him to take another instead because it was his favorite.

The agent rejected the request.

The youth approached the chief of tribe**[3]** who mediated and
recommended but the agent refused.

The chief of tribe went to the herd of camels collected from people
against Zakat. He took that infant camel from the herd and gave it to
the youth, its owner.

The agent reported the matter to Abu Bakr and Abu Bakr immediately sent
troops there.

The people rioted and the tribes of Yemen rose to fight against them.

When the people of Daba became aware of the fighting of Kinda tribe they
too rioted and expelled Abu Bakr’s agent from their town.

Abu Bakr wrote to the commander of the army to go there and fight them.

He went there, surrounded them and caused for them great many
difficulties.

People approached Abu Bakr’s agent and offered peace to him saying  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [His name was Ziyad bin Labeed; he was among those who besieged
the house of His Eminence, Ali and Fatima (a.s.) (*Tarikh Tabari,* Vol.
2, Pgs. 443-444)]  
**[2]** [Zakat]  
 **[3]** [His name was Haritha bin Suraqa]

they would pay whatever tax was incumbent upon them.**[1]**

The agent said: I don’t accept unless you admit that we are on the right
and you are wrong. Our killed ones are in heaven and yours in hell. You
must accept our decision.

They had no way but to accept. Then the agent ordered them to leave
their weapons and go out of their native town which also they did.

In the meantime, the soldiers entered the town. One by one cut the
throats of the elders. Womenfolk and children were made captives and
their property was seized. Then they went to Abu Bakr with the captives
and spoils.

After this, they went ahead with their tyranny, attacked Kinda and cut
the throats of dignitaries and others were dispatched to Medina.

Such and similar cases abound during the period of Abu Bakr.”**[2]**

The details of the incident are:

“Abu Bakr wrote to Ziyad bin Labeed and Muhajireen of Bani Umayyah
Makhzumi to come together and obtain people’s acknowledgement to his
Caliphate. If any refused to give allegiance or pay Zakat, they must
fight him – whoever it may be.

Athim says in Futuh:

Ziyad bin Labeed was involved in collecting Zakat from people, some of
whom paid willingly and some under force, unwillingly. He was too strict
and harsh with people in collecting tax. One day it so happened that a
youth, Zaid Ibn Muawiyah Qashari, accidentally saw his camel with the
stamp of Zakat over it among the camels which Ziyad bin Labeed had
collected from people. The herd was still there and not yet moved to be
sent to Abu Bakr. The youth approached Haritha bin Surakha one of the
heads of Kinda tribe and said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [It is surprising that inspite of this historical proof it is
claimed that: “Before military campaign Hazrat Abu Bakr started a
peaceful campaign.” (Fareedoon Islamniya: *Ashra-e-Mubashira*, Pg.
35)]  
 **[2]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Naqsh-e-Aaimma Dar Ahya-e-Deen*
(Role of Imams in the Revival of Religion, Vol. 14, Pgs. 40-41 &
*Saqifah* (Study about the formation of government after the passing
away of the Holy Prophet), Edited by Mahdi Dashti, Pgs. 68-69; quoting
from: *Al-Futuh,* Vol. 1, Pgs. 49-61. The details of this incident can
be seen in his book *Abdullah bin Saba,* Vol. 1, Pgs. 175-237 & Vol. 2,
Pgs. 51-77.

O cousin! Ziyad bin Labeed has taken one of my camels and stamped it and
kept it among camels of Zakat. I don’t mind paying Zakat but I am very
much fond of this particular camel. Please talk with Ziyad and ask him
to take another instead.

Athim adds: Haritha bin Surakha approached Ziyad bin Labeed and said: If
possible, do a favor to this youth to return his camel and take another
instead.

Ziyad answered:

This camel in now a part of God’s property and also stamped as such. I
don’t want to substitute it by any other.

Haritha said:

We are asking you to do a favor. Do this by way of charity and
generosity. It will be better than to do it by force. Ziyad was also
enraged by Haritha’s statement and he said:

I will not let this camel to go. I’ll see who can take it from me.

Athim goes on:

Then Haritha went to the herd and spotted the camel, took it out and
gave it to the youth and told him: If anyone asks you anything about it,
break his nose by the sword. Then, he added:

We obeyed the Prophet of God when he was alive. After his death had any
from members of his Household succeeded him we would have obeyed him
also. But the son of Abu Qahafa has no obligation on us neither is it
incumbent on us to obey him or pay allegiance to him.

Athim continues:

When these couplets reached Ziyad bin Labeed dread overtook him: He
feared to lose the whole herd of camels he had collected as Zakat. In
the darkness of the night, which was a good covering to him, he together
with his colleagues fled from Hadhramaut to Medina. Ziyad bin Labeed was
driving the herd to surrender them to Abu Bakr. All of a sudden he
changed his mind. He sent the camels to Medina with a reliable person
and advised the man not to say a word to Abu Bakr about the developments
that had taken place. He himself returned to Bani Zahal bin Mawia – a
branch of Kinda tribes and reported to them all the events. He also
invited them to accept Abu Bakr as Caliph and pay allegiance to him and
remain obedient to Abu Bakr. Ziyad went from tribe to tribe among Kinda
with this same mission. Wherever he went and extended invitation

to obey Abu Bakr, he received a negative answer. They did not entertain
him as guests are usually received among Arabs because of his
mission.**[1]**

Disappointed, Ziyad had no alternative but to return to Medina. He met
Abu Bakr and reported the matter to him adding a little mischief. He
told Abu Bakr that Kinda tribes about to renounce Islam and return to
their previous infidelity. So soon they will be Murtads.

Abu Bakr sent an army of four thousand soldiers to Hadhramaut under the
command of Ziyad himself.**[2]**

Ziyad first attacked Bani Hind – a division of Kinda, and defeated them.
Then he set out towards another branch named Banu Aqal. Then he attacked
the sub-division named Bani Hujar. In this sub-division, he made a
surprise attack. After this, he headed to Bani Jumair. It is not that he
went to pay friendly visits. Wherever he went he waged a battle and
fought the inhabitants, killed their elders, made their widows and
orphans captives. So wherever he went, death and destruction accompanied
him. The bloodshed at the hands of Ziyad bin Labeed and cruelties he
committed began to be talked of and reached Ashath bin Qais. Ashath bin
Qais was very much perturbed and he called for a domestic meeting
consisting of his cousins only to decide what should be done. They
headed towards Ziyad, met him near the town of Tareem. Fighting started
and with it started bloodshed. Ashath bin Qais killed three hundred
soldiers of Ziyad and he was defeated. Ziyad found himself nowhere. He
fled to the town of Tareem and took refuge there. From there he reported
the matter in a letter to his master – Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr saw he held no
more cards. So he wrote a letter to Ashath and tried to make peace with
him. The messenger while talking to Ashath accused him of apostasy. One
of the cousins of Ashath rose, pulled to the sword and brought it down
on the head of the messenger who died instantly.

This incident deprived Ashath of his friends. Most of his friends
deserted him and fled. Now only two thousand persons remained with
Ashath.

Ziyad wrote to Abu Bakr that the messenger has been killed. Abu Bakr
said: If they refused to pay Zakat to me or paid less even by a camel’s
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** From this it can be surmised that Ziyad did not invite these
tribes to accept Islam because they were already Muslims and they
accepted the commands of Prayer and Zakat. It was only that they
rejected Abu Bakr’s Caliphate and refused to pay Zakat to him.  
**[2]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar
Afsaane* (Abdullah Bin Saba and other legends), Vol. 2, Pgs. 218-223

tether from the quantity the Prophet had fixed for them I will wage war
against them. Abu Bakr wrote to Akrama bin Abi Jahl asking him to
mobilize a group of Meccans and also those who obeyed him and to go to
Ziyad bin Labeed. Accordingly Akrama moved towards Ziyad with two
thousand mounted men from Quraish and also those who had a treaty with
him. The inhabitants of Daba got the intelligence of Akrama’s arrival in
the town of Ma’arab. They became angry by this and made a plan to engage
Akrama in some occupation or other and not to let him go and attack
their cousins from Kinda tribe and other than Kinda. They had expelled
Hudhaifah bin Mehsin – the agent of Abu Bakr for reporting the revolt of
Daba people to Abu Bakr. This development enraged Abu Bakr who wrote to
Akrama: I had instructed you in my previous letter to move towards
Hadhramaut. But now upon receipt of this letter please change your route
and go to Daba. Deal with the inhabitants as they deserve. Do not be in
the least careless in carrying out the mission, which is the theme of
this letter. Upon completion of the task arrest the people and send them
to me. Afterwards you go to Ziyad bin Labeed. I hope that God will
conquer the land of Hadhramaut at your hands.”**[1]**

“Akrama, son of Abu Jahl, acted according to the contents of the letter,
moved towards Daba**[2]** with a battalion and faced the inhabitants
there. A battle ensued. The attacks were lethal and fatally destructive
to such an extent that the armed generation of Daba could not stand
before the army of Akrama.

The military pursued and killed them wherever they were found and even
dragged them out of their hiding places to kill. But the swords of Abu
Bakr’s army under Akrama’s command remained yet thirsty. Altogether one
hundred men of Daba were killed in this battle a few could manage to
escape to neighboring towns or remote lands for their life.**[3]** Some
seeing no hope to be safe from those dreadful swords, which were
tempered in revenge, surrendered to Akrama.

Akrama’s soldiers killed the elders, commanders and heads of Daba
people. The folks that became captive were three hundred in number;  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar
Afsaane* (Abdullah Bin Saba and other legends), Vol. 2, Pgs. 224-229  
**[2]** [This incident alone is sufficient to prove that the people of
Oman and Mohra were wrongly accused of apostasy]  
**[3]** [In the text of the document, the word of Muslims is used so
that the opposite group could be posed to be of apostates.]

among them were warriors, children and women. They were sent to Abu
Bakr.

Abu Bakr wanted to kill the men and distribute among Muslims the
children and women. But Umar did not allow.**[1]**…”**[2]**

What all these tyrannies and atrocities, in addition to bloodshed on a
wide scale, were for? It started from a baby camel!!!

Why should Abu Bakr’s agent behave in such a harsh, impolite and
inhumane way with them? Had he shown least leniency to that youth no one
would have been killed. Had he given that camel back to the youth who
had promised to substitute it by another, what wrong would have been
there in it?

Was it such a serious matter that it had to be responded with military
attacks and bloodshed of hundreds of Muslims?!!

“While the Prophet had ordered his agents and officials to be mild and
polite with the people and strictly enjoined them to not show any
inconsideration to values of brotherhood, humanity and morals. The way
Abu Bakr handled this and several such cases had, indeed, enraged the
magnanimous soul of Prophet. For instance, when the Prophet sent Maaz
bin Jabal to Yemen he instructed him as follows:

“Maaz! You are going to the people of the book – Jews and Christians.
They do not deny God and His religion. You only invite them to oneness
of God and prophethood of Muhammad. If they comply you inform them that
God had made five times prayers incumbent on Muslims. If they accept
this you make them aware of Zakat which God has made incumbent on the
rich and wealthy people to benefit of needy and poor ones. If they
accept this you do not take what is dear to them under pretext of Zakat.

Do fear the curse of a victim and an oppressed one. God swiftly complies
with the curse of victims.

This tradition is mentioned in reliable sources such as Sahih of
Bukhari, Abu Dawood, Tirmidhi, Nasai, Ibn Majah, Darimi, Malik and Ibn
Hanbal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [Because on one hand tribal prejudice did not permit him this
and on the other hand Ashath bin Qais Kindi was his staunch
supporter.]  
**[2]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 69

Ibn Hajar in Fath al-Bari writes about things which were dear to the
people and must not be taken in Zakat from them. The Prophet means
anything which is good or worthy and which is dear to its owner must not
be snatched from him. The real philosophy of Zakat is (a) help to needy
ones, (b) providing satisfaction to wealthy people that their property
is blessed by God because of the share they have given in Zakat to poor.
Therefore in no way a Zakat payer should be wounded in his thoughts,
feelings and conjectures. If so it will disturb the system.

In commenting on the Prophet’s warning: Do fear the curse of a victim he
says: The Prophet means to prohibit torture and harassment of people. He
warns us to not do things, which could become a cause for a victim to
curse us.

Thus was the instruction of Prophet was with regard to Zakat and the way
it should be collected from people. Now the reader himself can see and
judge how Abu Bakr acted in this suspect. He acted exactly opposite to
Prophet’s teachings and instructions and did so under the claim of being
the Caliph of God’s Prophet. The Prophet took Zakat and distributed it
among the poor and needy people. But Abu Bakr collected Zakat through
his agents and sent it to wealthy personalities of Quraish. The needy
ones had no share in it. So there is obvious contrast between what they
did and what the Prophet had taught to do or himself used to do. They
went against Prophet’s teachings, took from people things they held
dear. They took by force while the Prophet was against it. They did not
heed their requests and petitions. For the sake of a baby camel, they
waged bloody battles that enveloped several tribes…”**[1]**

When they realized that what they had done was wrong they gave it a
covering by accusing them falsely of apostasy.

Following are sources of traditions of Prophet on Zakat with regard to
the command that things dear to owners must not be taken.

1 – Sahih Bukhari, Chapter: Charities, Vol. 1, Pg. 181

2 – Ibid. Chapter: Costly things, Vol. 1, Pg. 176

3 – Fath al-Bari, Vol. 4, Pg. 65-97

4 – Musnad Ahmad, Vol. 1, Pg. 233

5 – Sunan Punch Guneh: Tirmidhi, Nasai, Ibn Majah, Darimi and Muwatta
Malik, Chapter of the Regulations of Zakat.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar
Afsaane* (Abdullah Bin Saba and other legends), Vol. 2, Pgs. 236-237  
**[2]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 250

Inspite of these historical documents can it be accepted that:

“This staunch stand and strong determination of Abu Bakr was the right
and faith he obtained directly from fountains of bounty of prophethood.
This enabled him to attain the position of Siddiq Akbar (The great true
one).”!**[1]**

“The stand of Abu Bakr Siddiq arose from that foundation. His insistence
on truth and his endeavor to avoid giving least allowance or distinction
to any is also based on his ardent faith.”!**[2]**

“If we ponder a little how deep his statesmanship was and how wise his
policies that he repelled every riot and suppressed every revolt and
brought under control the whole peninsula of Arabia overcoming the
political corruption; we are compelled to feel so lowly before this
great man in respect and awe.”!**[3]**

### B) Behavior with Nasr bin Hajjaj

There is a historical document, which says that the Second Caliph
expelled a youth to Basrah because he was much attractive and handsome.
He had no other sin. He did not allow him to return as long as he was
alive.

“Abdullah bin Buraid says: Umar used to go out into the town at night.
One night he saw a house that its door was closed but from inside came a
female voice that was singing:…**[4]**

…the next day he [the Caliph] called for Nasr bin Hajjaj.

When he came the Caliph saw that he was young, handsome and
exceptionally charming.

Umar ordered to shave his head from the front and when it was done, the
forehead became more prominent and it enhanced his elegance.

The Caliph said: Go and shave the rest of your head.

When he did so he became still more beautiful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sayyid Abul Hasan Nadwi (Translation Muhammad Qasim Qasimi):
*Yaqeen Mardaan-e-Khuda* (3<sup>rd</sup> Edition 1381), Pg. 36  
**[2]** Salah Abdul Fattah al-Khalidi (Translated by Abdul Aziz
Sulaimi): *Khulafa-e-Raashideen Az Khilafat Taa Shahadat*
(1<sup>st</sup> Edition 1382), Pg. 80  
**[3]** Sayyid Abdur Raheem Khateeb: *Shaykhain* (6<sup>th</sup> Edition
1382), Pg. 52  
**[4]** [In couplets composed by him he had expressed love for a young
man called Nasr bin Hajjaj.]

Umar said: O, son of Hajjaj! You should not live in the town I live.

Then he expelled him to Basrah**[1]**

Nasr remained in Basrah for a long time. He wrote a letter to Umar with
a few verses.

He criticized Umar as to what his sin was that he were expelled. You
presumed about me wrongly. You deprived me of my right to live in my
native town. Finally, he ended the letter with a request to let him
return. Umar received the letter and after reading said:

He should not come back as long as I am alive.”**[2]**

Sacrifices of Limitations
-------------------------

Although much is claimed about individual and social liberties during
this period, such as:

“In the days of Umar’s Caliphate, one day a woman met him in the streets
of Medina. She started to advise him about running the government. Umar
continued listening to her in a most respectable and humble manner. Then
he promised her with gratitude to act upon her advice.”!**[3]**

“See the liberty: A woman advises and criticizes the Caliph, the
powerful one of his time, Umar too stops on the street, listens to her
without showing any uneasiness and even says: you are right while I
wrong.”**[4]**

But records show something else:

### A) Ibn Abbas

“The roughness of Umar reached to the extent that Ibn Abbas could not
dare to mention a religious rule about his inheritance:

Umar died. Now Ibn Abbas could make the demand. He was criticized why he
did not say during the time of Umar. Ibn Abbas answered: By  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [Umar issued same order for the cousin of Nasr bin Hajjaj.
(Refer: *Tabaqat Ibne Saad,* Vol. 3, Pg. 385)]  
**[2]** Sayyid Abdul Husain Sharafuddin: *Ijtihaad Dar Maqabil-e-Nass*
(Translated by Ali Dawani), Pgs. 355-356; quoting from: *Sharh Nahjul
Balagha,* Ibne Abil Hadeed, Vol. 3, Pg. 122  
**[3]** Kamaal Ruhani: Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam Magazine, Issue
No. 8, (7000 copies), Winter 80, Pg. 58  
**[4]** Ibid. Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam Magazine, Issue No. 8,
Winter 80, Pg. 59

God, I was afraid of him.”**[1]**

“Ibn Abbas says: There was a thing. I waited for two years to ask about
it. The thing that withheld me was the fear of Umar.**[2]**”**[3]**

B) Abu Ayyub

“Abu Ayyub Ansaari did not dare to act on the traditions of Prophet.
Umar used to abuse, scold and beat anyone who acted according to
traditions of the Prophet.”**[4]**

C) Slave of Zubair bin Awwam

“Once after Asr prayer a slave of Zubair stood to pray. At the same
moment, he became aware that Umar was coming towards him with his
cane**[5]** so he fled from there at once.”**[6]**

D) Sabeegh bin Isal

“Sabeegh bin Isal Tameemi**[7]** was a dignitary and chief of tribe. He
was very fond to learn and understand the meanings of Quran. Therefore
he traveled to various towns where companions of Prophet lived such as
Kufa, Basrah, Damascus, Humis, Iskandaria and he ask them meanings of
Quranic verses.

Amr Aas wrote to Umar that there was a man who asked about the
commentary of Quran.

Umar told him to send him to Medina.

So he was dispatched to Medina. He came to the Caliph and had not yet
seated when Umar asked him: What is the meaning of: Wazzariyat zarwan?

Umar said: You are that same one! Come here! Then with the branch of
dates**[8]** hit him on his head a hundred times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Quoted from: *Al-Mahalli,* Vol. 8, Pgs. 279-280; *Kanzul Ummal,*
Vol. 11, Pg. 28  
**[2]** Quoted from: *Tarikh Umar bin Khattab,* Pg. 126  
**[3]** Ali Muhammad Meer Jalili: *Imam Ali (a.s.) wa Zamaamdaaraan*
(Imam Ali and the Rulers), Pg. 110  
**[4]** Allamah Ja’far Murtuza Amili: *Tahlili Az Zindagi-e-Siyasi Imam
Hasan Mujtaba (a.s.),* Pg. 124; quoting from: *Al-Musannaf,* Vol. 2, Pg.
433  
**[5]** Rasool Ja’faryan: *Tarikh Khulafa,* Pg. 66; quoting from:
*Al-Marifah wat Tarikh,* Vol. 1, Pgs. 364-365  
 **[6]** Refer: Ahmad al-Bakri: *Min Hayatul Khaleefa,* Pgs. 375-377  
**[7]** Refer: Ahmad al-Kubra: *Min Hayat al-Khaleefa,* Pg. 375-377  
 **[8]** [A broom]

The man said: What was in my head has now gone. Then Umar ordered him to
be imprisoned.

When he arose his clothes were smeared with blood.

When he recovered, Umar ordered him to be brought again.

This time he beat him a hundred times at the waist so that it was badly
bruised. Then he told them to throw him into the prison.

After that the man was brought before Umar for the third time. The man
said: If you want to kill me, kill without any hindrance. Relieve me.

Umar expelled him to Basrah. He wrote a letter to the governor of
Basrah, Abu Moosa Ashari, to see no one contacted him. He must be
boycotted.

This man used to go to congregation prayers. But nobody talked to him.
After a long time he approached Abu Moosa and asked him to recommend to
Umar using his good offices. Abu Moosa wrote to Umar that the man had
repented, could he please forgive him? Umar accepted. Then people began
to interact with him.

It is mentioned that the man was one of the dignitaries. But after this
incident he lost his station.”**[1]**

“The punishment of Sabeegh was so serious and harsh that it rang the
bell of danger to all.

A man asked Ibn Abbas the meaning of a Quranic verse and Ibn Abbas
explained it to him.

The man repeated his question again and again. Ibn Abbas got tired and
said:

Your case is like that of Sabeegh whom Umar had beaten up.

Why do you want the same treatment?

Umar got intelligence and he beat up the man such that his back
bled.”**[2]**

“And it is also mentioned that: A man approached Umar and asked the
meaning of a Quranic verse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Naqsh-e-Aaimma Dar Ahya-e-Deen*
(Role of Imams in the Revival of Religion, Vol. 14, Pgs. 50-51; quoting
from: *Sunan Darimi,* Vol. 1, Pgs. 54-55; *Tafseer Ibne Kathir,* Vol. 4,
Pg. 232; *Itqan Suyuti,* Vol. 2, Pg. 4; *Tafseer Qurtubi,* Vol. 18, Pg.
29  
**[2]** Ustad Ali Koorani: *Tadween-e-Quran,* Pg. 119; quoting from:
*Ad-Durre Manthur,* Vol. 3, Pg. 161

Umar hit him with a cane he was carrying so that his turban fell
down...”**[1]**

“Abdur Rahman bin Yazeed narrates: A man asked Umar the meaning of a
particular word of Quran. Umar ran after him with a lash in
hand.”**[2]**

“It is also narrated that: A man came to Umar and told him that he knew
the most difficult part of Quran.

Umar lashed his head and said: What business do you have with
Quran?”**[3]**

E) Narrators of Traditions

“Abu Huraira says: In the days of Umar, there was no one who could
narrate any saying of Prophet but that it was certain that his back
would bleed.”**[4]**

From the above preceding instances one can understand to what extent
liberties existed in the time of Umar. Neither religious laws nor Quran
or traditions were allowed to be mentioned.

Roughness and Extremism
-----------------------

Here are a few cases of roughness of the Caliph taken from historical
annals:

A) “He was the first to always carry a cane.”**[5]**

B) “Ibn Shubbeh narrates that a man told Umar:

People are angry with you. People are angry with you. People hate you!

Umar asked: Why?

The man replied: Because of your tongue and your cane.”**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. quoting from: *Sunan Darimi,* Vol. 1, Pg. 54  
**[2]** Ibid. quoting from: *Ad-Durre Manthur,* Vol. 6, Pg. 317  
 **[3]** Ibid. quoting from: *Ad-Durre Manthur,* Vol. 2, Pg. 227  
**[4]** Najah Ata at-Tai: *Nazaryaat al-Khaleefatain,* Vol. 2, Pg. 477;
quoting from: *Mukhtasar Tarikh Ibne Asakir,* Vol. 3, Pg. 11  
 **[5]** Rasool Ja’faryan: *Tarikh Khulafa,* Pg. 65; quoting from:
*Tarikh Tabari,* Vol. 4, Pg. 209; *Tarikh al-Khulafa,* Pg. 137; *Tabaqat
al-Kubra,* Vol. 3, Pg. 282  
**[6]** Rasool Ja’faryan: *Tarikh Khulafa,* Pg. 65; quoting from:
*Tarikh Madinatul Munawwara,* Vol. 2, Pg. 858

On the other hand it is claimed that:

“No one was unhappy in his rule. All were pleased, happy and satisfied.
They had trust in his justice.”**[1]**

“When Uthman announced that he would act according to the Book of God,
Sunnah of Prophet and method of Abu Bakr and Umar, people rejoiced
because they were fond of the God-pleasing programs**[2]** of the two
preceding Caliphs.”!**[3]**

On the whole it can be said

“The spiritual personality of the Caliph had a great influence in his
executive activities and political job. He was of short temper**[4]**
and from viewpoint of his thoughts, he was an extremist.”**[5]**

*C)* “He viewed Islam only from a harsh and merciless angle. This was
the reason that Jabla bin Aiham, one of the kings of Syria who had
committed a mistake, fled from Mecca to Syria and renounced
Islam.”**[6]**

“The story was: Five hundred riders from tribes of Akka and Jafna
entered Medina. Their complexion was Arabic. Their dress was woven with
threads of gold and silver. Jibla (an Arab speaking the Ghasani language
of Jordan) was leading them. His mother, Maria wore a costly crown
inlaid with jewels. They all became Muslims. Muslims rejoiced their
conversion because of the long following they had. Jibla went with his
followers in the company of the Caliph to Hajj. While King Jibla was
going round Kaaba according to the rules of Hajj a man of Fuzara tribe
stepped on the cloth the king had wrapped around himself; so it became
loose and rolled down. Jibla slapped the man who complained to Umar and
Umar called for Jibla. He ordered the victim to slap Jibla or that Jibla
should obtain the man’s forgiveness and satisfy him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ali Tantawi (Translated by Abu Bakr Hasanzadeh):
*Dastan-e-Zindagani-e-Umar,* (1<sup>st</sup> & 2<sup>nd</sup> Edition
1380), Pg. 78  
**[2]** Author of the article has considered the audience in Masjid as
Emigrants and Helpers!  
**[3]** Abdul Qadir Dahqaan Siraawaani: Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 14, Summer 82, Pg. 16  
**[4]** Quoted from: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Ibne Abil Hadeed, Vol. 1,
Pg. 183  
 **[5]** Rasool Ja’faryan: *Tarikh Khulafa,* Pg. 65  
**[6]** Ibid. Pg. 67; quoting from: *Tabaqat al-Kubra,* Vol. 1, Pg. 265;
*Al-Futuh,* Vol. 2, Pgs. 302-304

Umar made the case so hard that Jibla dispaired from satisfying Umar and
the complainant.

Jibla fled in the night with his followers and associates and landed in
Constantine. The harsh and rough behavior of Umar made him scornful to
Islam, so all of them became Christians again.

Hercules, the emperor of Rome, received them with great honor and
distinction, accorded them a grand welcome and provided every facility
and pleasure to them.

Inspite of this, Jibla used to cry and lament for having had lost and
given up the faith of Islam.”**[1]**

It seems Umar had forgotten the recommendation of Zaid bin Thabit with
regard to Ubadah bin Samit. So Umar’s obstinacy towards Jibla was like
one he showed to Amr Aas and his son. He did so to crush their
personality.

Ibn Abi al-Hadeed compares Imam Ali (a.s.) with all Caliphs thus:

“The three Caliphs who preceded, acted according to the dictates of
their personal interests and in accordance with their hidden
proclivities. They did not pay regard whether it was in accordance with
laws of Islam or not.

There is no doubt that one who acts as he desires becomes distant from
faith. He cannot perform what goes against his desire though it could be
in line with religion. As a result, there cannot be discipline in him
and no coherence in his actions.”**[2]**

Allamah Ja’far Murtuza based on the above analysis, writes about the
stand of Umar against Egyptians and his reply to his critics in the same
atmosphere.

*D)* Some came from Egypt to investigate with Umar for his not acting in
some cases according to Quran. Umar maintained that he had acted
according to his personal interpretation of Quran. Then he asked them:

“Do people of Medina know for what you have come here? They said: No.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sayyid Abdul Husain Sharafuddin: *Ijtihaad Dar Maqabil-e-Nass*
(Translated by Ali Dawani), Pgs. 346-347; quoting from: *Al-Iqdul
Fareed,* Vol. 1, Pg. 187  
**[2]** Allamah Ja’far Murtuza Amili: *Tahlili Az Zindagi-e-Siyasi Imam
Hasan Mujtaba (a.s.),* Pgs. 123-124; quoting from: *Sharh Nahjul
Balagha,* Ibne Abil Hadeed, Vol. 12, Pg. 83

Umar said: Had they known the reason of your coming I would have
punished you so much that it could be a lesson for others.”**[1]**

*E)* So can it be believed that a woman advised him and he listened to
her patiently? The records say:

Roughness of Umar was a block to criticize him

“Ayesha, daughter of Uthman, says that Umar was a harsh and rough man.
Therefore no one dared to criticize him.”**[2]**

Umar was harsher to ladies

“Women were terrified with Umar because he was harsher towards
them.”**[3]**

For example:

1 – “Abdul Razzaq Sanani says: Ibrahim Nakhai narrates that Umar used to
roam in the rows of women. Once he smelt perfume from the lines of
women. He declared: If I knew which of you has applied this perfume I
would have done such and such.

The woman who had used the perfume urinated out of fear.”**[4]**

2 – “Umar’s face was so dreadful that a pregnant woman saw him and
miscarried.”**[5]**

The incident occurred at a time when Umar summoned the woman to court.
The woman was terrified and she miscarried.

While it is said in his praise:

“He was the first leader of the people and a democratic one in
Islam.”**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Pg. 117; quoting from: *Hayatus Sahaba,* Vol. 3, Pg. 260  
 **[2]** Rasool Ja’faryan: *Tarikh Khulafa,* Pg. 69; quoting from:
*Nasrud Durar,* Vol. 4, Pg. 34  
**[3]** Shaheed Murtuza Mutahhari: *Seeri Dar Nahjul Balagha,* Pg. 160  
 **[4]** Rasool Ja’faryan: *Tarikh Khulafa,* Pg. 66; quoting from:
*Al-Musannaf,* Vol. 4, Pgs. 343-344  
**[5]** Ali Muhammad Meer Jalili: *Imam Ali (a.s.) wa Zamaamdaaraan*
(Imam Ali and the Rulers), Pg. 111; quoting from: *Sharh Nahjul
Balagha,* Ibne Abil Hadeed, Vol. 1, Pg. 183; *Tarikh Umar bin Khattab,*
Pg. 125  
 **[6]** Ahmad Naseeb (translated by Saaduddin Shaykh Ahmadi):
*Mohabbat-e-Payambar Dar Qalb-e-Yaaranash* (1<sup>st</sup> Edition
1380), Pgs. 85-86

Historical records show:

3 – “The harsh behavior raised the objection of people. They approached
Abdur Rahman bin Auf to talk to Umar in this respect and to tell him
that daughters in home fear him. Umar said in reply:

People must be dealt with in only this way. Else, they cannot be
reformed. If I don’t do thus they will take off my dress from my
body.**[1]**

He himself had acknowledged that people were terrified of him.**[2]**

In fact, this behavior prevented people to oppose him in any
matter.**[3]**”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Quoted from: *Nasrud Durar,* Vol. 2, Pg. 35; *Uyun al- Akhbaar,*
Vol. 1, Pg. 12  
**[2]** Quoted from: *Hayatul Haiwan,* Vol. 1, Pg. 49  
**[3]** Quoted from: *Nasrud Durar,* Vol. 4, Pgs. 34-35  
**[4]** Rasool Ja’faryan: *Tarikh Khulafa,* Pg. 67
