Conclusionzahra’s Speech Describes the Social Conditions After Usurpation of Caliphate and Identifies the Ills in Politics and Government
=========================================================================================================================================

In the end we refer to five points indicated by Zahra to Ansaar ladies
in her speech. And we end this volume thereat.

The ladies visited Zahra to see her and inquire into her health because
Zahra was sick at home as her sides were broken due to the door falling
on her by the kick of her enemy.

Zahra sketched to them a picture of society of tomorrow – a society
deprived of Imamate and Guardianship of Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) and
molded into the present illegitimately running government:

“Beware of pulled out swords, sharp and destructive – and a tyrant
attack advancing atrocities and a haughty stubbornness of oppressors.

All your affairs will be upset except the haughtiness of tyrant and you
will be given your lot but little.

Your gatherings will be separated by swords. You will harvest nothing
but fruit of disappointed hope. Where will you go; and where will your
destiny end.”**[1]**

A history of thirteen years of national rivalry from Saqifah and finally
its surrender to Bani Umayyah who held it so tightly under their claws
showed deviation of Muslims from the path prescribed by Quran through
His Prophet and the Prophet announced it in Ghadeer. The consequences
that followed – how horrible, how dreadful and how destructively fatal!

It was not only the matter of tyranny to Ahle Bayt (a.s.). The tyrannies
committed against the dearest ones to God, against the purified
personalities of time immemorial cannot be confined to writing by any
pen. Although endeavors were made to make history forget or take it as
little as possible the rightfulness of Ali to Caliphate, which was
usurped so openly by the conspiracy  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mahdi Ja’fari: *Mastoor Aaftaab-e-Sarmad,* Pgs. 190-194; quoting
from: Ibne Taifur: *Balaghatun Nisa,* Pg. 32; Jauhari: *Saqifah wa
Fadak,* Pg. 117; Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 16, Pg.
233; Umar Reza Kahhala: *Alaamun Nisa,* Vol. 3, Pg. 1219

of Saqifah. While they claim:

“People liked the method of Caliphate of Abu Bakr and Umar! And were
really fond of it! They were sure their Caliphate was truly based on the
method of Prophet. They could live in safety under this Caliphate from
tyranny and danger.”!**[1]**

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdul Qadir Dahqaan Siraawaani: Article quoted in Nida-e-Islam
Magazine, Issue No. 14, Summer 82, Pg. 16
