Discourse Oneabsence of Ali’s Approval To Abu Bakr’s Caliphate
==============================================================

There is no doubt that if Abu Bakr’ Caliphate had been legitimate in the
view of His Eminence, Ali in any of these aspects – legitimacy,
popularity, entity – he would have never refrained from paying
allegiance and would have never tried to overthrow it through armed
uprising. So the fact is that there was no approval at all from the side
of Ali (a.s.).**[1]**

### Historical documents

Moosa bin Uqbah (d. 141) narrates from Ibne Shuhab Zuhri:

“Some Muhajireen were enraged about the allegiance of Abu Bakr, among
them were Ali and Zubair…and they had weapons with them.”**[2]**

Ibne Mitham Bahrani (d. 679) narrates from the book, *Waqatus Siffeen*
by Nasr bin Muzahim Minqari (d. 212) that Ali said:

“Had I found forty men of determination I would have fought.”**[3]**

Ibne Abil Hadeed Motazalli (d. 656) also has narrated the same words of
Ali:

“Had I found forty men of determination!”**[4]**

After quoting these words in *Waqatus Siffeen* he writes:

“A large number of biographers have quoted this statement.”**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** With this aim His Eminence Ali (a.s.) accompanied by Hazrat
Zahra (s.a.) went door to door of Ansaar.Refer: Ibne Qutaibah:
*Al-Imamah was-Siyasah,* Vol. 1, Pg. 29; Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul
Balagha,* Vol. 6, Pg. 13 & Vol. 2, Pg. 47  
 **[2]** [His book, *Maghazi* has not reached us; but some narrators
have quoted from it like: Kalai Andalusi (died 634): *Al-Iktifa,* Vol.
2, Pg. 446; Mohib Tabari (died 694): *Riyadh an-Nazarah,* Vol. 1, Pg.
241; Dayar Bakri: (died 982): *Tarikh Khamees,* Vol. 2, Pg. 169]  
**[3]** Ibne Mitham Bahrani: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 2, Pgs.
26-27  
**[4]** Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 2, Pg. 22  
**[5]** The text mentioned by Ibne Abil Hadeed is as follows: Ali said:
I have no supporter except my own family members. I feared their death.
Ali always used to say particularly after the death of the Prophet:
Alas, if I had forty men of determination! This is mentioned by Nasr bin
Muzahim in his book *Waqatus Siffeen.* Most biographers too have
mentioned this. It is clear in the text of Ibne Abil Hadeed that the
last part of

In the same way in his book he has quoted the text of letter Muawiyah
had written to Ali in which he has quoted this statement of His
Eminence, Ali (a.s.):

“Had I forty men of determination I would have fought them.”**[1]**

The firm determination of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) to have an armed
uprising was that when – due to some exigencies**[2]** – he became
hopeless and confined himself to his house he remarked as follows:

“If I had not feared discord among Muslims and their going back to
infidelity and not worried about the destruction of the religion of
Islam I would have behaved with them in a different manner.”**[3]**

“And by Allah! If there had been no risk of discord among Muslims as a
result of which they would have reverted to infidelity, we would have in
every possible way tried to bring down the regime.”**[4]**

According to Shia sources the dissatisfaction of Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
was to such an extent that he did not accept it for even a moment; so
how can it be possible that he gave allegiance to Abu Bakr?

Thus he said:

“By God, if I had the number of supporters that Talut had or supporters
the Prophet had in battle of Badr, and they were inimical to you - I
would have fought you with sword till you returned to truth. The
separation among you would have suited you best and most befitting to
you.

O God judge between us with truth and You are the best of judges.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

the sentence is missing. So it is not known what Ali would have done had
he got forty men of determination. This text reads in the writing of
Abdul Salam Muhammad Haroon: Alas, if I had forty men ‘… then Ali said
some other matter. So, here to the sentence is incomplete.(Minqari:
*Waqatus Siffeen,* Pg. 163)**  
[1]** Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 2, Pg. 47 [This
letter was written by Muawiyah to His Eminence, Ali (a.s.)]  
 **[2]** Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) explained this matters in a way that
there was nothing restraining Amirul Momineen (a.s.) from mobilizing
people against Abu Bakr except that he feared they would revert to their
ignorance and apostize from Islam.(Thiqatul Islam Kulaini: *Kafi,* Vol.
8, Pg. 295; Shaykh Tusi: *Amali,* Pg. 230)  
**[3]** Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 1, Pg. 307  
**[4]** Shaykh Mufeed: *Al-Jamal,* Pg. 437

The narrator says: Then he left the mosque and passed through
Baseer**[1]** where around thirty sheep were there. He pointed to the
sheep and said: By God, if I had men of this number of sheep, sincere
and true to God and His Prophet, I would have overthrown him from power.

By nightfall, three hundred and sixty persons gathered around him and
pledged their support to him until death.

Ali asked them to come the next day to Ahjaaris Zait**[2]** with their
heads shaved. Ali shaved his head. Among those three hundred and sixty
came none except Abu Zar, Miqdad, Huzaifa bin Yamani, Ammar bin Yasir
and Salman.

Then Ali raised his hands towards the sky and said:

If a covenant had not been taken from me by the Prophet I would have
drowned the opponents in the gulf of their ambitions and brought down
upon their heads fatal destructive lightning of death. Of course they
will come to know soon.”**[3]**

### Conclusion

Says Ibne Maytham Bahrani (d. 679):

“The event of Saqifah, occurrence of differences between companions and
Ali’s refusal to pay allegiance is an evident fact which can neither be
denied nor concealed. It is from here that eternal differences and
rivalry among them followed. The truth is that rivalry remained fixed
and alive between Ali and he that seized the Caliphate in his time. The
tyranny that resulted is open and clear. It remains at constancy and
morally it declares what happened.”**[4]**

Therefore it can be said:

Sayings and behavior of Ali towards Abu Bakr’s Caliphate indicate his
harsh and serious opposition. This open opposition they claim to be his
acceptance and approval of Abu Bakr’s Caliphate.

Ali’s strong resistance and refusal to pay allegiance to Abu Bakr
finally resulted in those atrocities. The armed attack on house of
Divine Revelation, then their entrance into the House, the insults on
Zahra, the only daughter of the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [A shed for keeping cattle and sheep]  
**[2]** [A locality in Medina]  
**[3]** Thiqatul Islam Kulaini: *Kafi,* Vol. 8, Pgs. 32-33  
**[4]** Ibne Mitham Bahrani: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 1, Pg. 252

Prophet, then beatings and physical hurt committed against her, then the
miscarriage of her unborn child, Mohsin – what all this represents…?

Even when Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was disappointed of the possibility of
armed uprising and possibility of overthrowing the tyrant rule of Abu
Bakr, he still did not accept the validity of Abu Bakr’s regime.

It is natural that such denial can never be construed as his approval to
Abu Bakr’s Caliphate in any of the aspects we have stated above.

On the basis of this it can be said:

**Amirul Momineen (a.s.) neither approved Abu Bakr’s Caliphate nor he
accepted it.**

As a result:

**Abu Bakr’s Caliphate, in his view, was illegal and usurped because it
did not belong to him. Caliphate was his right according to Prophet’s
declaration in Ghadeer. It was usurpation. It was not only illegitimate
but even short of popularity and identity.**

What is the Meaning of Silence?
-------------------------------

As mentioned in first chapter of second volume of this book, Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) due some exigencies, some of which we listed, changed
his stance from planning an armed uprising into sitting quiet at home.

**In other words, he became obliged to undergo those sore and bitter
conditions prevalent at that time, such as:**

**A)** To forego the armed uprising against Abu Bakr’s Caliphate and to
ignore any preparations in that regard.

**B)** To avoid campaigning seriously and abstain from disclosing any
confidential matters.

**C)** To let go without opposition anything having a bearing on Abu
Bakr’s Caliphate, or anything in relation to it.

While enduring these things was so hard that in his own words it was:
“…a thorn in my eyes and a bone in my throat…”**[1]**

### It was bitter and painful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** “So I adopted patience although there was pricking in the eye
and suffocation (of mortification) in the throat.” (Sayyid Razi: *Nahjul
Balagha,* Shiqshiqya Sermon)

On the basis of this requirement of the above matter, absence of
confronting the rulers which is described as silence can in no way be
interpreted to be approval of Abu Bakr’s Caliphate in any of its
aspects: legitimacy, popularity or factuality.

In the same way ‘acceptance of silence and giving up of armed uprising’
has no relation and necessity of his taking steps to his paying
allegiance to Abu Bakr, though his silence is wrongly interpreted and it
is claimed:

“Ali saw himself more deserving to Caliphate, but for the sake of the
interests of Muslims he did Bay’at with Abu Bakr.”**[1]**

Now it should be asked:

### At what time, at which ground and under what conditions it took place.

Can such acceptance fulfill the necessary requirement of granting
legitimacy to the ruler?

Or because of difference between the meaning of silence and paying
allegiance does there exist any bearing between the two? The sense and
the application of the word “acknowledgment” or “paying allegiance” in
such expressions is **wrong**.

What is the Meaning of Allegiance?
----------------------------------

In order to understand the meaning of *Bay’at* (that is the matter they
claim to have occurred between Ali and Abu Bakr) and to know why the
regime was so much concerned about getting the *Bay’at* of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) let us study the following to get a compendious sense
and a concise description of this word:

Ibne Khaldun (d. 808) writes in his book *Muqaddima:*

“To pay allegiance (Bay’at in Arabic) means a covenant, a fact that
commits one to be obedient to the other. One who enters into Bay’at with
the other (or an Amir, a master) surrenders to his view in relation to
himself and Muslims. He has no say in affairs concerning him or others.
In short, one resigns to other. This is the sense of Bay’at. After
accomplishment of Bay’at, he must be resigned irrespective of his
willingness or otherwise.

It was customary at the time of *Bay’at* that one laid his hand into the
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Hadi Marefat: Zahidan Daily, Issue No. 12, Mehr 1382

hand of Amir or Lord as a token of his submission to him.

This is the general sense and common meaning in religion and common
parlance.”**[1]**

**In the light of this and other several similar descriptions it can be
said:**

A) Individuals indicate obedience to one another by means of their
actions and conduct. They show their resignation to his orders and
authority which is called *Bay’at*.

*Bay’at* with Caliph means acknowledgement to his being a Caliph and
obedience to his orders. This indicates acceptance of his Caliphate and
rule.

B) Through *Bay’at* people leave their possibilities, properties and
their social interests at the disposal of their leader or Imam or
Caliph. By this means and method the leadership or Caliphate is
established in society and attains a ground for its legitimacy. Those
who enter into *Bay’at* are committed to honor the choice and opinion of
the *Bay’at* taker.

C) Through their *Bay’at* people are committed to be loyal and devoted
to the *Bay’at*-taker. They also are committed to provide possibilities
to strengthen the stand of government and make its foundation stronger.
All these activities are reflected in their *Bay’at* to the Caliph.

### Conclusion

*Bay’at* is an act by which one’s support, consent to obedience,
commitment of loyalty and sincerity and acceptance of his (the
*Bay’at*-taker) power or office is expressed.

It is a means through which people display their approval and
acknowledgement to the aforesaid items. It is a formal declaration.

### Reminder

**A)** Those who believe in Ali’s *Bay’at* to Abu Bakr either do not
speak with knowledge or use the word in its dictionary meaning to convey
the above connotation.

**B)** There is a great difference in the meaning of silence and
abandoning armed uprising. It is absolutely wrong as it is not possible
at all to use the word *Bay’at* even for the sake of reference.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdur Rahman Khaldun: *Muqaddimah* (Translated by Muhammad
Parvin Gunabadi), Vol. 1, Pg. 400

In other words, the term *Bay’at* carries a particular sense it cannot
be used in places which do not fit its sense or do not fall within its
range. The word silence is interpreted in a sense of *Bay’at* and then
the very word of *Bay’at* is attributed to Ali that he performed
*Bay’at* with Abu Bakr because he had maintained a long silence.

Comparison of silence to Bay’at
-------------------------------

Three aspects of the topics:

**A)** Imam Ali’s (a.s.) untiring efforts to overthrow Abu Bakr’s
Caliphate; his belief in overthrowing the regime – even after his
getting disappointed that it would be fruitful and beneficial. Though he
gave up hope of armed uprising he continued his efforts.

**B)** Imam Ali’s (a.s.) adamancy in his denial to give *Bay’at* to Abu
Bakr until (according to Sunnis) firewood was gathered and Zahra’s house
was set afire.

**C)** The accurate interpretation of Ali’s social and political stand
that is regarded as silence:

**What was forced upon Ali (a.s.) can be sketched as follows:**

**1 –** Absence of effective efforts to have armed uprising against Abu
Bakr’s Caliphate and his ignoring it. Since no necessary ground was
available to him he had to accept this situation.

**2 –** He had to forsake stiff opposition and tough steps because of
their evil results and unsuitable conditions.

**3 –** Absence of opposition from all sides to orders of the Caliph and
all acts of the regime as a result of bad consequences and unfavorable
conditions because of no general support or lack of consent of the
society.

So it is clear how difficult it was to undergo such conditions in spite
of one’s unwillingness. This is termed as silence with regard to Imam
Ali’s (a.s.) political and social stands. He (Ali) adopted this policy;
and this policy had no bearing on his *Bay’at* or no relation to it that
it be construed as *Bay’at* to Abu Bakr. This silence did not bind Ali
to give *Bay’at* to Abu Bakr.

Far before these developments,**[1]** His Eminence (a.s.) had occupied
himself in collecting verses and chapters of Quran in his house. He had
been disappointed of any possibility of bringing the downfall of
illegitimate rule. The main  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: Shaykh Abduz Zahra Mahdi: *Al-Hujoom Alaa Bait-e-Fatima,*
Pgs. 482-488

setback was state of society, which was not yet ripe to foresee the
dangers in store if the people betrayed him.

It is obvious that to yield to such conditions and arrange thereon the
political and social stands of his own should not create any obligation
to give his acceptance and approval to Abu Bakr’s Caliphate. Or that it
could be used to prove that the *Bay’at* really took place.

Mere occurrence of something cannot be a proof of its legitimacy. To
prove the establishment of Abu Bakr’s regime cannot be a proof that he
had the allegiance of Amirul Momineen (a.s.). Neither can his silence be
construed as approval.

**To accept a factual happening does not denote one is in agreement to
it. So Ali’s silence does not call for *Bay’at.***

Conditions of achieving Bay’at
------------------------------

“Placing ones hand into that of other in Arab parlance is completion of
a transaction.

But in Islam it is a sign of a covenant which means acknowledgement to
one’s authority or superiority. It represents obedience of Bay’at giver
to Bay’at taker and his submission to him.

The analysis of the word Bay’at in the days of the Prophet shows that it
was based on three points:

1 – The Bay’at giver

2 – The Bay’at taker

3 – Commitment of obedience to rules of Bay’at

According to this order, the object of Bay’at must be clearly known and
conceived because its performance is committed.

So according to traditions of Prophet, as a token of acceptance one puts
his hand into the hand of Bay’at taker. Thus Bay’at is concluded.

So Bay’at takes to it a religious feature**[1]** and becomes a religious
term.

But these days most Muslims do not know the conditions of getting Bay’at
on religious basis in Islam. Therefore it is incumbent to explain that:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [Religious terminology] (Allamah Askari: *Outlooks of two
schools about sources of Islamic legislation,* Vol. 1, Pg. 125.)

In Islam Bay’at is sought when the following three conditions exist:

1 – The Bay’at giver should have fitness and eligibility of Bay’at. He
must be free and independent.

2 – The Bay’at taker should have fitness and eligibility to take Bay’at
from him.

3 – Bay’at must be for a legitimate object and aim.

On the basis of this:

Bay’at must be concluded on the basis of willingness and inclination.
Bay’at loses its authenticity and characteristic if it is obtained by
force.

As such, if it is performed under coercion or tyranny it is illegitimate
and invalid.

Bay’at is wrong and invalid if concluded with one who is a known sinner
or if Bay’at will lead to disobedience to God or to commit a sinful act.
In all these cases it has no validity.

So Bay’at is an Islamic term and Islam has framed its rules and
regulations.

The above can be summed up as follows:

Bay’at in Arabic means giving hand into the hand of another as a token
of completion of a transaction. In Islam it means that the Bay’at giver
shall endeavor to perform obligations to the interest of Bay’at
obtainer. If relative conditions do not exist, Islamic Bay’at cannot be
accomplished.

Conditions of Bay’at are:

1 – Bay’at of a mad or an immature is not valid.

2 – Bay’at obtained by force and from an acknowledged sinner is not
correct.

3 – Bay’at to perform things, which go against religion, is of no value.

Bay’at in the light of above is like a business deal. It takes place
with mutual consent and agreement. It loses its strength if obtained by
force or fraud.

Likewise, Bay’at could not be performed for sin or disobedience to God.
Bay’at cannot be done with an open sinner.”**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Allamah Askari: *Outlooks of two schools about sources of
Islamic legislation,* Vol. 1, Pgs. 254-255; Pgs. 261-263; Pg. 310

Imam Ali (a.s.) on this basis has said:

“My Bay’at to them did not constitute any right for them as they had no
right to take Bay’at and it does not represent my willingness or consent
to them.”**[1]**

So according to the words of Ali, his *Bay’at* to Abu Bakr had no
validity.

To understand still more accurately the above words we shall scrutinize
historical documents related to their demand from Ali to give *Bay’at.*
Then we shall see the result against the conditions of obtaining
*Bay’at.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Dailami: *Irshad al-Quloob,* Pg. 396
