Beginning of Discussion Awareness of Basics of Intellectual Movement – Research Towards Creating Islamic Unity
==============================================================================================================

By the efforts of Shaykh Muhammad Taqi Qummi an institute, Darul
Taqreeb, was founded in Egypt in recent years. It can be considered a
starting point of this movement.**[1]**

We pursue the movements – scientific, intellectual and those of research
since then. We come across irregular and contradictory views and
outlooks. Taking into consideration originality and purity of thought,
they can be classified into two categories.

**First Tendency:** Outlooks which desire to create ability and achieve
Islamic unity. However they ignore to maintain the rule of originality
and purity. They believe:

“We must not immediately pass judgment that this is right and that,
wrong. We must rather control and check differences. We should specify
its limits.”**[2]**

“We do not say this is right and that is wrong…”**[3]**

“It should not be the concern of one who calls for unity among religions
to say which one is right and which wrong or which one is correct and
which erroneous. Of course deviation from Islam can serve a reason for
him to put in a word as was the practice with men of sagacity like
Sayyid Jamaluddin and some of his pupils and fellow thinkers.

We have witnessed the climax of such an invitation launched by JAMA’ATUL
TAQREEB BAIN AL-MAZAHAB AL-ISLAMIA (i.e. Society for Reconciliation of
Islamic Sects). We must point out that the two obligations should not be
combined. One: Invitation towards unity and two: protection or support
to religion. Books and articles written in this regard have little to do
with unity. Generally their motive is to prove their religion is right
while the others’ is wrong. They add to confusion  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The thought of nearness among Muslims and an invitation to it
took ground in Egypt by the proposal of Sheikh Muhammad Taqi Qummi. The
scholars of first category of al-Azhar besides Shia head of clergies.
The late Burujardi supported the idea. A great number of writers joined
the movement.  
 **[2]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: *Nida-e-Wahdat* (Call of unity)
Pg. 121  
 **[3]** Ibid: *Nida-e-Wahdat*, Pg. 123

and block the way of unity.”**[1]**

They also believe:

“Nearness has its own demands...that is this distinction should always
be kept in view in order to protect it from a decree (Fatwa) someone
might issue against it…in all activities of culture, intellect,
scholastic theology, philosophy, jurisprudence, traditions and study of
narrators (Rijaal) this distinction should be above all.”!**[2]**

Therefore the basis of thought of our predecessors was established on
conjecture that reality can always be sacrificed for sake of unity.

**Second Tendency:** The outlooks have paid utmost attention to the rule
of maintaining originality and sincerity as well as seeking truth. This
is in addition to creation of ability, belief and adherence to necessary
Islamic unity. In view of these two tendencies, it can be said that
Islamic unity has two meanings – one, correct and the other, wrong.

Islamic unity in the correct meaning: It is to create a **political
unity,** which is good and useful against common enemy. This keeps any
type of dispute or war from taking place. Religious beliefs would not
stand as a reason for bloodshed among Muslims.

There is no controversy between this type of Islamic unity, which should
correctly be termed as Islamic unity and discussions of Shia beliefs.
Therefore limits of right and wrong shall remain as they are. They
cannot be abolished. However it gives ground for distinctly sketching
the existing limits between right and wrong. Drawing of limits carries
two benefits:

Firstly: The union overruns political boundary and that of interests. As
such, it becomes real.

Secondly: In future – in a long run – protection of this political unity
for the sake of interests cannot become a cause to forget or neglect
right and wrong besides any deviation from beliefs from correct Shia
faith. In addition to this, correct Islamic unity cannot give rise to
any possibility of taking a wrong meaning to itself; that is Shia
beliefs to melt into Sunni beliefs.**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid: Article: ‘Elements of Islamic unity and its handicaps’
quoted in *Book of Unity* Pgs. 25 & 52-53  
 **[2]** Interview in ‘Haft Aasmaan’ (Seven Skies) Magazine, Issues 9 &
10, Spring & Summer 80, Pg. 10-11  
 **[3]** *Tazweeb* = melting
