Discourse Twoefforts To Obtain Imam Ali’s (a.s.) Bay’at After the Prophet’s Demise
==================================================================================

Narrations in Sunni sources about *Bay’at* taken from Imam Ali (a.s.)
can be classified into three categories:

First Category
--------------

Narrations under this category indicate that Ali entered into *Bay’at*
willingly and openly with Abu Bakr immediately after the latter got
Caliphate.

Second Category
---------------

Narrations under this category indicate that Ali entered into *Bay’at*
willingly and openly with Abu Bakr after six months.

Third Category
--------------

Narrations under this category indicate unsuccessful attempts of
supporters of Caliph to obtain *Bay’at* from Imam Ali (a.s.) by force
and compulsion.

Narrations under first and second categories are in contradiction to one
another. Therefore they have neither credibility nor validity, hence
they are discarded.**[1]**

On the basis of this there remain only narrations of third category that
carry some weight and we shall investigate them thoroughly. These
narrations are also mentioned in Shia sources hence we shall refer to
them in this section.

In this section with reference to the book, *al-Hujoom alal Baitul
Fatima* by Ustad Muhaqqiq Shaykh Abduz Zahra Mahdi we shall explain how
the Caliph and his associates made efforts to compel Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) to give allegiance to Abu Bakr and Ali’s persistent refusal to
their demand to give *Bay’at* to Abu Bakr. So that it becomes clear what
value this *Bay’at* has.

Motive of Caliphate in taking Bay’at from Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.)
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Even though Amirul Momineen (a.s.) after trying to mobilize help for
bringing down the regime retired dejected to his home the Caliphate
system was not satisfied. They continued to make all efforts to extract
allegiance from him at any cost. Silence of the Holy Imam (a.s.) and his
disinclination to take up an armed campaign began to be construed as his
approval or rather readiness to give allegiance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Details of this can be found in narrations from Shia sources.

So from this aspect they wanted him come to the Mosque at rate and lend
legitimacy to their regime and that *Bay’at* may be taken from him for
Abu Bakr.**[1]** And in this way by accepting the silence of His
Eminence (a.s.) they may show that it was customary.

Perhaps they also wanted to eliminate Amirul Momineen (a.s.) under the
pretext of his refusal to give *Bay’at.*

A Look at Historical Proofs and Documents in Sunni Sources
----------------------------------------------------------

**Waqidi (d. 207)**

### Document No. 1

“Ali and Zubair were enraged. They did not do Bay’at.

Umar shouted: Come out or we shall burn the house with you.

They still refused to come out. So he pulled both of them out by force
and dragged them to Abu Bakr till they paid allegiance.”**[2]**

Some narrators of this report are:

Tabari Imami (4<sup>th</sup> century): *Al-Mustarshid,* Pg. 378

Ibne Shahar Aashob (d. 588): *Mathalib,* Pg. 419

Ibne Tawoos (d. 664): *Al-Taraif,* Pgs. 238-239

Nasr bin Muzahim (d. 212)

### Document No. 2

“Muawiyah wrote to Ali: Against all of them (means Caliphs) you
committed tyranny (rebelled). This we came to know through your enraged
looks, your words laced with scorn and rancor, sigh of your breast and
unwillingness to co-operate with them. You were taken to each of them as
a camel is dragged by its reins**[3]** till you paid allegiance while
you hated.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** By *Bayyat* a person submits to another in unequivocal terms so
that there should not remain doubt for anyone.  
**[2]** [Most probably the title of his book is *Saqifah wa Bayat-e-Abu
Bakr*, but we could not have access to it.]  
**[3]** [Regarding the meaning of the word ‘Khashshaash’ experts say:
“It is a piece of wood placed in the nostril of a camel to have greater
control on it.” (Ibne Athir: *An-Nihaya fee Ghareebul Hadith,* Vol. 2,
Pg. 33)]  
**[4]** Minqari: *Waqatus Siffeen,* Pg. 87

Some narrators of this report are:

Ibne Athim Kufi (d. 314): *Al-Futuh,* Vol. 2, Pg. 578

Ibne Abde Rabb (d. 328): *Al-Iqd al-Fareed,* Vol. 4, Pgs. 308-309

Shaykh Mufeed (d. 413): *Al-Fusool Al-Mukhtar,* Pg. 287

Khateeb Khwarizmi (d. 568): *Al-Manaqib,* Pg. 175

Ibne Abil Hadeed (d. 656): *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 15, Pg. 74 & 186

Qalaqshandi (d. 821): *Subh al-Ashi,* Vol. 1, Pg. 273

### Document No. 3

“[His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) wrote in reply to Muawiyah:] I was dragged
like a camel by its reins till I gave allegiance.”

Some narrators of this report are:

Sayyid Razi (d. 406): *Nahjul Balagha,* Letter 28

Ibne Hamdoon (d. 562): *Al-Tazkeratl Hamdonia,* Vol. 7, Pg. 166

Ibne Abil Hadeed (d. 656): *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 15, Pg. 183

Nuwairi (d. 737): *Nihayatul Arab,* Vol. 7, Pg. 236

Qalaqshandi (d. 821): *Subh al-Ashi,* Vol. 1, Pg. 276

Bawoni Shafei (d. 871): *Jawahir al-Matalib,* Vol. 1, Pg. 374

### Document No. 4

“[Muawiyah wrote in reply to Muhammad bin Abu Bakr.]

Then the two (Abu Bakr and Umar) invited him (Ali) to their Bay’at. But
he ignored and refused. So they designed great plots for him.”**[1]**

Some narrators of this report are:

Masoodi (d. 346): *Muruj az-Zahab,* Vol. 3, Pg. 12-13

Ibne Abil Hadeed (d. 656): *Sharh* *Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 3, Pg. 190

Ibne Qutaibah Dinawari (d. 276)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Pg. 120 [It is interesting that in the continuation of
this letter Muawiyah says that Abu Bakr and Umar did not give Ali any
share in their regime neither did they divulge their secrets to him.]

### Document No. 5

“Ali’s refused to do Bay’at with Abu Bakr:

Umar said to him: you are not free unless you give Bay’at.

They pulled him out of the house and took him to Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr
said: Give the Bay’at:

Ali said: What if I don’t?

They said: By God! We swear, we would cut off your neck.”**[1]**

Some narrators of this report are:

Ibne Athim Kufi (d. 314): *Al-Futuh,* Vol. 1, Pgs. 13-14

Ibne Shahar Aashob (d. 588): *Matalib,* Pgs. 138-139

Ibne Abil Hadeed (d. 656): *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 6, Pgs. 11-12

Balazari (d. 279)

### Document No. 6

“Abu Bakr sent Umar bin Khattab to Ali when the latter refused give
allegiance telling him: bring him to me with utmost force.”**[2]**

Some narrators of this report are:

Sayyid Murtuza (d. 436): *Ash-Shafi,* Vol. 3, Pg. 240

Shaykh Toosi (d. 460): *Talkhees Shafi,* Vol. 3, Pg. 76

### Document No. 7

“Abu Bakr sent some people to Ali to take his Bay’at. But he did not
give the Bay’at. Then Umar went to Ali carrying fire.”**[3]**

Some narrators of this report are:

Sayyid Murtuza (d. 436): *Ash-Shafi,* Vol. 3, Pg. 241

Shaykh Toosi (d. 460): *Talkhees ash-Shafi,* Vol. 3, Pg. 76

Ibne Shahar Aashob (d. 588): *Mathalib,* Pg. 419

Muhammad bin Jurair bin Yazid Tabari Shafei (d. 310)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Qutaibah: *Al-Imamah was-Siyasah,* Vol. 1, Pgs. 28-29  
**[2]** Balazari: *Ansaab al-Ashraaf,* Vol. 1, Pg. 587 (Vol. 2, Pg. 269
Dar al-Fikr)  
**[3]** Ibid. Vol. 1, Pg. 567 (Vol. 2, Pg. 268 Dar al-Fikr)

### Document No. 8

“Ali and Zubair did not give Bay’at. Umar went to them and brought them
by force.**[1]**

### Document No. 9

“Umar bin Khattab came to the house of Ali and said: By God, I will burn
(it) over you, or you come out to give Bay’at”.**[2]**

Some narrators of these two reports are:

Ibne Shahar Aashob (d. 588): *Mathalib,* Pg. 419

Ibne Abde Rabb (d. 328)

### Document No. 10

“Those who did not do Bay’at with Abu Bakr were Ali and...Abu Bakr sent
Umar bin Khattab to pull them out of Fatima’s house. He enjoined Umar to
fight them if they refused. Umar came to the house with fire to burn the
house together with them.”**[3]**

Some narrators of this report are:

Ibne Tawoos (d. 664): *Al-Tarayif,* Pg. 239

Abul Fida (d. 732): *Al-Mukhtasar Fil Akhbaar al-Bashar,* Vol. 1, Pg.
156

Ibne Athir (d. 630)

### Document No. 11

“And Ali and Bani Hashim refused to give Bay’at… then came to them Umar
and took them to give Bay’at.”**[4]**

Ibne Abil Hadeed (d. 656) narrates from Abu Bakr Jauhari (d. 323)

### Document No. 12

“Then Umar entered and said to Ali: Get up and do Bay’at.

But he did not pay attention and did not come out from the house. Umar
held him by his hand and again said: Get up. Ali again refused to get
up. Umar held him by force and threw him. In the same way, he behaved
with Zubair too. Then Khalid caught both of them. Umar and his men took
them to Abu Bakr in a very bad manner.”**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari: *Tarikh al-Umam wal Mulook,* Vol. 2, Pg. 203  
**[2]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 203  
 **[3]** Ibne Abde Rabb: *Al-Iqdul Fareed,* Vol. 4, Pg. 242 (Beirut)  
**[4]** Ibne Athir: *Kamil,* Vol. 2, Pg. 325  
**[5]** Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 6, Pgs. 48-49

### Document No. 13

“Some Muhajireen were enraged…Ali and Zubair were also angry and they
entered Fatima’s house. Umar came to them with his men…Then Umar pulled
them out and took them forcibly to give Bay’at.”**[1]**

Conclusion
----------

The most prominent conditions under which *Bay’at* was demanded from
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) are Ali’s refusal to give *Bay’at* to Abu Bakr
and the atrocious and inhumane behavior of Umar and his men for
obtaining the *Bay’at*. Thus all Sunni sources have highlighted these
points.

But the matter is that these two points have put a question mark on the
validity of Abu Bakr’s *Bay’at* due to the following:

**Illegitimacy of the very subject of *Bay’at***

**The entity of *Bay’at*-taker was in a position of tyrant and usurper
of another’s right.**

**Unwillingness of *Bay’at*-giver**

Ibne Abil Hadeed (d. 656) writes:

“Narrations about Saqifah are different and contradictory. But what
Shias say and some traditionists have also narrated is as follows:

Ali refused to give Bay’at till it was taken by force.”**[2]**

As for Ali’s refusal to Bay’at that resulted in horrible way he was
pulled out is mentioned in traditions and biographers have also recorded
it.**[3]**

As for Jauhari’s saying in this regard, we have already said: Jauhari is
a man of tradition. He is trustworthy and of confidence. Many others
(trusted and reliable people) have also stated the incident.

Most traditionists have narrated that after the happenings of Saqifah
Ali endured great many atrocities as he was taken against his will to
enter into Bay’at with Abu Bakr. He shouted in protest. He called for
help. He lastly gestured to the Prophet’s grave and said: Son of my
mother! Surely the people reckoned me weak and had well-nigh slain
me.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 50 & Vol. 6, Pg. 47  
**[2]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 21  
**[3]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pgs. 59-60  
 **[4]** Ibid. Vol. 11, Pg. 111

It is interesting that in spite of historical documents they still
claim:

“Whatever happened among Muslims in the early days of Islam,
particularly after passing away of Prophet between Ali and companions of
Prophet, was friendly and cordial type of dispute.”**[1]**

“Differences between companions of Prophet were internal differences but
friendly…”**[2]**

Further, it is more surprising that when contemporary historians come
across these historical documents they claim:

“These narrations are liable to suspicion and to more pondering. Some
simple-minded people have launched these things in order to indicate
that Imam Ali (a.s.) was victimized. On the other hand it is imaginable
that Ali perhaps saw himself responsible towards those who were in the
house. So he came out and went to Abu Bakr to avoid any danger to
them.**[3]**”!**[4]**

Where did the efforts of Emigrants for taking forced Bay’at from Ali end?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Document No. 1

Ali bin Husain Masoodi (d. 346) quotes a document about Ali extending
his hand to Abu Bakr.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjat Kermani: Jam-e-Jam Daily, Issue No. 10,
Bahman 1379  
**[2]** Ibid. Interview in Nida-e-Islam Magazine, Issue No. 4, Summer
79, Pg. 61  
**[3]** Asghar Qaidan: *Tahleeli Bar Mawaze Siyasi Ali Ibne Abi Talib
(a.s.)* [Research on political stands of Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.)], Pg.
86  
**[4]** This writing was published with the support of Dr. Sayyid Ja’far
Shahidi and Dr. Sadiq Ainawand. It is a good analysis yet short of
scientific worth. In some way or other it is avoiding to acknowledge the
ill treatment of Caliphs towards Ali. But the writer openly denies the
tyrannical conduct against Imam Ali. On the contrary he paints a picture
showing peaceful environment in which Ali’s was invited to give
*Bayyat*. In order to hide similar behavior towards Zahra, he writes
thus:  
On the other hand the Caliph and his supporters could not behave with
Zahra as they did against the opposition and stubbornness of Ali.  
We must ask the writer of this text: whether you accept the inimical
conduct of Caliphs towards Ali that now it can be expected from you to
acknowledge the tyrannies and atrocities committed towards Zahra?  
It were better had the writer benefited from the analysis of Ali’s
political stand in the book (*Analysis of Political Stance of Ali Ibne
Abi Talib (a.s.).* The unity seekers deny the historical facts such as
assault on Zahra’s House and the events that followed.

He writes:

“They rushed to his house and attacked it and burned the door. They
pulled him out by force.

They crushed the sacred person of Zahra behind the door and she
miscarried the unborn child, Mohsin.

They took him (Ali) to give Bay’at but he refused.

They said: We shall kill you.

Ali said: If you kill me you would have killed a God’s servant and His
Prophet’s brother.

They pulled his hand. His fist was closed. They tried to open his fist,
but they could not.

Then touched Ali’s closed fist over Abu Bakr’s hand.”**[1]**

### Document No. 2

Sayyid Abul Abbas Ahmad bin Ibrahim Hasani Zaidi (d. 352) quotes a
document as follows:

“They told Ali (a.s.): Do Bay’at.

Ali said: What if I don’t?

They replied: We shall kill you – and then they pulled his hand.

He closed his fingers tight and raised his head towards the sky, saying:
O God! Be a witness!

Then they touched his hand to Abu Bakr’s?”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Masoodi: *Asbat al-Wisaya,* Pg. 155  
**[2]** Hasani Zaidi: *Al-Masabih*, manuscript in Great Public library,
Sanaa, Yemen, Serial no. 2185; Ibne Hamza Zaidi (died 614) in his book,
*Ash-Shafi* has mentioned this from the book *Al-Masabeeh.*  
Similarly, Husaini Zaidi also mentions this in his book *Anwar
al-Yaqeen.* His source is also *Masabeeh.* The photocopy of this
document is in Markaz-e-Aqaid, Qom. The text is as follows:  
“Umar kicked at the door and it broke. It was made of branch and leaves
of date palm. Then they entered. He (Umar) tied a rope around the neck
of Ali and pulled him out. Then they took him; Umar enjoined Ali to do
*Bayyat.* Ali asked: What if I don’t? Umar: I swear by God, I will cut
your throat. Ali said: In that case, you’ll kill a servant of God and
brother of Prophet. Umar said: Servant of God – yes. But brother of
Prophet, no. He repeated this thrice.”

### Document No. 3

Muhammad bin Masood Ayyashi (d. 320) after narrating the attack on
Zahra’s house and pulling out of Ali for *Bay’at* of Abu Bakr**[1]** and
the threats to kill him,**[2]** writes:

“Abbas heard the news and he ran out shouting: Leave my nephew. I will
take from him Bay’at for you.

Then Abbas came forward, took Ali’s hand and put it over Abu Bakr’s
hand. Then they let Ali (who was enraged) to go.”**[3]**

On the basis of this narration, in order to save Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
Abbas took the hand of His Eminence (a.s.) and kept it on the hand of
Abu Bakr.

### Document No. 4

Allamah Majlisi (d. 1111) narrates similar to that which Tabarsi has
mentioned in book *Ihtijaaj.* **[4]**

“Then he said: Get up! O Ibne Abi Talib and do Bay’at.

(Ali) asked: What if I don’t?

(Umar) said: If so by God, we shall kill you.

He (Ali) protested to them three times. Then he extended his hand while
his fist was closed. Over his fist, Abu Bakr hit his hand. This was the
Bay’at they could get from Ali but they were content at this much.

Before doing this Bay’at Ali shouted while the rope was round his neck:

Son of my mother! Surely the people reckoned me weak and had well-nigh
slain me.” **[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Husaini Zaidi: *Al-Masabih,* copy available in Great Public
Library, Sanaa, Yemen, No. 2185; Ibne Hamza Zaidi (died 614) in his
book, *Ash-Shafi* (Vol. 4, Pgs. 171-172) has quoted this from
*Al-Masabih.* In the same way Husaini Zaidi (died 670) in his book,
*Anwaar al-Yaqeen* (Pg. 9) has quoted this from *Al-Masabih*. The
facsimile of this text is present in Markaz-e-Aqaid, Qom.  
**[2]** The text quoted in his book is as follows: Umar kicked at the
door of date branches and broke it open. Then he went inside and brought
Ali (a.s.) out with rope around his neck.  
**[3]** Ayyashi Samarqandi: *Tafseer Ayyashi,* Vol. 2, Pgs. 66-68  
**[4]** We shall refer from this quotation in the coming pages also.  
**[5]** Allamah Majlisi: *Biharul Anwar,* Vol. 28, Pg. 276

In another document, which is very much similar to the above, the text
runs thus:

“…Then he extended his hand without opening the fist. Abu Bakr hit over
it by his hand. Abu Bakr was content at that. Then (Ali) went home.”
**[1]**

### Document No. 5

Sayyid Murtuza (d. 436) writes:

“Adi bin Hatim narrates: I was sitting with Abu Bakr when Ali was
brought in.

Abu Bakr told Ali to do Bay’at.

Ali replied: What if I don’t?

Abu Bakr said to him: I will behead you.

Then Ali lifted his head towards sky and said: O God! Be witness! Then
he extended his hand and gave Bay’at.”**[2]**

### Document No. 6

Shaykh Ahmad Tabarsi (6<sup>th</sup> century) mentions a document as
follows:

“Abu Bakr said to Qunfudh: If he (Ali) comes out, it is all right. If
not, attack him. Again if he refuses to give allegiance, burn the house
with its occupants.

Qunfudh set out with his associates as ordered, attacked the house
without warning, entered it and put a black rope around Ali’ neck.

Then they took Ali to Abu Bakr. The black rope was around his neck. Umar
was standing with a naked sword. Around Abu Bakr were sitting with his
companions holding swords.

Umar threatened him and said: Do Bay’at.

Ali answered: What if I didn’t?

Umar answered: We shall kill you disrespectfully.

Then Ali before doing Bay’at shouted:**[3]** Son of my mother! Surely
the people reckoned me weak and had well-nigh slain me.

Then he extended his hand and did Abu Bakr’s Bay’at.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Vol. 28, Pg. 301  
 **[2]** Sayyid Murtuza: *Ash-Shafi fil Imamah,* Vol. 3, Pg. 244  
**[3]** [It means bringing the hand of Abu Bakr to touch the closed fist
of Amirul Momineen (a.s.)]  
**[4]** Tabarsi: *Ihtijaaj,* Vol. 1, Pgs. 83-84

### Document No. 7

Tabari Imami (4th century) writes:

“A group was sent after Ali. They brought Ali with a rope around his
neck.

Then they told him to do Bay’at.

He asked: What if I don’t?

They said: We shall kill you.

Ali said: Then you would have killed a servant of God and a brother of
the Prophet.

They said: A servant of God, yes! But a brother of the Prophet, no!

The narrator says: On that day Ali returned without giving
Bay’at.”**[1]**

How Sunnis narrate this event?
------------------------------

### Document No. 8

Ibne Qutaibah (d. 276) writes under the title: Ali’s denial to do
*Bay’at* with Abu Bakr:**[2]**

“Afterwards Ali was brought to Abu Bakr. He was saying: I am God’s
servant and brother of Prophet of God. He was told: Do Bay’at with Abu
Bakr.

Ali said: Rather I deserve to take Bay’at. I won’t do Bay’at with you.
It is you that must do Bay’at to me.

Umar said: Unless you do Bay’at, you are not free.

Ali told Umar: By God, O Umar! I do not accept your word and nor would I
give Bay’at.

Abu Bakr said to Ali: If you don’t do Bay’at, I will not force you.”

The writer says under the heading: **How was the *Bay’at* of Ali with
Abu Bakr**:

“They pulled out Ali and took him to Abu Bakr and said to him: Do
Bay’at.

Ali asked: What if I don’t?

They said: By God, except Whom there is no god! We shall kill you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari Imami: *Al-Mustarshid,* Pg. 380  
**[2]** Refusal of Ali from *Bayyat* of Abu Bakr.

Abu Bakr was silent. He did not utter a word. Then Umar said Abu Bakr:
Why don’t you issue any orders to him?

Abu Bakr replied: I don’t order him as long as Fatima is by his
side.”**[1]**

This historical document has an explanation. Fatima’s house was
attacked. It was set afire. Ali was pulled out by force against his will
and inclination. He was taken to the mosque and threatened with death.
Because of Zahra’s presence in the mosque and her defense of Ali, he
returned home without doing *Bay’at* with Abu Bakr.**[2]** He even
pretended to having done *Bay’at* to be free from the tyranny of the
regime.

**In other words, according to a historical document, which is from a
reliable source, acknowledged[3] by Sunni sect, no hand shaking or
ceremony of placing hand in the hand of Abu Bakr took place. Because of
the presence of Prophet’s daughter in the mosque, he (Ali) was set
free.**

Conclusion of the Eight Documents
---------------------------------

### Paying attention to:

1 – Ayyashi has also mentioned in the beginning of the document that we
quoted from him: The presence of Zahra in the mosque and the threat that
she will curse the Caliph and his supporters.

2 – Majlisi too before the document we related from him has referred to
the above incident. It emphasizes that Ali was freed because of Hazrat
Zahra (s.a.).

The text of the document in question reads as under: “Then she took his
hand and set out with him.”**[4]**

3 – Tabarsi has also referred to this in the document we have mentioned
from him.**[5]**

So we conclude:

There appears no contradiction between the narration of Ibne Qutaibah
and other historical documents. If reconciled with one another it leads
us to conclude that:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Qutaibah: *Al-Imamah was-Siyasah,* Vol. 1, Pgs. 28-31  
**[2]** Ahle Sunnat cannot deny this statement.  
**[3]** Refer: Ibne Arabi: *Al-Awasim Minal Qawasim,* Pg. 248  
**[4]** Allamah Majlisi: *Biharul Anwar,* Vol. 28, Pg. 252  
**[5]** Refer: Tabarsi: *Ihtijaaj,* Vol. 1, Pgs. 86-87

A) Abu Bakr saw Zahra entering the mosque. So he sufficed on that much
military action**[1]** against the Family of Prophet considering it a
commitment on the part of Ali to do *Bay’at* and to not take up arms
against the system of Caliphate.

B) The hand of Imam Ali (a.s.) reaches the hand of Abu Bakr while Ali’s
hand was closed in a fist. It happens at a time when the attack over
Zahra’s House was parallel to rushing out of Abbas, the uncle of the
Prophet. As such, it is obvious that it took place against the wish and
will of Imam Ali (a.s.).

C) The Imam Ali’s (a.s.) hand reaches the hand of Abu Bakr and Zahra too
reaches the mosque. It happens simultaneously. It was a tyranny applied
most wickedly on Ali. Then Zahra threatened to curse the Caliph (Abu
Bakr) and his supporters.

Therefore Abu Bakr was content with that much and as a result of curse
of Hazrat Zahra (s.a.) freed His Eminence, Ali (a.s.).

D) Some audiences, particularly supporters of Abu Bakr, have narrated
the event in a way that it reflects that Ali did *Bay’at* willingly
without any force or pressure and that he willingly put his hand into
the hand of Abu Bakr.

E) Ibne Qutaibah refrains from narrating detailed facts such as attack
on Zahra’s house and exercising every possible atrocity and force
against Ali to get his *Bay’at.* There events happened simultaneously
with the advent of Zahra to mosque. He wants to exculpate Abu Bakr and
pose him as innocent. He relates in such a way as if Abu Bakr waited for
the arrival of Zahra to mosque to set Ali free. Further, he shows as if
Abu Bakr was not pleased with the deeds of his colleagues.

Remark
------

In the end we remind:

Some Sunni historians have veiled the conduct of Caliph. They use mild
words like:

“Abu Bakr did not want Ali to do Bay’at. He did not force
him.**[2]**”**[3]**!**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Details of these conditions can be seen in the books of Ayyashi,
Masoodi, Tabarsi and Majlisi.  
**[2]** Insistence on the version of Ibne Qutaibah instead of the
versions of Ayyashi, Masoodi, Tabarsi and others is due to this aim
only.  
 **[3]** Regretfully Asghar Qaidan on page 87 has also propagated the
same view.  
**[4]** Refer: Ibne Hazm: *Al-Fisal Fil Milal wan Nihal,* Vol. 4, Pg.
235

**Historical documents openly prove the attack, setting fire to the
house, calling for firewood, pulling out of Ali and all the things with
their minute details.[1]**

### Final conclusion about attack on Zahra’s house and efforts for taking *Bay’at* from Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.)

### Paying attention to:

1 – The strict and strong denial of Ali to do *Bay’at* is recorded in
history and narrated by all historians.

2 – This denial itself is a proof of Ali’s dissatisfaction and
invalidity of Caliphate. It rescinds credibility of Abu Bakr’s
Caliphate.

3 – Illegitimacy of Caliphate entails two consequences:

A) Abu Bakr in spite of his incompetence had become a Caliph.

B) The issue of *Bay’at* is also illegal and out of order.

4 – The pressure at such a level over Imam Ali (a.s.), then the
atrocities and tyrannies exercised against him themselves prove that the
person from whom *Bay’at* was obtained by trick was not willing to pay
it. Had he been willing he would not have had to face this force and
threats? All historical documents clearly establish this fact.

On the whole it can be said:

The story refusal of Ali to do *Bay’at* with Abu Bakr represents:

That he (Ali) regarded Abu Bakr’s Caliphate illegitimate and invalid.

Therefore Abu Bakr comes in a man incompetent for the office. Neither
suitability adjusted, nor competence concurred, nor the eligibility
determined the office for him.

On the other hand efforts of his associates of Caliphate in taking
*Bay’at* from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) by force failed and thus the
*Bay’at* of Abu Bakr had no validity because it fails to fulfill the
necessary conditions.

From this aspect, it can be said:

“To prove *Bay’at* of Abu Bakr is impossible. A show of it or a feigned
*Bay’at*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: Shaykh Husain Ghaib Gholami: *Ahraaq Bait-e-Fatima
(s.a.)*

is in vain – inefficacious and of no effect. In obtaining *Bay’at,*
supporters of Abu Bakr applied force, threats and atrocities against
Ali. The *Bay’at* was taken when the conditions were not favorable. As
such, the *Bay’at* loses its validity.

On the basis of this the only thing that can be proved is that it was a
forced *Bay’at* and hence it was no *Bay’at* at all.

### Final Conclusion

The most important result that comes out of these historical documents
is Ali’s displeasure with Abu Bakr’s Caliphate and his denial to it.

Ali’s displeasure can be detected in his efforts to overthrow Abu Bakr’s
rule by means of an armed uprising. Further, his continued denial to do
*Bay’at* is also another proof of his unacceptance.

### Abu Bakr’s Caliphate was always shown by Ali as not rightful.

In the same way by paying close attention to documents and sources that
have recorded the attack on Fatima’s house clearly proves that the
atmosphere that reigned at the time of demanding *Bay’at* from His
Eminence (a.s.) was laced with forceful actions, threats and
unwillingness.

So it is impossible to prove completion of *Bay’at* of Abu Bakr by this.

Therefore it is possible to conclude that:

It is not possible to prove the completion of *Bay’at* of Abu Bakr and
its mere pretension has no effect.
