Discourse Threelack of Public Satisfaction From Abu Bakr’s Caliphate
====================================================================

Historical Documents
--------------------

Ibne Abil Hadeed Motazalli (d. 656) narrates from Abu Bakr Jauhari (d.
323):

“When the refusal of Ali to do Bay’at with Abu Bakr became a topic of
public discussion and Abu Bakr and Umar became harsher on Ali (a.s.)
Umme Mossattah bin Athatha came out to the grave of the Prophet and
recited the following verses:

Unpleasant, dreadful things have occurred;

Had you witnessed, little you would have uttered.

We miss you as the earth is of rain deprived,

See your Ummah in confusion, alas, if you had lived.”**[1]**

Amirul Momineen (a.s.), in order to prove the lack of people’s approval
for Abu Bakr’s Caliphate and their lack of satisfaction from that rule
says as follows:

**“If you have taken their (people’s) affairs in hand on the basis of
consultation, then how it is that the very consultants themselves are
absent.”[2]**

The norm of general popularity is that the approval of people should
precede the takeover of affairs.

But even though in Saqifah, only a few had accepted.**[3]** the
government was announced formally and took on legitimacy. After that
others were forced to give *Bay’at*.

When one is at power, to get *Bay’at* from people or any particular
person becomes easier. The conditions of *Bay’at* are freedom, liberty
and choice. If these elements are absent the *Bay’at* is worthless.
*Bay’at* must be the right of masses – to accord. *Bay’at* is not the
right of rulership to be obtained from the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 2, Pg. 50 & Vol.
6, Pg. 43  
 **[2]** Sayyid Razi: *Nahjul Balagha,* Saying No. 190  
**[3]** Mawardi (died 450) has explained it to be equal to the number of
fingers in a hand and he writes: “The *Bayyat* of Abu Bakr was effected
through the unanimity of five persons.” (Mawardi: *Al-Ahkaam
as-Sulataniyah,* Pg. 6)

people by force.

“The fundamental discussions regarding Saqifah are about identification
of opponents of Abu Bakr. The most important result of it is that the
claim of consensus disappears and loses its worth.

Names of opponents are not recorded in history. Generally, names of
reputed personalities are paid attention to. Prominent personalities
come to mind. The common ones glide into oblivion. Those personalities
have a following to whom opinion of their role models is acceptable.

Some have been mentioned in groups. For instance, in the early stage
Bani Hashim refrained from Bay’at.**[1]**

In fact, Kinda tribe refused to pay the Zakat. They did so because they
opposed Abu Bakr’s becoming Caliph.

So opponents of Abu Bakr’s selection are many in number. A multitude of
them cannot be mentioned here.

Most opponents of Abu Bakr later were either killed or bribed or
promised future gains, so their number diminished. They later did the
required Bay’at. It needs a separate chapter to discuss this.

We could gather the names of following fifty opponents:…”**[2]**

After that he has listed these names in alphabetical order.

Another look at Historical Documents about Public Allegiance to Abu Bakr
------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Document No. 1

In *Sahih Bukhari*, which is the most reliable source of Sunni sect, it
is mentioned from Ayesha that people were threatened to give *Bay’at* to
Abu Bakr.

This document is most important testimony that establishes incredibility
and worthlessness of peoples’ *Bay’at* to Abu Bakr. When *Bay’at* is
wrong and of no worth it overruns peoples’ acceptance or their
acknowledgment of Abu Bakr’s Caliphate.

Ayesha narrated after narrating developments of Saqifah:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Quoted from: Tabari: *Tarikh al-Umam wal Mulook,* Vol. 3, Pg.
208; Ibne Athir: *Al-Kamil fit Tarikh,* Vol. 2, Pg. 10 & Pg. 14; Ibne
Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 2, Pg. 21  
**[2]** Sayyid Hasan Fatimi: Article ‘Saqifah’ quoted in *Danish Nama
Imam Ali (a.s.),* Vol. 8, Pg. 443

“Umar had threatened the people.”**[1]**

### Document No. 2

On authority of Abu Bakr Jauhari (d. 323) Ibne Abil Hadeed (d. 656)
narrates: Umar behaved with those who had taken refuge in Fatima’s house
as follows:

“Then he said: I swear by God in Whose hands lies my life that I will
take you to perform Bay’at. If not, I will burn this house over you.
Then he pulled them out by ropes around their necks. He dragged them by
force until they gave Bay’at to Abu Bakr.”**[2]**

### Document No. 3

In the same way he writes about his (Umar’s) roughness and atrocities to
strengthen Abu Bakr’s Caliphate:

“It was Umar who established Bay’at of Abu Bakr. He suppressed all those
who opposed Bay’at, he broke the sword of Zubair when Zubair pulled it
out. He hit at the chest of Miqdad. He, in Saqifah plotted against Saad
bin Ubadah and shouted: Kill Saad. May God kill Saad. He defeated Bani
Habbab Mundhir. He threatened and pulled out those from Bani Hashim who
had taken refuge in Zahra’s House.

And if there was not Umar, Abu Bakr’s rule would have never
established.”**[3]**

### Document No. 4

On this matter, historical sources, proofs and documents are so numerous
that Shaykh Mufeed (d. 413) writes:

“The incidents of forcing people to do Bay’at with Abu Bakr and taking
them to Abu Bakr against their will and pleasure are so numerous that
this book would fall short of pages if we were to mention all of
them.”**[4]**

### Document No. 5

For instance, Shaykh Ahmad Tabarsi (6th century) narrates:

“Umar belted his waist tightly and started roaming the streets of
Medina. He was shouting: Beware! Abu Bakr has been acknowledged as
Caliph. So hurry up to do Bay’at with him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Ismail Bukhari: *Sahih Bukhari,* Vol. 4, Pg. 195  
 **[2]** Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 2, Pg. 48  
**[3]** Ibid. Vol. 1, Pg. 174  
 **[4]** Shaykh Mufeed: *Al-Jamal,* Pgs. 118-119

People rushed and crowded at and in the mosque to do Bay’at with Abu
Bakr.

Umar knew that some remained in their houses to avoid Bay’at. He
attacked them by surprise and brought them by force to the mosque to
give Bay’at.”**[1]**

His support was an armed gang, blacks and nomads from Bani Aslam tribe,
who by the admission of Umar himself had a very important role in the
success of Saqifah party.

### Document No. 6

“Tabari narrates that after their arrival in Medina they gathered in the
streets in such large numbers that the streets were jammed and Umar
said: When I saw Bani Aslam tribe I became certain of victory.”**[2]**

### Document No. 7

Ibne Athir has mentioned in the book Kamil:

Bani Aslam tribe arrived and its members did Bay’at. Then Abu Bakr
became strong and at that time people gave Bay’at to Abu Bakr.**[3]**

### Document No. 8

More eloquent than these two is Shaykh Mufeed in the book of Jamal. His
quotes from Abu Mikhnaf that: A group of nomad Arabs came to Medina to
buy rations. People did not attend to them because on that day the
Prophet of God had passed away.

They also did Bay’at with the new Caliph and accepted his rulership.
Then Umar called them and said:

Whatever rations you need, will be given to you free provided you go
into the lanes and streets of the town, gather the people and take them
to Abu Bakr to do Bay’at with him. You are free to break head or nose of
anyone who resists.

The narrator says: I saw those rough Arabs all of a sudden tightening
their waists and then without any warning they started hitting people
with canes and forced them to do Bay’at.**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabarsi: *Ihtijaaj,* Vol. 1, Pg. 80  
 **[2]** Quoted from: Tabari: *Tarikh al-Umam wal Mulook,* Vol. 2, Pg.
459; Qalaqshandi: *Nihayatul Arab,* Vol. 4, Pg. 35.  
**[3]** Quoted from: Ibne Athir: *Al-Kamil fit Tarikh,* Vol. 2, Pg.
331  
**[4]** Quoted from: Shaykh Mufeed: *Al-Jamal,* Pg. 119 [We would like
to add that this narration is related by many. Some among them are Abu
Mikhnaf Lut bin Yahya al-Azadi. His source is Muhammad bin Sayyid
al-Kalbi and Abu Salih. The green light shown to them by Umar resulted
in that the people had no alternative but to pay allegiance to Abu Bakr
or to be beaten by the Arabs.]

That is why afterwards many tried to justify these atrocities to exempt
them from shame of desert dwelling and being nomads.

Ayesha by way of thanks for their beneficial service to her father
fabricated a saying of Prophet in praise of these Arabs. But the
falsehood of this tradition can well be understood by the
readers.**[1]**”**[2]**

### Document No. 9

In the same way Masoodi says in *Athbaat al-Wisaya*, page 116:

“Umar paid allegiance to Abu Bakr. That is he did by hitting by his hand
over that of Abu Bakr. Then the desert Arabs who were at that time in
Medina did Bay’at with Abu Bakr. Then non-Muslims who were in Medina
under protection of Muslims enjoining their hospitality and kind
treatment and consideration also performed Bay’at to show their
gratitude and to please them. They saw themselves indebted to Muslims
for their favors. So they thought it was a proper time and befitting
opportunity to return their thanks. After them others did Bay’at.”

### Document No. 10

Ibne Abil Hadeed (d. 656) has also narrated from Baraa bin Azib that:

“I saw Abu Bakr with Umar and Abu Ubadah and a group of Saqifah
associates coming forward. They had tied their waists tight. Whomever
they came across, they beat up and forced to give Bay’at to Abu Bakr. It
did not matter to them whether he liked it or not.”**[3]**

### Document No. 11

Zubair bin Bukkar in his book *Mawafaqiaat* has quoted from *Sharh*
*Nahjul Balagha* of Ibne Abil Hadeed, Vol. 6 Pg. 287 that:

“Abu Bakr became strong with the Bay’at of Bani Aslam. But it is not
known when Bani Aslam turned their backs at him.”**[4]**

More interesting is that ignoring all these historical testimonies
regarding the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: Ibne Saad: *Tabaqat al-Kubra,* Vol. 8, Pg. 294  
**[2]** Masoodpoor Sayyid Aaqai: *Chashma dar Bistar,* Pgs. 76-78  
**[3]** Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 1, Pg. 219  
**[4]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Saqifah*, Edited by Mahdi
Dashti, Pg. 50

attitude of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) they still claim:

“The reason of this Bay’at was to honor public opinion.”!**[1]**

“When the majority of people concentrate on someone else, it becomes
necessary to preserve unity in society by Bay’at.”!**[2]**

### In the end, it is pointed out:

“The thought of selecting a Caliph through general consensus is like
searching for causes after something has already happened. It is
creation of fanciful elements of history and not a justification
applicable to the event that has already occurred. Sunni scholars also
do not claim thus. They do not think it is necessary for Imamate.

Sometimes a social phenomena appears or takes to itself existence in a
way or other, occasionally the base of monitoring movements is geared by
a handful of conjectures. It is justified only for the sake of
justification. But the very spirit that brought the phenomena into being
is ignored.

Justification of the Caliph’s rule by means of public opinion or its
being a government of majority over minority is a formula that obviously
serves the ground with regard to Caliphs. The issue of public opinion
was never applied, nor ever occurred to them.

In order to decorate Caliphate of Caliphs with an outer show of its
being with the people or having had come from the people, some writers
have tried to justify it. It exists only in the imaginations of those
who justify Caliphs. Reality is something else. It is among those causes
that come into being after the happening of a thing.**[3]**

Even though it is claimed:

“Imam Ali (a.s.) did Bay’at after a period to guard unity among
Muslims.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdul Ali Bazargan: *Shura-O-Bayat* (Consultation and
Allegiance), Pg. 90  
**[2]** Ibid. Pg. 88  
**[3]** Ustad Ja’far Subhani: *Peshwayi az Nazar-e-Islam* (Leadership in
the view of Islam), Pgs. 285-286  
**[4]** Abdul Kareem Bi-Aazaar Shirazi: Article quoted in *Collected
Papers of International Conference on Imam Ali,* Vol. 1, Pg. 70
