Discourse Fourefforts To Prove the Bay’at Was of Free Choice After Zahra’s Martyrdom
====================================================================================

A suspicion
-----------

Sunni sources mention that *Bay’at* with Abu Bakr took place in a free
atmosphere with a free choice. Ibne Abil Hadeed Motazalli (d. 656) has
this to say in this aspect:

“This is what a group of narrators say and reputed persons of prominence
among them too say. He (Ali) did not do Bay’at with Abu Bakr for six
months. He remained in his house. He did not do Bay’at until the death
of Fatima. When she died he did Bay’at voluntarily.”**[1]**

Cause of Zahra’s wrath against Abu Bakr
---------------------------------------

Readers by now must have become aware of the claim Sunni sources allege
that Ali performed *Bay’at* with Abu Bakr by his own will and wish,
after Zahra’s martyrdom!!

As if the only hindrance of his willing *Bay’at* was remaining alive of
the daughter of the Prophet. And if there was delay in this for some
months it was only because of this hindrance and there was no other
reason!!

Such claims convey that Ali did not see any wrong in doing *Bay’at* in
addition to his having recognized the legitimacy of Abu Bakr’s
Caliphate. The handicap was the daughter of the Prophet whom he revered
and respected.

Therefore as soon as she passed away he hurried over to Abu Bakr and
paid allegiance to him!!

It is nothing but a clever ploy to gain legitimacy of the Caliphate of
Abu Bakr and to cast doubts on the sacredness of the anger of Hazrat
Zahra (s.a.) on Abu Bakr and make it as insignificant as female
emotion.**[2]**

Analysis and criticism about allegation that *Bay’at* with Abu Bakr took
place with his (Ali’s) free choice becomes important:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 2, Pg. 22  
**[2]** Thus Ibne Kathir in his audacity has put a question mark of the
infallibility of Hazrat Zahra (s.a.) who is protected by the guarantee
of the Verse of Purification. (Ibne Kathir: *Al-Bidaya wan Nihaya,* Vol.
5, Pg. 249 & Pg. 286)

**Because *Sahih Bukhari[1]* and *Muslim[2]* mention that it entailed
wrath of Zahra against Abu Bakr.**

**In fact, the text runs thus:**

**Likes of Muhammad bin Ismail Bukhari and Muslim bin Hajjaj Nishapuri
have used words like: “So Fatima, daughter of Prophet of God, got
enraged at Abu Bakr and left him (deserted). She boycotted him till her
death.”[3]**

**“and Fatima got angry at Abu Bakr. So she left him and did not talk to
him till she died.”[4]**

**They have mentioned these points in their books. Indeed, it had been
their efforts to invalidate or discredit these narrations. So they took
to vague claims such as *Bay’at* willingly after the martyrdom Zahra.”**

**They have cast suspicion on anger of God in the person of Zahra –
Siddiqa Tahera – on Abu Bakr and her most elevated station.**

**First the allegation that *Bay’at* was by Ali’s desire should undergo
a thorough scrutiny then alone would it enable us to rely on narrations
regarding anger and discontent of Zahra against Abu Bakr. Criticism is
necessary to bring out the treasury of history where its gleam and
glitter will dazzle and astonish the fact-finding sights and blind the
prejudiced eyes.[5]**

**On the basis of this to establish the falsehood of claim that *Bay’at*
was of free choice goes parallel to defend Zahra’s anger against Abu
Bakr. Exposing this matter will enable one to draw a line between wrong
and right after the passing away of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
especially regarding the discussion of Imamate and Caliphate.**

Motive of Sunnis in proving the occurrence of this Bay’at?
----------------------------------------------------------

With reference to suspicion surrounding the correctness of *Bay’at* of
Imam Ali (a.s.) with Abu Bakr during the early stage of the usurpation
of Ali’s Caliphate,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tradition No. 3913  
 **[2]** Tradition No. 3304  
**[3]** Muhammad Ismail Bukhari: *Sahih Bukhari,* Tradition No. 2862  
 **[4]** Ibid. Tradition No. 3913; Muslim bin Hajjaj: *Sahih Muslim,*
Tradition no. 3304  
**[5]** As you will see in the text of Ibne Qutaibah Dinawari in
*Al-Imamah was-Siyasah* in the description of the condolence of these
two for Hazrat Zahra (s.a.) the same attitude is present.

defenders of Caliph have preferred to pave the way for another *Bay’at*
free from all these troubles which the first *Bay’at* carried. They
thought this would be advantageous to wipe out stigmas of shame, which
the preceding events brought to them.

To get more familiar with the above refer to following sources:

Ibne Hazm: *Al-Fasl Fil Milal Wan Nihal,* Vol. 4, Pg. 235

Ibne Athir: *Al-Kamil Fit Tarikh,* Vol. 2, Pg. 10

Abil Fida: *Al-Mukhtasar,* Vol. 1, Pg. 165

Ibne Jauzi: *Tadhkiratul Khawaas,* Pgs. 60-61

Ibne Athim Kufi: *Al-Futuh,* Pg. 8

It is interesting that some have come under the influence of these
writings of Sunni Sources and they say:

“Some say that Ali never did Bay’at with Abu Bakr. This is against
historical reality. Such sayings are outcome of bigotry which conceals
historical facts.”**[1]**

And more interesting is that other defenders of School of Caliphate
allege that Imam Ali (a.s.) did *Bay’at* in the very early days of Abu
Bakr’s Caliphate, and he did it with all his pleasure and willingness.

Some have inserted thoughts, which are their own created lies between
the lines of their writings:

Ibne Abde Rabb: *Al-Iqd al-Fareed,* Vol. 4, Pg. 247

Tabari: *Tarikh al-Umam wal Mulook,* Vol. 3, Pg. 207

Ibne Katheer: *Al-Sirah al-Nabawia,* Vol. 4, Pg. 495

Nuwairi: *Nihayat al-Arab,* Vol. 4, Pg. 37

It should be mentioned here that the allegation is in open contrast with
all historical documents. Further, it clearly contradicts the view of
Sunni scholars, which says that Ali did not do *Bay’at* with Abu Bakr as
long as Zahra was alive.**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Asghar Qaidan: *Tahleeli Bar Mawaze Siyasi Ali Ibne Abi Talib
(a.s.)* [Research on political stands of Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.)], Pg.
89  
**[2]** Even though these clarifications close all avenues of falsehood
propagators we must

In how many ways Sunnis narrate this incident?
----------------------------------------------

These narrations can be divided into three categories:

Type One) Issue of *Murtad* (apostasy)

 Type Two) Issue of the letter of Ali

Type Three) Special meeting of Ali with Abu Bakr

It must be mentioned that some have tried to establish legality of Abu
Bakr’s Caliphate by means of these very narrations, which to them serve
as a foundation. They go on and make claims like:

“After passing away of Prophet, Ali did not enter into Bay’at with Abu
Bakr for a period. Then afterwards he agreed and did Bay’at with Abu
Bakr.”**[1]**

“Ali refrained from Bay’at for a short period. But his high moral and
generous nature impelled him to agree to Bay’at.”**[2]**

“Ali and a group of elder companions of Prophet refrained from Bay’at
with Caliph whom they themselves had selected. But after a period they
saw that their refusal to do Bay’at would result in undue repercussions
in Islamic world. So later they paid allegiance. Secondly, they saw that
one who had occupied the seat of Caliph is a man who would make every
possible effort to strengthen Islam. This was the final aim and
aspiration of Ali from Caliphate. So he did Bay’at.”!**[3]**

Criticism of Three Standards in Narrations of Sunni Sources Concerning willing Bay’at
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### First standard: Scrutiny into allegation of becoming *Murtad* of some Arabs

Balazari (d. 279) writes:

“When the issue of apostasy arose Uthman came to Ali and said:

Cousin, as long as you do not give Bay’at no one will go out to fight
these enemies. And he insisted on this so much that Ali came to Abu Bakr
with Uthman and pledged allegiance.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

not be unmindful of the aims of confession makers.**  
[1]** Mustafa Husaini Tabatabai: *Raahi Bi Soo-e-Wahdat-e-Islami* (Way
to Islamic Unity), Pg. 163  
**[2]** Abdul Kareem Bi-Aazaar Shirazi: *Mashal-e-Ittehaad* (Torch of
Unity), Pg. 20  
**[3]** Ibid. *Paara-e-Payambar* (Portion of the Prophet), Vol. 6, Pgs.
14-15

After Ali’s Bay’at to Abu Bakr Muslims became glad. They prepared to
fight the Murtads and from every side people went to the
battle.”!**[1]**

In view of the above document the issue of this *Bay’at* can be divided
into three original pivots, which are as follows:

1 – Apostasy of Arabs and its danger to Islam and Muslims.

2 – The allegation of Uthman that no one was willing to join the
campaign to crush the movement as long as Ali refrains from *Bay’at.*

3 – A vast army set out to crush the apostates as a proof of completion
of this *Bay’at.*

Allegation of Sunni Sect concerning the Bay’at having had taken place because of Murtads cannot be considered reliable
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### A) Investigation on reliability of this narration

The real pivot of this *Bay’at* is Arabs becoming *Murtad* in the time
of Abu Bakr’s Caliphate. Now we must see whether there is any or a
little truth in it and to what extent.

Biographies in Sunni historical sources show a vast canvas of ‘Denial of
Faith after accepting it’ (which in Arabic is *Irtitaad* – the noun of
the Adjective *Murtad*) during Abu Bakr’s Caliphate. This creates a
probability of imminent danger that could change into a terrible attack
on Medina.

“Tabari from Saif and he from Sahl bin Yusuf narrates that: the various
tribes of Thalaba bin Saad and other tribes who had associated with them
under a pact like the tribe of Murra and Abas in a place called Abraq,
which was in the territory of Rabaza. Another group from Bani Kinana too
had joined this confederation. They became a large multitude, which this
location fell short to house them all.

Being short of accommodation, they divided into two groups. One group
remained in that same location, Abraq. The second group moved to another
location named Zilqissa. Tolaiha Asadi who had claimed himself to be a
Prophet sent help and forces to his brother, Jibal, who was the chief
there.

Among these tribes, the tribes of Diyil and Laith and Madhij too were
present. Auf, son of Falan bin Sanin, administered the Marra tribe in
Abraq. The leadership of the tribe of Thalaba and Abas was
responsibility of Harith bin Falan. Harith was one of the folk of the
tribe of Bani Saba.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Balazari: *Ansaab al-Ashraaf,* Vol. 1, Pg. 587

So their number went on increasing and their multitude widened.

These tribes delegated a number of their men to Medina as their
representative. The representative of the Murtad groups that returned
from Medina reported to their respective tribes the weakness and paucity
of men in Medina. What they had witnessed in Medina they reported to
their chiefs concerned. The weakness among Muslims, the little number of
Muslims created greed in the minds of the chiefs of the various tribes
gathered in Abraq. Their strength and extraordinary manpower encouraged
them to attack Muslims and they got ready for it.

After three days, a large number Murtads started the most calculated
attack on Medina by night.”!**[1]**

These events are related as a preliminary ground for the battle of
Abraq. This is the first battle of *Murtad* by the soldiers of Abu Bakr.
Historians have stated these events in various versions but the point of
apostasy is same. The danger inherent in it is reflected in the
narration of Balazari.

In the course of Tabari’s narration of these developments and events, we
come across preliminary events that preceded the Abraq battle. We give
hereunder extract from Tabari:

“Abu Bakr got the intelligence of the attack designed by Murtads. He
appointed Ali, Talha, Zubair and Ibne Masood at the entrance points of
Medina.”**[2]**

In view of this allegation the *Bay’at* (of Ali) was concluded in those
early days, that is when the *Murtads* delegated their representatives
to Medina and Abu Bakr became aware of their plan.

Therefore Abu Bakr was able to provide the people of Medina with
necessary elements of defense. According to the claims he (Abu Bakr)
made Ali the commander of the army stationed at the entrance point to
Medina.

**There is a close link between the narration of Balazari about *Bay’at*
and credibility of events related to the battle of Abraq. This link
enhances credibility of Balazari and makes the events believable.**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar
Afsaane* (Abdullah Bin Saba and other legends), Vol. 2, Pgs. 29-30;
quoting from: *Tarikh Tabari*, Vol. 1, Pgs. 1871-1875  
**[2]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 30

In spite of this, the events are surrounded by surmise and suspicion.

Investigation of correctness and occurrence of the Battle of Abraq and events following it
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Allamah Askari in Volume Two of *Abdullah bin Saba and other historical
stories* has dwelled much on the analysis of battles and victories
during Abu Bakr’s Caliphate. In his analysis he has exposed the
fabrications and lies of Saif bin Umar.

Regarding the reliability of report about Abraq battle and events ensued
therefrom, which we have mentioned, he writes:

“Through serious research it should be said with certainty:

Things narrated with so many details about Abraq battle and story of
Zilqissa**[1]** – all are fabricated and created by Saif. No historian
except Saif has narrated them. So it is nothing but a lie and
imagination of Saif.

Neither is true apostasy of most of these tribes whom Saif has accused
of being *Murtads*. There was no gathering of *Murtad* in Abraq and
Zilqissa. There is no basis of sending representatives of *Murtad* to
Medina. Likewise, the choice of Abu Bakr has no base. There is no truth
in it. Again, he posted soldiers at entry points of Medina. He sent army
to fight them. All this is again wrong. Nothing of it is correct. The
four battles**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [The details of this forgery are as follows: Tabari proceeds:
Abu Bakr’s army chased them (the *Murtad*) until Zilqissa. This was the
first victory gained by Abu Bakr.  
(Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 32; quoting from: *Tarikh Tabari*, Vol. 1, Pgs.
1880-1885)  
Then he continues. The followers of Tolaiha remained in Abraq – Rabaza.
The army (of Abu Bakr) chased them upto Zilqissa. Tolaiha sent a message
to Gidila and Ghouse. They were two branches of Tai tribe and invited
them to help him. Some at once marched towards him in compliance with
his message. They enjoined others to join Tolaiha gradually.  
(Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 52; quoting from: *Tarikh Tabari*, Vol. 1, Pgs.
1871-1873)  
When Abu Bakr saw such developments, he was encouraged and moved towards
the territory of Zilqissa. There he gathered a large army of Muslims.
Since the army was great and vast in manpower, he divided it into eleven
battalions, each under a commander. He gave a banner to each commander
and ordered each of them to move to a tribe that had gone *Murtad.* In
biographies Saif bin Umar is described as follows; it is enough to prove
that he was a liar.  
(Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 52; quoting from: *Tarikh Tabari*, Vol. 1, Pgs.
1880-1885)  
**[2]** [The first and the second battle was related to the Abraq wars
and it the preface of it and the fourth battle was connected to Zilqissa
expedition in the eleventh group.

which Saif has attributed to Abu Bakr are also without ground.”**[1]**

The following extracts from Rijaal books sufficiently prove that Saif
bin Umar was a liar

“1 – Yahya bin Moin (d. 233) says about him:

His sayings are weak and feeble.

2 – Nasai, author of Sahih (d. 303) says:

Many have avoided him. They do not quote from him because of his not
being honest or reliable.

3 – Abu Dawood (d. 275) says:

He is worthless. A great liar!

4 – Ibne Abi Hatim (d. 327) says:

They have ignored his narrations.

5 – Ibne al-Sakan (d. 353)

He is weak.

6 – Ibne Hibban (d. 354)

He used to invent traditions and narrate them attributing to some
reliable source. He is accused of being an atheist. Saif is accused of
creating false traditions.

7 – Darqutni (d. 385) says:

He is weak. His narrations are avoided.

8 – Hakim (d. 405) says:

His traditions are avoided because he is said to be an atheist.

9 – Firozabadi (d. 817) complier of Qamoos says:

He is weak.

10 – Ibne Hajar (d. 825) says:

He is weak.

11 – Suyuti (d. 911) says:

He is very weak.

12 – Safiuddin (d. 923) says:

He is considered weak.”**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(Refer: Ibid. Vol. 2, Pgs. 45-46)**  
[1]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pgs. 46-47

Result
------

Most narrations regarding *Bay’at* quoted by Sunni writers are from
Saif. Similar is the issue of *Murtad* and battle of Abraq. Hence it
loses credit and does not carry any historical credibility.

### B) Analysis of proof of this narration

The issue of *Bay’at* is related to the issue of *Murtad* and battle of
Abraq. Its correctness too is related to the above.

In Sunni books, like *Tarikh Tabari*, the issue of *Murtad* and story of
attack of Medina by *Murtads* commences from the battle of Abraq and
ends at Umme Zamal becoming a *Murtad.*

Continuation of scrutiny about authenticity of Abraq battle and events following it
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

According to Sunni sources, *Murtads* after their defeat in Abraq battle
invited the Tai tribes to co-operate with them and another battle took
place in Zilqissa at Buzakha. They confronted eleven divisions of Abu
Bakr’s army but were again defeated.

These people who were defeated for the second time gathered around a
woman who had become *Murtad.* Her name was Umme Zamal. Again they posed
danger to Islam. This movement too was crushed by forces of
Caliph.**[2]**

**On the basis of this authenticity of *Bay’at*, narrator of which is
Balazari, is related to authenticity of the four battles:**

1 – Battle of Abraq.

2 – Campaign at Zilqissa and battle at Buzakha.

3 – Apostasy of Tai tribe.

4 – Apostasy of Umme Zamal.

The interesting point is that some researchers consider all narrations
relating to above events as fabricated. They give credibility only to
developments that occurred at Zilqissa – and that too not totally. We
quote some texts:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Vol. 1, Pg. 70**  
[2]** Refer: *Tarikh Tabari*, Vol. 1, Pgs. 1871-1872 (Events preceding
the battle of apostates); Ibid. Vol. 1, Pgs. 1873-1875 (Battle of
Abraq); Ibid. Vol. 1, Pgs. 1880-1885 (Battle of Zilqissa and war of
Buzakha); Ibid. Vol. 1, Pgs. 1871-1873 (Apostasy of Tai tribe); Ibid.
Vol. 1, Pg. 1902

“Usamah along with his army returned to Medina from the battle of Syria.
It was the time Abu Bakr was preparing for confrontation with Murtad.
With a group of Muslims he left Medina and reached Zilqissa, which is
twelve miles from Medina on route to Najd. He camped here and his army
also remained alert.

Khalid bin Waleed was sent to Murtad tribes. Abu Bakr vested the command
Ansaar to Thabit bin Qays and made Khalid commander-in-chief. Abu Bakr
ordered Khalid to move towards Tolaiha and Oyinat bin Hisn who were
stationed in the vicinity of Bani Asad tribe at a place called Buzakha.

In the meantime Abu Bakr told Khalid: Good will shortly ensue from this
meeting of yours with my army at Khaiber. Of course Abu Bakr’s words
were based on policy and were a trick. His idea was that the enemy would
come to know; and this would create a dread in their hearts. It is
concluded thus because Abu Bakr had already sent all his warriors with
Khalid towards the enemy. There remained no one with Abu Bakr to be sent
to the support of Khalid either to Buzakha or Khaiber.**[1]**

Yaqubi too has mentioned in his history the incident in which Abu Bakr
moved towards Zilqissa and appointment of Khalid as Commander. Yaqubi
adds that the appointment of Thabit as leader of Ansaar was after Ansaar
objected to Abu Bakr why he did not appoint anyone of them as the
commander.”**[2]**

“When we compare the narrations of Saif regarding Abraq battle and story
of Zilqissa with narrations of other historians it obviously shows the
imaginative mind of Saif. Because all other historians are unanimous in
saying that Abu Bakr left Medina for battle only once. After the return
of Usamah from Muta**[3]** he moved towards Zilqissa. There he provided
a well-ordered army and vested Khalid with command of this army. He made
Thabit chief of Ansaar under supervision of Khalid. Then Abu Bakr
ordered them to move towards Buzakha to crush Tolaiha and those from
tribes of Asad and Fuzara who had gathered around him.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [On the basis of this same quotation we will analyze the claim
of free *Bayyat.*]  
 **[2]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar
Afsaane,* Vol. 2, Pgs. 40-41  
**[3]** [On the basis of this same quotation we will analyze the claim
of free *Bayyat.*]  
 **[4]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 43

“Other historians write regarding this that from groups living on
outskirts of Medina only two tribes rose against Islam. One was Asad,
the tribe of Tolaiha himself and the other was Fuzara a branch of
Ghatfan and Ghatfan itself was a sub tribe of Qays Eylan. Except these
two, no other tribe is seen aiding Tolaiha or fighting against
Muslims.”**[1]**

“In the army of Tolaiha there were a few persons from Asad tribe, which
was his own tribe and a few other from Fuzara tribe under the
supervision of their chief Uyanna bin Hisn.”**[2]**

“Some historians again write that soldiers of Tolaiha assembled in
Buzakha a populated place of Asad tribe. Khalid bin Waleed came from
Zilqissa with two thousand seven hundred men from Fuzara and confronted
them. A severe battle took place between them.”**[3]**

More interesting is the point that the issue of *Bay’at* of free choice
is related to the issue of apostasy of Tai tribe while the fact is that:

“Tai is the same tribe, which was not Tolaiha’s supporter, but they took
the stand against – Tolaiha. Whenever an army confronted Tolaiha, they
too joined them against Tolaiha. They used to say: Abu Bakr must fight
you so hard that you will name him Abul Fahal. Besides, he (Khalid)
sought help from them in the battle against Tolaiha.”**[4]**

**For the first time issue of *Murtad* was shown as a great danger:**

1 – Usamah’s army had returned from Muta so Abu Bakr had no shortage
from military aspect.

Therefore there was no need for him to demand Ali’s allegiance in order
to call for volunteers.

2 – Tolaiha and his associates were not in considerable number and the
issue of apostasy was not so widespread that it needed a huge army to be
crushed.

As a matter of fact, the issue of *Murtads* was not a serious danger to
threaten a town like Medina that it should have required demanding Ali
to give *Bay’at* to Abu Bakr.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 58  
 **[2]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 61  
**[3]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 58  
 **[4]** Ibid. Vol. 2, Pg. 61

### Result

The issue of *Bay’at* of free will of Imam Ali (a.s.) for the sake of
crushing the revolt of *Murtads* is a thing added to historical
documents. The propaganda disseminated on the wings of falsehood was so
high that the issue of *Murtads* gained a ground.

Another look at the case of Apostasy of Arabs
---------------------------------------------

The researchers have acknowledged the *Murtad* Arabs were few in number.
In his research into the history of battles against *Murtad*, Allamah
Askari has concluded that it was not such a serious matter.

The issue of apostasy was such that researchers have very simply passed
by without pursuing it like Allamah Askari.**[1]** So the lies written
by Tabari in this respect remained unchallenged. But when historical
records and documents mentioned in Sunni books are scrutinized it proves
that:

“The vastness of Arabian Peninsula caused the historians to believe that
apostasy was also so widespread. While the limited number of inhabitants
who accepted Islam during Prophet’s lifetime remained adherents of
Islam.”**[2]**

“Most historians have exaggerated the matter. They imagined the length
and breadth of Arabian Peninsula and fancied that the issue of
Murtads**[3]** was also as widespread. So they wrote: The Arabs became
Murtads – a superlative expression reflecting a wrong idea that all the
population apostised while in fact it was not so. They exempted three
towns: Medina, Mecca and Taif from being Murtad. But research shows a
different picture. Many tribes were loyal to Islam and government at
Medina. If was quite likely they even helped the central government in
crushing Murtads.

Through historical testimonies and sources we shall prove that most of
these tribes and people adhered to their faith in Islam and the
exaggeration in this issue is uncalled for…

There are many reports that indicate people’s loyalty to Islam and their
scorn of apostasy. A few instances are as under:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: Ali Gholami Dahqi: *Janghai Irtdidat wa Bohran
Janasheeni-e-Payambar,* Pg. 34; Pg. 41 (Commanders of Ridda wars); Pg.
39 & Pg. 117 (Instruction of Abu Bakr to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) for
defending Medina).  
**[2]** Ali Gholami Dahqi: *Janghai Irtdidat wa Bohran
Janasheeni-e-Payambar,* Pg. 120  
**[3]** Refer: Waqidi: *Kitab ar-Ridda,* Pg. 48; Ibne Kathir: *Al-Bidaya
wan Nihaya,* Vol. 6, Pg. 312; Tabari: *Tarikh al-Umam wal Mulook,* Vol.
3, Pg. 242

1 – Most historians are unanimous that there was no apostasy in Mecca,
Medina and Thaqif and they even came out to help in crushing the
apostates of Asad, Zibyan and Ghatfan.**[1]**

2. Loyalty of tribes living between Mecca, Medina and Taif like Muzina,
Ghiffar, Johaina, Balla and…to Islam.**[2]**

After the Prophet’s passing away some of these tribes paid Zakat to Abu
Bakr. The Caliph sought their help in his coming battle of Ridda.**[3]**

There are indications that some individuals of Amir and Hawazin also
remained loyal to Islam. As mentioned in the report of Fujaat that Amir
and Hawazin used to support all the Muslims of Sulaym tribe.**[4]**

A group among the tribe of Bani Kalb under leadership of Imrul Qays bin
al-Asbagh and similarly a group from Bani al-Qain under leadership of
Umar bin al-Hakam who was an agent of the Prophet, remained Muslims
until the last.**[5]**

Besides these there are many in Yemen such as Nakha, Jofi, Murad and
Madhij who separated themselves from Aswad Ansi and protected themselves
from apostasy…

A large number of tribes from Bani Tameem also remained Muslims and they
remained firm against the claim of prophethood of Sajjah. On the basis
of this it can be said that among the Bani Tameem the number of those
who remained Muslims was more than those who had doubts about Islam or
those who had apostised.

Maqdasi has absolved many from Nakha’a and Kinda from being Murtads in
addition to Bahrain, Mecca and Medina.**[6]**

The fact is that to give such vastness to the issue of apostasy is a
mistake. So the right thing is that some claimants of prophethood and
their  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Quoted from: Tabari: *Tarikh al-Umam wal Mulook,* Vol. 3, Pg.
242  
**[2]** Quoted from: Mahdi Razaqallah Ahmad, *Ath-Thabitoon Alal Islam
Ayyam Fitnatur Ridda,* Pg. 20; quoting from: Kalai Balansi: *Haroob
ar-Ridda,* Pg. 41  
**[3]** Quoted from: Ibne Saad: *Tabaqat al-Kubra,* Vol. 1, Pg. 293;
Ibne Hisham: *As-Sirah an-Nabawiya,* Vol. 2, Pg. 309; Dayar Bakri:
*Tarikh Khamees,* Vol. 2, Pgs. 21-22; Waqidi: *Kitab ar-Ridda,* Pgs.
54-67  
**[4]** Quoted from: Tabari: *Tarikh al-Umam wal Mulook,* Vol. 2, Pg.
264; Dayar Bakri: *Tarikh Khamees,* Vol. 2, Pg. 202  
**[5]** Quoted from: Tabari: *Tarikh al-Umam wal Mulook,* Vol. 3, Pg.
243  
**[6]** Quoted from: Maqdisi: *Al-Bado wat-Tarikh,* Vol. 6, Pg. 151

followers and some others who attacked the central government of Medina
may be called apostates. Even the claimants of prophethood cannot be
called apostates because they had not accepted Islam in the first place
that they could turn away from it.

Perhaps the fact that apostates were scattered in a large area caused
the historians to believe that they were in such a large number.

In Tarikh Ridda while listing apostate tribes the following are absolved
from being Murtads: Abas, some from Ashja, Ghiffar, Juhaina, Muzina,
Kaab, Thaqif, Tai, Huzail, people of Sarrah, Bajila, Khathama, Hawazin,
Nasr, Jusham, Saad bin Bakr, Abdul Qays, Doos, Shajeeb, Hamadan and Anba
in Sanaa.**[1]**

…the result is that the issue of apostasy was not so widespread in
Arabian Peninsula as historians have made it out to be and most of them
remained Muslims and were loyal to Islam.”**[2]**

Conclusion
----------

As you saw the magnitude of apostasy described by Waqidi and Tabari is
not having any truth as shown in analysis of Allamah Askari. But
researchers have not followed the line of Allamah Askari and thus
apostasy remains in the same exaggerated condition.

On the basis of this from every angle you look at the issue of apostasy
you will conclude that:

**The apostasy of Arabs was neither so widespread nor such a serious
danger to Islam.**

**Therefore its suppression has no connection with the *Bay’at* of Imam
Ali (a.s.) to Abu Bakr.[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Quoted from: Khurshid Ahmad Farooq: *Tarikh ar-Ridda,* Pgs.
5-8  
**[2]** Ali Gholami Dahqi: *Janghai Irtdidat wa Bohran
Janasheeni-e-Payambar,* Pgs. 33-37  
**[3]** Regretfully the author of *Janghai Irtdidat wa Bohran
Janasheeni-e-Payambar* has ignored this point and he thinks that the
apostasy of the people was a factor of *Bayyat* by Amirul Momineen
(a.s.).But he has also mentioned about the dissatisfaction of His
Eminence Ali (a.s.) with Abu Bakr in the matter of dealing with the
apostates without his direct intervention.(Refer: Ibid. Pgs. 115-118 &
Pg. 120)

### Three main outcomes of scrutiny of the issue of Apostasy of Arabs

**Conclusion 1 –** The scrutiny can be summed up in one sentence: The
issue of apostasy of Arabs was a fabricated case. *Bay’at* of Imam Ali
(a.s.) had no bearing on it as Sunnis claim.

**Conclusion 2 –** Even if for the sake of argument we even accept the
issue of apostasy of Arabs in the magnitude as is claimed, yet we do not
see any *Bay’at* taking place. In narration of Balazari the words (so he
gave *Bay’at*) are fabricated and a presumption of narrator himself.

**Conclusion 3 –** Even if for the sake of argument we accept the
narration of Balazari it does not exercise any influence on historical
realities as the *Bay’at* itself was a forced one. It was only a show.

In other words, the *Bay’at* which occurred as a show was basically
invalid.

On the margins of analysis of issue of apostasy of Arabs
--------------------------------------------------------

If for the sake of argument we suppose that the matter of *Bay’at* is
correct we must pursue the concealed motives and aims of Caliphate about
the *Bay’at* and make a fresh analysis of circumstances surrounding its
occurrence.**[1]**

Because in this issue there is likelihood of preparation of background
to a psychological war in Medina as Uthman’s meetings with Ali shows.

This idea arises because the name of Tai has crept in the case of
Tolaiha and battle of Buzakha while according to historical records they
were not apostates but among supporters of Abu Bakr.**[2]**

Therefore there is probability that from the very base, the matter
narrated by Tabari on the authority of Saif**[3]** –was not a lie but
the tribe of Tai demonstrated *Irtitaad* to the benefit and advantage of
Abu Bakr. It can be said to be a pre-prepared game with mutual
understanding. An emergency atmosphere is created in Medina. And they
send representatives to put awe in the people which evidently served to
benefit the Caliph.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It is matter for contemplation and there is stronger possibility
of it being fabricated.  
**[2]** Refer: *Abdullah Ibne Saba Wa Deegar Afsaane* (Abdullah Bin Saba
and other legends), Vol. 1, Pg. 196; Vol. 2, Pgs. 56-57  
**[3]** Refer: Ibid. Vol. 2, Pgs. 51-52

Therefore it can be said:

Upon the martyrdom of Hazrat Zahra (s.a.) all the attention of the
system of Caliphate concentrated in subduing the opponents living
outside Medina.**[1]**

In the meantime, that which was a source of anxiety to the Caliph was
effort of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) to overthrow his regime. That also at a
time when he wanted to send all available troops out of Medina and his
own departure from Medina to Zilqissa.

Therefore they had to find a way that this time they had to without any
ceremony and show off and also without any display of threats and enmity
take assurance from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he will assume silence
and abstain from an armed uprising.

In these circumstances they initiated a systematic propaganda.

So first of all they spread the terror of attack of apostates on Medina.

Then Uthman pressurized Ali to give *Bay’at* so that the regime can
mobilize people for suppressing the apostates and that there was no
other way to defend Islam and Muslim.

Because of this propaganda it seemed that if Ali still refused
allegiance it would at least tarnish his character in the view of people
and put a question mark on his rightfulness.

From this aspect *Bay’at* to the Caliphs was under the pressure of
public opinion and widespread propaganda of government machinery against
His Eminence (a.s.).

In the analysis of this issue Allamah Askari writes:

“The correct Bay’at is that which must be given at pleasure and with
willingness, otherwise it is not Bay’at. It is only a handshake, or at
the most a show of Bay’at.

So Bay’at of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) after six months took place under
pressure and for preservation of Islam. So in fact, it was a Bay’at
without any willingness and just a show and a handshake.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: Ali Labbaf, *A Victim Lost in Saqifah*, Vol. 3, Pgs.
140-173; Pgs. 183-190  
**[2]** Allamah Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Saqifah*, Edited by Mahdi
Dashti, Pg. 116

### Last Reminder

More interesting is the point that some narrations regarding the issue
of apostasy do not mention anything about the occurrence of *Bay’at* of
Ali, they only repeat the matter of silence.

These documents clearly prove that the phrase ‘so he did *Bay’at’* in
the narration of Balazari is an interpolation by the narrator and there
is no truth in it.

Tabari Imami (4th century) narrates from Waqidi (d. 207):

“When Arabs turned Murtad, Uthman came to Ali and said: O, cousin of
Prophet! As long as you do not do Bay’at with Abu Bakr, no one goes to
fight the enemy. You yourself are better aware of things. Your viewpoint
is correct. But I fear this present issue could develop into a great
trouble and might bring havoc to all of us.

Uthman kept on insisting on Ali and his pleadings bore fruit. Finally he
brought Ali to Abu Bakr.

Muslims became happy with this development. From every side the horse
riders came out. People became desirous to fight. They got ready for the
battle.

His attitude that he will neither undertake a movement not an armed
uprising alone acted as a deterrent. Because swords of mischief were
pulled out and flames of havoc were leaping high. The lances were
directed against Islam and Muslims. So he gave up demand of restoration
of his rights.**[1]**”**[2]**

Second standard: Scrutiny into narrations regarding the letter of Ali
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Another document used to prove willing *Bay’at* is Imam’s letter to his
companions. On the basis of it they claim:

“Ali refrained from Bay’at for a certain period. The hypocrites started
their activities. Then the issue of Murtad arose. These two issues posed
an eminent danger to Islam and Muslims. Therefore for sake of Islam Ali
did Bay’at with Abu Bakr at his free will.”!**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [By sword]  
**[2]** Tabari Imami: *Al-Mustarshid,* Pgs. 383-384 (Published
Mahmoodi)  
 **[3]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Nahjul Balagha Magazine, Issue
No. 4-5, Pg. 181

### A) A look at this letter

1 – The letter in *Al-Imamah was-Siyasah* is as follows:

“I withheld my hand even though I considered no one more deserving than
myself for the successorship of Prophet. So I remained patient on
destiny till I saw a group departing from Islam calling others to give
up the religion of Muhammad and Ibrahim.

So I feared that if I do not help Islam and Muslims the havoc will be
far greater than that of giving up succession to the Prophet. So I went
to Abu Bakr and did Bay’at.”!**[1]**

2 – In *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* the letter is referred to without its
contents.**[2]**

3 – In *Al-Gharaat* the contents of this letter are:

“I withheld my hand even though I considered no one more deserving than
myself for the successorship of Prophet. So I remained patient on
destiny till I saw a group departing from Islam calling others to give
up the religion of Muhammad and Ibrahim.

So I feared that if I do not help Islam and Muslims the havoc will be
far greater than that of giving up succession to the Prophet. So I went
to Abu Bakr and did Bay’at.”!**[3]**

### A – 1) Remark about *Al-Gharaat*

Although the writer of this book is Ibrahim bin Muhammad Thaqafi Kufi
(d. 283) an Imamiyah scholar but the first copy of *Al-Gharaat* has come
down to us only through a Sunni channel so we treat it as a Sunni
source.**[4]**

### A – 2) Common points in Narrations of Ibne Qutaibah and Thaqafi

A close attention to the above will bring to light two basic pivots
common in both.

### Pivot A

People going *Murtad* in the period of occurrence of this *Bay’at* as
proved from the words: ‘I saw people returning from Islam’.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Qutaibah: *Al-Imamah was-Siyasah,* Vol. 1, Pg. 175  
**[2]** Balazari: *Ansaab al-Ashraaf,* Vol. 2, Pg. 383  
**[3]** Thaqafi Kufi: *Al-Ghaaraat* (with Preface and Notes by Meer
Jalaluddin Muhaddith Armawi), Vol. 1, Pgs. 305-306  
 **[4]** Refer: Ali Akbar Zakiri: *Seemai Kaarguzaaraan Ali Ibne Abi
Talib Amirul Momineen (a.s.),* Vol. 2, Pg. 124

### Pivot B

Going of Imam Ali (a.s.) to Abu Bakr and doing *Bay’at* with him as
mentioned in the words: ‘Then I went to Abu Bakr and did *Bay’at’.*

### B) A glance at the incident mentioned in this letter

1 – Ibne Qutaibah writes about the reason of writing this letter:

“Hujr bin Adi, Amr bin Hamaq and Abdullah bin Wahab Rasibi visited Ali
to inquire Imam’s opinion about Abu Bakr and Umar…”**[1]**

2 – Balazari writes:

“Hujr bin Adi Kindi, Amr bin Hamaq Khuzai, Habba bin Juwin Bajili Urani,
Abdullah bin Wahab Hamadani and Ou bin Saba came to Ali…”**[2]**

3 – Thaqafi Kufi writes:

“Amr bin Hamaq, Hujr bin Adi, Habba Urani, Harith Awar and Abdullah bin
Saba visited Ali…”**[3]**

### B – 1) Outcome

As you must have noted in the documents of this letter appear some
personalities such as Abdullah Ibne Wahab Rasabi Hamadani Sabayee.
Balazari calls him Ibne Saba. Thaqafi calls him Abdullah bin Saba as one
of the questioners, which is a point worth contemplation.**[4]**

Abdullah bin Wahab Rasabi Hamadani was among the Khawarij and was the
commander of Khawarij in the battle Nahrawan.

Shia and Sunni, both sects, regard Abdullah bin Saba as a perverted and
deviated person. According to research of Allamah Askari, he (Abdullah)
is a creation of Saif bin Umar and was a design to distort historical
facts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Qutaibah: *Al-Imamah was-Siyasah,* Vol. 1, Pg. 154  
**[2]** Balazari: *Ansaab al-Ashraaf,* Vol. 2, Pg. 383  
**[3]** Thaqafi Kufi: *Al-Ghaaraat* (with Preface and Notes by Meer
Jalaluddin Muhaddith Armawi), Vol. 1, Pg. 302  
**[4]** Some researchers consider him responsible of making alterations
in this letter.  
(Refer: Ali Akbar Zakiri: *Hukoomat O Siyasat,* Pg. 61, Possibility B);
This view also supports that the mentioned letter is not reliable and
there is greater possibility of it being forged.

On the other hand Tabari Imami, the elder,**[1]** (4th century) has
mentioned this letter in his book, *Al Mustarshid Fil Imamah***[2]**
from Shoba (Amir bin Saraheel Abu Umar Kufi) who is only considered
reliable by Sunni sect and the Shias have opposed him.**[3]**

C) Investigation of credibility of sources mentioned in this letter
-------------------------------------------------------------------

As you must have noted the text of this letter is mentioned in two
ancient sources: *Al-Imamah was-Siyasah* by Ibne Qutaibah Dinawari and
*Al-Gharaat* by Thaqafi Kufi.

Since only Thaqafi Kufi was of Shia faith and Ibne Qutaibah was a
follower of the School of Caliphate his quotation in this particular
case cannot be trusted.

In the coming pages you will see that Ibne Qutaibah is very much
inclined to represent Ali firstly, in good terms with Abu Bakr; and
secondly to do *Bay’at* with him on his own willingness and desire.

Therefore Ibne Qutaibah in quoting the matter about the willing *Bay’at*
of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) to Abu Bakr blames the associates of the
Caliph and therefore assumes an external position; so in this pursuit he
has dared to confirm fabricated documents in which the signs of
fabrication and deviation are very much prominent.**[4]**

Therefore there is likelihood that the letter might have been distorted
by Ibne Qutaibah and since he has quoted it regarding willing *Bay’at*
it becomes unreliable.

**As for *Al-Gharaat* the most genuine and reputed source of this letter
it must be said:**

1 – This book *Al-Gharaat* has reached to us through Sunni sources
only.**[5]**

2 – The writer of *Al-Gharaat* has written it in Isfahan. In those times
in Isfahan  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad bin Jurair bin Rustam  
 **[2]** Mahmoodi Edition, Pg. 408  
 **[3]** Refer: Ali Akbar Zakiri: *Hukoomat O Siyasat,* Pg. 32  
**[4]** In the coming pages we will criticize this quotation and also
discuss the intellectual inclinations and religious leanings of Ibne
Qutaibah.  
**[5]** Ali Akbar Zakiri: *Seemai Kaarguzaaraan Ali Ibne Abi Talib
Amirul Momineen (a.s.),* Vol. 2, Pg. 124

lived stanch anti-Shia people. Most were opposed to Imam Ali
(a.s.).**[1]**

Muhaddith Armavi in preface to this *Al-Gharaat* gives the reason why
Thaqafi lived in Isfahan. According to him:

“…Thaqafi was originally from Kufa, later he migrated to Isfahan because
in Kufa he had written a book on the virtues of the Purified Ahle Bayt
(a.s.) and the defects of their enemies which the people of Kufa admired
and appreciated very much. But they advised him not to publish it as it
was time to be in dissimulation. Thaqafi asked them of a place where
Shias were less or it is far from Shias. They told him such a town was
Isfahan. So Ibrahim swore that he would not publish the book but in
Isfahan.

So he migrated from Kufa to Isfahan and published the book which was
against dissimulation there.”**[2]**

Hence there is very strong likelihood that the copy makers of Isfahan
who were of the Sunni School mixed and interpolated the material of the
book with their own prejudice against Ahle Bayt of Prophet.

### C – 1) Evidences that show deviation in *Al-Gharaat*

**Evidence 1 –** In the printed copy of *Al-Gharaat* we read the
instructions of ablution in line with Sunni sect. the instructions
direct to wash the fact instead of passing of palm over them. This is
Sunni practice which contradicts Shia method.**[3]**

Such interpolation is also found in the letter of Imam Ali (a.s.)
addressed to Muhammad bin Abu Bakr in Egypt.

The signs of interpolation in Evidence 1
----------------------------------------

Shaykh Mufeed has copied this letter in *Amali.* He has taken it from
*Al-Gharaat.* Some among its contents are like this:

“Then pass your palm over your head and feet.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rasool Ja’faryan: *Manabe Tarikh Islam,* Pg. 150  
**[2]** Quoted from: Muhaddith Qummi: *Tatammatul Muntaha,* Pg. 270  
 **[3]** Thaqafi Kufi: *Al-Ghaaraat* (with Preface and Notes by Meer
Jalaluddin Muhaddith Armawi), Vol. 1, Pg. 245  
**[4]** Shaykh Mufeed: *Amali,* Pg. 267

The interesting thing is that Ibne Al-Hadeed Motazalli has also not
mentioned it in *Sharh Nahjul Balagha*.**[1]**

**Therefore it can be said:**

This interpolation was done by those who duplicated *Al-Gharaat.* It
served their purpose to insert their belief within the words of Imam Ali
(a.s.).

Muhaddith Armavi has mentioned in the footnote in *Al-Gharaat* quoting
from Muhaddith Noori:

“It is clearly known that contents of Al-Gharaat have been distorted by
Sunnis; because they narrate from it.”**[2]**

**Evidence 2 –** The printed copy of *Al-Gharaat* contains many virtues
and superior qualities of Caliphs. While the irrefutable fact is that
all qualities attributed to Caliphs are false on the basis of the
attitude of Imam Ali (a.s.) in the six-persons Shura committee formed to
appoint a Caliph. Abdur Rahman bin Auf laid a condition that the new
Caliph must follow the path of Abu Bakr and Umar. The reply of Ali was
so severe and harsh**[3]** that it leaves no room to doubt that the text
concerning Caliphs is nothing but a fabrication.

The fabrication that has taken place concerns two letters of Imam Ali
(a.s.). One was addressed to Qays bin Saad bin Ubadah in Egypt and the
other to his (Ali’s) own companions.

Signs of forgery in Evidence 2 (including 2 letters)
----------------------------------------------------

### Evidence 2 – Letter One

The text of this letter**[4]** is as follows in *Al-Gharaat:*

“After the Prophet Muslims chose from among themselves two virtuous men
as their Caliphs and leaders who acted on the book of God and
administered the affairs in the best possible way. They did not go
beyond  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 6, Pg. 71  
**[2]** Thaqafi Kufi: *Al-Ghaaraat* (with Preface and Notes by Meer
Jalaluddin Muhaddith Armawi), Vol. 1, Pg. 245; quoting from: Muhaddith
Noori: *Mustadrak al-Wasael,* Vol. 1, Pg. 44  
 **[3]** Refer: Ibne Qutaibah: *Al-Imamah was-Siyasah,* Vol. 1, Pg. 26;
Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 1, Pg. 188; *Tarikh
Yaqoobi,* Vol. 2, Pg. 162; Balazari: *Ansaab al-Ashraaf,* Vol. 5, Pg.
22  
 **[4]** Sayyid Abul Fazl Barqai in his Preface to the book,
*Shahira-e-Ittihaad* has argued on the basis of these sentences.

the tradition of Prophet. Then God captured their souls. May God have
mercy on them.”!**[1]**

In this concern, Allamah Mirza Habeebullah Hashimi Khoei writes in his
commentary of *Nahjul Balagha*:

“They could have been such as a show off to the people. Although it is
also possible that these interpolations were made by the opponents of
Shias and inserted into the text.”**[2]**

That which proves the veracity of Allamah Hashimi Khoei is that:

What has come in the statements of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) is actually
the people’s view about the two Caliphs. There is another letter of Ali
addressed to Huzaifa bin Yaman in the town of Madayn. The letter reads
as follows:**[3]**

“After passing away of Prophet some Muslims raised two men to Caliphate.
They were pleased with the behavior and the conduct of those
two.”**[4]**

The difference in the words of Ali is another proof of deviation in the
text. The difference in the wording is clear comparing the printed copy
of *Al-Gharaat* with the narration of Sayyid Ali Khan Madani.

He (Sayyid Ali Khan Madani) has copied the letter in his book
*Al-Darjaat ar-Rafiya* from *Al-Gharaat.* The text concerning Caliphs
runs as follows:

“After the Prophet, Muslims brought among themselves two men into
succession as their chiefs who acted in the best way till their
death.”**[5]**

The difference in the text with that of the printed copy of *Al-Gharaat*
shows that *Al-Gharaat* gradually underwent deviations by several hands.
There does not exist any copy which may tally with another. However
little or trifle, but there is a deviation in each. One differs from
another. This is an open proof of it not being original.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Thaqafi Kufi: *Al-Ghaaraat* (with Preface and Notes by Meer
Jalaluddin Muhaddith Armawi), Vol. 1, Pg. 210  
**[2]** Hashimi Khoei: *Minhaaj al-Bara-a,* Vol. 6, Pg. 106  
**[3]** [His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) by these words has put a question mark
on the public and general acceptance of the Caliphs.]  
 **[4]** Muhammad Baqir Mahmoodi: *Nahjus Saada Fee Mustadrak Nahjul
Balagha,* Vol. 4, Pg. 23  
**[5]** Sayyid Ali Khan Madani: *Ad-Darajaat ar-Rafia* (Elevated
Positions), Pg. 336

### Evidence 2 – Letter Two

This letter in *Al-Gharaat**[1]*** reads thus:

“Umar took over the charge of affairs. He administered the things in the
best way. He had a blessed soul.”**[2]**

Muhaddith Armavi writes in footnote of the text of this letter from
Allamah Muhammad Baqir:

“It seems it was such in the eyes of the people. He has mentioned about
Abu Bakr in the same manner. Of course dissimulation too is obvious in
the speech. It is also quite likely that deviation should have taken
place by opponents.”

Allamah Majlisi too writes that the contents of the letter reflect the
view of the people about the Second Caliph. It is not that of Imam Ali
(a.s.) himself. If cannot be. There is narration regarding the letter,
which we refer to.

Tabari Imami, the elder (4th century) is among those who have mentioned
the contents of the second letter. In his book *Al-Mustarshid fil
Imamah* the contents pertaining to the Second Caliph are:

“And he (Umar) was among the people of good character and a blessed
soul.”**[3]**

Difference in the text with that of *Al-Gharaat* indicates deviation and
shows hand-to-hand circulation of the copy.

### C – 2) Results of the investigation of above evidences

As such, the copy of *Al-Gharaat* is short of credibility as that of
*Imamate and Siyasat* regarding the *Bay’at* at a free will.

D) A look towards inadvertency of Balazari to the contents of the letter of Ali
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Once again, if we divert our attention to the reasons common between
narrations of this letter (Point A-2) and place it by the side of
Balazari’s narration we will find that the narration of Balazari is in
line with the contents of Imam Ali’s (a.s.) letter telling the same
thing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Article in *Collected Papers of
International Conference on Imam Ali,* Vol. 2, Pg. 38  
**[2]** Thaqafi Kufi: *Al-Ghaaraat* (with Preface and Notes by Meer
Jalaluddin Muhaddith Armawi), Vol. 1, Pg. 307  
**[3]** Tabari Imami: *Al-Mustarshid,* Pg. 415 (Mahmoodi Edition)

In the contents of the letter inserted in the book *Al-Mustarshid,*
difference is recorded. This makes complete the application of the
letter with the narration of Balazari. The text in the book
*Al-Mustarshid* reads thus:

“And I saw people not moving against them (the enemies of God) because
of my isolation and non-participation.”**[1]**

**With reference to the above points following questions arise:**

1) Balazari himself is one of the narrators of Arabs turning *Murtads*
and the *Bay’at* of Imam Ali (a.s.) with Abu Bakr at his free will. He
has refrained from mentioning the contents of the letter. He only
mentions the primary ground that cause the writing of the letter.
Why?**[2]**

2) What justification could be there for Balazari for ignoring to
mention the text of this letter?

3) The copy of the letter which was in possession of Balazari whether it
did not indicate occurrence of such a *Bay’at*? All present copies of
the letter mention that a *Bay’at* of Ali with Abu Bakr did take place
at his own choice and willingness. This is quite in line with the
religious inclinations of Balazari and his taste of writing history.

### Reply

The answer of these questions can be found in the narration of Muhammad
bin Jurair bin Rustom Tabari (4<sup>th</sup> century). In his narration,
there is no mention of *Bay’at.* So such a letter does not meet any of
the aims of Balazari.

The text of the letter according to *Al-Mustarshid* is as follows:

“I withheld my hand though I saw myself more deserving for the place of
Muhammad among the people as one who denies his self.

So I endured what God had desired. Then I saw among the people their
return from Islam openly. They invited the people to give up God’s
religion and change the Ummah of Muhammad.

So I feared that if I do not support Islam and sit idle I will have to
see ruin and destruction therein. Its havoc upon me will be greater than
losing Caliphate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Pg. 412 (Mahmoodi Edition)  
**[2]** Balazari: *Ansaab al-Ashraaf,* Vol. 1, Pgs. 282-283

And I saw people not inclined to fight the enemy of God because of my
isolation and lack of participation.

So I went to Abu Bakr and co-operated with him. Had I not done this,
Islam would have been destroyed.”**[1]**

### Reminder

The words of Imam Ali (a.s.): **Had I not done this, Islam would have
been destroyed** convey the meaning of ceasefire and that is all.

Three prime results of scrutiny of Ali’s letter
-----------------------------------------------

### Result 1

The false story of Arabs going *Murtad*, which Tabari has created and
publicized to make it doubtless, is used as a tool to draw benefit from
this letter. With the help of this letter, deviations are made according
to their desire. Misunderstandings and advantages are drawn to support
the claims of Sunnis.

It is important to note that we should not necessarily go to the Arabs
*Murtad* when the subject matter happens to be any *Murtad.* Muhaddith
Armavi writes in the footnote of *Al-Gharaat* in explanation of ‘Return
of the people’ on the authority of Allamah Majlisi:

“It is likely that he should have meant the hypocrites who had gathered
around Abu Bakr and were always seeking an opportunity to create
mischief or an element to provide them with an excuse to become
Murtad.”**[2]**

This idea is supported by Imam Ali’s (a.s.) wordings. He refers to the
time after the incident of Saqifah and the early Caliphate. A little
attention is enough to reach to the said conclusion. Hypocrites are
meant here not *Murtads.* It corresponds to the time when Ali had not
isolated himself. He was after an armed uprising to take his usurped
right.

It was exactly when Ali sensed the danger of people turning their back
upon Islam*.* He felt the danger of Islam’s annihilation. It is the same
meaning in which Allamah Majlisi has said that the Imam assumed silence.
And the words: “I saw ruin and destruction of Islam more terrible than
losing authority over your affairs.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari Imami: *Al-Mustarshid,* Pg. 412 (Mahmoodi Edition)  
 **[2]** Thaqafi Kufi: *Al-Ghaaraat* (with Preface and Notes by Meer
Jalaluddin Muhaddith Armawi), Vol. 1, Pg. 306

**Therefore:**

So the *Bay’at* which is the theme of this letter on the ground of Arabs
*Murtad* is fabricated.

Sunni historians have a very strong inclination to pose the *Bay’at* of
free choice as linked to the issue of *Murtad* which is false and
lacking veracity and this has led to interpolation in the letter to
their advantage.

**The alterations were as follows:**

**Supposition A)** The words: “So I went to Abu Bakr and did *Bay’at*
with him” are added in the original letter to so that it will support
the false narrations of Ahle Sunnat in this matter.

**Supposition B)** The words: “I saw that as I had not given *Bay’at*
people refrained from campaign, so I went to Abu Bakr” are added to the
original letter so that people may began to think on the lines of a
*Bay’at* done willingly and accept the claims of historians like
Balazari.

These additions in the contents can give three dimensions to the sense
of “I co-operated with him.” This phrase exists in the narration of
Tabari Imami in a sense of ‘ceasefire’. It was later changed to
*Bay’at.* There are several possibilities in it.

The ups and downs of the letter do not carry any reference to incidents
of Arabs becoming *Murtad* or *Bay’at* at free choice which is the
subject of Sunni claim. It seems to be of the early days of usurpation
of Caliphate from Ali. In those days, Ali went into isolation. Those
days were very hard and difficult for Ali.

### Result 2

Supposing this letter was at the time of *Murtad* issue, the phrase: “I
did *Bay’at”* is conjecture of the narrator**[1]** or it was added
later.

### Result 3

If we suppose the correctness of the whole text of this letter and the
correctness of the phrase: “So I gave *Bay’at* to him”, the phrase of
“So I feared that if I do not help Islam…” which is common**[2]** in all
narrations, will makes it ‘a *Bay’at* for show, which is invalid’; still
they claim:

“His Eminence (a.s.) did Bay’at at his free will.”**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It denotes a phrase of marginal notes inserted into the actual
text.  
**[2]** Quoted from: *Al-Mustarshid,* this statement is also worth
noting: If I had not done so, Islam would have been destroyed.  
**[3]** Muhammad Barfi: Article quoted in *Collected Papers of
International Conference on Imam Ali,* Vol. 2, Pg. 49

On the margin of scrutiny of the letter of Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
-----------------------------------------------------------------

If we treat this letter in accordance with the narration of Balazari,
the analysis previously done becomes applicable here too. As a result:

The *Bay’at* mentioned in this letter is of show without reality. It is
nothing more than a handshake, so it is devoid of any effect or
reliability.**[1]**

In fact with reference to this letter the event that ensued should be
named as “Show of *Bay’at* which is basically invalid”.

Third standard: Scrutiny of Narrations about the secret meeting of Ali with Abu Bakr
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Narration No. 1

“It is mentioned in Tarikh Tabari**[2]** that a man told Zuhri: Is it
not that Ali did not do Bay’at with Abu Bakr until six months? Zuhri
said: Not only Ali, but no one among Bani Hashim did Bay’at until Ali
did. Because when Ali saw that people were not inclined to have him as
their Caliph he was compelled to compromise with Abu Bakr. Therefore he
sent a messenger to Abu Bakr and invited him to come for talks, but
alone. Ali did not like Umar to accompany him. He knew the roughness of
Umar and the extent of his impoliteness. Umar told Abu Bakr not to go
alone but Abu Bakr replied: No, by God, I’ll go alone to him. What do
you think they will do? Abu Bakr visited Ali all alone. He saw all the
members of Bani Hashim were around Ali. Ali got up; received Abu Bakr.
First, he (Ali) thanked and praised god. Then said: O, Abu Bakr! Your
virtues we do not deny, nor does it stand on way to do Bay’at with you.
I do not envy with what God has directed to your side. But in our view
in this affair we too have a share. You have laid hand over it. You have
withheld it from us. After this, Ali recalled his relation and close
link with the Prophet of God. Then Ali dealt in detail on things that
relate him with the Prophet. Abu Bakr was so influenced that he wept.
Ali became silent. Then Abu Bakr spoke after thanking and praising God:
I swear by God, kinship with the Prophet of God is the dearest thing to
me. I do not give preference to my own relations and kinship to that of
Prophet of God. I again swear by God that the properties that are
between you and me I have not laid possession thereon but for the sake
of good and for benefit of all. I have heard from  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Only in this instance we can say that it was show *Bayyat*
because there is no indication of force in it.  
**[2]** Tabari Shafei: *Tarikh al-Umam wal Mulook,* Vol. 2, Pg. 447

the Prophet of God: We do not leave anything for inheritance. What we
leave is charity. The progeny of Muhammad too feeds thereon. I take
refuge of God. I do not recall anything that the Prophet had done. I too
shall do it. Then Imam Ali (a.s.) said: Our rendezvous is afternoon for
Bay’at. Abu Bakr after finishing prayers faced the people and narrated
the conversation between him and Ali. Then Ali got up. He spoke to the
people about the greatness of Abu Bakr and his right. Then he went
towards Abu Bakr and did Bay’at with him.

Then people gathered around Ali and appreciated him for what he had
done. This narration is quoted by Tabari on the authority of
Ayesha.”!**[1]**

### Narration No. 2

Ibne Qutaibah Dinawari in his book, *Al-Imamah was-Siyasah* has given
another version of the special meeting of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) with
Abu Bakr.

“Then Abu Bakr went to the Prophet’s mosque and faced the people then he
excused Ali for not giving Bay’at to him.

After that Ali got up and praised his station and extolled his greatness
and precedence. After this he went to Abu Bakr and did the Bay’at.
People approached Ali and said: You did a good thing. After the matter
of Abu Bakr’s Bay’at ended he used to tell the people for three days: I
left you free for my Bay’at. Is anyone you displeased with it?

Ali stood up before the people and said: By God! We have not appointed
you as our leader and chief. It is the Prophet of God who has preferred
you over all of us so that our religion remains safe. Now who could drag
you behind for the sake of our world?”!**[2]**

**Each points of this event is astonishing and indicates the falsehood
of these two narrations**

### A) Excuse for compromise with Abu Bakr!

The Arabic word used means ‘made himself little’ or ‘vilified himself’.
This means Ali accepted to vilify himself to compromise with Abu Bakr.

In the two books of *Bukhari* and *Muslim* the words are: ‘he implored
to compromise with Abu Bakr and do *Bay’at.’* In a sense it is near to
the above meaning.**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Haider Ali Qalamdaran: *Shahira-e-Ittihaad,* Pgs. 20-21  
 **[2]** Ibne Qutaibah: *Al-Imamah was-Siyasah,* Vol. 1, Pg. 33  
**[3]** Bukhari: *Sahih Bukhari,* Vol. 4, Tradition no. 3913; Muslim:
*Sahih Muslim,* Tradition

### B) Testimony to the superiority of Abu Bakr!

The sentence: ‘It does not restrict us to do *Bay’at* with you, Abu Bakr
nor is it a denial of your virtues.’ is a vain allegation in open
contradiction with Sunni view of ‘Elected Caliphate’.

It is surprising why Abu Bakr in chaos of Saqifah while disputing with
Ansaar did not refer to his virtues or superior qualities.

### C) Caliphate was a bounty that God gave to Abu Bakr!

It cannot be believed that Ali (a.s.) said: ‘Caliphate was a bounty God
directed towards you (Abu Bakr).’**[1]**

### D) Accepting that inheritance of Prophet was Sadaqah!

It is meant by the words: ‘I have heard from the Prophet of God: We do
not leave anything for inheritance. What we leave is charity.’

### E) The Prophet preferred Abu Bakr to others!

As mentioned in the statement: ‘…Who can detain you for the sake of our
world?’

Deviated Consequences of Forged Narrations
------------------------------------------

1 – Interpreting and replacing the divinely ordained Caliphate of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) with precedence and replacing the Imamate that is
divinely ordained into that of Imamate by selection.

2 – Deviation in the meaning of rightfulness of Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
and change in the meaning of protests of His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) in
this regard.

3 – Separation of position of Imamate from the position of Caliphate and
separation of the holders of these offices!

4 – They not only believe but even persist on Caliphate being at the
choice of people.

5 – A wrong interpretation of Ali’s refraining from *Bay’at* with Abu
Bakr and distortion in the analysis of his aims in not doing *Bay’at*
with Abu Bakr.

6 – Finally Ali’s willingness to do *Bay’at* with Abu Bakr without any
compulsion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

no. 3304**  
[1]** If the Imam (a.s.) really had such beliefs how can we justify his
refraining from allegiance of Abu Bakr for six months and what about the
anger of Hazrat Zahra (s.a.) against the Caliphs?

7 – Giving legitimacy to Abu Bakr’s Caliphate and bringing it out of the
circle of usurpation.

8 – Excusing Abu Bakr for his perversion from religious course.

9 – Showing as though Islamic regulations were practiced in Abu Bakr’s
rule.

10 – Showing as though Abu Bakr had committed himself to follow the
conduct of the Prophet.

11 – Showing as though Ali had a belief in fitness of Abu Bakr to the
office he had usurped.**[1]**

12 – Showing as though Ali participated in the administration of the
government.

13 – Showing as though Ali compensated the shortcomings of Abu Bakr.

14 – Showing as though there lasted good relations based on good terms
with Ahle Bayt (a.s.) of the Prophet from the side of Abu Bakr.

15 – Showing as though there lasted goodwill, peace, affection and
friendship from the side of Ali towards Abu Bakr.

Thus they say:

“Imam Ali (a.s.) had another point in his view. He feared the things
would spoil and a chaos might take place if the administration falls in
incompetent hands. So he hesitated to do Bay’at for some period. He was
very much concerned that no corruption creeps in religion or belief of
people. But later Imam Ali (a.s.) saw Abu Bakr handled the matters
prudently. He was particular to keep within bounds of religion and also
particular to carry out the penalties, decrees and other religious
commitments. This satisfied Ali. At this point, he did not allow himself
to prolong his hesitation. So he finally did Bay’at.”!**[2]**

“Ali inspite of his position did Bay’at with Abu Bakr without any
coercion. First he pointed out his mistakes then drew Abu Bakr’s
attention to failings in administration. He gave legitimacy to Abu
Bakr’s Caliphate. When all the loopholes were filled, he saw no reason
to not enter into Bay’at with Abu Bakr. Later he co-operated with Abu
Bakr in running the government.”!**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Results no. 8-11 are that they begin to think that Abu Bakr had
the capability to obtain Caliphate.  
**[2]** Haider Ali Qalamdaran: *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in
Islam), Vol. 1, Pg. 169  
**[3]** Ibid. *Shahira-e-Ittihaad,* Pg. 292

This shows how elevated the position of Ali was. In fact, Ali occupied
the highest rank. His position was greater than Caliphate. He invited
Abu Bakr to his house. Abu Bakr repeatedly acknowledged the superiority
of Ali and verbally and practically extolled the greatness of Ali. Ali
too frankly said:

“We do not deny your bright past nor do we deny your virtues.”

“We are not rivals to you in your Caliphate. We do not envy you. Bay’at
was withheld for this reason that Imam Ali (a.s.) because of his
position as Imam and a guardian should have been consulted.

But when Abu Bakr swore that he endears the link with the Prophet more
than his own relatives and kinship and commits himself to follow the
footsteps of Prophet, Ali said to him: Tomorrow for Bay’at our
rendezvous is the mosque.”!**[1]**

“There is no crime greater than that there be accord between the Imam
and Caliph but discord among the people.”!**[2]**

What does history say?
----------------------

We need not go after a proof or testimony. The falsehoods are obvious
and evident in both the narrations of Tabari and Ibne Qutaibah. We
suffice only with the statement of the Second Caliph to Ali and Abbas,
the Prophet’s uncle.

It is a confession of Umar in the presence of Uthman, Abdur Rahman bin
Auf, Zubair and Saad bin Abi Waqqas.**[3]** The falsehood of above
narrations is proved at once.

### Document No. 1

This document is recorded and mentioned in *Sahih Muslim* one of the
most reputed and reliable sources among Sunni sect. In this document
Umar bin Khattab says:

“The Prophet passed away. Abu Bakr said: I am the (wali)
successor**[4]** of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) in your
leadership.

You two (Abbas and Ali) came to demand your inheritance. You (Abbas)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdul Kareem Bi-Aazaar Shirazi: *Seemai Imam-e-Muttaqeen,*
(Portrait of the Imam of the Pious), Vol. 5, Pgs. 21-22  
**[2]** Ibid. *Hambastigi-e-Mazaahib-e-Islami* (2<sup>nd</sup> Edition),
Pg. 255  
**[3]** At the beginning of the narration it is mentioned that these
people were present.  
**[4]** [It is interesting that Abu Bakr uses the word of Wali for his
Caliphate but Sunnis take it in the meaning of friend!]

demanded inheritance of your nephew and you (Ali) inheritance of your
wife from her father.

Then Abu Bakr said: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: We are not
inherited. What we leave is charity.

But you accused him to be a liar, a sinner, a cheater and a
betrayer.”**[1]**

Even if Imam Ali (a.s.) had accepted one of these things for Abu Bakr
was it proper for him to praise him before the people?

### Document No. 2

Indeed even if claims of Bukhari, Tabari and Ibne Qutaibah regarding the
issue of *Bay’at* of free choice and the conversation of Ali with Abu
Bakr and his words – all this were also true, why did Ali in the
six-person committee openly reject the condition put forward by Ibne Auf
that made it compulsory to follow the conduct of two Caliphs? Ali openly
refused to follow the footsteps of Abu Bakr and Umar and put to question
the legality of their Caliphate.**[2]**

Similarly, there are other historical documents that Imam Ali (a.s.) did
not do *Bay’at* with Abu Bakr after Zahra’s martyrdom. Because as it is
said:

The term *Bay’at* carries a distinct sense in Islam. It makes some
matters necessary for one who enters into *Bay’at*.

On the basis of this foresight of Umar bin Khattab and Amr Aas about the
reactions of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that it would be at least a
ceasefire between His Eminence (a.s.) and Abu Bakr and Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) will only give up his dispute with Abu Bakr.**[3]**

### Document No. 3

Abu Bakr says to Umar in consultation:

“I plan to send Ali to the battle against Kinda and Hadhramaut (in
Yemen) as I am aware of his courage, bravery and virtues. He is a man of
Justice. So a majority of people would be pleased with him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muslim bin Hajjaj Nishapuri: *Sahih Muslim,* Tradition no.
3302  
 **[2]** Refer: Ibne Qutaibah: *Al-Imamah was-Siyasah,* Vol. 1, Pg. 26;
Ibne Abil Hadeed: *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,* Vol. 1, Pg. 188; Yaqoobi:
*Tarikh,* Vol. 2, Pg. 162; Balazari: *Ansaab al-Ashraaf,* Vol. 5, Pg.
22  
 **[3]** Most of Ahle Sunnat sources mention that the role of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) in this matter was giving counsel with regard to the
battle of Zilqissa (Ref: Ibne Kathir: *Al-Bidaya wan Nihaya,* Vol. 6,
Pg. 315)

Umar agreed and confirmed the qualities, which Abu Bakr attributed to
Ali but said: I am afraid Ali would not agree**[1]** and if he refused
no one would show any inclination to go to war except by force.**[2]**

Therefore I suggest that Ali remains in Medina and the Caliph benefits
from his consultation while Akrama bin Abi Jahl can go to fight.

Abu Bakr agreed to Umar’s proposal.”**[3]** “Ali did not go to fight
their battles since neither he considered their Caliphate illegitimate
not the Kinda people apostates but the Caliph and his advisors feared in
this matter and delegated Akrama to the battle.”**[4]**

### Document No. 4

Abu Bakr summoned Amr Aas and asked his opinion how to utilize the
services of Ali in suppressing Tolaiha.

“Amr said: Ali will not obey your order.”**[5]**

**In conclusion, it can be said:**

These two documents clearly indicate that *Bay’at* which took place was
not at a free choice nor it was done willingly and nor it was in
relation to *Murtad* Arabs otherwise Ali (a.s.) would have accepted the
command of the Caliph’s army and obeyed his orders.

Final conclusion about Bay’at by choice as Sunnis claim
-------------------------------------------------------

**A)** From all investigations in this regard it can be concluded that
except for the attack on Zahra’s house no other efforts were made by the
Caliph to take allegiance from Ali (a.s.). Still with every leniency we
can say:

Ali performed something similar to *Bay’at.**[6]*** This also he did to
save Islam within a limited framework.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [The aim of the regime in sending Uthman to Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) must also be in pursuit of this same point.]  
**[2]** [Such refusals clearly show absence of *Bayyat*]  
**[3]** Ali Gholami Dahqi: *Janghai Irtdidat wa Bohran
Janasheeni-e-Payambar,* Pg. 116; quoting from: Waqidi: *Kitab ar-Ridda,*
Pgs. 197-198; Ibne Athim: *Al-Futuh,* Vol. 1, Pg. 57  
**[4]** Ibid. Pg. 117  
**[5]** Ibid. Pg. 117; quoting from: Yaqoobi: *Tarikh Yaqoobi,* Vol. 2,
Pg. 129  
 **[6]** Shaykh Tusi (q.s.) remarks: “Can anyone whose door is burned
upon him has any other choice than giving *Bayyat*?” (Shaykh Tusi:
*Talkhees Ash-Shafi,* Vol. 3, Pg. 76)

Imam Ali (a.s.) about his attitude says:

“People did Bay’at with Abu Bakr while (by Allah) I was more superior to
him and deserving of it.**[1]** So I too obeyed**[2]** fearing the
people would return to infidelity. Some would cut throat of some by
sword. After Abu Bakr Bay’at was given to Umar [and he was made Caliph]
while (by God) I was more deserving**[3]** than he to it. But I feared
people might become infidels.”<sup>(**[4]**)(**[5]**)</sup>

**B)** All narrations, which take root from various and several sources,
are dubious and not certain. They are rife with signs of falsehood and
deviation. In such a way that it can be said:

The aim of spreading these narrations is to veil the shameful deeds and
attack on Zahra’s house to take *Bay’at* from His Eminence (a.s.) in the
initial period of the usurped Caliphate of Abu Bakr.

**C)** If we pay attention to the conditions under which *Bay’at* of Ali
was, it would be clear that it was invalid from religious viewpoint.

**D)** Analysis of events after passing away of Prophet rescinds the use
of the word *Bay’at* even if it were concomitant with its conditions.
The sense by terms of such ‘silence’ or ‘not campaigning by sword’ do
not convey the meaning of *Bay’at.* Therefore it would be better to use
them instead of *Bay’at*.

**E)** In the analysis of events after the martyrdom of Hazrat Zahra
(s.a.) – supposedly accepting the historical documents – it could only
be called a *Bay’at* of show and hence invalid from the legal point of
view.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [The right of Caliphate was restricted to me.]  
**[2]** [It implies second obedience.Second obedience is obeying kings
and rulers whose obedience is not divinely ordained and they have
occupied the seat of power by force. The Almighty Allah has allowed
their obedience for Amirul Momineen (a.s.) because it was necessary for
security of religion and preventing people from turning back from Islam.
(Ref: Muhammad Biyabani Iskoi, *Marefat-e-Imam,* Pgs. 22-23)]  
**[3]** [The right of Caliphate was restricted to me.]  
**[4]** Khwarizmi: *Manaqib,* Section 19, Pg. 313; Juwaini: *Faraidus
Simatain,* Vol. 1, Pg. 320, No. 251; Ibne Asakir: *Tarikh Madina
Damishq,* Vol. 42, Pg. 434; Dhahabi: *Mizan al-Etedaal,* Vol. 1, Pg.
442; Asqalani: *Lisanul Mizan,* Vol. 2, Pg. 156; Muttaqi Hindi: *Kanzul
Ummal,* Vol. 5, Pg. 724  
 **[5]** Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was forced to give up armed resistance
as he feared the apostasy of Ummah and destruction of Islam.
