Discourse Twosunni-inclined Interpretations of Imamate and Wilayat
==================================================================

**According to the belief of seekers of revision in Shia Faith:**

**Imamate and *Wilayat* is in the meaning of rulership!**

Those who are after revision in Shia beliefs**[1]** are easily entrapped
in deviated beliefs. It could be due to their inclination to discussions
related to Islamic government. They are prey of this perverted belief of
chosen Caliphate.

The first particularity of the system of ‘chosen Caliphate’ has
enchanted**[2]** these open-minded ones or seekers of revision in
belief. They have fallen prey to consider the subject of Imamate and
*Wilayat* unimportant in relation to rulership.

According to this all traditions, Quranic verses and signs related to
the subject of Imamate and *Wilayat* have become an object of moral
deviation and perversion, which is, of course detrimental and very much
harmful. It has a direct bearing on government.

Thus it is claimed:

“In the pristine faith of Islam the subject of Imamate concerns only
government affairs and administration of political and social affairs
and issues of Ummah.”!**[3]**

“Imamate means leadership and to run the political affairs of Islamic
Ummah.”!**[4]**

“The executive of Islamic orders applies to Waliul Amr (possessor of
affairs).”!**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer: Rasool Ja’faryan: *Jaryaanha wa Saazmaanhai Mazhabi –
Siyasi Iran,* Pgs. 350-377  
**[2]** This enchantment has put a big question mark over their
originality and sincerity.  
 **[3]** Haider Ali Qalamdaran: *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in
Islam), Vol. 1, Pg. 52  
**[4]** Ibid. *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in Islam), Vol. 1, Pg.
51  
 **[5]** Sayyid Asadullah Meer Islami Kharqani: *Raah-e-Tajdeed-e-Azmat
O Qudrat-e-Islami* (Way to renovate the glory and power of Islam)
(Preface by Sayyid Mahmood Taliqani), Pg. 101

“If an Islamic ruler carries out an Islamic order or commandment he is
called Waliul Amr.”!**[1]**

“In Quran Waliul Amr is mentioned which gains meaning in the domain of
government!”

“In Islamic literature, the word Imam is mentioned repeatedly. It is
used in a sense of chief of government. His duties have been discussed
repeatedly.”!**[2]**

“The dispute between Shia and Sunni since centuries is on the issue of
government.”!**[3]**

**According to the belief of seekers of revision in Shia Faith:**

***Wilayat* and Imamate is rulership and an elected post**

These advocates of revision in beliefs of Shia are strongly inclined
that Ummah must be present in field of Islamic government, which is the
second deviation of this group.

Thus it is claimed:

“Wilayat and rulership that is surrendered by people to an administrator
if it carries Islamic conditions, it will be a divine government and it
will be called an Islamic government as well as a popular one….”!**[4]**

Their superficial understanding about elected Caliphate and elected
nature of government is the real cause of their deviation.

As said in preceding pages the theory of selection goes beyond the issue
of Imamate and Caliphate and becomes a common field without any divine
sanction.**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. *Raah-e-Tajdeed-e-Azmat O Qudrat-e-Islami* (Way to
renovate the glory and power of Islam) (Preface by Sayyid Mahmood
Taliqani), Pg. 101  
**[2]** Mustafa Husaini Tabatabai: *Hukumat-e-Deeni O Hukumat-e-Mardumi*
(Government of religion and Government of people), Pg. 1-2  
 **[3]** Ibid. *Hukumat-e-Deeni O Hukumat-e-Mardumi* (Government of
religion and Government of people), Pg. 2  
**[4]** Nimatullah Salihi Najafabadi: *Hukumat-e-Salihaan* (Government
of the Righteous), Pg. 75  
**[5]** Refer to introduction of Ibne Khaldun and Abul Hasan Ashari.

Choice is a deceptive word used only to avoid or overshadow its being a
divine office. This term is utilized in the issue of Caliphate and
Imamate to attract the attention of revision-seekers or the so-called
modern open minded youths. Then it can be easily claimed:

“The choice of government after the Prophet does not lie in the hands of
Prophet. But it lies in hands of people to choose whomever they
like.”**[1]**

“To choose or to select an Imam is only the right of Ummah.”**[2]**

“Chief Executive of Muslims is a chosen one.”**[3]**

“To choose a Waliul Amr is a determined certainty of all Muslims which
is unchangeable.”**[4]**

“The responsibility of installing the government of Quran is an
obligation on all Muslims. The ruler of Muslims is chosen from among the
masses themselves.”**[5]**

“The issue of Caliphate, Imamate and appointment of a chief is in the
hands of people.”**[6]**

“It is the people who give Wilayat to whoever they desire in an open
environment of freedom. It is the people who give entity and reality to
his rule. These are powers of the masses which furnish reality to
Wilayat and authority of Imam.”**[7]**

“A man chosen by people has the right to govern the people.”**[8]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Haider Ali Qalamdaran: *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in
Islam), Vol. 1, Pg. 129  
**[2]** Ibid. *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in Islam), Vol. 1, Pg.
128  
 **[3]** Sayyid Asadullah Meer Islami Kharqani: *Raah-e-Tajdeed-e-Azmat
O Qudrat-e-Islami* (Way to renovate the glory and power of Islam)
(Preface by Sayyid Mahmood Taliqani), Pg. 38  
**[4]** Ibid. *Raah-e-Tajdeed-e-Azmat O Qudrat-e-Islami* (Way to
renovate the glory and power of Islam) (Preface by Sayyid Mahmood
Taliqani), Pg. 290  
 **[5]** Mustafa Husaini Tabatabai: Article quoted in the book
*Deen-O-Hukumat* (Religion and Rulership), Pg. 574  
 **[6]** Husain Ali Montazeri: *Mubaani-e-Fiqhi Hukumat-e-Islami*
(Translated by Mahmood Salawati) (Sources of Islamic jurisprudence in
Islamic Government), Vol. 2, Section 4. Proof of the wrong of the
caliphate elected by people, Pg. 299  
**[7]** Nimatullah Salihi Najafabadi: *Hukumat-e-Salihaan* (Government
of the Righteous), Pgs. 68-69  
 **[8]** Ibid. *Hukumat-e-Salihaan* (Government of the Righteous), Pg.
200

“Islam has vested rulership and authority to the masses
themselves.”**[1]**

**According to the belief of seekers of revision in Shia Faith:**

**Only ways of installing Imamate and *Wilayat* (Rulership) are
consultation and *Bay’at***

The view that consultation and *Bay’at* are correct ways has exercised
great influence on minds of seekers of revision in Shia beliefs. To
think so is a particularity of the system of the thought of ‘chosen
Caliphate’.

In the preceding discussion, it was indicated that in the system of
conjecture of ‘chosen Caliphate’ in reality consultation and *Bay’at*
have a very narrow and tight domain. But the simple-minded people do not
detect this and are easily dominated by false allegations and
window-dressing, because there are several other ways to install a
Caliphate.

In other words, those who have laid the foundation of ‘chosen Caliphate’
do not treat *Bay’at* and consultation as the only way to establish
Caliphate. Furthermore, they do not consider it necessary for each and
every individual of Ummah to have a say in choosing the Caliph. The
founders of chosen Caliphate have made the job for themselves easy.
Since the beginning they were particular to clear the way and avoid
setbacks and hindrances.

The close inclination to *Bay’at* and consultation has caused this group
of revision-seekers to persist on this principle as the only way to
establish Imamate and *Wilayat*. They want to purge the beliefs of
founders of theory of chosen Caliphate, although it is an attraction to
them. Yet they criticize the system of Sunni thought**[2]** that why
they go after other ways and means and leave aside the way of
consultation.

They have the following claim:

“The Sunni Sect has gone against Divine commands and traditions of the
Prophet with regard to Caliphate and Caliph. They do not follow the
conditions which exist in own books including the reputed Sahih Bukhari
and Sahih of Muslim. The qualities of Caliph are stated therein. But in
practice they did not exercise these conditions.”**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdul Ali Bazargan: *Shura-O-Bayat* (Consultation and
Allegiance), Pg. 69  
**[2]** The system of thoughts of Ahle Sunnat is the real founder of the
view of ‘Elected Caliphate’.  
**[3]** Haider Ali Qalamdaran: *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in
Islam), Vol. 1, Pg. 135

“If they refer to their own books and traditions, they could see what is
required in the personality of the Caliph. But the thing is they have
overlooked these facts.”**[1]**

“Almost all Islamic sects have gone astray with regard to issue of
Caliphate. The Quranic verse of Ulil Amr was forgotten from the first
day. It was rightful to have these two verses of Ulil Amr as touchstones
after the Prophet’s passing away. Each one of companions was an object
of this verse and was suitable to be a Caliph. Such a practice would
have lasted until the Days of Judgment. Caliphate would have been a
Quranic one.”**[2]**

Rulership of Muslims is selection according to the command of Quran! One
whose qualities are specified by Quran…Muslims must choose as their
Executive since it is enjoined by Quran.

So since the era of Muawiyah upto now all leaders of Islam were chosen
against Quranic standards.”**[3]**

It is misunderstanding the meaning of chosen Caliphate that impelled
revision-seekers to purge the beliefs of Sunni outlook on this issue.
And they limited their criticism to Sunnis only to this subject.

While what they criticize is coherent with the thought of chosen
Caliphate. Contrary to their imagination, the Sunni Sect is not lacking
anything in the issue of Imamate and Caliphate. They do their job
without *Bay’at* and consultation.

On the whole, it can be said:

Wrong conclusions about conjecture of chosen Caliphate have resulted in
a belief that there is no way other than *Bay’at* and consultation to
appoint a Caliph. Therefore they say:

“The real issue of Caliphate according to traditions and Quran is based
on consultation and choice.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in Islam), Vol. 1, Pg.
136  
 **[2]** Sayyid Asadullah Meer Islami Kharqani: *Raah-e-Tajdeed-e-Azmat
O Qudrat-e-Islami* (Way to renovate the glory and power of Islam)
(Preface by Sayyid Mahmood Taliqani), Pg. 42  
**[3]** Ibid. *Raah-e-Tajdeed-e-Azmat O Qudrat-e-Islami* (Way to
renovate the glory and power of Islam) (Preface by Sayyid Mahmood
Taliqani), Pg. 101  
**[4]** Haider Ali Qalamdaran: *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in
Islam), Vol. 1, Pg. 121

“The matter of rulership in Islam is through consultation and
selection.”**[1]**

While the system of Imamate and Caliphate (rulership) is so designed
that no criticism applies thereon because the thought in Sunni
conjecture is based on choice.

The revision-seekers regard *Bay’at* and consultation as the only way to
fix Imamate and *Wilayat*. They emphasize on it too much.

This group in the end justifies all other ways of forming Caliphate
(rulership) and they further say:

“Domination over masses by means of force or succession or Bay’at by
only a few people is not ground of governorship. If it does not secure
the satisfaction of all, it would be short of validity. If it is
supported by agreement of all it is a valid choice.”**[2]**

**According to the belief of seekers of revision in Shia Faith:**

**Consultation and *Bay’at* is source of legitimacy of Imamate and
*Wilayat***

Misunderstanding of this group regarding view of chosen Caliphate is the
cause for considering *Bay’at* and consultation to be the only ways to
form Caliphate and Islamic government. But they have gone even farther.
They think that *Bay’at* and consultation is the means to give
legitimacy to the chosen Caliphate.

Thus it is said:

“Discussion is how to establish the system of Wilayat and Imamate. It
would not attain popularity through means of Bay’at and
consultation.”**[3]**

“A head of government must be chosen through consultation and public
opinion. The Holy Quran refers to this as a legitimate way. It further
lays stress on the necessity of its practice in absence of the
Prophet.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in Islam), Vol. 1, Pg.
111  
 **[2]** Husain Ali Montazeri: *Mubaani-e-Fiqhi Hukumat-e-Islami*
(Translated by Mahmood Salawati) (Sources of Islamic jurisprudence in
Islamic Government), Vol. 2, Pgs. 190-191  
**[3]** Abdul Ali Bazargan: *Shura-O-Bayat* (Consultation and
Allegiance), Pg. 18  
**[4]** Mustafa Husaini Tabatabai: *Hukumat-e-Deeni O Hukumat-e-Mardumi*
(Government of religion and Government of people), Pg. 5

“The principle of consultation in Islam is an absolute principle. If the
government happens to lack this principle, it will not be
legitimate.”**[1]**

“If people choose a man of their choice by consultation with Imam or a
guardian to administer affairs of Islamic government it will please
God.”**[2]**

“Bay’at is a right of leader on the masses. This gives legitimacy to
government. A governor or a ruler has no command on the people and
people too have no obligation to obey him.”**[3]**

“As long as people have not done Bay’at with him they are not obliged to
obey him. But as soon as they do Bay’at with him his rule becomes
legitimate and obedience becomes a religious duty on them.”**[4]**

“Rightfulness of Islamic government comes to light when the people have
entered into Bay’at with it.”**[5]**

All this is borrowed from belief of Sunni Sect about the issue of
Imamate of selection. As a matter of fact, the chosen Caliphate on the
basis of *Bay’at* and consultation has quite a different dimension with
Sunnis. But revision-seekers are unaware of it.

To explain further:

Founders of ‘chosen Caliphate’ believe in its substitute or transferring
it to another. This is against Quranic verse and Divine appointment as
is the belief of Shia Imamiyah Sect. Sunni belief is briefed in this:

God has allotted a right to people to choose an Imam for themselves to
administer their affairs and govern the society.

To prove their belief that God has sanctioned them to choose an Imam
they follow several ways. One of the important ways is *Bay’at* and
consultation. According to them it has an important place in Islam.

In other words, founders of chosen Caliphate believe its legitimacy lies
in substitution of authority. Therefore they lay much stress on
consultation and *Bay’at* because they think it a correct one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Guzarish Daily, Issue no. 99,
Pg. 15  
 **[2]** Abdul Kareem Bi-Aazaar Shirazi: *Seemai Imam-e-Muttaqeen,*
(Portrait of the Imam of the Pious), Vol. 7, Pg. 18  
**[3]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Nahjul Balagha Magazine, Issue No.
4-5 Pg. 172  
**[4]** Ibid. Nahjul Balagha Magazine, Issue No. 4-5 Pg. 171  
**[5]** Abdul Ali Bazargan: *Shura-O-Bayat* (Consultation and
Allegiance), Pg. 98

Therefore these two elements, consultation and *Bay’at* are to them one
of several ways to appoint Caliphate. They bring it forward as the
origin of legitimacy. This is the only proof with them towards
correctness of theory of transferring the authority.

In other words they regard consultation and *Bay’at* as the only
important sign, which gives them the right of choosing a Caliph for the
Ummah. They think this is the route through which they can obtain
legitimacy for Caliphate. Caliphate to them is not a divine appointment.
After all this dispute and argument, they do not bind themselves to any
particular method because they think they have established legitimacy to
it. They argue:

**“The nature and characteristic of system of chosen Imamate and
Caliphate lose importance of its means when the government is
established.**

**Revision-seekers think consultation and *Bay’at* to be the only means
to frame Imamate and *Wilayat*.**

The above perverted outlook is a reason why revision-seekers exert their
efforts to find ways and means to carry out *Bay’at* and consultation
towards establishment of government. To set aside the difficulties and
setbacks that hinder execution of this design they should borrow the
services of those who tie and untie as is the system in Sunni Sect.

It is neither practicable nor possible for each individual of the Ummah
to participate in choosing an Imam. The revision-seekers cannot conceal
every age and every occasion in history.

**The situation of some endeavors is as follows:**

### The first stage

“It is natural that all individuals can participate directly in the
first stage and choose a ruler for their society, which is most
necessary and important. Or to seek their opinion individually too is
not possible.

What is possible and practicable is that a few among the Ummah choose a
person. Masses too agree with the choice. Then the masses do Bay’at with
him. So a government is formed.”!**[1]**

“Between consultation and Bay’at, there is a difference in meaning. Imam
and administrator of Islamic society must be a reputed person in
addition to his being popular and most popular among majority of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdul Ali Bazargan: *Shura-O-Bayat* (Consultation and
Allegiance), Pg. 135

people. Bay’at does not mean that all people know the candidate.
Consultation has a direct bearing on those who distinguish the
people.”**[1]**

“In the system of consultation the experts, the scholars and persons in
charge, who themselves are representatives and confederates of people;
choose a man having ability and competency for the job. They select him
for Guardianship (Wilayat Amr) of society. Then the masses (in case of
acceptance) do Bay’at with him. This is the same system of majority.
This system through two stages provides popularity and legitimacy to the
Islamic government.”!**[2]**

### The second stage

“Some have stressed that those who tie and untie should fix a head of
the government of Muslims. This right does not apply to all Muslims.
Here this much could be debated. First, if the body of those who tie and
untie is chosen by Muslims masses then all people share in political
matters. The only difference is that the ruler is appointed in two
stages instead of one.

Secondly, the appointment of the ruler by those who tie and untie is an
ephemeral job not a permanent one. As there is no way for presence of
masses to choose a ruler the persons who tie and untie should give
importance to this job. This is applied only when it is not possible to
collect popular opinion.”!**[3]**

Perverted Repercussions of this Conjecture on the subject of Alawi Government
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

### First wrong result

The sense of *Bay’at* is changed into a vote of confidence and
legitimacy to one with whom *Bay’at* is done.

Thus it is said:

“Bay’at is in the sense of opinion of trust, selection and formalization
of someone as a leader to whom Bay’at has been given.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. *Shura-O-Bayat* (Consultation and Allegiance), Pg. 141  
 **[2]** Ibid. *Shura-O-Bayat* (Consultation and Allegiance), Pg. 19  
 **[3]** Mustafa Husaini Tabatabai: *Hukumat-e-Deeni O
Hukumat-e-Mardumi* (Government of religion and Government of people),
Pgs. 6-7  
 **[4]** Nimatullah Salihi Najafabadi: *Hukumat-e-Salihaan* (Government
of the Righteous), Pg. 67

It can be said:

Such a sense originated from a wrong outlook that *Bay’at* is the source
of legitimacy and legality of Imamate and *Wilayat*.

As a result:

The text of Quran and *Bay’at* become parallel to each other. They
become two pillars of equal worth and importance. Both have a part in
exercising the right of Imam Ali (a.s.).

So they say:

“One chosen by people has a right to govern them.”**[1]**

### Second wrong result

When *Bay’at* is changed to a vote of confidence and a choosing right,
and becomes equal to Verse of Quran in forming a right to frame the
Alawi government, the sense of the verse of Ghadeer too is changed from
Divine support to that of priority of Ali towards forming a government.

As a result:

In addition to this Imamate is set outside the boundary of Divine
appointment. It becomes a sort of a chosen post. Imam Ali (a.s.) too
becomes the most befitting person whom God chooses to this job. They
also say:

“Although after passing away of Prophet, Muslims had the right to frame
a consulting committee to appoint a Caliph but it was better to act on
the will of the Prophet also about the consulting committee. Was Shura
formed according to God’s command more befitting and suitable than the
Prophet? The will is a finishing touch to the consulting body and the
completing element to it.”**[2]**

“When the Prophet has cleared a matter or recommended a thing the job of
consulting body becomes simple and easy. The Prophet had wanted to lay
the religion on a foundation that it could exist and last to the last
day of the world. So the Prophet introduced to Muslims a man most
prefect, most brave, must knowledgeable and consummate one in every
tribute and in each aspect. He was Ali. The Prophet presented him to the
Ummah as a model to be his successor. The Prophet even reminded to Ummah
a few of Ali’s virtues and qualities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nimatullah Salihi Najafabadi: *Hukumat-e-Salihaan* (Government
of the Righteous), Pg. 200  
**[2]** Abdul Ali Bazargan: *Shura-O-Bayat* (Consultation and
Allegiance), Pgs. 82-83

Finally, at Ghadeer he finished the job. He raised Ali on his hands and
declared him as the Imam and Caliph and his successor after
him.”!**[1]**

### Third wrong result

When *Bay’at* changes to the meaning of a vote of confidence and goes
parallel to the Holy text of Quran and helps in creating a right to
govern in Alawi manner, the sense of legitimacy also gets changed. It
becomes the eligibility of a ruler which rests with the people to
decide.**[2]**

So it is said:

“A leader or ruler in Islam should have legitimacy as well as
acceptance. His legitimacy is judged on the standards of a serious
school.”**[3]**

“Caliphate is a common right of all. It should be vested on the basis of
consultation to a competent person.”**[4]**

“God’s and Islam’s command is to choose a more suitable man for Imamate,
Wilayat and government. People must choose as a leader one who is more
suitable than all and has moral values.”**[5]**

### Reminder

**Explaining the position of *Bay’at* in the system of divinely
appointed Imamate**

“Bay’at neither has a religious aspect nor worth in the matter of
Wilayat, obedience and holy war. It cannot be a source of legitimacy.
According to this theory, the value of Bay’at goes as far as to oblige a
Bay’at doer to obey the ruler whose Guardianship is laid upon Muslims.
The obedience too goes as far as Divine commands go, and no further.

According to this theory Bay’at does not constitute any superiority or
Guardianship of others. According to my belief, this is the highest
angle of jurisprudence in this respect.

The Prophet enjoined the people at four stations to do Bay’at with him.
First at Aqaba One, then Aqaba Two, third at the Bay’at of Rizwan and
fourth on Ghadeer Day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Haider Ali Qalamdaran: *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in
Islam), Vol. 1, Pg. 123  
**[2]** In this system of thoughts the main power lies in the Shura,
Nass only makes the matter easy.  
**[3]** Abdul Ali Bazargan: *Shura-O-Bayat* (Consultation and
Allegiance), Pg. 98  
**[4]** Haider Ali Qalamdaran: *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in
Islam), Vol. 1, Pg. 162  
**[5]** Nimatullah Salihi Najafabadi: *Hukumat-e-Salihaan* (Government
of the Righteous), Pg. 77

The first Bay’at was an invitation. The second and the last one for his
governorship and successorship and the third for holy war. According to
this, three kinds of Bayyats took place in the time of the Prophet. In
these Bayyats, there is no jurisprudential decree to make it incumbent.
But reason makes it incumbent to pay allegiance because it is demanded
by the Prophet.

Obedience to Prophet is incumbent in peace and war. It is a religious
duty.

The issue of Bay’at in Imamate and Wilayat has no jurisprudence value.
It does not give legitimacy. It is only a connection and link between
Ummah and its leader. It strengthens ties between the two.”**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ustad Muhammad Mahdi Asifi: *Waashze Maandgaaraan* (Translated
by Hasan Shanechi), Pgs. 85-86; Ibid. *Mudkhil Ilaa Daraasata Nassul
Ghadeer,* Pgs. 72-73
