Discourse One Keeping Quiet and Prohibiting Difference-creating Activities
==========================================================================

Introduction
============

It is perhaps the most simple and at the same time, most insincere
method of creating Islamic unity. It is completely based on narrations
mentioned in the first tendency. It advocates restriction from
difference- producing analyses and maintaining silence. Now at this
advanced stage, the secrets are recommended not be told.

Hence it is said:

“Now, as it is said that these are secrets of progeny of Muhammad, then
they must be kept confidential and not revealed.”**[1]**

Obviously, unity gained by negligence of knowledge will be imaginary
unity. Furthermore, the outcome can well be judged if the steps, already
suggested, are to be taken on road to Islamic unity such as:

“In controversial issues we should view afresh and anew. We should find
new ways of friendship. We should give no room to new
differences.”!**[2]**

“Many differences in our time are groundless. As such, many differences
should be forgotten and ignored. We should revise the method of debating
issues or arguments.”!**[3]**

“We must not dig graves under the sun in order to bring to life what is
dead and buried.”!**[4]**

“The subject matters that carry differences should not be discussed too
openly in meetings or gatherings held under the title of
‘unity’.!**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Article in *Collected Papers of
International Conference on Imam Ali,* (1st Edition 1381) Vol. 2, Pg.
29  
 **[2]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: *Payaam-e-Wahdat,* Pg. 135  
 **[3]** Ibid. *Payaam-e-Wahdat,* Pg. 305  
 **[4]** Sayyid Jawad Mustafavi: Article: ‘Unity in *Nahjul Balagha*’
quoted in *Kitab-e-Wahdat* (Book of Unity), Pg. 127  
 **[5]** Ibid. ‘Unity in *Nahjul Balagha’* quoted in *Kitab-e-Wahdat*,
Pg. 138

“What we say in this article can be summarized as: Muslims must not
speak about differences that existed among their own leaders fourteen
centuries ago: and more undesireable it is to speak about differences
that have happened later and are constant and current.”!**[1]**

“Narration of any matter that might hurt our Sunni brothers is
prohibited.”!**[2]**

“…There are certain matters which must be taken into consideration by
broadcasting stations, television and media collectively. Besides,
writers and speakers also must delete such matters, particularly about
the Fatimid period in gatherings. Then alone unity is possible.
Whatever, it could be, if it hurts the feelings of our Sunni brothers it
must be avoided in our public gatherings and should not be mentioned at
all. I can prove that whatever is being published in books and
newspapers and told over the pulpits in religious gatherings and over TV
and Radio is sufficient to injure the feelings of our Sunni brothers.
Hence it is prohibited.”!**[3]**

“We Muslims are not allowed to behave in a way that could endanger
Ummah’s unity: To protect a part of the Ummah or Faith – no matter if
that Faith happens to belong to Ahle Bayt of Prophet – we cannot injure
unity as a whole.”!**[4]**

“From the viewpoint of religious obligation anything that weakens Islam
and strengthens infidelity or hurts Islamic unity, as a whole, is
prohibited. It is obvious that consequent to such speeches there will
not remain any unity in the Islamic front. As such, Islam will become
weak against infidelity.”!**[5]**

Criticism and Analysis
----------------------

Ustad Ali Iraqchi Hamadani has discussed in detail in his book, *Sad
Dars Az Bahas-e-Imamat* the captioned topic. We have summarized them
below retaining the original points:

“Perhaps before a discussion on Imamate takes place it comes to mind
that in this age when Muslims are facing such terrible enemies, are such
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. ‘Unity in *Nahjul Balagha’* quoted in *Kitab-e-Wahdat*,
Pg. 144  
 **[2]** Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: Ittelaat Daily, 29<sup>th</sup>
Khordad 1379  
 **[3]** Interview published in Nida-e-Islam Magazine, Issue 4, Winter
79, Pg. 63-64  
 **[4]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: Interview in ‘Haft Aasmaan’
(Seven Skies) Magazine, Issues 9 & 10, Spring & Summer 80, Pg. 11  
 **[5]** Ibid. *Payaam-e-Wahdat* (Message of Unity), Pg. 274

discussions beneficial or not? Because the nature of this subject of
Imamate is such that it necessarily renews differences, which are
cornerstones laid immediately after the demise of Prophet. Various
animosities and several bloodsheds have occurred since then. Because of
these differences, the real enemy is neglected….as the unity of Muslims
is most important necessity and discussions on Imamate cause disunity,
for the sake of safeguarding unity, it is prudent to keep
quiet...[because] the its harm is less than the harm of disunity which
gives room to foreign influence.”**[1]**

In reply to this objection the following questions may be posed:

“Is unity and integration useful in every subject and matter? Or
subjects differ in this respect? There is no doubt that any subject if
it happens to be useful or reasonable for an Ummah, co-ordination and
co-operation becomes necessary for its achievement. On the contrary, any
subject of no benefit – its availability is not only unnecessary but
even harmful– Therefore elegance of the word ‘unity’ should not deceive
us. As such, we must keep in view the aim prior to unity. Besides, Quran
too approves unity if it be for truth and considers it harmful if it be
in a wrong direction. Furthermore, it recommends having unity if it be
for God’s sake. But it prohibits unity for the sake of wrong and
falsehood.”**[2]**

“Consequently, according to reason and Quran every man is obliged to
judge the matter first. If it is correct and right he may extend his
hand of unity towards a group. If it is otherwise he must refrain from
it. As such, unity is necessary and desirable. However the aim must
become transparent ahead of unity. Truth will cast a shadow over unity.
Now to arrive at the truth, there is no way other than a debate or
discussion which is not workable in a friendly atmosphere.”**[3]**

If we desire that the difference that appeared among Muslims immediately
after the Prophet’s passing away should disappear and vanish, we must
search for a ground to pluck it from its root.

“We ought to know the events as to what they were; or persons as to who
they were? Either events or persons are causes of difference after the
Prophet. As a result, when we lay hands upon them we must draw a line  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ali Iraqchi Hamadani: *Sad Dars az Bahas-e-Imamat* (A Hundred
Lessons on Imamate), Pgs. 9&12  
 **[2]** Ibid. Pgs. 12-13  
 **[3]** Ibid. Pg. 14

between them and Islam. In other words, we must separate them from
Islam. The reality of Islam will be obtained. Then we must be united to
preserve this reality.

It goes without saying that the issue of Imamate and leadership became
the cause of difference. After the Prophet’s passing away, a group
claimed this position and therefrom sprung the difference.

So prior to unity, a debate is necessary into this subject in order to
reach truth so that unity could be based on truth and reality. Otherwise
such a unity would be useless and impossible.”**[1]**

“Now this objection arises that: Whether it is good and sensible to be
truthful about anything in any age or not? Most probably it might be
said that to maintain silence is dictated by reason when telling the
truth and narrating facts brings unwanted consequences. Such undesired
aftermath must be avoided. Religiously too our infallible Imams have
recommended dissimulation in cases when truth becomes a cause of
mischief.**[2]** Therefore we should choose a way of protecting truth
and safeguarding reality so that truth may not be totally sacrificed.
The very prestige and entity of Muslims may not be destroyed. Instead of
such discussions, we must try to make Muslims come closer. For the sake
of protecting a greater reality we may overlook this.”**[3]**

In reply we say:

“Subjects and instances must be scrutinized case by case. If truth be
useful, it is good to speak. Else, one must resort to silence.**[4]**
But it should be understood that Imamate is a very beneficial subject.
No harm comes from it. Of course it depends on the way it is dealt so as
to not end in a fracas or foul-mouthing.”**[5]**

When one aims to reach truth through a debate or discussion, the trend
will be logic, reason, proof and never abuse or inflexibility. Such a
type of argument carries no corruption except benefits to a great
extent.”**[6]**

“In short, discussion about Imamate in an atmosphere away from  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Pg. 15  
 **[2]** Ibid. Pgs. 15-16  
 **[3]** Ibid. Pg. 18  
 **[4]** Ibid. Pg. 18  
 **[5]** Ibid. Pg. 19  
 **[6]** Ibid. Pgs. 20-21

childish bigotry and remote from abuses and vilifications has had been
beneficial in every age and in the present age also.”**[1]**

“Some short-sighted people imagine that since Shias believe Ali as
immediate successor of Prophet and Sunnis believe Abu Bakr to be the
immediate successor of the Prophet etc., so if Shias do not refer to the
issue of succession of Prophet and show respect and affection towards
the three Caliphs who preceded Ali this difference will be completely
removed. Muslim all over the world could be united and become a power
worth consideration! These people don’t know that if supposing such a
thing ever took place, the enemy will seek some other way to ignite
differences.”

Well, to reach a tangible result we have a suggestion. You separate Shia
population from Muslims. Do all other sects of Muslims have unity among
themselves although they share the same belief with regard to Caliphate?
No. They are not united. Their respective governments too are not united
with one another. Their nations too, although under the banner of Islam,
are not in one row of Islam. The gap of disunity is more pronounced
there.”**[2]**

“In fact the great block on way of unity is imperialism and imperialists
who have been active in every age in fomenting differences and keeping
alive disunity.”**[3]**

“Can these pains be assuaged by our silence regarding the right of Ali
and his sons?

While it is that all these differences, mischiefs and bloodshed have
been there only because the Shia society is loyal and devoted to the
right of Ahle Bayt of Prophet and they do not entertain any friendly
feelings towards their enemies. See how far has injustice gone! To what
extent is this ignorance?! The body of Islam and Muslims is weakened due
to shortage of blood which is the source of life in both the worlds
(this and the next). God and His Prophet have pointed out this. All
Muslim sects have narrated it. In other words, it is to be in line with
Ali and his infallible sons. We must seek their embrace to invigorate
Islam and Muslims. We cannot act like those in the guise of
open-mindedness and waste this minimum blood resulting in collapse of
Islam, only for the sake  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Quoted from same source Pg. 21  
 **[2]** Ibid. Pgs. 22-23  
 **[3]** Ibid. Pg. 22

of unity and attaining power and pomposity.”**[1]**

Those who claim unity desire Shias to give up their particular beliefs.
Of course they are after their own interests. However they ignore the
fact that the enemy will anyway persist in his task through some other
means so that differences remain.

“In any case, the issue of Imamate if argued on basis of reason and
evidence; will result in unity not disintegration.”**[2]**

“Because in this discussion, we shall cover beliefs particular to each
of the two parties referring to original Islamic sources that is Quran
and authentic traditions; unveil truth and bring to fore the divine rope
of rescue. Then all will together hold the hand of unity under the rich
shadow of truth. The glory and greatness gone long ago will be regained
by crushing foreign enemies and their associates by means of oneness and
sacrifice. Indeed, such a unity will be a living one and
deep-rooted.”**[3]**

This type of discussion will give ground to:

“To discover reasons of difference through perfect scrutiny. Then to
draw a line between right and wrong. Thus to know and recognize enemies
who inserted the wrong into right by deception and cheating so that we
can boycott them and those with them and discover Islam – pure,
pristine, real and original – that the Prophet brought to us and
introduced for our practice. Such an association that will come into
being will be with knowledge and learning. Unity that will be gained
will be fruitful among Muslims and fatal to outsiders and adversaries.

In such a case, the enemy will be deprived of excuse of differences of
belief and other excuses would also become ineffective.

Because the enemy aims to gain from ignorance of people and thereby to
obtain power over them and create disunity. Knowledge and awareness are
strong walls to prevent the enemy from advancing his influence on
Muslims. And discussion on Imamate leads to awareness, knowledge,
exposing of realities and truth.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Pg. 24  
 **[2]** Ibid. Pgs. 27-28  
 **[3]** Ibid. Pgs. 26-27  
 **[4]** Ibid. Pg. 29

Through discussion on Imamate we can gain following things:

“Difference of beliefs can be repudiated. Muslims can know one another.
And unity, which is fatal to enemy, can be achieved.”**[1]**

“To mend these defects it is necessary that Muslim people from Shia and
Sunni community should come forward to form associations and programs
where debates, discussions and teaching should take place. The light of
Islam and Quran should be projected into depths of Muslim entity. We
must know that Imamate is an important and fundamental issue. Muslims
must discuss this subject since it is a cornerstone; because leadership
is one of the pillars in Islam.”**[2]**

“If Muslims are acquainted with real and original face of Islam, all
sects will come closer to one another – resulting in unity. Such a unity
that comes into being on the basis of knowledge and learning shall be
powerful and lasting. This unity can withstand foreign influences.
Knowledge can be attained through classes and debating
societies.”**[3]**

Ustad Ja’far Subhani in his analysis about the root of this type of
tendency writes:

“Sometimes it is seen that simple-minded youths have a misunderstanding
concerning unity which serves a good pretext in their hands. They try to
criticize the truth-seekers. Their claim is that discussion about Abu
Bakr’s Caliphate and Ali as to whose right it was, neither has a need
nor is it fruitful…”**[4]**

Those who harbor such opinion have neglected the bright consequences of
this discussion, and therefore they think that it is useless and a
hurdle for Islamic unity. But in our opinion it is nothing but ignorance
about philosophy of recognizing the Imam. It has no other root except in
‘Sunni obduracy’ or ‘Wahabi tendency’.

This objection can bear meaning only in the event our belief about
Imamate or Caliphate in Islam is same as that of Sunni scholars. In
other words, to consider it a worldly office or position when its
function will be to guard Islamic frontiers and strengthen defenses.
However from Shia viewpoint Imamate is constancy of Message and
continuation of divine  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. Pg. 28  
 **[2]** Ibid. Pgs. 31-32  
 **[3]** Ibid. Pg. 32  
 **[4]** [More will be said about this objection.]

bounty through the Prophet. Therefore the discussion becomes not only
necessary but obligatory about duties of Imam and it cannot be briefed
in the foregone ones. He should expound and explain important divine
regulations, the prohibited, the sanctioned; besides giving explanatory
notes on Quranic data. Imam is the only source and oracle immediately
after passing away of Prophet…

Here we see that intellectual succession of Prophet is something that
demands a thorough discussion because the relative issue is alive and it
takes to itself importance of utmost nature. It must be clarified that
the Imam is Ummah’s leader in knowledge, principles, divine commandments
and its branches. Such a station and position as that of Imam if not
completely understood, will yield no required or desired result.

…So much so if we**[1]** set aside the issue of Caliphate and overlook
issue of leadership after the Prophet that goes to an infallible person;
the issue that remains worth arguing is that of religion. Authority as
to who it is or who must it be in matters of faith or religion after the
Prophet’s passing away. This matter has an immediate bearing on
prosperity and future of Muslims as a whole.”**[2]**

The Ustad proceeds:

“There are some groups among extremists who aspire very much to
establish a united government all over Islamic territories. They have
prohibited any speech or discourse over issues of difference. They
consider it as the cause of difference. They have even gone farther
because they treat it as a factor that takes us backwards to the ages of
battles of Ottoman Caliphs and Sultans of Iran.**[3]**

We must point out to this group that the matter is not as hot as they
consider. There are debates and discussions – one differs with other.
There are discussions, which open the way to see facts. Such discussions
are far from blind bigotry. They depend only on documents, which both
parties consider authentic. Through such discussions alone is possible
to illuminate the dark spots in Islam concerning belief, traditions and
jurisprudence, etc. Does Quran not itself invite towards contemplation
and consideration on its verses?

Groups that have prohibited discussion of issues (having differences)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [It is not as a belief but continuity of the discussion.]  
 **[2]** Ustad Ja’far Subhani: *Rahbari-e-Ummat* (Leadership of the
nation), Pgs. 12-14  
 **[3]** In the Safavid period

regard the writers of such matters as provokers and instigators. They
must know as to what would be the consequences of such a theory of
theirs. A great part of Quran, the Prophet’s traditions and Islamic
history will vanish little by little into forgetfulness. No one will
recall the events nor will lift the veil to see what has happened.
Therefore matters of great importance will thus be missed and lost.

How much better it would be if we dwell upon reformation instead of
prohibiting this and that or assassination of thought. The writers
should be reminded of existing chaos of Muslims. They should perform
their job towards betterment of their position with utmost impartiality
and neutrality. They should take care not to hurt feelings of others
while they write on any of these critical issues. They should know that
their writings will be judged on the Day of Judgment and it will
constitute a part of the record of their deeds.

Briefly: Issues of belief that form the foundation of thought in every
religion carry two views, which should be explained:

1- Unity cannot last long without knowing the branch matters or issues
of difference. Unity founded on blind bigotry and without knowledge of
branches will be feeble and shaky and of short duration.

2 – Our sons should be acquainted with this school by learning and
reason because we are sure of the truth of this school – They must
refrain from imitation in matters of belief. However it becomes
necessary that these issues must be studied and taught. It is obligatory
that our school must be transferred to our successors. Otherwise all
will go by the winds and in days to come nothing will remain.

Every type of argument if handled with the method mentioned in foregone
pages it will neither be harmful nor create differences. Rather it will
be good and useful for unity. If scholars of each sect explain these
difference-bearing issues openly, honestly, and without any cheating,
most accusations, misconceptions and misunderstandings will fade away.
Only truth will remain as it is.

…We have witnessed in our life that any book if written through
conscience and based on truth and Quran without any trick or malicious
motive; has served in bringing two opposite groups closer. And the tree
of integration has borne fruits at the earliest.

…Such a book has never produced any difference.**[1]** It is remarkable
to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [Reference to Fatwa of Shaykh Shaltoot that permits following
Shia Imamiyah

point out here that the work so far done in this respect is the effect
of the cause. It is towards defending truth, logic and the reason of
Shia sect about its belief, principles and branches of its regulations.
If pretext of Islamic unity goes as far as overrunning Shia school then
no truth, no reality would have survived. Nor honor and prestige
remained for Shia.

The argument based on reason and sense with correct Islamic outlook,
purged of bigotry and foul language cannot be objected or blamed. It
brings closer the two disparate groups.”**[1]**

Therefore any discussion or argument cannot be restricted by some or
other pretext or a superfluous excuse. Islamic unity generally has
become an excuse only.

Allamah Askari writes about this in his article:

“If in the past writing the sayings of the Prophet were prohibited under
excuse of remembering Quran by heart. Today also the same is repeated
under pretext of protecting Islamic unity. They want to close the door
of learning and research. The policy is the same. However religion
demands keeping the door of learning and research open.

Don’t argue! How strange it is! How dreadful and dangerous this sentence
is. See the hurt and harm hidden therein. Is it not tantamount to say:
Don’t go after knowledge? Do not speak about the conduct of the Prophet.
In other words, do not learn these sciences. It is harmful what they are
saying under pretext of religion that one should not hold any
discussions!

Why at all should we give up argumentation and research? For the sake of
Islamic unity? Whether all these differences among Muslims, in opinions,
thoughts, religious commandments, will subside by just giving up
argumentation? How should a discussion be given up when so many made-up
traditions and altered history exists? In the face of so many
controversies in Islamic belief, Prophet’s behavior, commandments of
Quran and Islamic history that exist, argument should be set aside or it
is the need of the day?

The fact is that arguments have become a persisting essentiality to
invite debate or to publish reality for public scrutiny. After
Infallible Imams,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

school]**  
 [1]** Ustad Ja’far Subhani: *Peshwayi az Nazar-e-Islam* (Leadership in
the view of Islam), Pgs. 8-16

our (Shia) scholars have followed this path. They have sacrificed their
life. They put themselves to danger and risk. However they did not give
up disseminating true Islamic knowledge.”**[1]**

Invitation to Silence as Open-mindedness
----------------------------------------

We are invited to keep quiet and historical research and analysis is
banned. All this is done under the mask of open-mindedness. Likewise,
this statement:

“So what for are present differences between Shia and Sunni? Does it
concern election,**[2]** which took place 1380 years ago? The scrutiny
of the things is made such as to make it invalid or of no worldly
advantage to you and me. Of course it is advantageous only in the next
world when we die. It is so to say, if we carry the love of Ali in our
hearts – whose right was usurped in Saqifah – after death we will enter
heaven. While those who support the other candidates will go to
Hell…”**[3]**At a single instance they have shown Shiaism in form of
historical loves and hatreds…while it has a value for our life of today
and tomorrow or an effect on our opinions.”!**[4]**

It seems such type of viewpoint is a reflection of a deviated outlook
about Imamate.**[5]** That *Wilayat* is being compared to rulership and
all discussions about Imamate are confined to this environment.

It is expressed that:

“Usurping the Caliphate immediately after passing away of Prophet that
took place in such a way is an obvious and an open tyranny and atrocity
against reality and truth. A person who was the self and shadow of the
Prophet was deprived of power and office of administration. As a result,
Islam was deprived of the bounty of such a person. However whatever it
was; did happen. To recover the right to whomever it concerns is  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sayyid Murtuza Askari: *Hamasa-e-Ghadeer* (Collected Articles),
Pgs. 506-507  
 **[2]** [Election here means the meeting of Saqifah Bani Saada and
other candidates means Caliphs. As if it was based on election and it
made a mistake only in selecting a befitting individual.]  
 **[3]** [Regarding the exalted position of correct belief in Imamate
and its effect in gaining success and happiness in the next world refer
to the book: *Dar Justujoo-e-Ilm-e-Deen* (In search of religious
knowledge) by Ustad Sayyid Muhammad Dhiyabaadi (Pg. 131-161)  
 **[4]** Dr. Ali Shariati: *History and Study of Religions* (Collected
Writings 15) Vol. 2, Pg. 26-27  
 **[5]** Refer: Ali Labbaf, *A Victim Lost in Saqifah* Vol. 4, Section 2

impossible. To talk about it is now a hue and cry.”**[1]**

In their camp Caliphate is regarded only a worldly office, that is an
executive of an administration. In other school, it is seen through
quite a different angle, which is:

“They only consider Imamate to be in sense of leadership of society.
They say that the Prophet had installed Ali to succeed him for
leadership and guidance. And Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman came
inopportune.”

Shias are of the same caliber and there are two other issues also.
[Absolute religious point of reference and total divine Guardianship].
Either they have no belief in this or they are silent in this regard.
There are also those who acknowledge the second stage. However they have
not reached the third.”**[2]**

Ustad Ja’far Subhani replies:

“The issue of Imamate or leadership of Muslims depends on the nature of
argument. If the argument is framed: Who occupied the social and
political office of Imamate and administered after the Prophet? This
becomes a historical question. After fourteen centuries, it would not
interest the youth of present generation. Besides, it has nothing to
teach or provide any useful information. To know that person was a
matter of necessity in its age. The passage of time has made this issue
lose dignity and importance.

If the trend of argument is changed, the issue will take the real entity
to itself. In this issue, there are two things. The political and social
leadership of Islamic society after Prophet and besides this there is
another thing, which is authority in religion, its principles and its
branches. The question is who it is to administer this school after
Prophet? Who are and must be those to show or explain to the masses
God’s commandments – what is allowed and what not and so forth. They
must be of such a caliber that their word and actions must stand an
authority, an absolute – unshakeable and unalterable one until the last
Day. What they said and what they did must serve as a model to man.
Therefore from this stage the argument bears sense and carries weight.
It becomes needful to know the personage and personality of the Imam.
The nature of this issue is such that it becomes a part of life. As
such, nobody can ignore or overlook it. To know the Imam as to who and
what he  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Haider Ali Qalamdaran: *Hukoomat Dar Islam* (Government in
Islam), Vol. 1, Pg. 141  
 **[2]** Ustad Murtuza Mutahhari: *Imamat-o-Rahbari* (Imamate and
Leadership), Pg. 57

should be becomes obligatory because it is a part of religion.”**[1]**

“In Shia view the Imam holds the office, which is continuity of message
and extension of Prophethood. A matter of such an import should not be
argued. It is an issue full of life. It is obligatory to know this
station of Imam. Otherwise it will remain inconclusive…”**[2]**

Invitation to Keep Quiet as Mark of Sympathy
--------------------------------------------

There is another suspect in the margin of this very tendency, which
makes silence obligatory. That is:

“Occupation in differences has kept the youth from reaching truth and
basic principles of Islam. The spirit of faith is taken away from the
people leaving them with the name of religion only.**[3]**

Ustad Mutahhari writes while describing this type of outlook:

“The present generation of our current age is fed up of faith and less
interested in Islam as a result of discussion about Caliphate, Imamate
and unpleasant events that took place and its repetition. They are
already suffering by spiritual chaos.

Such discussions could have had desired consequences in the past. They
could even have diverted attention from one branch to another. However
in present times bringing it back to memory weakens thoughts with regard
to structure and its root. We see in other schools they always try to
hide the ugly part of their history. But on the contrary, we Muslims try
to keep it alive on narration and rather magnify it more than its actual
bulk.

We cannot concur with the above opinion.

We do acknowledge that criticism of history if it be narration alone or
a reflection of events, the effect that will be exercised will be same
as above. If the glorious side of history should be sketched and ugly or
shameful part of it overlooked, it will be deviation of history rather
than criticism or analysis. Supposing if it were customary to forget,
neglect or avoid disgraceful and ugly parts of history, what its
aftermath will be with regard to issues that concern the very gist of
Islam. What will be the fate of the issue relating to leadership of
Islamic society? To ignore such  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ustad Ja’far Subhani: *Rahbari-e-Ummat,* Pgs. 7-8  
 **[2]** Ibid. Pg. 13  
 **[3]** Abdul Kareem Bi-Azaar Shirazi: *Islam Aaine Hambastigi* (Islam,
the Constitution of Solidarity), Pg. 13

an issue tantamount to ignoring the prosperity of Muslims. Besides, if
the rights of some persons had been trespassed or taken away by force
and those persons happened to be of dignity and decorum; what will be
the case if historical facts are overlooked? It will be nothing but
called verbal and written support of oppression.”**[1]**

Invitation to Keep Quiet for Confidentiality
--------------------------------------------

Invitation towards silence on part of unity-seekers and their insistence
to avoid arguments that create differences is continuation of their same
thoughts with same aim but in a different form. We can see this if we
are mindful of the extent of its influence.

This change is a tricky one. It invites to not argue issues that create
differences, particularly Saqifah and attack on the house where divine
revelation descended, confiscation of Fadak and martyrdom of Zahra. This
time their pretext is quite different and charming too; that is secrets
should not be disclosed or made public.**[2]** Where would this end? In
a long run its end will be deviation and denial of realities, which will
be totally forgotten because of no argument whatsoever about it.

Dr. Muhammad Asadi Garmarudi writes in this respect:

“Secrets of the Prophet’s Ahle Bayt were of two categories: one: They
themselves were insistent to not disclose them. They revealed them only
to their close companions. Generally everyone had neither capacity nor
ability to accept or bear them.

The second category consists of secrets by necessity of dissimulation
and conditions of time and place. However it was not throughout history.

As such, the season for keeping secret has already passed. Therefore
ignorance about those realities will entail deprivation of bounties and
benefits of true religion. Zahra herself has pointed out in her address
to chiefs of Migrants and Helpers the mandate that rests upon their lot
to convey realities to coming generations and make them aware of
truth.”**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ustad Murtuza Mutahhari: *Imamat-o-Rahbari*, Pgs. 13-16  
 **[2]** Refer: Muhammad Jawad Hujjati Kermani: *Jam-e-Jam Daily*
10<sup>th</sup> Bahman 1379  
 **[3]** Dr. Muhammad Asadi Garmarudi: *Haqeeqat-e-Sookhte* (The Burnt
Fact), (Critical Essays on *Wahdat-e-Islami* by Muhammad Jawad Hujjati
Kermani.) Pgs. 63-64
