Discourse Two Adopt Common Things and Ignore Differences Between Islamic Sects
==============================================================================

Introduction
============

One wrong conception formed by the term ‘Islamic unity’ is to accept
what is common among Islamic faiths and leave the points of differences.

Within the folds of this conception lies a point, which must not be
ignored. It is commonly used to block the way that raises issues of Shia
belief.

In this method, we come across the same idea that necessitates silence.
It invites discourse only in matters of common beliefs. Discussion is
very much encouraged from this outlook. However the case is not the same
with regard to subject of Imamate. Therefore under pretext of Islamic
unity, the most fundamental issue particular to Shia school, which is
belief in Imamate, goes into oblivion.

It is thus declared:

“All our efforts are towards this: Religions must wipe out past from
their mentalities. Discussion should take place within framework of
logic and reason including the most sensitive issue we have, i.e.
Caliphate and Imamate…

In this said ground, discussion is possible away from sympathy with
reason. The aim must not be to remove differences, but rather to control
differences and create mutual understanding between two sides. Both
sides should be brought home to the effect that presently these
discussions do not cater to the need of Muslims. On the contrary, they
do more harm than good.”!**[1]**

Criticism and Analysis
----------------------

Ustad Murtuza Mutahhari writes concerning the erroneous results of
Islamic Unity:

“The second fault is: by raising these issues what would be the status
of Islamic unity? The thing that befell Muslims was that their glory was
snatched away from them. They were belittled and brought under  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Waizzaada Khorasani: *Nida-e-Wahdat*, Pg. 120

domination of other non-Muslim nations. Imperialism, new or old,
utilizes this tool towards igniting old differences. This has served as
a good tool all over Islamic countries without exception. For
imperialism is, in the name of religion, showing sympathy for Islam but
aiming to enlarge the gulf and deepen rancor among Muslims themselves.
Does it not suffice whatever we have suffered and endured through this
way? Should we go on again? Will not raising such designs result in
helping the aims of Imperialism?

The answer is: Unity and co-ordination forms the most essential need of
Muslims. However the old rankling rancor is mother-pain of Muslims; now
it is contagion in the world of Islam. The enemy too benefits from it
always.

It seems that the accuser has mistaken the sense of Islamic unity.

Islamic sects must overlook principles of their respective beliefs for
the sake of unity. This was not the conception of Islamic unity among
clerics and scholars of faith and open-mindedness a century ago. In
other words, it means to accept joint material of belief among sects and
to set aside the very particulars of their own belief. Such a thing is
neither reasonable nor practicable. How is it possible to ask followers
of a faith to ignore or give up certain principles, which are in belief
or practice, in his view constitutes a part of text of Islam? That is
for the sake of unity of Islam and Muslims he should turn a blind eye at
a portion from the whole of Islam in the name of Islam?

There are several other ways to make people committed to a religious
principle. The most natural one is reason and logic. People cannot be
made faithful by means of request or in the name of interests nor can
they be stripped of faith.

We ourselves are Shia. We are proud to be followers of Ahle Bayt of
Prophet. We do not consider a least thing, whether be it an appreciable
or undesired, worthy of transaction against interests. We do not
entertain any request from any in this regard. Likewise, we do not
expect from others also to give up a principle among principles of their
belief for sake of Islamic unity. To accept common elements of belief
and to repudiate particulars of a sect is a kind of transgression on
absolute consensus.**[1]** Moreover, it is not a true Islamic product.
In any case, particulars of any sect among sects of Islam are parts of
Islamic text. There cannot be Islam  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** [A new statement different from the one having consensus (Refer:
*Lughta Name Dahe Khuda,* Vol. 26, Pg. 450)]

if it happens to be devoid of these distinctions and specifications. In
usual terms, it is a difference in one party and in one single front.

Unity of a party demands that all individuals be at equity with regard
to ideology, thought, way and vogue with the exception of personal
matters.

Nevertheless, unity of a front means something different. All parties
and groups, no matter however different in their taste, ideology,
customs and norms must stand in one row against their common enemy
because of combined elements common among them. It is obvious that
arranging a row against enemy does not contradict with defending
objectives and criticizing objectives of other brothers or inviting to
their own objectives by associates of the same front. However inviting
to or supporting Islamic unity cannot bar the truth. Things that provoke
bigotry or old rancor must not take place. Scientific discussion has an
immediate bearing on reason and not on sympathy and feelings.”**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ustad Murtuza Mutahhari: *Imamat-o-Rahbari*, Pgs. 16-19
