Introduction
============

The younger generations possess pure hearts and spirits which are full
of sensations, emotions and enthusiasms. They are passing through the
most sensitive and critical period of their lives and require guidance,
support and sympathy. A young person is like a nascent sapling requiring
the loving protection of sincere, experienced and wise gardener, against
the diseases and accidents. The famous Persian poet Sa'di said:

*A young man is like an arrow; rigid, hard and straight.*

*But it requires a flexible and bending bow (which is like a wise old
man) for the arrow to hit the target.*

The cultural maturity of a society, especially the Islamic one, is
proportional to the importance to attaches towards the guidance,
training, and continuous endeavours towards its younger generations.
Notwithstanding, with the opinion of some people, in general training is
a very difficult task, especially the training of younger generations,
which is complicated and contains various delicate points. The famous
German philosopher Kant has defined the training of younger generation
and the government of a country as the most difficult tasks in the
world.

Unfortunately, in today’s industrial societies parents, because of being
surrounded by numerous mental involvements do not have the opportunity
to think or ponder about the aim and days pass by speedily. Very often
the days pass into nights; new day begin; and weeks and months pass by
without parents finding suitable occasion to indulge into serious
communications with their off springs.

Although, the problem of raising responsible, nature, conscientious, and
righteous children is a serious matter that all parents are worried
about; but how to deal with the younger generations and to establish a
friendly, rational, and logical communications with them is an art, and
naturally all of us are not skilled artists. So, the things remains
within the chests of parents awaiting for an appropriate opportunity,
which very often never arises or at least when it is already too late.

The author of the book: How to bridge? The Generations Gap, has provided
you this God-given opportunity, so keenly desired by all the parents.
The present book was first published in Persian in the year 1963, and
deals with such important topics such as The Rights of Parents. The
Child's Rights, The Responsibilities of Parents, The Teacher Rights, The
Role and Necessity of Religious, Faith, and The Hidden Treasures of the
East etc. in a simple logical manner. Then now, instead of wishing for
the right opportunity and the right time, the parents may simply present
book as a birth day gift to their children.

At this critical and sensitive juncture, when the enemies are determined
to destroy all spiritual values of dear Islam with the empty
materialistic ones; more than any other time in the past, there is a
need to build the ideal monotheistic younger generations who could
culturally and ideologically defend the fortress of Islam.

We, the Muslim parents have a duty to produce a generation who must
believe that Allah is Great; Greater than all the power of which men
might be afraid of; Greater than anybody who could dare to challenge His
created laws. They must appreciate that Allah is not only the God of his
race, his country and mankind; but also belongs to tiny creatures such
as bees and ants.

He is the Creator of stars, sun, moon, heaven, milky ways and other
galaxies. This future generation should be free from all sorts of
prejudices, narrow-mindedness, nationalism, sectarianism,
shortsightedness and should think about the domain of Islam for beyond
the narrow limited national boundaries.

They must consider themselves like a fish in the ocean of Tawheed
(Monotheism) as pro-claimed by Allamah Iqbal Lahori, fifty years ago.

The success of the Islamic movement in the near future will depend if we
could bestow upon the young generations the enlightenment regarding the
Principles, Beliefs, Monotheism, Day of Judgement, Prophethood, Imamat,
Will of Allah, Ethics, Purification of Self, Desirable Characteristics.
Forbidden Characteristics, and Social obligation etc. They should be
thoroughly familiar with the discourses of the Holy Qur'an and
narrations about Patience, Jihad, World and Hereafter.

They must be knowledgeable about the international political issues;
identify the friends and foes; be aware about the enemy onslaughts and
tactics and should know how to counteract them. We, the Muslim parents
are duty bound to make the younger generation familiar with all the key
issues facing the Islamic Ummah.

Simultaneously, we must do our utmost to produce, the younger generation
who could orient their lives with the Holy Qur'an. They must feel the
sweetness of the following verses in their own lives.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى اللَّهِ ۚ وَكَفَىٰ بِاللَّهِ وَكِيلً
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ***“And put thy trust in Allah for, Allah is sufficient as
trustee*****.*****”*****(The Holy Qur’an 33:3)**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلِ اللَّهُ مَوْلَاكُمْ ۖ وَهُوَ خَيْرُ النَّاصِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But Allah is your protection, and He is the best of
Helpers.”*****(The Holy Qur’an 3:150)**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ يَنْصُرْكُمُ اللَّهُ فَلَا غَالِبَ لَكُمْ ۖ وَإِنْ يَخْذُلْكُمْ
فَمَنْ ذَا الَّذِي يَنْصُرُكُمْ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ ۗ وَعَلَى اللَّهِ
فَلْيَتَوَكَّلِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If Allah is your helper, none can overcome you, and if He withdraw
His help from you, who is there who can help you? In Allah let believers
put their trust”*** **(The Holy Qur’an 3:160)**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يُسْلِمْ وَجْهَهُ إِلَى اللَّهِ وَهُوَ مُحْسِنٌ فَقَدِ
اسْتَمْسَكَ بِالْعُرْوَةِ الْوُثْقَىٰ ۗ وَإِلَى اللَّهِ عَاقِبَةُ
الْأُمُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whosoever surrender his purpose to Allah, while doing good, he
verily has grasped the firm hand, unto Allah belongs the sequel of All
things.”*****(The Holy Qur’an 31:22)**

May Allah bless all the present, and coming future Muslim generations to
pay heed to the wisdom of the following verses of The Holy Qur'an given
by Loqman - the wise to his son;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بُنَيَّ إِنَّهَا إِنْ تَكُ مِثْقَالَ حَبَّةٍ مِنْ خَرْدَلٍ
فَتَكُنْ فِي صَخْرَةٍ أَوْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ أَوْ فِي الْأَرْضِ يَأْتِ
بِهَا اللَّهُ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَطِيفٌ خَبِيرٌ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ***“O my son!” (said Loqman), If there be (but) the weight of a
mustard-seed and it were (within a rock, or (anywhere) in the heavens or
on earth, God will bring is forth: for God understands the finest
mysteries, (and) is well-acquainted*** ***(with them).”*** **(The Holy
Qur’an 31:16)**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بُنَيَّ أَقِمِ الصَّلَاةَ وَأْمُرْ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَانْهَ عَنِ
الْمُنْكَرِ وَاصْبِرْ عَلَىٰ مَا أَصَابَكَ ۖ إِنَّ ذَٰلِكَ مِنْ عَزْمِ
الْأُمُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O my son! establish regular prayer, enjoin what is just, and forbid
what is wrong; and bear with patient constancy whatever betide thee; for
this is firmness (of purpose) in (the conduct of) affairs.”*** **(The
Holy Qur’an 31:17)**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تُصَعِّرْ خَدَّكَ لِلنَّاسِ وَلَا تَمْشِ فِي الْأَرْضِ مَرَحًا ۖ
إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يُحِبُّ كُلَّ مُخْتَالٍ فَخُورٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And swell not they cheek (for pride) at men, nor walk in insolence
through the earth; for Allah loveth not any arrogant boaster.”*** **(The
Holy Qur’an 31:18)**

In this modern glittering age of science and technology in the present
20th century, together with the worldly education, if we could produce a
generation, who could feel the presence of Allah in their daily lives
then we as parents must thank Him for giving us the blessing of
discharging our obligations successfully.

Since completion of this translation coincides with the ***“Week of
Eight Years of Sacred*** ***Defence”*** in the Islamic Republic of Iran,
it will be be-fitting to dedicate this translation to the martyrs of the
imposed war, who scarified themselves so that the divine light of
Allah's revelations remain ignited forever. The history will bear
witness the heroic defence of the Islamic combatants who, with faith in
Allah resisted the deadly pressures of all the arrogant powers for eight
long years.

To the extent it was possible, I have tried to remain faithful to the
original text but, at some places where word by word translation in
English was not possible, efforts have been made to reflect the theme of
main text by omitting some phrases and sentences. I wish to thank all
those who have contributed to the realization of this translation,
especially, Mr. Sayyid Mohammad Taqi Hakim for proof reading the Arabic
text. Sincere thanks are due to Mr. Soulat Parviz for his diligence and
quality work in type-setting.

I convey sincere gratitude to Ayatullah Ibrahim Amini, the learned
scholar jurisprudent from the Religious Learning Center of Qom, and Mr.
Ansaryan for their valuable suggestions, guidance, and encouragement.
Finally, from the bottom of my heart, I would like to thank my friends
for editing, proof reading, and making helpful suggestions; and who out
of modesty prefer to remain discreetly in the background.

Elucidatory footnotes added by the translator are identified with (Tr.):
all other footnotes are by Mr. Hakim himself: For any errors of
commission, I take responsibility.

Sayyid Hussein Alamdar  
 September 27, 1994  
 Rabi-attani 20, 1415  
 Tehran


