The Religious Beliefs vs. Superstitions
=======================================

The Father
----------

My child! Now that you have become mature, wise and of age, instead of
honouring and respecting you parents, you are calling them ignorant, old
fashioned and superstitious! What you call superstition, they consider
religious knowledge and tradition. And they are deeply committed to
observing them. Don't you think they could be right? And couldn't what
you refer to as superstition be a set of truths that can be understood
only after comprehension and attention?

My beloved! Speak with your conscience for a moment. Think about the
things you label nonsense. See if you are not mistaken. Think hard and
apply your wisdom for analyzing your understanding regarding religious
facts. If you feel helpless, you may seek assistance from the religious
scholar. See what can you come out with? Do you find them to be
superstitious? Or are they a strong moral code based on logic, science,
and discoveries?

I bear witness in front of my conscience that if you follow this method,
and if you sincerely look into the roots and the branches of religion,
you will then believe in them in a scientific and logical manner. And
therefore while your parents were committed to their faith on the basis
of following (Taqlid) [^1] of the others, you will become Muslim in your
own capacity on the basis of enlightenment achieved by you, after a
through knowledge of the religion.

The Child
---------

The illogical statements and irrational behaviour of some people in the
name of religion make us turn away from it. The superstitions which
appear as religious facts as well as hard to believe imaginary rituals
caused us to flatly reject religion. Otherwise, most of us young people
do believe in the Islamic teachings and we look at the Holy Qur'an with
extreme respect. Further, we have no difficulty in accepting the factual
aspects of the religion.

Of course, we still need guidance in understanding of what we consider
ambiguous and unclear. We also need someone to touch our hearts with
simple but interesting explanations about our religious obligations and
to convince us of the necessity of following them.

[^1]: A Muslim must accept the fundamental principles of Islam
(Usulud-din) with reason and faith and must no follow anyone in this
respect without proof and conviction. On the divine practical laws of
Islam (ah-kamud-din) one must be either a mujtahid (authority) based on
reasoning. Or, one must be confident enough in one's ability to
cautiously judge between rulings of different mujtahids (for example: If
one mujtahid forbids an act and others do not, one must refrain from
committing that act, or if one mujtahid makes an act obligatory and
others only recommend it, one must perform that act). If one is not a
mujtahid and does not have such confidence in himself, then one must
follow a (taqlid) of a particular mujtahid and act according to his
rulings.[Tr].


