Preface
=======

The Printings of this Book
--------------------------

This book was first printed on the 10th day of Bahman, 1342 (January 30,
1964). In response to overwhelming requests for the book by the public,
the second printing soon got underway. In addition to revealing many
important truths to fathers and children, the book was also revised and
republished in Mordad of 1343 (August 1964). Minor revisions were made
in the third and fourth editions. The present work, the ninth edition,
is being published by the Daftar-e-Nashr-e Farhang-e-Islami, Tehran.

Topics of this Book
-------------------

The topics presented in this book are a series of discussions on
responsibilities of fathers and mothers towards their children and vice
versa. During these discussions, the parent's sincerity and love for
their children as well as their mutual hopes and expectations are
portrayed. There is no doubt that such topics are very important. Not
only are they not to be ignored, but should be considered as top
priorities by the caring head of every family.

The fact that youth are caught between the new and old schools of
thought (the so called generation gap) on the one hand, and that parents
are helplessly confronted with their children's new ways of thinking on
the other, are not matters to be dealt with lightly. Both generations
are troubled by these perplexities and thus ways and means by which to
find an equitable solution are greatly needed. Towards fulfilling this
important task, the present work attempts to point out the mutual
compatibilities that do exist.

The Method used in this Book
----------------------------

The subjects discussed in this book are brought out through a series of
dialogues. The fictitious characters of father and child carry on
conversations in such a frank and lively fashion that they will
undoubtedly touch the hearts of everyone. Current events and everyday
situations have been taken under consideration in this book as much as
possible. In each instance, the father and his child are engaged in
truly frank heart-to-heart discussion and exchange their thoughts quite
freely.exchange their thoughts quite freely.

The Aim
-------

The author's aim, through the writing of this book, is to help parents
and their children enjoy the best of relationships, which is also in
accordance with the divine guidance of Islam. This relationship would be
free of unpleasant encounters, there would be a recognition and respect
of mutual rights, and above all, there would be mutual love and
fulfillment of divine responsibilities. The author's aim, through the
writing of this book, is to help parents and their children enjoy the
best of relationships, which is also in accordance with the divine
guidance of Islam. This relationship would be free of unpleasant
encounters, there would be a recognition and respect of mutual rights,
and above all, there would be mutual love and fulfillment of divine
responsibilities.

For What?
---------

Generally speaking, where do differences originate? Why are relations
sometimes strained between parent and child? Why should each has his own
separate ways unconcerned with the other's feelings? And finally, if one
of them is following a righteous straight path, why not the other one
joins him? Is such a mistrust brought about because of influence of the
poisonous thoughts? Or is the environment to be blamed?

How about the differences of opinion and differences between the old and
new ideas due to misunderstandings by the former? Finally, what has
created such a wide Generation Gap? The answer is probably that any one
of more of the above causes could be responsible for child deviation and
friction with his father. But, in any case our job here is first to
identify the cause and then to offer the remedy leading to a better
understanding between them.

Countless Factors
-----------------

On the subject matter of the responsibilities of fathers and children
towards each other, child rearing. Guidance in case of deviations, and
the remedy of the differences of opinion between them, the topics are
countless. Considering different parameters, we may expand the
dimensions of our discussion and may enlarge the scope of research,
especially in the present circumstances when the sun of Islam is slowly
rising upon the horizon. In the same manner that his shining glory
brightened the land of the Arabian Peninsula, and later spread to all
distant corners of the earth, its glistening rays have engulfed our
country.

The signs of blasphemy are being rid of one after another. The Islamic
culture has come once again, out of the closet1 and is being accepted
heartily by masses of the people. The suppressed and the underdog, as
well as the oppressed and the poor, have found a new hope for the
vindication of their natural rights. In such an environment, in addition
to religious and moral questions, we are confronted with political and
social ones, each of which is worthy of research and deliberation.

Thank Allah that the policies and the course of the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran are becoming progressively clearer and the
clouds of doubt are vanishing from them. However this does not mean that
we should no longer investigate and research any problem to which we may
encounter. Of course, a detailed comprehensive discussion regarding all
the problems is out of the scope of such a brief book. Here, I have
tried to address some of the problems to the extent it was possible to
do so. Thank Allah that the policies and the course of the Government of
the Islamic Republic of Iran are becoming progressively clearer and the
clouds of doubt are vanishing from them. However this does not mean that
we should no longer investigate and research any problem to which we may
encounter. Of course, a detailed comprehensive discussion regarding all
the problems is out of the scope of such a brief book. Here, I have
tried to address some of the problems to the extent it was possible to
do so.

Encouragement and Effectiveness
-------------------------------

As soon as this book was published and reached in the hands of its
readers, many of them conveyed their thanks to the author through their
encouraging letters. More than anything else, the clarity and simplicity
of the subjects implied in this book were appreciated. And as far as I
know, these small efforts have not been ineffective as there are
individuals who have been guided by them. And therewith, many fathers
and children have replaced hard feelings and disagreements with peace
and reconciliation between themselves, returning to a pleasant normal
life.

Such is the story of one of the brothers in Islam who came one day to my
house with his old father. He then explained about their difficulties
and the fact that reading the book **“How to bridge The Generation
Gap?”** has awakened him to this mistake and that he had expressed his
apologies to his father and asked for forgiveness and reconciliation
from him. has awakened him to this mistake and that he had expressed his
apologies to his father and asked for forgiveness and reconciliation
from him.

The Rich Culture
----------------

The Islamic Culture from the standpoints of social, ethical, daily
family affairs, and human relations is a very rich one. Also, it has
contributed significantly for enrichment of other cultures in the world.
Besides the Glorious Holy Qur'an,[^1] such masterpieces as
Nahjul-Balaghah,[^2] Al-Sahifah Al-Sajjadiyyah,[^3] and other authentic
narrations Haddiths have for long offered us assistance and guidance in
finding ways to an ideal society.

In fact, they act as if they have silent, but existing, teachers hidden
between every other line throughout their pages. You shall notice a few
samples in the following pages. They are all written in the Arabic
language. It is with regret that not all of us are familiar with Arabic
to be able to take advantage of these vast Islamic treasures. One cannot
help but wonder why, in spite of all these, we are still seeking help
from non-Islamic sources.

Of course, some authors have already translated some of these works and
have offered them to the public. I am hoping that those of our learned
and knowledgeable authors who have mastered the Arabic language, and who
I am certain are well versed in these excellent culture sources; will
fulfill their responsibilities to Islam through translating them not
only into Persian but also into other languages. By doing so they may
discharge their due obligations towards dear Islam and its ideal rich
culture. Of course, some authors have already translated some of these
works and have offered them to the public. I am hoping that those of our
learned and knowledgeable authors who have mastered the Arabic language,
and who I am certain are well versed in these excellent culture sources;
will fulfill their responsibilities to Islam through translating them
not only into Persian but also into other languages. By doing so they
may discharge their due obligations towards dear Islam and its ideal
rich culture.

Why Then?
---------

Some of our readers may complain that why, in spite of such a rich
Islamic Culture and able Muslim writers, we are relying on foreign
sources. In response, I have to mention that unfortunately, due to the
extensive Western propaganda in the past, they have created a sort of
Westoxicated mentality, especially among our youth. This has made them
strongly attracted towards the Western literary works.

Therefore, it was in this background that references were made to the
quotations of some famous Western writers to attract the attention of
the West-toxicated youths. Also to bring to their attention that the
learned Western scholars have already acknowledged the greatness of the
work done by the Islamic authors and have bowed their heads in front of
the excellence of the rich Islamic culture.

However, thanks to Almighty Allah that, with the victory of Islamic
Revolution, now the Muslim youth have gone through a deep internal
intellectual revolution of their own throughout the world. A strong
faith in the teachings of Islam is apparent in them. And in short, they
have fallen in love with the Islamic Culture. However, thanks to
Almighty Allah that, with the victory of Islamic Revolution, now the
Muslim youth have gone through a deep internal intellectual revolution
of their own throughout the world. A strong faith in the teachings of
Islam is apparent in them. And in short, they have fallen in love with
the Islamic Culture.

No Confusion
------------

If at times, in order to prove a point of truth, we rely on someone's
words, it does not necessarily mean that we always approve of all his
words or deeds. We sometimes even quote our enemies. For instance, they
say that Muawiyyah had said the following about Imam ‘Ali (a.s):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لوملك بيتا من تبروبيتا من تبن لا نفد تبره قبل تبنه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“If ‘Ali had two houses, one filled with gold and the other with straw,
he would donate in the way of Allah, the former the later.”* [^4]

Also, they say that Marwan has said the following about Imam Hassan
(a.s):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يوازن حلمه الجبال
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Imam Hassan's clemency equates mountains.” [^5]

The Author's Expectations and Hopes
-----------------------------------

The author expects all the fathers and the children who wish to solve
their problems and misunderstandings by reading this book to do so
thoroughly and in an unbiased manner. And the, for the final decision,
rely on their own intuitional judgement.

I hope and pray that through the blessings of the concealed facts
beneath the words in this book and of the spirit of its sentences, and
of the heart of its subject matters; each and every one of the readers
will find the truth leading him?

Her to experience an internal spiritual revolution. May then, they be
able to identify their wrongdoings they may have committed by depriving
a person of his or her rights. And thereby, to offer their apologies and
to make up for their past ill deeds. And, in case of they have been
conducting themselves in a pleasing way, to keep up the good work.

I ask Allah to grant all fathers, mothers and their children sincerity,
health and happiness.

**Sayyid Mohammad Taqi Hakim**  
 15th Rabiul Thani 1403  
 10th Bahman 1361  
 30th January 1982

[^1]: Very recently, Radio Moscow (Russia) broadcasted a programme Face
of Islam, announcing that the words of the Holy Qur'an are the words of
an ever-living God for all the places and for all the times, and are not
limited to the period of the prophet Mohammad (p.b. u. h.). Moscow is
the capital of former USSR, where they waged war against God for last
seventy years. Also, most recently in Holland a Muslim soldier in a
ceremony for taking the Oath of Allegiance, refused to be sworn in the
name of the Queen of Holland. He was able to get exceptional
constitutional permission to take his oath in the name of Allah (Key han
sept 26 1994)

[^2]: Nahjul-Balagah: The Path of Eloquence is a book containing sermon,
letters, orders and some of the sayings of the Commander of the Faithful
Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s) as compiled by Syed Razi. These sermons
and preaching of Imam ‘Ali (as) were so highly valued and venerated in
the Islamic world that within a century of his death they were taught
and read as the last word on the philosophy of Monotheism, as the best
lectures of character building, as exalted sources of inspiration, as
persuasive sermons towards piety and as guiding beacons towards truth
and justice. They present the marvellous eulogies of the Holy Prophet
(S) and the Holy Qur'an. These sermons are the most convincing discourse
on the spiritual values of Islam, and contain the most awe inspiring
discussions about the attributes of Allah. The Commander of the Faithful
‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) was the first perfect exemplar of the teachings
of the Most Noble Messenger (S.) 'Ali was raised by him from early
childhood and followed him like a shadow until the very end of the
latter's life. He was like a moth before the prophetic flame; the final
moment when he was separated from the Most Noble Messenger (S.) was when
he embraced his corpse and laid it to rest. '‘Ali (as) was the first
person after the Most Noble Messenger (S.) to approach spiritual
realities in the manner of philosophical reflection, that is, by free
exercise of reason. He used many technical terms and laid out and
organized the rules of Arabic grammar in order to protect the Holy
Qur'an from copyists’' error. The exact scholarship, spiritual culture,
and consideration of ethical, social, political, and even mathematical
Problems shown in ‘Ali's (as) discourses, letters, and other documents
that have reached us are astonishing. The wealth of these documents
makes ‘Ali (as) the best known individual among Muslims to have a full
realization of the sublime goals of the Holy Qur'an and the critical and
practical concepts of Islam as they should be realized. They testify to
the soundness of the Prophetic saying, I am the city of knowledge, and
‘Ali is its gate. انَا مَدِينةٌ العِلم, و علَيٌّ بَابُهِا Furthermore,
he combined this knowledge with action. In short, Ali's outstanding
character is beyond description, and is virtues are innumerable. Never
in history has someone's character drawn the attention of the world's
scholars and thinkers to such an extent.

[^3]: Al Sahifah Al-Sajjadiyyah: includes certain supplications quoted
from Imam Zain al-Abidin Ali b. Husain b. Ali ibn Abi Talib. (as) He is
one of the Imams belonging to the household of the Prophet whom Allah
has kept pure and free of defilement. The Imam was the fourth in line of
the Imams of the Prophet's household. Imam Ali ibn Al-Husain (as), was
born in the year 38 A.H or, perhaps as is conjucted, a little before
that and lived for a period of 57 years. Imam al-Shafi considered Imam
“Ali ibn al-Husain (as) as the most supreme jurist of all the people of
Medina” Abd al-Malik bin Marwan said to him, “In the area of religious
sciences, in devotion and piety, you have been granted that which no one
before you has had other than your ancestors”. Further Umar bin Abd
al-Aziz said, The light of this life, the beauty of Islam is Zain
al-Abidin” Al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyyah represents and stands out as a
profound social work of the time and a reflection of a supreme endeavor
to meet the exigencies of spiritual ordeals facing the society at the
time of the Imam. But beyond this it is a profound collection of
supplications in the divine tradition, a unique compilation which will
remain throughout the ages as a gift to mankind, a work of moral
inspiration for worldly conduct and a torch of guidance. Human beings
will constantly remain in need of this heavenly souvenir; and the need
increases whenever Satan comes to increase the allurements of the world
for people and by its fascination to keep them in bondage.

[^4]: Nahjul Balagah ibn Abi Al-Hadith Vol. 1.p.22

[^5]: Maqatul-Altalibeen p.49.


