All about Religion
==================

The Father
----------

My child! Now that you have assured me to accept the truth of your
willingness and are committed to the true religion, in order to
strengthen your faith and to enable you to do the same for others; I am
going to offer you some explanations about the need for religion, the
faith, Islam and some examples of its exalted commandments and the
spiritual and intellectual greatness of its leaders. My child! Now that
you have assured me to accept the truth of your willingness and are
committed to the true religion, in order to strengthen your faith and to
enable you to do the same for others; I am going to offer you some
explanations about the need for religion, the faith, Islam and some
examples of its exalted commandments and the spiritual and intellectual
greatness of its leaders.

### 1. The Need for Religion

My child! Religion is needed for everyone. Man must have religion to
enable him to have an enjoyable life. Members of society by gathering
together meet their material needs and their industrial development but
will not be satisfied with only what is rightfully their own.

And if and When some of them could, they would invade other's rights in
favour of their own comfort, even if it would be at the cost of other's
comfort and well-being. Wisdom allows seeking that degree of comfort,
which does not conflict with other's rightful interests. But beyond
these limits, it would end up in deprivation of someone's genuine
rights. That of course, is not allowed, since it will result in a guilty
conscience.

Therefore, a set of laws is needed to stop the invasion to the rights of
others and rather to protect people's rights. Such laws must be general,
i.e. to work day and night, at home and on a journey, inside and outside
the house, when alone or in the company of others, in the city or in the
country, and in short, in all given times, places, and occasions. It
must be enforceable against everybody, and people must have respect for
it as well as be fearful of breaking it.

A man made law, although general, may not have all these
characteristics. That is to say that it may allow a person to break it
at times. An example to when none is watching, one may feel free to
break the law because his unlawful act shall never be discovered. He may
do so simply because he is not afraid of any consequences.

However, the Divine Law which is made available to man through Allah's
prophets, creates a faith in him that tells him no matter where you are,
who you are or whatever the occasion may be, Allah will punish you for
any sin you may commit. As Allah is everywhere, no sin will go unnoticed
by Him.

Therefore, the Divine Law is for the protection of society and the
rights of its members. It is effective in preventing corruption. This
Divine Law is nothing but religion and its articles as contained in the
Holy Qur'an which was revealed to the Holy Prophet (S.) through Divine
Revelation brought by the Angel Gabriel.Therefore, the Divine Law is for
the protection of society and the rights of its members. It is effective
in preventing corruption. This Divine Law is nothing but religion and
its articles as contained in the Holy Qur'an which was revealed to the
Holy Prophet (S.) through Divine Revelation brought by the Angel
Gabriel.

### 2. The Faith

My child! As in the present age, the industrial and intellectual
revolutions progress and the mass communications are rapidly made
available, the disease “Anxiety” is progressively on the rise. The cure
for this disease is Iman (faith). Iman, apart from the being a social
order has numerous independent benefits. Because a man with faith enjoys
a feeling of peace within himself, he never feels lonesome or at a loss.
Rather, he believes that somehow by the divine grace he shall be rid of
his problems. A faithful person will never become fade up with life,
bored or commit a suicide.

The famous Dale Carnegie, after describing his father's difficulties,
debts, failures, worries and anxieties in his life, continues:

*“One day my father sopped his horse on a bridge over a big river and
looked in the river for a long time. He was worried about his problems
and was debating whether or not he should jump into the river. Of course
he did not. Years later, my father told me the only thing that prevented
him from jumping into the river was my mother's strong faith. She would
say: “If we love God and do what he wants us to do, everything will
okay.”*

*“My mother was right. Everything did work out okay. My father enjoyed
another forty two years of life. He died in 1941 at the age of eighty
nine.*

*Throughout those difficult years, my mother would never worry. Through
prayers, she would take the problems to God Almighty. Every night at
bedtime, she could read a chapter on faith from the Bible. We would
kneel in prayer in the small country home and would beg God for his love
and mercy.”* [^1]

Dale Carnegie again writes:

*“As the electricity, water and good food are useful and important in my
life, so is faith. Electricity, water and food help me to provide a
better and more comfortable life, but the advantages of religion
relatively far exceed than all these material things. Religion gives me
faith, hope and courage. It takes fear and anxiety away from me;
determines a course and an aim for my life.*

*Religion, to a large extent, completes my happiness and gives me
wellbeing. It helps me find a quiet oasis during the stormy times of my
life. Today, the most modern science (psychology) teaches what the
divine prophets have taught in the past. Why? Because the psychiatrists
have found out that prayer, meditation and having a strong religion,
worry, anxiety and fear.”* [^2]

One of the pioneers in science says:

*“One who really believes in religion shall never have psychological
disorders.”* [^3]

*“Today, even the psychiatrists are preaching religion. They do not
preach religion for the sake of saving us from the fires of Hell on the
world to come. Rather, from the hell of ulcer disease, Angina Pectoris,
nervousness and insanity.”* [^4]

Dale Carnegie writes about the meeting he had with Henry Ford:

*“When I asked him if he had ever worried, he said no. He then said: “I
believe that God takes care of everything. Besides, he needs no
recommendation or guidance from me. Because God is in charge of things,
he will do everything in the best way. So there is no reason to worry.”*
[^5]

If the late Mahatma Gandhi, who after Mahatma Buddha was the greatest
leader in India, had not received help and inspiration from powerful
prayers, he would definitely be destroyed. How do I knows this? Well,
from what he himself has said:

*“If it were not for the prayers, I would have long become insane.”*
[^6]

Professor William James of Harvard University says:

*“The most effective medicine for anxiety is a religious belief.”*
[^7]  
 In another place, he says:

*“Faith is one of the forces that man lives by and its total absence
means the downfall of humanity.”* [^8]

Still, in another place he says:

*“The roaring waves on the surface of the oceans never disturb the
peacefulness of their depth, and to those who are dealing with more
significant sublime realities and who are more stable, the life's hourly
ups and downs are rather insignificant. Therefore, a truly religious
person is free from any sort of anxiety. He is calmly prepared to do any
job that life may bring to him.”* [^9]

Immanuel Kant, the famous German Philosopher says:

*“Have faith in God, as we need such a belief.”* [^10]

Dr. Carl Jung, the most famous psychiatrist in one of his books, writes:

*“During the past thirty years, I have treated hundreds of people from
the civilized world. Among those older than thirty five years of age, I
did not find even one whose problem was not* *eventually related to a
religious belief in life. I can say with certainly that each to them
were ill because they lost what the major world religions have given to
their followers. And those who had not gotten back their religious
belief, did not really get cured.”* [^11]

Dr. Alexis Carrel, the author of the book, Man - the Unknown (1935), and
Noble prize Winner (the greatest academic honour) in an article writes:

*“Prayer and meditation like the gravity is the greatest force which has
an actual eternal existence. In my medical profession, I have seen
people who got rid of their melancholy through the force of prayer after
all other treatments had failed. Prayer, like Radium, has a brilliant
source of energy created by itself. Through prayer, man tries to
increase his limited energy by resorting to the unlimited source of all
forces.*

*When we pray, we connect ourselves with the endless motivational energy
that connects the whole universe. We pray that some of the energy may be
appropriated to our needs. According to this demand, our shortcomings
will be eliminated. Then we will get up with a* *better feeling and with
more energy. When we address God with warmth and excitement in our
prayers, both our bodies and souls will change for the better. It is
impossible for a man for a woman to engage in one moment of prayer
without* *getting something positive out of it.”* [^12]

### 3. The Complete Religion

My child! For the right way of life, we should choose a religion that
meets with intellect and logic; a kind of religion by which we can
achieve confidence; a kind of religion that gives our hearts peace and
enlightenment; a kind of religion that prevents wrongdoings; a kind of
religion that makes us conduct an ethical way of life; a kind of
religion with clear proofs; a kind of religion with no vague or
incomprehensible points a kind of religion that guides an supports man
step-by step through life; a kind of religion that we can rely on during
our difficulties and to be able to resort to it in hard times; and
finally, a kind of region whose commandments and directions are fresh
and lively at every epoch and that does not become obsolete by the
scientific and industrial progress, but instead their hidden secrets
become unveiled.

### 4. Testimonies of Non-Muslims about Islam

My child! Now we have to see which religion had all the above
characteristics. A study of different religious faiths indicate that
Islam [^13] is such a religion, because it is a collection of laws that
ensure the prosperity of its followers. The Islamic religion commands to
perform good deeds and to avoid bad ones. The Islamic religion calls for
gentleness, fortitude, patience, steadfastness, resistance, struggle and
sacrifice in the way of a holy cause, fairness, mercifulness,
generosity, chastity, modesty, justice, honesty, truthfulness, equality,
brotherhood, know-now and performance, glory, endeavour, earning a
living, an cleanliness. And it warns against inactivity, laziness,
idleness, begging, treason, telling lies, arrogance, selfishness,
injustices and violating the rights others.

Count Henry Decasterie, the French scientist, in the book Islam and
Thoughts, writes:

*“Islam had occupied an extensive area of the world because of its grand
and simple instructions. It was the sound and firm Islamic Laws that
persuaded and uncivilized, fantical idol worshippers to accept the faith
of Islam and to fly its flag not only on the roof tops of their houses
but also throughout their country as well as major countries of the
world.”* [^14]

Lothron Stodard, the famous American scientist and historian says:

*“For the greatness of Islam it is enough to say that despite all
obstacles, it still manifests its truths and excellence in the world. It
does so, because Islam is a simple and prudent religion.”* [^15]

Wells, the famous English historian in the book General History writes:

*“Islam is a social order, and a civil law for the humanity. It appeared
in the Dark Ages and has* *struggled against any kind of tyranny,
treason, crime, and injustice with its holy instructions.”* [^16]

Dr. Gustave Le Bon, the French historian, in the book, The Islamic
culture and the Arabs, writes:

*“The simplicity and clarity of the principles of Islamic beliefs and
its beneficent way of dealing with masses, which is minted on the coin
of the Islamic faith, is the reason for its conquering of the globe.”*
[^17]

Sir William, an Englishman in a book about Islam, writes:

*“Islam like a fast horse has taken big steps in the path of human
progress and civilization. It has rapidly come a long and difficult way
and has entered the land of truth. Its noble commandments teach lessons
in morality, sociability and conduct in a beautiful way.”* [^18]

Prince Boorguise in the book *New Italy*, writes:

*“The greatness of Islam is apparent from the fact that the Islamic
civilization began with the start of Islam and the appointment of its
prophet (S.) whereas the European civilization became apparent six
hundred years after Christ and Christianity.”* [^19]

The English Lady Evelyn Cobbold, in the book “Towards God”, writes:

*“Islam in all senses is a great and flawless social law; because its
principles are on the fundamental of civilization, progress, intellect
and reason, it shall never die.”* [^20]

Conte de Gobineau in the book, Three Years in Asia, says:

*“Islam has brought a chaste, immaculate and flawless religion for
humanity.”* [^21]

Emile Dermenghem, author of the book “The Life of Mahomet”, writes:

*“Islam, like a loud call, moved the hearts and it’s awakened the East
and the West from impiety and ignorance. It had such an impact on hearts
that throughout ages, the human history does not remember such a
spiritual revolution and a social movement”* [^22]

John Bernard Shaw, the famous writer in his book Getting Married,
writes:

*“I have always looked at Mohammed's religion with extreme respect
because it has wonderful energy and freshness. In my opinion, it is the
only religion that can adjust itself to different stages of a free life.
Its instructions are compatible with time.”* [^23]

### 5. Islam and Productivity

My child! Islam has form and valuable instructions on productivity. I
will tell you of one such instruction so you would become aware of how
its leaders have advised people to strengthen their financial mean and
to increase their wealth through productive activities.

Imam As-Sadiq (a. s) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكيمياء الاكبر الزراعة
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Agricultural is the greatest Alchemy”* [^24]

Everyone is in search of “Alchemy”, hoping it will make their dreams in
getting all they want in life come true. Here, our sixth Imam is saying
that the best Alchemy is Agriculture. Whoever wants to meet all his
needs must pursue them in this way.

Take a good look and see how beautifully he is expressing a noble idea
in such a simple phrase. What a rich and meaningful statement. One
cannot but to admire its clarity. I believe on order to better introduce
Islam, Its leaders and its wealth of knowledge, this sort of maxims
should be written in large letters and in a calligraphic manner and be
placed in all agricultural colleges and learning centers.phrase. What a
rich and meaningful statement. One cannot but to admire its clarity. I
believe on order to better introduce Islam, Its leaders and its wealth
of knowledge, this sort of maxims should be written in large letters and
in a calligraphic manner and be placed in all agricultural colleges and
learning centers.

### 6. The Hidden Treasures in the East

My child! Our religious leaders through interpretation of the Holy
Qur'an, as a duty, have explained to us all the good and the evil. Their
instructions are concerned with our individual as well as social welfare
and happiness in both this world and the world to come. Their word,
without any shortcoming, is a complete guide for a happy, free from
anxiety, and a prosperous individual and social life.

But unfortunately, we have not pondered into them deeply enough. In many
literary sources of the East and the West, I have come across the fact,
that more than a thousand years ago, our Holy Book and religious leaders
have been the pioneers in revealing valuable sublime realities about
life. They have excelled in doing so, at a time when there were no
scientific or intellectual thoughts available.

Think about it and see the guidelines and instructions our religious
leaders have given us on morality, hygiene, psychological, scientific,
social and political issues. And see how recently we have been getting
similar instructions as new and modern Ideas from the Western countries!
At this time I would like to present you some guidelines and laws of
others and in order to prove their truth would quote some Islamic
religious commandments what I call, the hidden treasures (of knowledge)
in the East as follows:

1. In the advanced countries, now they have found out that you cannot
put a man's body and soul through too much work. And that the maximum
length of work as well as minimum length of rest period should be eight
hours. This idea is now a universal law, whereas this same thing was
said by Imam ‘Ali (as) more than thirteen hundred years ago. In the
Nahjul-Balagha, his unique book of wisdom, he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
للمؤمن ثلاث ساعات: فساعة يناجي فيها ربه، وساعة يرم معاشه، وساعة يخلى
بين نفسه وبين لذتها فيما يحل ويجمل
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A believer divides his day into three parts. He spends one for
worshipping Allah, another for making a living, and another for resting
and for legitimate pleasurable activities.”* [^25]

Of course, by worshipping Allah, we do not mean that one should spend
all his time only in prayers, rather to become engaged in activities
which pleases Him, such as serving people and charity of public
interest.

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان اعظم الناس منزلة عندالله يوم القيامة امشا هم في ارضه بالنصيحة لخلقه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“One who endeavours the most in goodwill* *toward people on earth,
shall have the highest rank with Allah in the day of* *Judgement.”*
[^26]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سئل رسول الله (صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم) من احب الناس الى الله تعالى؟
قال انفع الناس للناس
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The Prophet of Allah once was asked who the most beloved person in the
eyes of Allah is. He replied: “The one who benefits people most.”* [^27]

The Prophet (S) of Islam also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من اصبح لا يهتم بامور المسلمين فليس بمسلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“He who spends a say without making any efforts in the affairs of
Muslims, is not a Muslim himself.”* [^28]

The Holy Prophet (S) also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انسك الناس نسكا انصحهم جيبا واسلمهم قلبا لجميع المسلمين
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The best worshipper of all is the one who is the most truthful and the
most benevolent to and the most found of the Muslims.”* [^29]  
 Thus, if a person in addition to the prescribed obligations such as the
daily prayers, engages himself in such actions as assisting, encouraging
others by soft words, visiting the sick and ridding someone of his
problems, he has done acts of worship. If every Muslim follows these
instructions, by spending several hours a day in the affairs of public
interest would not then the Islamic countries be the best countries and
the Muslims people be the most tranquil people of the world?

II. Dale Carnegie under the heading of “Don't hurt of ungratefulness”
writes:

*“The owner of a national corporation gave ten thousand dollars as a
Christmas bonus to thirty four employees. None of them thanked him for
it. And he was complaining about it.”* [^30]

Imam ‘Ali (a.s) discussing this same topic said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يزهد نك في المعروف من لا يشكره لك
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Do not get discouraged when you do someone a favour but he does not
appreciate you for it.”* [^31]

III. Homer Croy has entitled one of his articles:

*“After any hardship there is a relief.”* [^32]

First of all, the Holy Quran under this subject matter says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّ مَعَ الْعُسْرِ يُسْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ***“Even with difficulty, there will be relief.”*** **(The Holy Qur'an
94:5)**

Secondly, still in this matter Imam ‘Ali (as) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عند تناهى الشدة تكون الفرجة وعند تضايق حلق البلاء يكون الرّخاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“When hardship comes to an end, relief comes about, and when the rings
of difficulty become too tight, there comes comfort.”* [^33]

IV. Dale Carnegie on page 95 of the book How to Live, under the topic of
“Take with calm has no cure” concludes:

*“Get along and cooperate with what is incurable.”*

He also quotes Arthur Schopenhauer as saying:

*“Submitting to the incurable events is the most important provision for
a journey through life.”*

Now, let us examine the sayings of our own religious leaders, which are
full of wisdom and are based upon faith on Allah, regarding the topics
earlier discussed.

Imam As-Sadiq (as) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لم يكن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم يقول لشىء قد مضى لو كان غيره
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“About the events, the Holy Prophet (S.) never would say I wish they
would have happened in a different manner.”* [^34]  
 He also asks:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
باى شئى يعلم المؤمن بانه مؤمن؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“How could one know that he is a believer?*

He replies:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بالتسليم لله والرضا فيما وردعليه من سرور او بسخط
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Through submission to Allah, and being satisfied with whatever joy or
anxiety that comes his way.”* [^35]

V. Dale Carnegie in the book How to live on page 130, concludes:

*“Never attempt to take revenge because you will hurt yourself more than
others.”*

With paying a little attention, you will find this same conclusion in
what our own religious leaders have said.

On this subject, the Holy Prophet (S.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الا ادلكم على خير اخلاق الدنيا والآخرة؟ تصل من قطعك و تعطى من حرمك
وتعفو عمن ظلمك
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Shall I advise you of the best disposition in this world and the world
to come? To the one who rejects you, attach yourself. To the one who
deprives you, give. And to the one who treats you with injustices, offer
forgiveness.”* [^36]

Also Imam ‘Ali (as) has spoken eloquently about this matter as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قدرت على عدوك فاجعل العفو عنه شكر اللقدرة عليه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In being thankful for coming out victorious* *forgive your enemy after
you have defeated him.”* [^37]

My dear child! These were just a few samples of the many brilliant
topics on our faith and religious beliefs that explained to you. I hope
you have found them interesting. You can take it from here to see that
every single Islamic commandment is just as acceptable s these, as one
can find no faults with them. Religion is an important topic and the
discussions about it are extensive. There have been numerous books
written on it. But for the sake of brevity, and in order to make you
tired, I will stop at this point. I will never wish to impose upon you
my opinion or to force you into accepting a certain belief without any
logical reasoning.

As much as I thought it might be advisable, very briefly, I offered my
guidance. That, I feel is enough for you. The rest, I shall leave up to
you. Allah has granted man intellectual power by which he may
distinguish the Good from the evil, and accordingly may select the best
course for himself. I whole heartedly accept and faithfully believe in
the matters I have just discussed with you. You can think them over and
if your intellects permits you may accept and believe in them, as well
as other Islamic instructions and obligations regarding prayers, social,
and ethical issues.

The Child
---------

Your explanations about religion have enlightened me and have created an
optimism in me. Now I am looking at religion with respect. What I have
learned from you, has made one realize that what I thought to be
ambiguities in religion in fact are not. Rather, I had not understood
them correctly. Through asking questions and research, we must eliminate
any such uncertainties. At last, I understand that Islam can be a
worldwide religion. It can manage the affairs of people. And it can
establish discipline and universal peace. And finally it can provide
eternal happiness for mankind.

[^1]: How to Live pp.178-181.

[^2]: How to Live pp. 181-192

[^3]: How to Live pp. 179-185.

[^4]: How to Live pp. 178-185

[^5]: How to Live pp. 179-185

[^6]: How to Live pp. 179-185

[^7]: How to Live pp. 179-185

[^8]: How to Live pp. 179-185

[^9]: How to Live pp. 184-188

[^10]: How to Life pp. 184-188.

[^11]: How to Life pp. 184-188.

[^12]: How to live 8th Edition p. 186

[^13]: Here it will be appropriate to refer to definitions of Islam as
defined by Imam Ali (as) as follows: “Praise be Allah who revealed
Divine Laws through Islam. For its followers He made its code easy to
understand and gave its principles a position so exalted and so noble
that their eminence overcomes all contentions and objection. He destined
Islam to be a harbinger of eternal peace and haven of unfailing security
for those who enter its fold. Its doctrines provide logical and well
founded arguments for those who what to defend truth and justice. Its
precepts contain the best precaution for piety and virtue.” “It is a
heavenly beacon unto seekers for light, and a great source of
enlightenment for intellectual persons. Who pay due attention to it will
find great wisdom in its teachings, and its careful examination will
prove it to be a very bright manifestation of the goodness of virtue.
Islam furnishes most educative patterns and instances to those who want
to discern between right and wrong and who are willing to accept its
timely admonitions of the consequences of evil and falsehood, It brings
salvation to tis testifiers, great moral strength to its believers,
perpetual peace and comfort to its faithful followers, and considerable
power of resistance against sin and vice to those patiently beat
suffering in life.” - Nahjul-Balagha Sermon No.109 “You must be thankful
to Allah that He made you a Muslim and selected you to represent and
propagate Islam. As its name indicates it is a religion which brings
peace and salvation to mankind. He has bestowed universality of truth
through its simple, distinct and intelligible code as well as, through
the deeper and far reaching significance and inferences hidden in its
orders and interdictions. The wonders that Islam can achieve in
improving human mind and miracles it can work to raise the standard of
human life, will never come to an end. Islam holds secrets of real peace
and prosperity which you will never acquire but through its help; it can
direct you to ways of improving your knowledge (about material as well
as spiritual world), and you can never attain this but through its
guidance. The Merciful God had ordered you to faithfully accept its
principles and to sincerely and diligently obey its commands and
interdictions. It brings salvation to those who follow it, and worldly
protection to those who enter its folds.” - Nahjul-Balagha Sermon No.156
“Have you fully realized what Islam is? It is a religion founded on
truth. It is such a fountain-head of learning that from it flow out
several streams of wisdom and knowledge. It is such a lamp that from it
several lamps will be lighted. It is a tall beacon lighting the path to
Allah. It is a set of principles and beliefs which will satisfy every
seeker of truth and reality. Know you all that Allah has made Islam the
most sublime path towards His supreme pleasure and the highest standard
of His worship and obedience. He has favoured it with noble precepts,
exalted principles, undoubtable arguments, unchallengeable supremacy and
undeniable wisdom. It is up to you to maintain the eminence and dignity
granted to it by the Lord, to follow it sincerely, to do justice to its
articles of faith and belief, to implicitly obey its tenets and orders,
and to give the proper place in your lives.” - Nahjul-Balagha Sermon No.
203

[^14]: Hygiene in Islam

[^15]: Hygiene in Islam

[^16]: Hygiene in Islam

[^17]: Hygiene in Islam

[^18]: Hygiene in Islam

[^19]: Hygiene in Islam

[^20]: Hygiene in Islam

[^21]: Hygiene in Islam

[^22]: Hygiene in Islam

[^23]: Hygiene in Islam

[^24]: Foru'e Kafi Fifth Ed. p, 261

[^25]: Nahjul-Balagha, p. 545

[^26]: Wafi, Third part, p.99

[^27]: Usul Kafi, Second Volume, pp.163-164

[^28]: Usul Kafi, Second Volume, pp. 163-164

[^29]: Usul Kafi, Second Volume pp. 163 -164.

[^30]: How to Live p. 138

[^31]: Nahjul-Balagha

[^32]: How to Live. p.271

[^33]: Nahjul Balagha. p. 536

[^34]: Usul Kafi, Second Volume p. 63.

[^35]: Usul Kafi, Second volumes p. 63

[^36]: Usul Kafi, Second volume, p.107

[^37]: Nahjul Balagha, p.470.


