The Responsibilities of Fathers & Mothers
=========================================

The Father
----------

My child! Based on the verse in the Holy Qur'an that advise benevolence
to parents, next to worshipping of Almighty Allah, it is understood that
next to our obligations to Him, there is no greater obligation than that
to our parents.

The Child
---------

My honourable father! Your responsibilities to me as parents are as
great as your authority over me. It is all up to you as to how you raise
and rear me and how to educate me. Our times are different from each
otherâ€™s. Our environment too is different from that in which you were
growing up. A simple life, with no means of corruption and not too many
social obligation or luxuries, raised you to the way you are. But I was
born into this world in the age of Atom, machine and cinema and in a
polluted environment.

As if I were to spend all day and night serving you would not be too,
much, you should do likewise for me, and have a watching eye day and
night one me in this rough sea (of life). If I am about to drown, grab
my hand and rescue me. Parents should periodically go to their
children's schools and inquire about their education and behaviour from
their teachers. Ask about their associates and close friends and
particularly to ask about where they spend their time when they are out
for the evening.

At night at home they should help their children with their homework by
offering them guidance. If they are about to engage in an unwise
activity, they should stop them by explaining to them the harms that may
be involved. In this way, they will learn from their parent's past
experiences. Of course, their involvement should not be detrimental to
the children's independent personality or to their confidence building.


