Biography of Hujjat al-Islam Wal-Muslimeen Sayyid Mohammad Taqi Hakim
=====================================================================

He was born in the year 1926 in the famous ancient city of Shoostar, in
Khozestan Province, Southwestern Iran. Both his parents belonged to
religious scholarly families and therefore he spent his childhood years
in a pure spiritual atmosphere. His great grandfather was a famous
learned scholar; Allamah Sayyid Nematoallah Jazari. After finishing his
primary education, with encouragement of his father he started his
religious studies in 1950 at Shoostar.

In his early theological studies at Shoostar he finished sarf-e-Mir صرف
ميز with Ayatullah Sayyid Mohammed Jaffar Marooj; Tasreef تصريف with
Hujjat al-Islam Sayyid Mohammad Baqir Hakim, and Hadaya هدايه under the
able tutorship of Ayatullah Sayyid Mohammad Hasan Aley Tayyib. After
finishing his primary theological studies within a period slightly more
than two years, he was able to join the famous Religious learning Center
of Qum in the year 1942.

He was resident at famous Faiziyey School in Qum for five years. In his
stay in Qum he received higher theological education under the able
guidance and tutorship of eminent jurisprudence such as Hujjatul-Islam
Sayyid Mohammad Kazim Aley Tayyed, Mustafa Amili, Sheikh Abul Qasim
Nahvi, Sheikh Abulfazal Qummi, Shikh Abul Qasim Ashtiyani, and Martyr
Ayatullah Sheikh Murtaza Motahari (r.a.).

Having completed his higher education at the Religious Learning Center
at Qum, he went to the city of Ahqaz Khuzestan Province in the year
1947. He stayed there for four years and during this period continued
higher theological education under eminent scholars such as Ayatullah
Marza Jaffer Ansari and late Ayatullah Sayyid Mohammad Taqi Aley Tayyeb.

In order to further pursue higher religious learning, he joined the
famous Religious Learning Center at Najaf in Iraq in the year 1950.
During his stay over there he completed higher religious curriculum
under the tutorship of eminent learned scholars such as Ayatullah Mirza
Hasan Yazdi, Ayatullah Sheikh Mohammad Taqi Iravani, Ayatullah sheikh
Mujtaba Lankarani, and Ayatullah Sayyid Abdul ‘Ali Sabzavari. Also
during this period he attended the lectures of Grand Ayatullah Sayyid
Mohsin Hakim (r.a.) for Dars-e-Kharij [^1] as well as participated in
the lectures of Grand Ayatullah Sayyid Abul Qasim Khoei (r.a.) for
Dars-e-Kharij (Usool) [^2] after completing the advance theological
learning during one year and a half, he again returned to Ahwaz in 1951.

He continued his stay in Ahwaz for the next 9 years and during this
period taught Jurisprudence, principles of jurisprudence, and literature
at the religious learning centers. He came to Tehran in 1961 and
accepted the leadership “Imamate” of the *Hisar-e- Bounali Mosque* in
Niavaran, and has remained in this position till today.

During his stay in Tehran, apart from his responsibilities for managing
the Hisar-e- Bouali Mosque and relevant social affairs; he has written
numerous books and articles covering educational, theological, and
ethical matters. Also, he is a professor of Arabic at the University of
Tehran and at various religious learning centers (Howze-Ilmias) in
Shemiran.

He has a good command of the Persian, Arabic languages and is familiar
with English. He has written numerous articles which have been published
in the famous magazines of Iran namely; Payam-e-Inqilab, Khanavadeh,
Ayand-e-Sazan, Iman and Saf, He is a prominent scholar and jurisprudent
and have produced valuable literature covering religious, social,
ethical, and medicine etc. Some of his famous books may be listed as
follows:

*Sayings of Imam ibn Jaffar (as), The guide for Hajj Rituals,
Arabic-Grammar Guide, how to bridge? The Generation Gap, The Philosophy
and Mysteries of Hajj, The Sayings of Imam ‘Ali (as), Foods and Drinks,
The Message of the Prophet (S.). The Qur'an from the tongue of Qur'an,
How to recite the Holy Qur'an, Hajj Guide in accordance with the decrees
of Grand Ayatullah Hakim (r.a)*

He has also translated numerous literary works from Arabic to Persian.
His translations include: the rights of women in Islam, and the Limits
of Freedom and Rights of Women in Islam. He has recently completed a
book “The life of Qazi Nourirullah Shooshtari,” (956-1019 AH) who is
famous as Third Martyr (shahid-e- Thalis) in the Islamic History, and
was martyred by the Moghal Emperor Jahangir, his tomb is located in the
city of Agra, Province of Uttar Pradesh in India.

[^1]: Dars-e-Kharij. The highest level of theological education relation
to jurisprudence, in the form of lectures, beyond the limited boundaries
of text books.

[^2]: Dars-e-Kharij (Usool) (Ibid).


