Caring For the Family and the Mankind
=====================================

The Father
----------

My child! In same manner that one should honour and respect his parents,
it is appropriate that he be compassionate to his spouse, children,
brothers, sisters and all his relatives, so life would become pleasant
for him.

Lord Aviboury says:

*“One must have love and kindness in every aspect of life. What is a
home without love likes? How is life possible in such a home? It is
possible to have a beautiful building equipped with all facilities and
appliances. But such a place without love is nothing less than hell. On
the other hand, if you base your home on love and friendship,* *you can
live there in happiness forever after.”* [^1]

He further continues:

*“Life in this world is like dream.*[^2] *It does not last long. Here
man is like a drop of dew that shines of a few moments then suddenly he
disappears. In this case, why should we spend this short life with
misery and hardship? In our short lifetime, we should love one another
and enjoy each other’s friendship.”* [^3]

The Child
---------

Of course, loving and caring for family, relatives and friends and all
mankind, brightens our hearts and makes life a more pleasant and joyous
one to live.

[^1]: In Search of Happiness, pp. 107, 139

[^2]: In a poem written in 1982, William Buttler Yeats commented on the
brevity of human life: “From our birthday until we die is but the
winkling an eye.” Also the Holy Qur'an says as follows: He says: “What
number of years you did stay on earth?” They will say: “We stayed a day
or part of a day, but ask those who keep accounts.” (The Holy Qur'an 23:
112-113 [Tr])

[^3]: In Search of Happiness, pp. 107, 139


