The Spiritual Fathers
=====================

The Father
----------

My child! As in the same way that you are greatly indebted to your
parents, we are obligated to the Holy Prophet (S.) and to our other
religious pioneers and leaders. Our Holy Prophet (S) founded the
religion of Islam. Imam ‘Ali (as) and other Imams strengthened its
foundation as far as they possibly could propagate it, and struggled
diligently for the betterment of Islam and the Muslims. They took great
pains in strengthening and protecting Islam's roots against dangerous
and cataclysmic events throughout their lives.

These true leaders have always had people’s interest in mind and have
issued instructions for people to follow in order to achieve complete
happiness in life. Through their divine influence on masses, they were
able to attract their unshakeable loyalty. The later were even willing
to sacrifice their own lives for the Imams.

Through following their philosophy, one can learn about perseverance,
faith, strong belief, struggling for the cause of liberty,
self-sacrifice, serving others, suppressing injustice, assisting the
oppressed and finally bout love for human beings. My child! The entire
world pays homage to the excellent thoughts and firm institutions of our
religious leaders.

The Child
---------

Of course, to be fair to our religious leaders is to put their words of
guidance into practice, and to model our actions after their actions. If
we could sincerely implement their guidelines our society will become
the most dynamic, prosperous community of mankind. Simply, knowing their
noble characters and greeting and remembering them with honour, is not
enough.

I say so, because I know of people who speak of their love and respect
for our Imams and utter excellent salutations after upon hearing their
names and even in some instances, will rise in their honour, but when it
comes to act according to their instructions, it is something else. They
forget all about them.

In my opinion these sort of people simply deceive themselves, and feel
happy that they are the followers of the Holy Prophet (S.), Imam ‘Ali
(as), and other religious leaders. Because their acts and deed do not
reflect any traces from these exalted leaders. Certainly, the Prophet
and innocent Imams are unhappy with these type of people. As Islam is a
practical religion, only those who adhere to and practice according to
its principles, will benefit from Islam.


