The Teacher's Rights
====================

The Father
----------

In addition to parent’s obligations, Islam attaches special regards for
the teachers’ right.We must appreciate their existence and should
discharge our duties and obligations towards them. It is believed that
Imam ‘Ali (as) has said.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من علمني حرفاً فقد صيرني عبداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The one, who had taught me one word had indeed earned the rights of
master hood upon me.”*

It is the teacher who fights ignorance or in other words fights
illiteracy. He sacrifices his productive years educating and nourishing
people’s minds. Finally, it is he who delivers these services and
through his endeavours brings value to the society.

A famous Iraqi poet known as Rassafi has written a beautiful and
meaningful poem in praising teachers, describing their contributions in
an appropriate manner, as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذا كان هل الناس مدعاة غيهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فليس سوى التعليم للرشد سلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلو قيل من يستنهض الناس للعلى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذا ساء محياهم لقلت المعلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
معلم ابناء البلاد طبيبهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يداوى سقام الجهل والجهل مسقم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وما هو الا كوكب في سمائهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
به يهتدى السارى الى المجد منهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلا تبخسن حق المعلم انه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عظيم كحق الوالدين واعظم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فان له منك الحجى وهو جوهر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وللوالدين العظم واللحم والدم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الا النما تعليمنا الناس واجب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وان على الجهال ان يتعلموا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وما اخذ الله العهود على الورى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بان يعلموا حتى قضى ان يعلموا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whenever ignorance misleads people, there is nothing for progress
except learning. If I am asked, 'when people are deep in corruption, who
is the one who can save them out of it? I would “the teacher'. The
teacher of the children of the country, are also their physicians who*
*treat their ignorance. As lack of knowledge is pathogenic. The teacher
is like a brightest star shining in the society's sky, who guide the
knowledge seekers to glory and greatness.*

*Do not underestimate your indebtedness to your teacher. It equals that
to your parents and even more. Your wisdom comes from your teacher while
your muscles and bones are from your parents. It is our duty to teach
the illiterate and it is theirs to learn. Allah has not commanded the
people to learn without first making* *arrangement of divine teachers
(the prophets) and the heavenly books.* [^1]

A Persian poet too, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مقدار معلم ز پدر بيش بود بيش
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اين پرورش تن دهد، آن پرورش جان
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Higher than rank of the father is that of the teacher. As the former
nourishes one's body* *while the later, his soul.*

“George Herbert says: *“O God! You have provided for us in every way. At
first with our parents to bring us up, and later with our teachers to
nourish our minds and to teach us the laws of intellect.”* [^2]

Immanuel Kant says: *“It is only through education that man can
culturally become a most complete or perfect human being. In fact he is
the result of his education.”* [^3]

The Child
---------

In general, teachers, professors and those serving others through
educational activities play an important part in people's happiness. One
can easily state that the people's future depends on the way the
educators educate them.

Of course they should be sincerely devoted teaching and should bestow
knowledge upon their pupils. They must possess a pure heart and be of
excellent character to succeed in educating good-natured and enlightened
students, because to receive good quality education and to learn good
character, the students are entrusted to them.

Only after they have successfully taught their students, the teachers
have fulfilled their grave duty. An accomplished teacher succeeds in
replacing evil characters by good ones. Of course, such teachers are
worthy of high recognition and respect and are considered valuable and
useful to the society.

[^1]: Iraqi poet Rassafi

[^2]: The Book of Ethics, Part 1. p. 37

[^3]: The Philosophy of Education, Vol. 1 p. 41


