The Fatherly Guidance
=====================

The Father
----------

My child! Do take advantage of your youth and do not waste it. Use those
unreturnable years to prepare yourself for your golden years. Bravery is
not when one spends his younger years in lewdness and drunkenness.
Rather, it is when, in spite of his youthfulness and energy, protects
himself against any kind of sinful act, and to put his futureâ€™s
well-being ahead of his sensual desires and to follow his intellectual
judgment in every situation.

There are some young people who know nothing about good mannerism and
good behaviour. They should try to better themselves while there is
still a chance and before it becomes too late. They should also free
themselves from indulgence in their own desires. Instead, they should
try to conduct themselves with modesty and to protect themselves behind
a strong shield of chastity.

But, unfortunately, sometimes they are so deeply involved in such a
degree of neglect that they cannot find a way out and fail to have any
foresight. Undoubtedly, someday they will be sorry. But then, it will be
too late as they have lost all their chances. My child! I am afraid you
will grow up to be one of them. Choosing to lead a rebellious life, you
may have a future similar to theirs.

The Child
---------

Your fear about my future is justified because one can expect just about
anything from an unexperienced young individual. But, I am hoping that
with your guidance and advice you will help me find the right path and
that I will be able to follow it steadfastly.


