Hospitality and Appreciation
============================

The Father
----------

My child! If a person invites you to dinner in his home and treats you
with warmth and in a comfortable environment, undoubtedly you will thank
him. And if one takes you out for a meal, again, you will thank him. If
while on a trip, one accommodates you over night, you will never forget
his kindness. If someone invites for a lunch or dinner at his house, you
will always remember his favour. If one gives you a drink when you are
thirsty, I do not think you would not offer him your thanks.

If one gives you a pen or a book for a gift, every time you use it, you
will be thinking of him. If one helps you rest after you are tired, you
will express your thanks. If one helps you with your studies, you will
tell him thank you. If one gives you a helping hand, you will be obliged
to him. If one lets you use his automobile, he will receive you thanks,
as is the case when someone gives you a ride in his car or when one
offers you his seat on a bus. And finally, if one is only kind to you by
worlds and not by his deeds, there too, it is unrealistic to say you
will not say thanks.

My child! How is it then that for all these relatively small favours you
show your appreciation, but to all the love, attention, care and
happiness and to all the material conveniences that you parents have
provided for you, you are so indifferent and are taking them for
granted?

The Child
---------

Oh, how great it is that you have awakened me. And how appropriately you
brought this to my attention! I really have been neglectful as to all
you love, compassion and hospitalities and have been taking them for
granted. I have done so, just as one who pays no attention to the
importance of the sum simply because it rises every day. Now I confess
that I am greatly indebted to you and owe you all my existence. I take
this opportunity to give all my thanks and appreciation to you and my
mother even though I shall never be able to compensate you enough.


