The Unmatchable Love
====================

The Father
----------

My child! It seems that you have forgotten everything. You think you
were born that big! You are ignoring the different stages in your life.
And how gradually you have grown through them! Think of your childhood,
and the many exhausting troubles your parents were through for your
sake.

Think of when you were in your mother's womb[^1] and she carried your
weight and of how she had to suffer morning sickness and many other
complications related to different stages of pregnancy until you were
born. That was just the beginning. The beginning of a series of new
inconveniences for her as well as for your father. Your mother would
nurse you, quiet you when you were crying, she would wash you, change
you and keep your clothes clean.

During the night, she had to stay up in order to feed you and to lullaby
you to sleep. Many time, she would beg others to be quiet so you could
go to sleep. When you were healthy, they would worry that you wouldn't
get sick. And when you were ill, they would do their best to seek
medical assistance until you recovered your health again. In either
situation, they would alter their life style to meet yours.

When you became of age you needed, even if they would do that with
pleasure and satisfaction of being able to provide your food. And when
you become a little older and were able to play with toys, they
purchased for you toys and games.

My Child! As you grew older, they sent you to kindergarten, primary
school, high school, college, and university. They paid for all your
school needs to the best of their ability. They assigned a special room
for your study. Around your examination time, they worry about your test
results. And whenever you receive passing grades, it would make them the
happiest parents under the sun. My child! When you are happy, they are
happy and when you are sad, they are sad too. Whatever troubles your
body and soul, or comforts it, would bother or comfort theirs.

My dear child! In the family setting, your father and mother would
rather for you to be the one to have the best food, clothing, and
accommodations. They would spare you from any unpreventable
inconvenience. Even if they were not concerned about their own future,
they certainly cared about yours. They worked hard to send you on a
vacation so you would not get tired and bored. In the summer time, they
would work in the hot climate but would send you to a cool place. My
child! When you were at home, looking at you brought joy to their
hearts. And when you were away on a trip, you were constantly on their
minds. How could they forget about you? You are in their hearts. Whoever
is in one's heart is on one's mind.

My child! If you were a few minutes late in coming home from school,
they would worry about you. The same way if you were late coming home
after going to see a friend. Think again, and think hard. Do you have
anyone else in this world who would be so much concerned about you? My
beloved! You are the apple of you parent's eyes, the joy of their lives
and the source of their pride. Without you, the home is such a dull
place. When your parents are out, their thought are with you, and upon
returning home, they step in the house with anticipation of the joy of
seeing you here.

My child! After your educational goal is reached and you are ready to
off to work, they will use all their night and means to help you find
your desired kind of employment, so you would serve your society in the
best possible capacity. And now that you are putting your education to
work and starting to reap its intellectual and material fruits, your
parents have nor the least expectation to share its benefit with you.
Instead, they are happy for your good fortune. My child! When you are
ready for marriage, your parents, with their blessings and happiness,
will assist you in preparing for and make happen this joyous event of
your life.

My child! By the time you enter the society and occupy you place in
accordance with what you contribute to it, you have gone through many
life situations and in short, you have come a long way. My beloved
child! Take a good look at your past. Review and analyze every event.
See who had faithfully and sincerely stayed by you and helped you.

Were they any other than your father and your mother?

Yes? It was only they. It was only they who help you with your problems;
got rid of obstacles from your path and help you fulfill your dreams and
accomplish your goals. It was they who put up with all sorts of
hardships and hazards! Words cannot express the degree and extent of all
such inconveniences. Is there anyone who can do so? Only Allah knows all
your father and mother had suffered for your sake!

The Child
---------

I shall never forget all your endeavours that you, my father and mother,
have done for my success, and in my upbringing. Also, I shall never be
able to tell you how important you have been in my life. Or to mention
the depth of your love for me. However, I look forward to finding an
opportunity to express my appreciation both in words and in deeds,
indeed.

[^1]: The Holy Qur'an describes this theme as follows: (Tr) “And We have
commended unto man kindness towards parents. His mother bearth him with
pain, and bringth him forth with pain, and bringeth him forth with pain,
and the bearing of him and the weaning of him is thirty months, till,
when he attaineth full strenth and reachth forty years. He saith: My
Lord! Arouse me that I may give thanks for the favour wherewith Thou
hast favoured me and my parents, and that I may do right acceptable unto
Thee. And be gracious unto me in the matter of my seed. Lo! I have
turned unto Thee repentant, and lo! I am of those who surrender (unto
Thee).”-(46-15)


