A Gift of Allah
===============

The Father
----------

My child! Keep in mind that children are gifts of Allah. Do not belittle
this fact. Holy Prophet (S.) once said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الولد الصالح ريحانة من رياحين الجنة
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A righteous child is a flower from flowers of heaven.” [^1]

He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من سعادة الرجل الولد الصالح
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Of the signs of prosperity, the righteous child is one.” [^2]

And Imam Zain al-Abidin (as) is quoted as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من سعادة الرجل ان يكون له ولد يستعين بهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“One of the signs of a man's prosperity is having children from whom he
gets helps.” [^3]

Imam As-Sadiq (as)[^4] said:

*Once there was a man who said, he did not wish to have any children
until he went to Mecca. There at Arafat, he came across a young man with
tears in his eyes who was praying to Allah for his father. Seeing that
situation, persuaded me to have children.* [^5]

The Child
---------

Yes, a child is a gift, and man has been assigned obligations for this
gift as Imam As-Sadiq (as) once said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
البنون نعيم والبنات حسنات والله يسأل عن النعيم ويثيب على الحسنات
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Sons are gift and daughters are righteous deeds. Allah holds one
responsible for a gift but be rewards one for righteous deeds.” [^6]

Therefore, the father are responsible for their children and they should
be careful how they treat and rear them.

[^1]: The Book Wafi, Part 12, pages 196-197.

[^2]: The Book Wafi, Part 12, pages 196-197.

[^3]: The Book Wafi, Part 12, pages 196-197.

[^4]: The sixth Imam, Ja'far, known as As-Sadiq (as) (83/699-148/765).
The son of the fifth Imam, he lived in an increasingly favourable
climate and was able to teach openly in Medina. Large numbers of
scholars gathered around him to learn, including such famous Sunni
figures as Abu Hanifah, the founder of the one of the four Sunni schools
of law. Towards the end of Imam Ja'far's life severe restrictions were
placed upon his activities, as a result of growing shi'ite unrest. More
traditions are recorded from him than from all the other Imams together.
He is so important for twelve-Imam Shi'ite law that it is named the
“Ja'fari School” after him. He is buried in the Baqi, cemetery in
Medina. Ja'far's fame for religious leaning was great, greater than that
of his father or of any other Twelver Imam except for Ali b. Abi Talib
(as) himself. Perhaps the earliest historical reference presenting
Ja'far as one of the most respected and highly esteemed personalities of
his epoch, and as having profound knowledge and learning, is Ya'qubi's
statement that it was customary for scholars who related anything from
him to say: “The Learned One informed us.” Even the famous jurist of
Medina, the Imam Malik b. anas, is reported to have said, when quoting
Ja'far's traditions: “The Thiqa (truthful) Ja'far b. Muhammad himself
told me that ...” Similar compliments for Ja'far are attributed to the
Imam Abu Hanifa, who is also reported to have been his pupil. As-Sadiq's
(as). Knowledge was great in religion and culture, he was fully informed
in philosophy, he attained great piety in the world, and he abstained
entirely from lusts. He lived in Medina long enough to greatly profit
the sect that followed him, and to give his friends the advantage of the
hidden science.

[^5]: The Book Wafi, Part 12, pages 196-197.

[^6]: The Book Wafi, part 12, pages 196-197.


