Self-Censorship in Muslim History A case study of Da'wat dhu 'l-'Ashira
=======================================================================

1. Introduction
---------------

Many students of Islamic history begin with the assumption that if an
event or a statement has not been reported in the earliest sources of
Muslim history or hadith like *as-Sirah an-Nabawiyya* of Ibn Hisham or
*Sahíh* of al-Bukhari, it must be a later fabrication and therefore not
credible. They tend to ignore the biases and limitations that are
imposed on the writer by the ruling powers as well as by
self-inclination. Biases are not only relevant in fabrication of
mythical persons, events and statements, they are equally relevant in
ignoring and silently bypassing certain historical figures and stories.

This paper intends to examine the way Muslim historians have dealt with
the first open call to Islam known as Da'wat dhu 'l-'Ashira.

2. The First Open Call to Islam
-------------------------------

Islam began when the Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his
progeny) became forty years old. Initially, the mission was kept a
secret. Then three years after the advent of Islam, the Prophet was
ordered to commence the open declaration of his message. This was the
occasion when Almighty Allah revealed the verse

***"And warn thy nearest relations." (26:214)***

When this verse was revealed, the Prophet organized a feast that is
known in history as "Summoning the Family - *Da'wat dhu 'l-'Ashira*".
The Prophet invited around forty men from the Banu Hashim and asked 'Ali
bin Abi Talib to make arrangements for the dinner. After having served
his guests with food and drinks, when the Prophet wanted to speak to
them about Islam, Abu Lahab forestalled him and said, "Your host has
long since bewitched you." All the guests dispersed before the Prophet
could present his message to them.

The Prophet then invited them the next day. After the feast, he spoke to
them, saying:

O Sons of 'Abdu 'l-Muttalib! By Allah, I do not know of any person among
the Arabs who has come to his people with better than what I have
brought to you. I have brought to you the good of this world and the
next, and I have been commanded by the Lord to call you unto Him.
Therefore, who amongst you will support me in this matter so that he may
be my brother *(akhhí),* my successor *(wasiyyí)* and my caliph
*(khalifatí)* among you?

This was the first time that the Prophet openly and publicly called the
relations to accept him as the Messenger and Prophet of Allah; he also
uses the words "*akhí wa wasiyyí wa khalífatí*- my brother, my
successor, my caliph" for the person who will aid him in this mission.
No one answered him; they all held back except the youngest of them -
'Ali bin Abí Talib. He stood up and said, "I will be your helper, O
Prophet of God."

The Prophet put his hand on the back of 'Ali's neck and said:

"*Inna hadha akhhí wa wasiyyí wa khalífatí fíkum, fasma'u lahu wa
atí'u* - Verily this is my brother, my successor, and my caliph amongst
you; therefore, listen to him and obey."[^1]

This was a very explicit statement because the audience understood the
appointment of 'Ali very clearly. Some of them, including Abu Lahab,
even joked with Abu Talib that your nephew, Muhammad, has ordered you to
listen to your son and obey him! At the least, this shows that the
appointment of 'Ali bin Abí Talib was clear and explicit, not just
implied.

3. Why Doesn't Ibn Hisham Mention this Da'wat?
----------------------------------------------

One of the questions raised in relation to this issue is why 'Abdu
'l-Malik Ibn Hisham (d. 213 AH) does not mention this event in his
*as-Sirah an-Nabawiyya* - The Biography of the Prophet? After all, he is
the earliest of all historians.

What is known as the *Sirah* of Ibn Hisham is actually the summary of
the book of Muhammad Ibn Ishaq (born in 85 AH in Medina and died in 151
AH in Baghdad). The unabriged version of Ibn Ishaq's history book does
not exist anymore. So the question has to be reformulated: "Did Ibn
Ishaq mention the Summoning of the Family event?"

The political considerations that influenced Ibn Hisham in deleting
certain events and maintaining others is clear from his own statement.
While listing the items that he has omitted, Ibn Hisham writes,
"...things which it is disgraceful to discuss; matters which would
distress certain people...all these things I have omitted."[^2] Editors
of the 1955 Egyptian edition of the *Sirah* write that Ibn Ishaq had
quoted events that would not have pleased the 'Abbasids "like the
participation of al-'Abbas with the infidels in the battle of Badr and
his capture by the Muslims-the narration that Ibn Hisham later on
omitted out of the fear of the 'Abbasids."[^3]

Praises of Imam 'Ali bin Abi Talib, especially the traditon of *dar,*
were among the items that Ibn Hisham has deleted in summarizing the
*Sirah* of Ibn Ishaq. "The tradition of *dar*" is about the Summoning of
the Family event mentioned above.

The fact that Ibn Ishaq had mentioned the Summoning of the Family can be
seen through those who have narrated events from Ibn Ishaq by sources
other than Ibn Hisham. For example, at-Tabari (d. 310 AH) narrates the
same event through Ibn Ishaq. Shaykh Abu Ja'far at-Tusi (d. 460 AH) also
narrates the same event through two different chains of narrators: one
of those two is on the authority of Ibn Ishaq through at-Tabari.[^4]

This clearly shows that what has come to be recognized as the earliest
and the most authentic historical account is not free from bias in
ignoring certain events and in narrating others.

Ibn Ishaq himself has been accused of having Shí'ite leanings. If true,
this could be one of the considerations that prompted Ibn Hisham to omit
the items that he thought supported the Shí'ite cause. However,
al-Khatíb al-Baghdadi in *Ta'ríkh Baghdad* and Ibn Sayyidi 'n-Nas in
*'Uyunu 'l-Athar,* both Sunni historians, have defended Ibn Ishaq
against all kinds of accusations including that of having Shí'ite
leanings.[^5]

4. Self-Censorship by At-Tabari
-------------------------------

The case of Muhammad bin Jarír at-Tabari (d. 310 AH) is even more
interesting. The event of Da'wat dhi 'l-'Ashira given above is based on
the version of at-Tabari's monumental work in history: *Ta'ríkhu 'l-Umam
wa 'l-Muluk.* At-Tabari has also authored a famous commentary of the
Qur'an: *Jami'u 'l-Bayan 'an Ta'wíl Ayai 'l-Qur'an.* It is interesting
to compare the history of at-Tabari with his Qur'anic commentary in
relation to the present topic.

> القوم ليقوموا، ودعاهم محمد في الغداة كرة أخرى، فلما طعموا قال لهم: ما
> أعلم إنسانا من العرب جاء قومه بأفضل مما جئتكم به، قد جئتكم بخير الدنيا
> والآخرة، وقد أمرني ربي أن أدعوكم اليه، فأيكم يوازرني على هذا الأمر وأن
> يكون أخي ووصيي وخليفتي فيكم؟ فأعرضوا عنه وهموا بتركه، لكن عليا نهض وما
> يزال صبيا دون الحلم، وقال: أنا يا رسول الله عو نك، أنا حرب على من
> حاربت. فابتسم بنو هاشم وقهقه بعضهم، وجعل نظرهم ينتقل من أبي طالب إلى
> ابنه ثم انصرفوا مستهزئين20

In his *Ta'ríkh,* at-Tabari has quoted the words used by the Prophet for
'Ali in the Feast in its entirety:

"*akhhí wa wasiyyí wa khalífatí:*

my brother, my successor, my caliph."[^6]

But in his *at-Ta'wíl* (vol. 19, p. 74), while discussing the relevant
verse in which the Prophet was ordered to call his relations to Islam,
at-Tabari exercises self-censorship and has concealed the clear and the
explicit impact of the Prophet's words by recording it as follows:

*"akhhi wa kadha wa kadha:*

my brother, and so-and-so, and so-and-so."

Ibn Kathír, another famous Damascene author of *al-Bidayah wa
an-Nihayah* (vol. 3, p. 40), has used the *Ta'ríkh* of at-Tabari as his
main reference. However, when he comes to the event of the Feast, he
abandons the *Ta'ríkh* of at-Tabari and uses the altered version of
*Jami'u 'l-Bayan* of at-Tabari! This is not surprising since it is known
that Ibn Kathír had anti-Shí'a sentiments.

5. Self-Censorship In Modern Times
----------------------------------

A modern writer of Egypt, Dr. Muhammad Husayn Haykal, wrote a famous
book on the Prophet's biography known as *Hayat Muhammad*. Haykal had
first published the Prophet's biography in his weekly paper *as-Siyasa.*
The event of the Feast was published in the supplement of issue \# 2751
(12 Dhu 'l-Qa'dah 1350) p. 5, column 2. One of his critics wrote a
letter to the paper accusing Haykal of using Shí'ite sources for that
statement about Imam 'Ali. Haykal responds to this accusation in the
supplement of issue \# 2758, p. 6, column 4, by denying that he used a
Shí'ite source "since all traditions do speak of this behaviour of
'Ali;" and quotes the *hadith* from *Sahíh* of Muslim, *Musnad* of Ahmad
and others.[^7]

Haykal resisted the pressure to omit the Prophet's statement about 'Ali
when the biography was finally printed in a book form. In the first
edition of *Hayat Muhammad*, Haykal narrates the event of the Feast as
follows:

"...When they had finished eating, he [the Prophet] said to them, 'I do
not know any person among the Arabs who has come to his people with
something better than what I have come to you; I have come to you with
the best of this world and the hereafter. My Lord has ordered me to call
you unto him.

"'So who among you will help me in this matter, so that he may be my
brother, my successor, and my caliph among you?'

"All of them turned away from him and wanted to leave him but 'Alí stood
up although he was still a child who had not reached maturity and said,
'O Messenger of Allah, I shall be your helper! I will help you against
whomsoever you fight.' The Banu Hashim smiled, some of them laughed, and
their eyes moved from Abu Talib to his son; and then they left in the
state of ridicule."[^8]

> القوم ليقوموا، ودعاهم محمد في الغداة كرة أخرى، فلما طعموا قال لهم: ما
> أعلم إنسانا من العرب جاء قومه بأفضل مما جئتكم به، قد جئتكم بخير الدنيا
> والآخرة، وقد أمرني ربي أن أدعوكم اليه، فأيكم يوازرني على هذا الأمر وأن
> يكون أخي ووصيي وخليفتي فيكم؟ فأعرضوا عنه وهموا بتركه، لكن عليا نهض وما
> يزال صبيا دون الحلم، وقال: أنا يا رسول الله عو نك، أنا حرب على من
> حاربت. فابتسم بنو هاشم وقهقه بعضهم، وجعل نظرهم ينتقل من أبي طالب إلى
> ابنه ثم انصرفوا مستهزئين 24

Haykal has quoted the important words in the initial statement of the
Prophet asking for support; but conveniently left out the Prophet's
entire response to 'Ali's readiness to help him!

In the second edition, Haykal seems to have given into the pressure of
the bigots and even deleted the crucial words of the Prophet and just
wrote: "...he said to them, '...So who among you will help me in this
matter? All of them turned away from him..."[^9]

> ليقوموا، ودعاهم محمد في الغداة كرة أخرى، فلما طعموا قال لهم: ما أعلم
> إنسانا من العرب جاء قومه بأفضل مما جئتكم به، قد جئتكم بخير الدنيا
> والآخرة، وقد أمرني ربي أن أدعوكم اليه، فأيكم يوازرني على هذا الأمر وأن
> يكون أخي ووصيي وخليفتي فيكم؟ فأعرضوا عنه وهموا بتركه، لكن عليا نهض وما
> يزال صبيا دون الحلم، وقال: أنا يا رسول الله عو نك، أنا حرب على من
> حاربت. فابتسم بنو هاشم وقهقه بعضهم، وجعل نظرهم ينتقل من أبي طالب إلى
> ابنه ثم انصرفوا مستهزئين 26

This clearly shows that he doesn't doubt the actual "Summoning of the
Family" event but he lacked the intellectual courage to stand by the
logical conclusion of his initial findings in the study of history.

6. The Isnad of "Summoning the Family"
--------------------------------------

The opponents of the Shí'a view naturally have tried to question the
credibility of some of the narrators of this famous event.

Ibn Taymiyya, well known for his anti-Shí'a sentiments, has adamantly
declared it to be a fabricated *hadíth.* He has attacked the credibility
of 'Abd al-Ghaffar bin al-Qasim known as Abu Maryam al-Kufi.[^10] Abu
Maryam is the source of Ibn Ishaq in narrating the event of "Summoning
the Family". However, the only basis for questioning the credibility of
Abu Maryam is his Shi'a links; but, as any unbiased person knows, that
is not a sufficient ground to reject his narration. Shi'a biographers of
narrators have counted him among the reliable narrators of hadíth from
the fourth, fifth, and sixth Shi'a Imams (a.s.).[^11]

Salma bin al-Fadhl (d. 191), the foremost disciple of Ibn Ishaq, is also
recognized as credible in narrating the Prophet's biography from his
master. He is quoted as saying, "I have heard the *al-Maghazi* from Ibn
Ishaq two times;" and he is well known among the scholars of *hadith*
for historical narration from Ibn Ishaq.[^12] According to Muta'
at-Tarabíshí, Salma bin al-Fadhl's narration of historical nature are
accepted by all.[^13] Ibn Mu'ín says, "Salma [bin al-Fadhl] al-Abrash
ar-Razi was a Shí'i as already written and there is no defect in him...
Abu Zuhra says, 'The people of Ray did not like him because of his
undesirable [i.e., Shi'í] beliefs.'"[^14] Adh-Dhahabi writes the
following about Salma: "He was steadfast in prayer and full of humility
in his beliefs; he died in 191 A.H."[^15]

Shaykh Salím al-Bishri had raised the issue why al-Bukhari and Muslim do
not mention this tradition in their *Sahíhs*. Sharafu 'd-Dín al-Musawi
responded as follows:

"The tradition conflicts with the views of the two Shaykhs, Bukhari and
Muslim, in respect of the Caliphate and that is why they have not
recorded it in their *Sahíhs*. They have also scrupulously avoided
recording a number of other genuine traditions which stipulated the
Caliphate in favor of Amir al-Mu'minín lest the same serve as a weapon
in the hands of the Shí'as, and so intentionally concealed the truth.

Not only Bukhari and Muslim but also many other Shaykhs (i.e., senior
traditionists) among the Ahl al-Sunnah followed this practice...They
used to conceal everything of this nature and are well known for their
creed of concealment of facts (favoring 'Ali and the Ahl al-Bayt). Hafiz
Ibn Hajar has related this from them in *Fath al-Bari*...

"Anyone who knows the behaviour of Bukhari towards Amir al-Mu'minín and
other members of the Ahl al-Bayt also knows that his pen invariably
omits mentioning the clear traditions of the Holy Prophet in their
favor, and that his ink dries up before relating their distinguished,
excellent qualities and one will not be surprised at his skipping over
this and other similar traditions. There is neither might nor power but
by Allah, the High and the Great."[^16]

7. Conclusion
-------------

This brief review on the self-censorship that was exercised by the early
historians and compilers of hadíth proves that absence of an event in
the well known "early" books of Islamic history and hadíth does not
necessarily mean that that event is a later invention by the Shí'as or
is not considered credible. One must go beyond the artificial limits of
"early" and official history of the Muslim people and also study the
other "non-orthodox" sources to fully comprehend the real life drama
that unfolded in the early days of the history of Islam.

[^1]: Most Muslim historians and commentators of the Qur'an have quoted
this event. See the following Sunni sources: at-Tabari, at-Ta'ríkh, vol.
1 (Leiden, 1980 offset of the 1789 edition) p. 171-173; Ibn al-Athír,
al-Kamil, vol. 5 (Beirut, 1965) p. 62-63; Abu 'l-Fida', al-Mukhtasar fi
Ta'ríkhi 'l-Bashar, vol. 1 (Beirut, n.d.) p. 116-117; al-Khazin,
at-Tafsír, vol. 4 (Cairo, 1955) p. 127; al-Baghawi, at-Tafsír (Ma'alimu
't-Tanzíl), vol. 6 (Riyadh: Dar Tayyiba, 1993) p. 131; al-Bayhaqi,
Dala'ilu 'n-Nubuwwa, vol. 1 (Cairo, 1969) p. 428-430; as-Suyuti,
ad-Durru 'l-Manthur, vol. 5 (Beirut, n.d.) p. 97; and Muttaqi al-Hindi,
Kanzu 'l-'Ummal, vol. 15 (Hyderabad, 1968) pp. 100, 113, 115. For
further references, see 'Abdu 'l-Husayn al-Aminí, al-Ghadír, vol. 2
(Beirut, 1967) pp. 278-289. In English see, Rizvi, S. Saeed Akhtar,
Imamate: the Vicegerency of the Prophet (Tehran: WOFIS, 1985) pp. 57-60.
Available on line at:
http://www.al-islam.org/imamate-the-viceregency-of-the-prophet-sayyid-ak...
For an elaborate discussion on the isnad and meaning of the Prophet's
hadíth in this event, and also the variations in the early Sunni and
Shi'a sources, see Dr. Sayyid Talib Husayn ar-Rifa'í, Yawmu 'd-Dar
(Beirut: Dar al-Azwa', 1986).

[^2]: Ibn Hisham, as-Sírah an-Nabawiyya, vol. 1 (Cairo: Mustafa
al-Halabi & Sons, 1955) p. 11-12; also see its English translation by A.
Guillaume, The Life of Muhammad (Lahore: Oxford University Press, 1955)
p. 691. See also the introduction by Dr. Asghari Mahdawi to the 6th
century Persian translation by Rafí'u 'd-Dín Hamadani of the Sirah
entitled as Sirat-e Rasulu 'l-lah (Tehran, Bunyad-e Farhang-e Iran, 1360
[solar] AH) p. nun.

[^3]: Ibn Hisham, as-Sirah, vol. 1, p. 10.

[^4]: Abu Ja'far at-Tusi, Kitabu 'l-Amali, vol. 2 (Najaf: Maktabatu
'l-Haydari, 1964) p. 194-196.

[^5]: See the introduction to as-Sirah an-Nabawiyya, vol. 1, p. 15-17;
also see Guillaume, The Life of Muhammad, p. XXXIV-XXXVIII.

[^6]: See the 1879 edition of EJ Brill, Leiden (vol. 3, p. 1173), the
1908 edition of Daru 'l-Qamusi 'l-Hadíth, Cairo (vol. 1&2, p. 217), and
also the 1961 edition of Daru 'l-Ma'arif, Cairo, edited by Muhammad Abu
'l-Fadl Ibrahim (vol. 2, p. 321) in which the original words are intact.
Even at-Tabari's 1988 English translation published by State University
of New York, vol. 6 (translators: WM Watt and MV McDonald) p. 90-91 has
maintained the original words of the Prophet without any omission.

[^7]: Antonie Wessels, A Modern Arabic Biography of Muhammad (Leiden: EJ
Brill, 1972) p. 223, 245; also see 'Abdu 'l-Husayn Sharafu 'd-Dín
al-Musawi, al-Muraji'at, annotated by Husayn ar-Razi (Beirut: n.p.,
1982) p. 189.

[^8]: Haykal, Hayat Muhammad (Cairo: 1st edition) p. 104.

[^9]: Haykal, Hayat Muhammad (Cairo: 2nd edition, 1354) p. 139-140.

[^10]: Ibn Taymiyya, Minhaju 's-Sunnah, vol. 4 (Cairo: al-Matba'atu
'l-Kubra al-Amíriyya, 1322) p. 81.

[^11]: Sayyid Abu 'l-Qasim al-Khu'I, Mu'jam Rijali 'l-Hadíth, vol. 10
(Beirut: Madinatu 'l-'Ilm, 1983) p. 55-56.

[^12]: Muta' at-Tarabíshí, Ruwat Muhammad bin Ishaq bin Yasar fi
'l-Maghazi wa 's-Siyar wa Sa'iri 'l-Marwiyat (Damascus: Daru 'l-Fikr,
1994) p. 149.

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: S. Sharafu 'd-Dín al-Musawi, al-Muraji'at, p. 129; also its
English translation by M. A. H. Khan, The Right Path (Blanco, Texas:
Zahra Publication, 1986) p. 85-86..Also see
http://www.al-islam.org/al-murajaat-shii-sunni-dialogue-sharaf-al-din-al...

[^15]: Adh-Dhahabi, Mizanu 'l-I'tidal, vol. 2 (Egypt, Dar Ihya'i
'l-Kutubi 'l-'Arabiyya, n.d.) p. 192.

[^16]: Sharafu 'd-Dín al-Musawi, al-Muraji'at, p. 191-192


