Ghadir Khumm and the Orientalists
=================================

1. Introduction
---------------

***Note:*** This is a revised and expanded version of a paper first
published simultaneously in the bi-monthly The Light (June 1990)
magazine and in Ghadir (Toronto: ISIJ & NASIMCO, July 1990) under the
title of "Orientalists & the Event of Ghadir Khumm".

**\*\*\***

The 18th of Dhu 'l-Hijja is celebrated in the Shí'a world as the *'idd*
of Ghadir Khumm in which Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) said about Imam 'Ali:
"Whomsoever's master (*mawla*) I am, this 'Ali is also his master." This
event is of such significance to the Shí'as that no serious scholar of
Islam can ignore it. The purpose of this paper is to study how the
Orientalists handled the event of Ghadir Khumm. By "orientalists", I
mean the Western scholarship of Islam and also those Easterners who
received their entire Islamic training under such scholars.

Before proceeding further, a brief narration of the event of Ghadir
Khumm would not be out of place. This will be especially helpful to
those who are not familiar with the event. While returning from his last
pilgrimage, the Prophet received the following command of Allah:

***"O the Messenger! Convey what had been revealed to you from your
Lord; if you do not do so, then [it would be as if] you have not
conveyed His message [at all]. Allah will protect you from the people."
(The Qur'an 5:67)***

Therefore he stopped at Ghadir Khumm on the 18th of Dhu 'l-Hijja, 10 AH
to convey the message to the pilgrims before they dispersed. At one
point, he asked his followers whether he, Muhammad, had more authority
*(awla)* over the believers than they had over themselves; the crowd
cried out, "Yes, it is so, O Apostle of Allah." Then he took 'Ali by the
hand and declared: "Whomsoever's master *(mawla)* I am, this 'Ali is
also his master - *man kuntu mawlahu fa hadha 'Aliyun mawlahu*." Then
the Prophet also announced his impending death and charged the believers
to remain attached to the Qur'an and to his Ahlul Bayt. This summarizes
the important parts of the event of Ghadir Khumm.

The main body of this paper is divided as follows: Part II is a brief
survey of the approach used by the Orientalists in studying Shí'ism.
Part III deals with the approach used to study Ghadir Khumm in
particular. Part IV is a critical review of what M.A. Shaban has written
about the event in his *Islamic History AD 600-750.* This will be
followed by a conclusion.

2. Study of Shí'ism by the Orientalists
---------------------------------------

When the Egyptian writer, Muhammad Qutb, named his book as *Islam: the
Misunderstood Religion,* he was politely expressing the Muslim sentiment
about the way Orientalists have treated Islam and Muslims in general.
The word "misunderstood" implies that at least a genuine attempt was
made to understand Islam.

However, a more blunt criticism of Orientalism, shared by the majority
of Muslims, comes from Edward Said, "The hardest thing to get most
academic experts on Islam to admit is that what they say and do as
scholars is set in a profoundly and in some ways an offensively
political context. Everything about the study of Islam in the
contemporary West is saturated with political importance, but hardly any
writers on Islam, whether expert or general, admit the fact in what they
say. Objectivity is assumed to inhere in learned discourse about other
societies, despite the long history of political, moral, and religious
concern felt in all societies, Western or Islamic, about the alien, the
strange and different. In Europe, for example, the Orientalist has
traditionally been affiliated directly with colonial offices."[^1]

Instead of assuming that objectivity is inhere in learned discourse,
Western scholarship has to realize that precommitment to a political or
religious tradition, on a conscious or subconscious level, can lead to
biased judgement. As Marshall Hudgson writes, "Bias comes especially in
the questions he poses and in the type of category he uses, where
indeed, bias is especially hard to track down because it is hard to
suspect the very terms one uses, which seem so innocently
neutral..."[^2]

The Muslim reaction to the image portrayed of them by Western
scholarship is beginning to get its due attention. In 1979, the highly
respected scholar trained in Western academia, Albert Hourani, said,
"The voices of those from the Middle East and North Africa telling us
that they do not recognize themselves in the image we have formed of
them are too numerous and insistent to be explained in terms of academic
rivalry or national pride."[^3] This was about Islam and Muslims
*vis-à-vis* the Orientalists.

When we focus on the **study of Shí'ism** by the Orientalists, the word
"misunderstood" is not strong enough; rather it is an understatement.
Not only is Shí'ism misunderstood, it has been ignored, misrepresented
and studied mostly through the heresiographic literature of their
opponents. It seems as if the Shí'ites had no scholars and literature of
their own. To borrow an expression from Marx, "they cannot represent
themselves, they must be represented," and that also by their
adversaries!

The reason for this state of affairs lies in the paths through which
Western scholars entered the field of Islamic studies. Hodgson, in his
excellent review of Western scholarship, writes,

"**First**, there were those who studied the Ottoman Empire, which
played so major a role in modern Europe. They came to it usually in the
first instance from the viewpoint of the European diplomatic history.
Such scholars tended to see the whole of Islamdom from the political
perspective of Istanbul, the Ottoman capital.

**Second**, there were those, normally British, who entered Islamic
studies in India so as to master Persian as good civil servants, or at
least they were inspired by Indian interest. For them, the imperial
transition of Delhi tended to be the culmination of Islamicate history.

**Third**, there were the Semitists, often interested primarily in
Hebrew studies, who were lured into Arabic. For them, headquarters
tended to be Cairo, the most vital of Arabic-using cities in the
nineteenth century, though some turned to Syria or the Maghrib.

They were commonly philologians rather than historians, and they learned
to see Islamicate culture through the eyes of the late Egyptian and
Syrian Sunni writers most in vogue in Cairo. Other paths-that of the
Spaniards and some Frenchmen who focused on the Muslims in Medieval
Spain, that of the Russians who focused on the northern Muslims-were
generally less important."[^4]

It is quite obvious that none of these paths would have led Western
scholars to the centres of Shí'a learning or literature. The majority of
what they studied about Shí'ism was channelled through the non-Shí'i
sources. Hudgson, who deserves our highest praise for noticing this
point, says, "All paths were at one in paying relatively little
attention to the central areas of the Fertile Crescent and Iran, with
their tendency towards Shí'ism; areas that tended to be most remote from
western penetration."[^5] And after the First World War, "the Cairene
path to Islamic studies became the Islamicist's path par excellence,
while other paths to Islamic studies came to be looked on as of more
local relevance."[^6]

Therefore, whenever an Orientalist stuided Shí'ism through Ottoman,
Cairene or Indian paths, it was quite natural for him to be biased
against Shí'a Islam. "The Muslim historians of doctrine [who are mostly
Sunni] always tried to show that all other schools of thought other than
their own were not only false but, if possible, less than truly Muslim.
Their work described innumerable 'firqahs' in terms which readily misled
modern scholars into supposing they were referring to so many 'heretical
sects'."[^7]

And so we see that until very recently, Western scholars easily
described Sunni'ism as 'orthodox Islam' and Shí'ism as a 'heretical
sect'. After categorizing Shí'ism as a heretical sect of Islam, it
became "innocently neutral" for Western scholars to absorb the Sunni
scepticism concerning the early Shí'a literature. Even the concept of
*taqiyyah* (dissimulation when one's life is in danger) was blown out of
proportion and it was assumed that every statement of a Shí'a scholar
had a hidden meaning. And, consequently, whenever an Orientalist studied
Shí'ism, his precommitment to Judeo-Christian tradition of the West was
compounded with the Sunni bias against Shí'ism.

One of the best examples of this compounded bias is found in the way the
event of Ghadir Khumm was studied by the Orientalists, an issue that
forms the main purpose of this paper.

3. Ghadír Khumm: From Oblivion to Recognition
---------------------------------------------

The event of Ghadir Khumm is a very good example to trace the Sunni bias
that found its way into the mental state of Orientalists. Those who are
well-versed with the polemic writings of Sunnis know that whenever the
Shí'as present a hadíth or a historical evidence in support of their
view, a Sunni polemicist would respond in the following manner:

Firstly, he will outright ***deny*** the existence of any such *hadíth*
or historical event.

Secondly, when confronted with hard evidence from his own sources, he
will cast ***doubt*** *on the reliability* of the transmitters of that
*hadíth* or event.

Thirdly, when he is shown that all the transmitters are reliable by
Sunni standards, he will give an ***interpretation*** to the hadíth or
the event that will be quite different from that of the Shí'as.

These three levels form the classical response of the Sunni polemicists
in dealing with the arguments of the Shí'as. A quotation from
Rosenthal's translation of Ibn Khaldun's *The Muqaddimah* would suffice
to prove my point. (Ibn Khaldun is quoting the following part from
*al-Milal wa 'n-Nihal,* a heresiographic work of ash-Shahristani.)
According to Ibn Khaldun, the Shí'as believe that

'Ali is the one whom Muhammad appointed. The (Shí'ah) transmit texts (of
traditions) in support of (this belief)...The authority on the Sunnah
and the transmitters of the religious law do not know these texts. Most
of them are supposititious, or [^8] some of their transmitters are
suspect, or [^9] their (true) interpretation is very different from the
wicked interpretation that (the Shí'ah) give to them.[^10]

Interestingly, the event of Ghadir Khumm has suffered the same fate at
the hands of Orientalists. With the limited time and resources available
to me at this moment, I was surprised to see that most works on Islam
have ignored the event of Ghadir Khumm, indicating, by its very absence,
that the Orientalists believed this event to be 'supposititious' and an
invention of the Shí'as.

Margoliouth's *Muhammad and the Rise of Islam* (1905), Brockelmann's
*History of the Islamic People* (1939), Arnold and Guillaume's *The
Legacy of Islam* (1931), Guillaume's *Islam* (1954), von Grunebaum's
*Classical Islam* (1963), Arnold's *The Caliphate* (1965), and *The
Cambridge History of Islam* (1970) have completely ignored the event of
Ghadir Khumm.

Why did these and many other Western scholars ignore the event of Ghadir
Khumm? Since Western scholars mostly relied on anti-Shí'a works, they
naturally ignored the event of Ghadir Khumm.

Dr. Laura Veccia Vaglieri, one of the contributors to the second edition
of the *Encyclopaedia of Islam* (1953), writes:

Most of those sources which form the basis of our knowledge of the life
of Prophet (Ibn Hisham, al-Tabari, Ibn Sa'd, etc.) pass in silence over
Muhammad's stop at Ghadir Khumm, or, if they mention it, say nothing of
his discourse (the writers evidently feared to attract the hostility of
the Sunnis, who were in power, by providing material for the polemic of
the Shí'is who used these words to support their thesis of 'Ali's right
to the caliphate). Consequently, the western biographers of Muhammad,
whose work is based on these sources, equally make no reference to what
happened at Ghadir Khumm.[^11]

Then we come to those few Western scholars who mention the *hadíth* or
the event of Ghadir Khumm but express their scepticism about its
authority-the second stage in the classical response of the Sunni
polemicists.

The first example of such scholars is Ignaz Goldziher, a highly
respected German Orientalist of the nineteenth century. He discusses the
*hadíth* of Ghadir Khumm in his *Muhammedanische Studien* (1889-1890)
translated into English as *Muslim Studies* (1966-1971) under the
chapter entitled as "The Hadíth in its Relation to the Conflicts of the
Parties of Islam." Coming to the Shí'as, Goldziher writes:

A stronger argument in their [Shí'as'] favour...was their conviction
that the Prophet had expressly designated and appointed 'Ali as his
successor before his death...Therefore the 'Alid adherents were
*concerned with inventing* and authorizing traditions which prove 'Ali's
installation by direct order of the Prophet. The most widely known
tradition (the authority of which is not denied even by orthodox
authorities though they deprive it of its intention by a different
interpretation) is the tradition of Khumm, which *came into being* for
this purpose and is one of the firmest foundation of the theses of the
'Alid party.[^12]

One would expect such a renowned scholar to prove how the Shí'as "were
concerned with inventing" traditions to support their theses, but
nowhere does Goldziher provide any evidence. After citing at-Tirmidhi
and al-Nasa'i in the footnote as the source for hadíth of Ghadir Khumm,
he says, "Al-Nasa'i had, as is well known, pro-'Alid inclinations, and
also at-Tirmidhi included in his collection tendentious traditions
favouring 'Ali, e.g., the *tayr* tradition."[^13] This is again the same
old classical response of the Sunni polemicists-discredit the
transmitters as unreliable or adamantly accuse the Shí'as of inventing
the traditions.

Another example is the first edition of the *Encyclopaedia of Islam*
(1911-1938) which has a short entry under "Ghadir Khumm" by F. Bhul, a
Danish Orientalist who wrote a biography of the Prophet. Bhul writes,
"The place has become famous through a tradition which had its origin
among the Shi'is but is also found among Sunnis, viz., the Prophet on
journey back from Hudaibiya (according to others from the farewell
pilgrimage) here said of 'Ali: Whomsoever I am lord of, his lord is 'Ali
also!"[^14] Bhul makes sure to emphasize that the hadíth of Ghadir has
"its origin among the Shí'is!"

Another striking example of the Orientalists' ignorance about Shí'ism is
*A Dictionary of Islam* (1965) by Thomas Hughes. Under the entry of
Ghadir, he writes, "A festival of the Shi'ahs on the 18th of the month
of Zu 'l-Hijjah, when three images of dough filled with honey are made
to represent Abu Bakr, 'Umar, and 'Uthman, which are struck with knives,
and the honey is sipped as typical of the blood of the usurping
Khalifahs. The festival is named for Ghadir, 'a pool,' and the festival
commemorates, it is said, Muhammad having declared 'Ali his successor at
Ghadir Khum, a watering place midway between Makkah and
al-Madinah."[^15]

Coming from a Shí'a family that traces its ancestory back to the Prophet
himself, having studied in Iran for ten years and lived among the Shí'as
of Africa and North America, I have yet to see, hear or read about the
dough and honey ritual of Ghadir! I was more surprised to see that even
Vaglieri, in the second edition of the *Encyclopaedia,* has incorporated
that nonsense into her fairly excellent article on Ghadir Khumm. She
adds at the end that, "This feast also holds an important place among
the Nusayris." It is quite possible that the dough and honey ritual is
observed by the Nusayris; it has nothing to do with the Shí'as. But do
all Orientalists know the difference between the Shí'as and the
Nusayris? I very much doubt so.

A fourth example from the contemporary scholars who have treaded the
same path is Philip Hitti in his *History of the Arabs* (1964). After
mentioning that the Buyids established "the rejoicing on that [day] of
the Prophet's alleged appointment of 'Ali as his successor at Ghadir
Khumm," he describes the location of Ghadir Khumm in the footnote as "a
spring between Makkah and al-Madinah where Shí'ite tradition asserts the
Prophet declared, 'Whomsoever I am lord of, his lord is 'Ali
also'."[^16] Although this scholar mentions the issue of Ghadir in a
passing manner, he classifies the *hadíth* of Ghadir is a "Shí'ite
tradition".

To these scholars who, consciously or unconsciously, have absorbed the
Sunni bias against Shí'ism and insist on the Shí'ite origin or invention
of the *hadíth* of Ghadir, I would just repeat what Vaglieri has said in
the *Encyclopaedia of Islam* about Ghadir Khumm:

It is, however, certain that Muhammad did speak in this place and utter
the famous sentence, for the account of this event has been preserved,
either in a concise form or in detail, not only by al-Ya'kubi, whose
sympathy for the 'Alid cause is well known, but also in the collection
of traditions which are considered canonical, especially in the *Musnad*
of Ibn Hanbal; and the hadiths are so numerous and so well attested by
the different *isnads* that it does not seem possible to reject
them.[^17]

Vaglieri continues, "Several of these hadiths are cited in the
bibliography, but it does not include the hadíth which, although
reporting the sentence, omit to name Ghadir Khumm, or those which state
that the sentence was pronounced at al-Hudaybiya. The complete
documentation will be facilitated when the *Concordance* of Wensinck
have been completely published. In order to have an idea of how numerous
these hadiths are, it is enough to glance at the pages in which Ibn
Kathir has collected a great number of them with their *isnads*."

It is time the Western scholarship made itself familiar with the Shí'ite
literature of the early days as well as of the contemporary period. The
Shí'a scholars have produced great works on the issue of Ghadir Khumm.
Here I will just mention two of those:

1. The first is *'Abaqatu 'l-Anwar* in eleven bulky volumes written in
Persian by Mir Hamid Husayn al-Musawi (d. 1306 AH) of India. 'Allamah
Mir Hamid Husayn has devoted three bulky volumes (consisting of about
1080 pages) on the *isnad, tawatur* and meaning of the *hadíth* of
Ghadir. An abridged version of this work in Arabic translation entitled
as *Nafahatu 'l-Azhar fi Khulasati 'Abaqati 'l-Anwar* by Sayyid 'Ali
al-Milani has been published in twelve volumes by now; and four volumes
of these (with modern type-setting and printing) are dedicated to the
hadíth of Ghadír.

2. The second work is *al-Ghadír* in eleven volumes in Arabic by 'Abdul
Husayn Ahmad al-Amini (d. 1970) of Iraq. 'Allamah Amini has given with
full references the names of 110 companions of the Prophet and also the
names of 84 *tabi'ín* (disciples of the companions) who have narrated
the *hadíth* of Ghadir. He has also chronologically given the names of
the historians, traditionalists, exegetists and poets who have mentioned
the *hadíth* of Ghadir from the first till the fourteenth Islamic
century.

The late Sayyid 'Abdu 'l-'Azíz at-Tabataba'í has stated that there
probably is not a single hadíth that has been narrated by so many
companions as the number we see (120) in the hadíth of Ghadír. However,
comparing that number to the total number of people who were present in
Ghadír Khumm, he states that 120 is just ten percent of the total
audience. And so he rightly gave the following title to his paper:
"*Hadíth Ghadír: Ruwatuhu Kathíruna lil-Ghayah...Qalíluna lil-Ghayah* -
Its Narrators are Very Many...Very Few".[^18]

4. Shaban & His New Interpretation
----------------------------------

Among the latest work by Western scholarship on the history of Islam is
M.A. Shaban's *Islamic History AD 600-750* subtitled as "A New
Interpretation" in which the author claims not only to use newly
discovered material but also to re-examine and re-interpret material
which has been known to us for many decades. Shaban, a lecturer of
Arabic at SOAS of the University of London, is not prepared to even
consider the event of Ghadir Khumm. He writes, "The famous Shí'ite
tradition that he [the Prophet] desginated 'Ali as his successor at
Ghadir Khumm should not be taken seriously."

Shaban gives two 'new' reasons for not taking the event of Ghadir
seriously:

"Such an event is inherently improbable considering the Arabs'
traditional reluctance to entrust young and untried men with great
responsibility. Furthermore, at no point do our sources show the Madinan
community behaving as if they had heard of this designation."[^19]

Let us critically examine each of these reasons given by Shaban.

### B. The Traditional Reluctance of the Arabs to Entrust Young Men with Great Responsibility

First of all, had not the Prophet introduced many things to which the
Arabs were traditionally reluctant? Did not the Meccans accept Islam
itself very reluctantly? Was not the issue of marrying a divorced wife
of one's adopted son a taboo among the Arabs? This 'traditional
reluctance,' instead of being an argument against the designation of
'Ali, is actually part of the argument used by the Shí'as.

They agree that the Arabs (in particular, the Quraysh) were reluctant to
accept 'Ali as the Prophet's successor not only because of his young age
but also because he had killed their leaders in the early battles of
Islam. According to the Shí'as, Allah also knew about this reluctance
and that is why after ordering the Prophet to proclaim 'Ali as his
successor

***"O the Messenger! Convey what had been revealed to you..."***,

He reassured His Messenger by saying that,

***"Allah will protect you from the people." (5:67)***

The Prophet was commissioned to convey the message of Allah, no matter
whether the Arabs liked it or not.

Moreover, this 'traditional reluctance' was not an irrevocable custom of
the Arab society as Shaban wants us to believe. Ja’fari, in *The Origin
and Early Development of Shí'a Islam,* says, "[O]ur sources do not fail
to point out that, though the 'Senate' *(Nadwa)* of pre-Islamic Mecca
was generally a council of elders only, the sons of the chieftain Qusayy
were privileged to be exempted from this age restriction and were
admitted to the council despite their youth. In later times more liberal
concessions seems to have been in vogue; Abu Jahl was admitted despite
his youth, and Hakim b. Hazm was admitted when he was only fifteen or
twenty years old."

Then Ja’fari quotes Ibn 'Abd Rabbih, "There are no monarchic king over
the Arabs of Mecca in the Jahiliya. So whenever there was a war, they
took a ballot among chieftains and elected one as 'King', were he a
minor or a grown man. Thus on the day of Fijar, it was the turn of the
Banu Hashim, and as a result of the ballot Al-'Abbas, who was then a
mere child, was elected, and they seated him on the shield."[^20]

Thirdly, we have an example in the Prophet's own decisions during the
last days of his life when he entrusted the command of the army to
Usamah bin Zayd, a young man who was hardly twenty years of age.[^21] He
was appointed over the elder members of the Muhajirín (the Quraysh) and
the Ansar; and, indeed, many of the elders resented this decision of the
Prophet.[^22]If the Prophet of Islam could appoint the young and untried
Usamah bin Zayd over the elders of the Quraysh and Ansar, then why
should it be "inherently improbable" to think that the Prophet had
designated 'Ali as his successor?

### 2. The Traditional Reluctance to Entrust Untried Men with Great Responsibility

Apart from the young age of 'Ali, Shaban also refers to the reluctance
of the Arabs in entrusting "untried men with great responsibility." This
implies that the Arabs selected Abu Bakr because he had been "tried with
great responsibilities."

I doubt whether Mr. Shaban would be able to substantiate the implication
of his claim from Islamic history. One will find more instances where
'Ali was entrusted by the Prophet with greater responsibilities than was
Abu Bakr. 'Ali was left behind in Mecca during the Prophet's migration
to mislead the enemies and also to return the properties of various
people which were given in trust to the Prophet. 'Ali was tried with
greater responsibilities during the early battles of Islam in which he
was always successful.

When the ultimatum *(bara'at)* against the pagan Arabs of Mecca was
revealed, first Abu Bakr was assigned to convey it to the Meccans; but
later on this great responsibility was taken away from him and entrusted
to 'Ali. 'Ali was entrusted with safety of the city and citizens of
Medina while the Prophet had gone on the expedition to Tabuk. 'Ali was
appointed the leader of the expedition to Yemen. These are just the few
examples that come to mind at random. Therefore, on a comparative level,
'Ali bin Abu Talib was a person who had been tried and entrusted with
greater responsibilities more than Abu Bakr.

### C. The Behaviour of the Madinan Community about Declaration of Ghadir Khumm.

Firstly, if an event can be proved true by the accepted standard of
hadíth criticism (of the Sunnis, of course), then the reaction of the
people to the credibility of that event is immaterial.

Secondly, the same 'traditional reluctance' used by Shaban to discredit
the declaration of Ghadir can be used here against his scepticism
towards the event of Ghadir. This traditional reluctance, besides other
factors that are beyond the scope of this paper,[^23] can be used to
explain the behaviour of the Madinan community.

Thirdly, although the Madinan community was silent during the events
which kept 'Ali away from caliphate, there were many among them who had
witnessed the declaration of Ghadir Khumm. On quite a few occasions,
Imam 'Ali implored the companions of the Prophet to bear witness to the
declaration of Ghadir. Here I will just mention one instance that took
place in Kufa during the reign of Imam 'Ali, about 25 years after the
Prophet's death.

Imam 'Ali heard that some people were doubting his claim of precedence
over the previous caliphs, therefore, he came to a gathering at the
mosque and implored the eyewitnesses of the event of Ghadir Khumm to
verify the truth of the Prophet's declaration about his being the lord
and master of all the believers.

Many companions of the Prophet stood up and verified the claim of 'Ali.
We have the names of twenty-four of those who testified on behalf of
'Ali, although other sources like *Musnad* of Hanbal and *Majma'
az-Zawa'id* of Hafidh al-Haythami put that number at thirty. Also bear
in mind that this incident took place 25 years after the event of Ghadir
Khumm, and during this period hundreds of eye witnesses had died
naturally or in the battles fought during the first two caliphs' rule.

Add to this the fact that this incident took place in Kufa which was far
from the centre of the companions, Medina. This incident that took place
in Kufa in the year 35 AH has itself been narrated by four companions
and fourteen *tabi'in* and has been recorded in most books of history
and tradition.[^24]

In conclusion, the behaviour of the Madinan community after the death of
the Prophet does not automatically make the declaration of Ghadir Khumm
improbable. I think this will suffice to make Mr. Shaban realize that
his is not a 'new' interpretation; rather it exemplifies, in my view,
the first stage of the classical response of the Sunni polemicists-an
outright denial of the existence of an event or a hadíth which supports
the Shí'a view-which has been absorbed by the majority of Western
scholars of Islam.

5. The Meaning of "Mawla"
-------------------------

The last argument in the strategy of the Sunni polemicists in their
response to an event or a hadíth presented by the Shí'as is to give it
an interpretation that would safeguard their beliefs. They exploit the
fact that the word *"mawla"* has various meanings: master, lord, slave,
benefactor, beneficiery, protector, patron, client, friend, charge,
neighbour, guest, partner, son, uncle, cousin, nephew, son-in-law,
leader, follower. The Sunnis say that the word *"mawla"* uttered by the
Prophet in Ghadir does not mean "master or lord", it means "friend".

On the issue of the hadíth of Ghadír, this is the stage where the
Western scholarship of Islam has arrived. While explaining the context
of the statement uttered by the Prophet in Ghadir Khumm, L. Veccia
Vaglieri follows the Sunni interpretation. She writes:

On this point, Ibn Kathír shows himself yet again to be percipient
historian: he connects the affair of Ghadir Khumm with episodes which
took place during the expedition to the Yemen, which was led by 'Ali in
10/631-2, and which had returned to Mecca just in time to meet the
Prophet there during his Farewell Pilgrimage. 'Ali had been very strict
in the sharing out of the booty and his behaviour had aroused protests;
doubt was cast on his rectitude, he was reproached with avarice and
accused of misuse of authority. Thus it is quite possible that, in order
to put an end to all these accusations, Muhammad wished to demonstrate
publicly his esteem and love for 'Ali. Ibn Kathir must have arrived at
the same conclusion, for he does not forget to add that the Prophet's
words put an end to the murmuring against Ali.[^25]

Whenever a word has more than one meaning, it is indeed a common
practice to look at the context of the statement and the event to
understand the intent of the speaker. Ibn Kathir and other Sunni writers
have connected the event of Ghadir Khumm to the incident of the
expedition to Yemen. But why go so far back to understand the meaning of
*"mawla"*, why not look at the whole sermon that the Prophet gave at
Ghadir Khumm itself? Isn't it a common practice to look at the immediate
context of the statement, rather than look at remote events, in time and
space?

When we look at the immediate context of the statement uttered by the
Holy Prophet in Ghadir Khumm, we find the following:

1. The question that the Prophet asked just before the declaration. He
asked, "Do I not have more authority upon you *(awla bi kum)* than you
have yourselves?" When the people replied, "Yes, surely," then the
Prophet declared: "Whosoever's *mawla* am I, this 'Ali is his *mawla*."
Surely the word *"mawla"*, in this context, has the same meaning as the
word "*awla:* have more authority".[^26]

2. After the declaration, the Prophet uttered the following prayer: "O
Allah! Love him who loves 'Ali, and be enemy of the enemy of 'Ali; help
him who helps 'Ali, and forsake him who forsakes 'Ali." This prayer
itself shows that 'Ali, on that day, was being entrusted with a position
that would make some people his enemies and that he would need
supporters in carrying out his responsibilities. This could not be
anything but the position of the *mawla* in the sense of ruler, master
and lord. Are helpers ever needed to carry on a 'friendship'?

3. The statement of the Prophet in Ghadir that: "It seems imminent that
I will be called away (by Allah) and I will answer the call." It was
clear that the Prophet was making arrangements for the leadership of the
Muslims after his death.

4. The companions of the Prophet congratulated 'Ali by addressing him as
"Amirul Mumineen - Leader of the Believers". This leaves no room for
doubt concerning the meaning of *mawla.*

5. The occasion, place and time. Imagine the Prophet breaking his
journey in mid-day and detaining nearly one hundred thousand travellers
under the burning sun of the Arabian desert, making them sit in a thorny
place on the burning sand, and making a pulpit of camel saddles, and
then imagine him delivering a long sermon and at the end of all those
preparations, he comes out with an announcement that "Whosoever
considers me a friend, 'Ali is also his friend!" Why? Because some (not
all the hundred thousand people who had gathered there) were upset with
'Ali in the way he handled the distribution of the booty among his
companions on the expedition to Yemen! Isn't that a ridiculous thought?

Another way of finding the meaning in which the Prophet used the word
*"mawla"* for 'Ali is to see how the people in Ghadir Khumm understood
it. Did they take the word *"mawla"* in the sense of "friend" or in the
meaning of "master, leader"?

Hassan ibn Thabit, the famous poet of the Prophet, composed a poem on
the event of Ghadir Khumm on the same day. He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال له قم يا علي فاننى رضيتك من بعدي اماما وهاديا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He then said to him: "Stand up, O 'Ali, for* *I am pleased to make you
Imam & Guide after me.*

In this line, Hassan ibn Thabit has understood the term *"mawla"* in the
meaning of "Imam and Guide" which clearly proves that the Prophet was
talking about his successor, and that he was not introducing 'Ali as a
"friend" but as a "leader".

Even the words of 'Umar ibn al-Khattab are interesting. He congratulated
Imam 'Ali in these words: "Congratulations, O son of Abu Talib, this
morning you became *mawla* of every believing man and woman."[^27] If
*"mawla"* meant "friend" then why the congratulations? Was 'Ali an
'enemy' of all believing men and women before the day of Ghadir?

These immediate contexts make it very clear that the Prophet was talking
about a comprehensive authority that 'Ali has over the Muslims
comparable to his own authority over them. They prove that the meaning
of the term *"mawla"* in hadíth of Ghadír is not "friend" but "master,
patron, lord, or leader".[^28]

Finally, even if we accept that the Prophet uttered the words
"Whomsoever's *mawla* I am, this 'Ali is his *mawla*" in relation to the
incident of the expedition to Yemen, even then *"mawla"* would not mean
"friend". The reports of the expedition, in Sunni sources, say that 'Ali
had reserved for himself the best part of the booty that had come under
the Muslims' control.

This caused some resentment among those who were under his command. On
meeting the Prophet, one of them complained that since the booty was the
property of the Muslims, 'Ali had no right to keep that item for
himself. The Prophet was silent; then the second person came with the
same complaint. The Prophet did not respond again. Then the third person
came with the same complaint. That is when the Prophet became angry and
said, "What do you want with 'Ali? He indeed is the *waliy* after
me."[^29]

What does this statement prove? It says that just as the Prophet,
according to verse 33:6, had more right *(awla)* over the lives and
properties of the believers, similarly, 'Ali as the *waliy,* had more
right over the lives and properties of the believers. The Prophet
clearly puts 'Ali on the highest levels of authority *(wilayat)* after
the Prophet himself. That is why the author of *al-Jami'u 's-Saghír*
comments*,* "This is indeed the highest praise for 'Ali."

6. Conclusion
-------------

In this brief survey, I have shown that the event of Ghadir Khumm is a
historical fact that cannot be rejected; that in studying Shí'ism, the
precommitment to Judeo-Christian tradition of the Orientalists was
compounded with the Sunni bias against Shí'ism. Consequently, the event
of Ghadir Khumm was ignored by most Western scholars and emerged from
oblivion only to be handled with scepticism and re-interpretation.

I hope this one example will convince at least some Western scholars to
re-examine their methodology in studying Shí'ism; instead of approaching
it largely through the works of heresiographers like ash-Shahristani,
Ibn Hazm, al-Maqrizi and al-Baghdadi who present the Shí'as as a
heretical sect of Islam, they should turn to more objective works of
both the Shí'as as well as the Sunnis.

The Shí'as are tired, and rightfully so, of being portrayed as a
heretical sect that emerged because of political circumstances of the
early Islamic period. They demand to represent themselves instead of
being represented by their adversaries.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليك يا أمير المؤمنين ، يا أمين الله في أرضه ، وسفيره في خلقه،
وحجته البالغة على عباده .
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليك يا دين الله القويم ، وصراطه المستقيم .  
 السلام عليك أيها النبأ العظيم ، الذي هم فيه مختلفون ، وعنه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يسألون .
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَشْهَدُ يَا أَمِيرَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَنَّ الشَّاكَّ فِيكَ مَا آمَنَ
بِالرَّسُولِ الْأَمِينِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وان العادل بك غيرك عائد عن ألدين القويم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
.الذي إرتضاه لنا رب العالمين واكمله بولايتك يوم الغدير
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you,

O my Master, Amiru 'l-Mu'minin!

O the trustee of Allah in His earth,

His representative among His creatures,

and His convincing proof for His servants...

Peace be upon you,

O the upright religion of Allah and His straight path.

Peace be upon you, O the great news about whom they disputed and about
whom they will be questioned.

I bear witness, O Amiru 'l-Mu'minin,

that the person who doubts about you

has not believed in the trustworthy Messenger;

and one who equates you to others has astrayed

from the upright religion which

the Lord of the universe has chosen for us and

which He has perfected through your wilayat

on the day of Ghadir.

*(Excerpts from Ziyarat of the Day of Ghadír)*

[^1]: Said, E.W., Covering Islam (New York: Pantheon Books, 1981) p.
xvii.

[^2]: Hodgson, M.G.S., The Venture of Islam, vol. 1 (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1974) p. 27.

[^3]: Hourani, A. "Islamic History, Middle Eastern History, Modern
History," in Kerr, M.H. (ed) Islamic Studies: A Tradition and Its
Problems (California: Undena Publications, 1979) p. 10.

[^4]: Hodgson, op. cit., p. 39-40.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Hodgson, op. cit., p. 66-67.

[^8]: Fajru 'l-Islam, p. 33 as quoted and then refuted by Muhammad
Husayn Kashiful 'l-Ghita', Aslu 'sh-Shí'a wa Usuluha (Qum: Mu'assasa
al-Imam 'Ali, 1415) p. 140, 142; also see the latter's English
translation, The Shí'a Origin and Faith (Karachi: Islamic Seminary,
1982).

[^9]: Fazlur Rahman, Islam (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976)
p. 171-172.

[^10]: Ibn Khaldun, The Muqaddimah, tr. Franz Rosenthal, vol. 1 (New
York: Pantheon Books, 1958) p. 403. In original Arabic, see vol. 1
(Beirut: Maktabatul Madrasah, 1961) p. 348.

[^11]: EI2, p. 993 under "Ghadir Khumm".

[^12]: Goldziher, Muslim Studies, tr. Barber and Stern, vol. 2 (Chicago:
Aldine Inc., 1971) pp. 112-113.

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: EI1, p. 134-135 under "Ghadir Khumm".

[^15]: Hughes, Thomas P., A Dictionary of Islam (New Jersey: Reference
Book Publishers, 1965) p. 138.

[^16]: Hitti, P.K., History of the Arabs (London: Macmillan & Co., 1964)
p. 471.

[^17]: EI2, p. 993 under "Ghadir Khumm".

[^18]: At-Tabataba'í, 'Abdu 'l-'Azíz, al-Ghadír fi 't-Turathi 'l-Islami
(Qum: Nashr al-Hadi, 1415) p. 7-8.

[^19]: Shaban, Islamic History AD 600-750 (Cambridge: University of
Press, 1971) p. 16.

[^20]: Ja’fari, S.H.M., The Origin and Early Developments of Shí'a
Islam, p. 22.

[^21]: Haykal, M.H., Hayat Muhammad (2nd edition) p. 478; also see its
translation, The Life of Muhammad, tr. al-Faruqi (n.p.: American Trust
Publications, 1976) p. 492.

[^22]: See Ibn Sa'd's at-Tabaqat and other major works on sirah.

[^23]: For more details, see Rizvi, S.S.A., Imamate, p. 120-121also
available on line: .
http://www.al-islam.org/imamate-the-viceregency-of-the-prophet-sayyid-ak...

[^24]: For full references, see al-Amini, al-Ghadír, vol. 1 (Tehran:
Mu'assasatu 'l-Muwahhidi, 1976) p. 166-186. [Also see section on
Reminders by Imam 'Ali [a] in Ghadir Khumm: Appointment of Imam 'Ali in
the Qur'an, Hadith, History]

[^25]: EI2 p. 993-994 under "Ghadir Khumm".

[^26]: Al-Amini gives the names of 64 Sunni traditionalists who have
quoted the preceding question, included among them are Ahmad bin Hanbal,
Ibn Majah, an-Nasa'i, and at-Tirmidhi. See al-Ghadír, vol. 1, p.
370-371. [Also see section on Acknowledgement of Authority in Ghadir
Khumm: Appointment of Imam 'Ali in the Qur'an, Hadith, History]

[^27]: See al-Amini, al-Ghadír, vol. 1, pp. 270-283 for references from
Sunni sources. [Also see section on Oath of Allegiance in Ghadir Khumm:
Appointment of Imam 'Ali in the Qur'an, Hadith, History]

[^28]: These contexts are from al-Amini's al-Ghadîr as summarized in
Rizvi, Imamate: the Vicegerency of the Prophet.

[^29]: See an-Nasa'í, Khasa'is 'Ali bin Abi Talib, p. 92-93;
at-Tirmidhi, Sahíh, vol. 5, p. 632 (hadíth \# 3712), and al-Jami'u
's-Saghír.


