The Concept of Ahlul Bayt: Tribal or Islamic?
=============================================

1. The Meaning of Ahlul Bayt
----------------------------

"Ahlul Bayt" literally means people of the house and it refers to the
family or children of a person. In Islamic terminology, it refers to the
family of the Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.).

What is the basis of the importance given to the Ahlul Bayt of the
Prophet? Is there anything about it in the Qur'an and the sayings of the
Prophet? Or is this an old Arab tribal concept with no basis in Islamic
sources? The Qur'an and the hadíth have a lot to say about the Ahlul
Bayt. However, before we even go to the Qur'an, a clarification on the
concept of Ahlul Bayt is necessary.

The term "family of the prophet" can be applied on three kinds of
relationships:

• Those who are related to the prophet by blood or marriage ties only.

• Those who are related to the prophet by soul and spirit only.

• Those who are related to the prophet by blood or marriage ties as well
as by soul and spirit.

When the Qur'an or the Prophet uses the term "Ahlul Bayt", it could not
be the first or the second group.

The first group is only physically related to the Prophet but not
spiritually, like the son of Prophet Nuh or the wife of Prophet Lut or
Abu Lahab, the Prophet's uncle. Allah clearly says to Prophet Nuh about
his son: "*Innahu laysa min ahlik* - He is not of your family."
(11:45-46) That is, he is not one of your spiritual family; he is only
physically related to you. Lut's wife and the Prophet's uncle, Abu
Lahab, both are counted as people of the Hell-Fire.

The second category is considered "Ahlul Bayt" only in a metaphorical
sense, not in the real meaning; for example, Salman al-Farsi about whom
the Prophet said, "Salman is from us, the Ahlul Bayt." This leaves us
with the third group.

2. Who Are the "Ahlul Bayt"?
----------------------------

Many people were related to the Prophet both by blood and marriage as
well as by soul and spirit. But the term "Ahlul Bayt" as used by the
Qur'an and the Prophet does not apply to all of them. We see that
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) clearly applied the Qur'anic term "Ahlul Bayt"
to four people: Fatima, 'Ali, Hasan and Husayn (peace be upon them all).

The **first verse** (33:33) is of purification (*tathír)*:

***"Verily Allah intends to keep away the abomination from you, O the
Ahlul Bayt, and purify you a thorough purification."***

No Muslim would question the inclusion of Fatima, 'Ali, Hasan and Husayn
in the "Ahlul Bayt". The disagreement arises in the inclusion of the
wives and other Hashimite relatives of the Prophet among the "Ahlul
Bayt". For example, during our time, a book has been published in Saudi
Arabia entitled as *'Allimu Awladakum Hubb Al-i Bayti 'n-Nabi* (Teach
Your Children the Love of the Family of the Prophet) by Dr. Muhammad
'Abduh Yamani in 1991.[^1] The order in which Yamani talks about the
Prophet's family is very interesting: he first talks about Khadija, then
Fatima, 'Ali, Hasan, Husayn, Zaynu 'l-'Abidyn, and then ends with the
other wives of the Prophet.

Wilfred Madelung makes the following observation on the verse of
purification: "Who are the 'people of the house' here? The pronoun
referring to them is in the masculine plural, while the preceding part
of the verse is in the feminine plural. This change of gender has
evidently contributed to the birth of various accounts of a legendary
character, attaching the latter part of the verse to the five People of
the Mantle *(ahl al-kisa')*: Muhammad, 'Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husayn.
In spite of the obvious Shí'ite significance, the great majority of the
reports quoted by al-Tabari in his commentary on this verse support this
interpretation."[^2]

From the many reports that the Sunni sources narrated, here I am just
quoting one as an example. Abu Sa'íd al-Khudari quotes Umm Salama, the
wife of the Prophet in whose house the incident of Kisa' took place. She
says: Jibra'íl came with the verse of purification; the Prophet called
Hasan, Husayn, Fatima and 'Ali, and he gathered them together and
covered them with the mantle. Then he said, "O Allah, these are my Ahlul
Bayt, so 'keep away the abomination from the Ahlul Bayt, and purify them
thoroughly.'" Umm Salama (may Allah be pleased with her) said, "Am I
with them, O Apostle of Allah?" The Prophet said, "You stay in your
place, and you are virtuous."[^3]

Since this verse is situated right in the midst of the verses addressed
to the wives of the Prophet, some Sunnis use its position to include the
wives in the "Ahlul Bayt". But the problem with their interpretation is
the difference in the pronouns: the sentences before and after the verse
of purification have feminine plural pronouns whereas the statement
itself has the masculine plural pronouns. This is internal evidence that
the statement of purification was an independent verse that was revealed
on its own in a different event unrelated to the wives.

In spite of the great majority of reports by Sunnis supporting the view
that this part of the verse was a separate revelation that was later
attached to the rest, Madelung has difficulty in accepting it as such.
In his interpretation, he has tried to apply the term 'Ahlul Bayt'
primarily to the Bani Hashim and then, in the second place, to the
wives. But he has failed to explain the gender difference in the
pronouns used in the whole passage.

The Shí'ite and Sunni reports clearly apply the term "Ahlul Bayt" in the
statement of purification to the Ahlul Kisa', excluding the wives of the
Prophet. And the gender difference in the pronouns was to show the
contrast between the "Ahlul Bayt" and the wives. In words of Mirza Mahdi
Puya, "While the address in the beginning of the verse is in the
feminine gender - there is the transition here in the address from the
feminine to the masculine gender.

While referring to the consorts of the Holy Prophet, the pronouns also
are consistently feminine. For a mixed assembly of men and women,
generally the masculine gender is used. This transition in the
grammatical use of the language, makes it quite obvious that this clause
is quite a different matter used for a different group other than the
previous one, and has been suitably placed here to show a comparative
position of the Ahlu 'l-bayt in contrast to the wives of the Holy
Prophet."[^4]

**Another important verse** of the Qur'an that talks about the Ahlul
Bayt is 42:23 in which Allah, *subhanahu wa ta'ala,* says:

***"(O Muhammad) Say, 'I do not ask for any reward for this (bringing of
Allah's message) except the love for the near kinship”.***

The fact that this verse was revealed concerning the Ahlul Bayt, the
family of the Prophet, is beyond any doubt. Imam Shafí'i, the founder of
the Sunni Shafí'í school of law, has explained the meaning of this verse
in a poem:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا اهل بيت رسول الله حبكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فرض من الله في القرآن انزله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من لم يصل عليكم لا صلاة له
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كفاكم من عظيم القدر انكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Ahlul Bayt of the Messenger of Allah, your love,*

*Is a duty from Allah, mentioned in the Qur'an.*

*In your honour, it is sufficient* *that one's prayer,*

*Is incomplete without praying for blessings on you*.[^5]

The Sunni polemicists have tried to reject the Shí'a point of view by
the following arguments: (1) This verse was revealed in Mecca when Hasan
and Husayn were not yet born, so how could it be applied on the Ahlul
Bayt in the sense of Ahlul Kisa'? (2) Since it was revealed in Mecca, it
is addressing the Quraysh by asking them 'to love Muhammad because he is
from their kinship.' (3) Some say that it refers to all the Hashimites,
and not just the Ahlul Bayt in the Shí'i definition.

First of all, the commentators of the Qur'an overwhelmingly state that
even though chaper 42 is a Meccan surah, its verses 23-25, 27 were
revealed in Medina. This makes the first and second arguments mentioned
above baseless.

Secondly, the commandment asking for "love of the kinship of the
Prophet" cannot apply to all of his kin because there were good as well
as evil people among them; and so one has to restrict the import of this
verse to those who were physically as well as spiritually connected to
the Prophet. And no one can argue that 'Ali, Fatimah, Hasan, and Husayn
were not among those who were physically as well as spiritually related
to the Prophet, even though he might extend this title to other members
of Hashimite.

Finally, there are many reports in Sunni sources in which the Prophet
applies this verse to the Ahlu 'l-Kisa'. For example, when this verse
was revealed, the people asked the Prophet: "Who are these near kin of
yours whose love is obligatory upon us?" He replied, "'Ali, Fatima, and
their two sons." He repeated this three times.[^6]

3. "Ahlul Bayt Not A Tribal Concept
-----------------------------------

What I have stated above is not a new interpretation; I have just
summarized the arguments of the Shí'a faith supported by reports from
the Sunnis that have existed for centuries. And so I was surprised to
see what the learned scholar had written about the concept of Ahlul
Bayt:

"The *shi'a* took advantage of the intimate historical relationship of
'Ali with Muhammad and of the old Arab tribal concept of *ahl al-bayt*
(people of the household)-the family from whom chiefs were chosen-and
zealously supported the candidacy of the 'Alids..."[^7]

It does not behove a person from Shí'ite background to say that the
Shí'a took advantage "of the old Arab tribal concept of ahl al-bayt"! So
now the concept of Ahlul Bayt becomes a concept of the
pre-Islamic/*jahiliyya* era that was used by the Shí'as to forward their
claim about the imamate of 'Ali and his descendants!

It is indeed sad that a scholar, from a Shí'í background, could not
discuss the concept of Ahlul Bayt from the Qur'anic perspective but a
non-Muslim scholar, Wilfred Madelung, has been able to discuss at length
the importance that was given to the families of prophets before Islam
and then deals with the Qur'anic verses specific to the Ahlul Bayt.[^8]
Although we disagree with Madelung's broad definition of Ahlul Bayt we
totally agree with his conclusion to that section in which he says, "The
Qur'an advises the faithful to settle some matters by consultation, but
not the succession to prophets. That, according to the Qur'an, is
settled by divine election, and God usually chooses their successors,
whether they become prophets or not, from their own kin."[^9]

It seems the learned Shí'a scholar is echoing the views of Marshall
Hodgson and Fazlur Rahman. Marshall Hodgson writes, "The
Alids-especially those descending from Fatimah-came to be called Ahl
al-Bayt, 'people of the house' (an old tribal term referring to the
family from whom chiefs were chosen..."[^10]

While commenting on the claim made by the Shí'as of Kufa that caliphate
be restored in the family of 'Ali, Fazlur Rahman writes: "The motives
that led to this curious legitimist claim on part of the Kufan Arabs are
not very clear, except...the fact that the Prophet had been from the
Banu Hashim came to be easily exploited."[^11] Fazlur Rahman implies
that the concept of Ahlul Bayt (that is, 'Ali and the Prophet were from
the Banu Hashim) was "exploited" by the Kufan Shí'as to promote their
claim for the imamate of 'Ali's descendants.

### Who took advantage of the pre-Islamic traditions in the dispute on caliphate?

'Ali was denied his rightful caliphate by the Quraysh on pretext of the
supposed old Arab tradition that leadership goes to the older people and
not to those who were relatively young. 'Ali, in comparison to Abu Bakr,
was younger in age and therefore, on the basis of the old Arab
tradition, was not suitable for leadership.[^12] So it was the Quraysh
who relied on the "old Arab tribal" tradition to usurp the caliphate
from 'Ali bin Abi Talib.

### Who "exploited" and "took advantage" of their relationship to the Prophet?

It was the Qurayshi group in Saqifa that exploited the fact that the
Prophet was from their tribe, and, therefore, they had more right to the
caliphate than their opponents from the Ansar (the inhabitants of
Medina).[^13]

When Imam 'Ali was informed about the debate between the Quraysh and the
Ansar at Saqifa, he asked, "What did the Quraysh plead?"

People said, "They argued that they belong to the lineal tree of the
Prophet."

'Ali commented by saying, "They argued by the tree but they destroyed
its fruits."[^14] The tree refers to "the tribe of Quraysh" and the
fruits refer to "the family of the Prophet".

[^1]: Published by Daru 'l-Qiblah li 'th-Thaqafati 'l-Islamiyya in
Jeddah.

[^2]: Madelung, The Succession to Muhammad, p. 14-15.

[^3]: As-Suyuti, ad-Durru 'l-Manthur, vol. 5, p. 197. Also see
at-Tabari, Jami'u 'l-Bayan, vol. 7, p. 22; Muhibbu 'd-Dín at-Tabari
al-Makki, Dhakha'iru 'l-'Uqba, p. 55-60.

[^4]: See note no. 1857 (p. 1261) in the Holy Qur'an, translated by S.V.
Mir Ahmad Ali. For other quotation from Sunni sources on this verse and
its application to the Prophet, Fatima, 'Ali, Hasan and Husayn (peace be
upon them all), see SSA Rizvi, Imamate: the Vicegerency of the Prophet
(Tehran: WOFIS, 1985) p. 49-54; Sayyid Murtaza al-'Askari, Verse of
Purification (Bombay: World Islamic Network, 1998) which is an
incomplete translation of his Hadíthu 'l-Kisa' fi Masadiri
'l-Madrasatayn (Tehran: Nashr Tawhid, 1997). For a comprehensive
discussion on this verse and its relation to the Ahlul Bayt, see Syed
Ja'far Murtaza al-'Amili, Ahlu 'l-Bayt fi Ayati 't-Tathír (Beirut: Daru
'l-Amír li 'th-Thaqafah, 1993).

[^5]: Muhammad bin Idrís ash-Shafi'í, Diwanu 'sh-Shafi'í, ed. Muhammad
al-Khafaji (Jeddah: Maktabah Dar Hira', n.d.) p. 106.

[^6]: For an exhausting discussion on this verse of "love the kinship",
see Ja'far as-Subhani, Mafahímu 'l-Qur'an, vol. 4 (Beirut: Daru
'l-Azwa', 1986) pp. 17-72.

[^7]: Abdulaziz Sachedina, Islamic Messianism, p. 6.

[^8]: See Madelung, The Succession to Muhammad, p. 6-17.

[^9]: Ibid, p. 17.

[^10]: Marshall GS Hodgson, The Venture of Islam, vol. 1 (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1974) p. 260.

[^11]: Fazlur Rahman, Islam, p. 171.

[^12]: See, for example, Ibn Qutayba ad-Daynwari, al-Imamah wa
's-Siyasah, p. 18; M. A. Shaban, Islamic History AD 600-750, p. 16.
Sachedina himself says the following about wilaya: "The new thing about
it was this that in the Arab culture, the Arabs were never used to see a
young person assuming the leadership. In Arab culture it was impossible
for a thirty year old young man to become a leader because the Arabs
believed that an older person has to become a leader..." From his 6th
speech in Muharram (1419) 1998 in Toronto.

[^13]: There were two contesting groups in Saqifa: the Quraysh who had
migrated from Mecca (known as Muhajirin) and the inhabitants of Medina
(known as Ansar). For the arguments employed by the Muhajirin in Saqifa
see the following English titles: SSA Rizvi, Imamate, pp. 113-126;
Murtaza al-'Askari, 'Abdullah bin Saba and Other Myths (Tehran: WOFIS,
1984) pp. 69-95; Muhammad R. al-Muzaffar, Saqifa (Qum: Ansariyan, 1998).

[^14]: Sayyid Razi, Nahju 'l-Balagha, sermon 67. For Sunni sources, see
at-Tabari, Ta'ríkh, vol. 6, p. 263 and Ibn 'Abdi 'l-Barr, al-Isti'ab
under biography of 'Awf bin Athathah. [Also see Master and Mastership]


