Wilayat and Its Scope
=====================

1. What is Wilayat?
-------------------

*"Wilayat,"* derived from *wila',* means power, authority or a right of
certain kind. In Shí'a theology, "*wilayat*" is the authority invested
in the Prophet and the Ahlul Bayt as representatives of Almighty Allah
on this earth.

According to the late Murtaza Mutahhari, *wilayat* has four dimensions:

The right of love and devotion *(wila'-e muhabbat):* This right places
the Muslims under the obligation of loving the Ahlul Bayt.

The authority in spiritual guidance *(wila'-e imamat):* This reflects
the power and authority of the Ahlul Bayt in guiding their followers in
spiritual matters.

The authority in socio-political guidance *(wila'-e zi'amat):* This
dimension of *wilayat* reflects the right that the Ahlul Bayt have to
lead the Muslims in social and political aspects of life.

The authority of the universal nature *(wila'-e tasarruf):* This
dimension reflects universal power over the entire universe that the
Prophet and Ahlul Bayt have been vested with by the grace of Almighty
Allah.[^1]

Using this division of *wilayat*'s dimensions, I would like to point out
the areas of agreement and disagreement among the various Muslim groups.

### The First Dimension: The Right of Love

All Muslims unanimously accept the first dimension of *wilayat* of Ahlul
Bayt. Loving the Ahlul Bayt is one of the "*dharuriyyat ad-dín,* the
essential parts of the Islamic faith." The inclusion of *salawat*[^2] in
the daily ritual prayers is a sufficient proof of this. See the famous
anti-Shí'a books like *as-Sawa'iqu 'l-Muhriqa* of Ibn Hajar al-Makki and
*Tuhfa-e Ithna-'Ashariyya* of Shah 'Abdul 'Aziz Dehlawi, and you will
realize that the Sunni polemicists labour painfully to explain that they
are against the Shí'a people but not against the Shí'a Imams for they
know that loving the Ahlul Bayt is an essential part of Islamic faith.

Love for the Ahlul Bayt is enshrined in verse 42:23 that we have already
discussed in the last chapter. Here I shall just quote one more hadíth
from the Sunni sources. Imam 'Ali said, "By Allah the One who has spilt
the grain and created the soul, verily the Prophet (a.s.) has promised
that none shall love me but the believer and none shall hate me but the
hypocrite."[^3] Actually Jabir bin 'Abdullah al-Ansari and Abu Sa'íd
al-Khudari, the two famous companions of the Prophet, used to say: "We
did not identify the hypocrites but by their hatred for 'Ali."[^4]

It is a common view of Shí'a scholars that whoever rejects one of the
*dharuriyyat ad-dín,* then he is no longer considered a member of the
Islamic faith.[^5] It is also based on this principle that the Khawarij
and the Nawasib (i.e., those who express hatred or enimosity towards the
Ahlul Bayt) are considered as non-Muslims by Shí'a jurists.[^6]

### The Second Dimension: The Spiritual Guidance

The second dimension of the *wilayat* is a commonly held belief of the
Shí'as as well as majority of the Sunnis who belong to Sufi orders.
Nothing reflects this more than the interpretation given by Maulawi
Salamat 'Ali, a Sunni scholar of India, to the hadíth of Ghadir. He
writes in *at-Tabsira,* "The Ahlu 's-Sunnah do not doubt the Imamate of
Amíru 'l-Mu'minín ['Ali]; and that is indeed the essence of faith. It
is, however, necessary that the import of the ahadíth of Ghadír be the
spiritual Imamate and not [the political] khilafat. This is the meaning
derived from the statements of the Ahlu 's-Sunnah and the scholars of
Sufism, and, consequently, the allegiance of all the [Sufi] orders reach
Amíru 'l-Mu'minín 'Ali bin Abi Talib and through him they are connected
to the Messenger."[^7]

Other than the Naqshbandi order, all Sufis trace the chain of their
spiritual masters back to the Imams of the Ahlul Bayt, ending with Imam
'Ali bin Abi Talib as the spiritual authority *par* *excellence* after
the Prophet.[^8] The Naqsbandi order traces its spiritual leadership
back to Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq and then follows the line through his
mother to Muhammad bin Abi Bakr and then to Abu Bakr. This diversion
from Imam as-Sadiq to Abu Bakr is, however, not valid because Muhammad
bin Abi Bakr was raised from a very young age by Imam 'Ali bin Abi Talib
who married Muhammad's mother, Asma' bint Umays, after Abu Bakr's death.
The only spiritual master that Muhammad bin Abi Bakr knew was Imam 'Ali
bin Abi Talib (a.s.).

### The Third & Fourth Dimensions: Socio-Political & Universal Authority

The third and fourth dimensions of *wilayat* are unique Shí'í beliefs,
and they are considered as part of the "*dharuriyyat al-madhhab,* the
essential parts of Shí'a sect." It is the common view of our scholars
that anyone who rejects one of the *dharuriyyat al-madhhab,* is not
considered a member of the Shí'a sect.

It is important to note that whenever the Shí'as use the term "Imamate"
or "Imam", it encompasses all the four dimensions of *wilayat.* It
excludes neither the spiritual and universal authority nor the social
and political leadership.[^9] In this sense, the Shí'í term "Imamate" or
"Imam" is more comprehensive than the Sunni term "khilafat" or
"khalifa".

In books dealing with the Shí'a-Sunni debate of the leadership after the
Prophet, the focus is more on the socio-political leadership but not in
the sense of denying the spiritual and universal authority of the Imam.
So while reading or discussing the issue of succession of Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.), one should not lose the universal import of the
status of an Imam from the Shí'a point of view.

2. The Universal Wilayat
------------------------

It seems necessary to explain the fourth dimension of the *wilayat* in
more detail for the benefit of the readers.

The fourth dimension is the universal authority that the Prophet and the
Ahlul Bayt have been vested with by the Almighty Allah. It is an
authority that makes it possible for the *wali* to exercise his power
over everything that exists. In the words of Ayatullah al-Khumayni, "It
is a vicegerency pertaining to the whole of creation, by virtue of which
all the atoms in the universe humble themselves before the holder of
authority."[^10]

This authority of the chosen servants of Allah is totally dependent on
His discretion and power. It should not be seen in the horizonal form
but in the vertical form vis-à-vis the power of Almighty Allah. As long
as we maintain the vertical hierarchy of the power, we have safeguarded
the *tawhíd* (unity and oneness) of Allah.

For example, all Muslims believe that it is Allah who gives life and
death to the people. The Qur'an itself says,

***"Allah takes the souls at the time of their death."*** **(39:42)**

But at the same time, the Qur'an also attributes death to the angels by
saying,

***"Say: It is the angel of death (who is given charge of you) who shall
cause you to die."*** **(32:11)**

If you place the imports of these two verses side-by-side (i.e.,
horizontal form), then you are guilty of *shirk,* polytheism; but if you
place them in the vertical form (with the power of the angels beneath
and dependent upon the power of Allah), then you have safeguarded the
*tawhid.*

Similarly, if we place the power and authority of the Prophets and the
Imams in the vertical form (with the conviction that their power is
beneath and dependent upon the power of Allah), then we have safeguarded
the *tawhíd* as well as the status of the chosen servants of Allah.

The Qur'an gives various examples of the persons who had been given the
authority on the universe.

**1.** Describing the powers that Allah, *subhanahu wa ta'ala,* had
given to Prophet 'Isa bin Maryam (a.s.), the Qur'an quotes him as
follows:

***"I make out of the clay the form of a bird, then I breathe into it
and it becomes a [real, living, flying] bird with Allah's permission;***

***I heal the blind and the leprous;***

***and I bring the dead back to life with Allah's permission;***

***and I inform you of what you are eating and what you store in your
houses..."*** **(3:48)**

**2.** Describing the powers given to Prophet Sulayman, the Qur'an says:

***"Then We made the wind subservient to him; it blew by his command
gently to wherever he desired.***

***And (We also made subservient to him) the jinn: each (of them as)
builder and diver, and others fettered in chains.***

***This is Our gift, therefore give freely or withhold, without
reckoning. Most surely he had a nearness to Us and an excellent
resort."*** **(38:36-40) also (21:81-82)**

**3.** Describing the power of Asif bin Barkhiya, the vizier of Prophet
Sulayman, the Qur'an describes the scene of the moments before the Queen
of Sheba and her entourage came to visit him:

***"He (Sulayman) said, 'O Chiefs! which one of you can bring to me her
(i.e., Queen of Sheba's) throne before they come to me in
submission.'***

***One audacious among the jinn said, 'I will bring it to you before you
rise from your place; and most surely I am strong and trustworthy for
it.'***

***(But) one who had the knowledge of some of the Book said, 'I will
bring it to you in the twinkling of an eye.' Then when he saw it (i.e.,
the throne) settled beside him, he said, 'This is the grace of my Lord
that He may try me whether I am grateful or ungrateful...'"***
***(27:38-40)***

In these three examples from the Qur'an, we see that Almighty Allah had
blessed some of his chosen servants with the power to breathe life to a
shape of an animal, to bring the dead back to life, to cure the blind
and the leprous, to subjugate the jinn for their work, to bring an item
from far away in the twinkling of an eye, etc. These examples are
sufficient to show that such powers can be given and have been given by
Allah to those whom He likes. It is this power that is referred to in
Shí'a theology as "*al-wilayah at-takwíniyya* - the power over the
universe or the universal authority."

Allah has given various ranks to the prophets and messengers (2:253 ;
(17:55) , and all Muslims are unanimous in believing that the Prophet of
Islam, Muhammad al-Mustafa, is higher in rank than all the prophets and
messengers.[^11] All prophets and messengers had come to prepare their
societies for the acceptance of the final and universal Messenger of
God, Muhammad (s.a.w.). If prophets like Sulayman, Dawud, 'Isa, and
Musa, and also Sulayman's vizier, Asif, were blessed with powers over
the nature, then it follows by necessity that Prophet Muhammad must have
been blessed with greater power over the universe. Two examples have
been clearly mentioned in the Qur'an. The ability of the Prophet of
Islam to travel into space and beyond with his human body ( 17:1 ;
53:5-18 ), and the parting of the moon by pointing towards it with his
finger ( 54:1 ).[^12]

Imam 'Ali and the other Imams of Ahlul Bayt are believed by the Shí'as
to be higher in rank than all prophets and messengers except the Prophet
of Islam (s.a.w.).[^13] It follows as a necessity that they also have
the powers that the Prophet had been blessed with by Almighty Allah.

At this point, I will only refer to one verse from the holy Qur'an on
this issue. During the early days in Mecca, when the idol worshippers
were rejecting the claim of the Prophet, Allah revealed a verse to
console him by saying:

***"And those who disbelieve say, 'You are not a messenger.' Say, 'Allah
is sufficient as a witness (between me and you) and the one who has
knowledge of the Book.'"*** **(13:43)**

Prophet Muhammad is being consoled that it doesn't matter if the
idolaters do not believe in your claim; it is sufficent that Allah and
'the one who has knowledge of the Book' are witnesses to the truth of
your claim. Whom is Allah referring to as a witness to the truth of the
Prophet's claim? Who is this person 'who has knowledge of the Book'?
According to Shí'í reports, supported by Sunni sources, it refers to
'Ali bin Abí Talib.[^14] There was definitely no one among the
companions of the Prophet who could claim that he had more knowledge
about Islam than 'Ali bin Abí Talib.

How does the description "having knowledge of the Book" prove the
universal authority for 'Ali? If you recall, Asif Barkhiya, Sulayman's
vizier, had so much power over nature that he could bring the throne of
the Queen of Sheba before the "twinkling of an eye". Asif has been
described as someone who had "'ilmun *min* al-kitab - knowledge of *a
portion of* the Book," not "the knowledge of the entire Book." In
comparison to this, Imam 'Ali has been described by Allah as someone who
had "*'ilmu 'l-kitab* - knowledge of the Book," not just a portion of
the Book. Therefore, it is not difficult to conclude that the power of
Imam 'Ali over nature must be many degrees greater than that of Asif
Barkhiya who brought the throne from far away before the "twinkling of
an eye".

Again, as an important reminder, I must state that this belief is to be
held in the vertical form vis-à-vis the power of Almighty Allah, and
only in that format can we preserve the concept of *tawhíd* in which
Allah is the Absolute Power and source of all power. It is to remind us
of the total dependency of the chosen ones upon Allah's will and power
that He commands the Prophet to say,

***"I do not*** ***control any benefit or harm for myself except as
Allah pleases."*** **(7:188)**

This is not a denial of having power; it is affirmation of the belief
that whatever power he has is according to the wish and pleasure of
Almighty Allah.

3. Wilayat: Spiritual vs Political
----------------------------------

The learned scholar's article in the *Bio-Ethics Encyclopaedia* (in
which he wrote that the Prophet Muhammad "had left no explicit
instruction regarding succession to his religious-political authority")
generated heated discussion among the community. The responses that the
learned scholar wrote to the community and the comments he subsequently
made in the majlises of Muharram 1419 at Toronto, portray the confusion
about the concept of *wilayat*.

### (a) "Spiritual Only, Not Political"

First the learned scholar claimed that the *wilayat* of the Prophet and
the Imams was only spiritual and not political. He said:

"By the way, the Prophet (s.a.w.) was never recognized as the political
leader. No, that is not correct at all. He was recognized as Rasululah,
the envoy of God, the Messenger of Allah (s.t.). There was no politics,
there was no political language attached to it. It isn't that what the
moderns are telling us; the way Iran is telling us time and again that
the Prophet was a political leader. No. He was recognized fundamentally
and essentially as a prophet of God.[^15]

"Task of prophethood was to lead the society to perfection. And that
perfection could not be done individually - it had to be done as members
of the community, the ummah. Ummah means a community under the Prophet
as prophet, not a political leader.

"Now we know why *'man kuntu mawlahu fa hadha 'Aliyun mawlahu'* meant
something very very important. The Prophet (s.a.w.) could have said,
*'man kuntu khalifa fa hadha khalifa'*. He could have said, *'man kuntu
hakiman fa hadha hakiman.'* He is not using any of the terminology that
we would use in the normal political sense of carrying on the authority
of the political leader...

"Look at the word chosen by Allah (s.t.) for guidance. After all the
Prophet is '*ma yantiqu 'anil hawaa in huwa illa wahyun yuhaa*.' He is
given instructions. '*Mawla'*: what does the word 'mawla' mean? Allah
(s.t.) says in the Qur'an *'wal kafirun laysa lahum mawla.'* The
disbeliever has no *mawla.* They don't have a *mawla* - they don't have
a protector, they don't have a patron, they don't have somebody who
cares for them. This is the meaning of *mawla*..."[^16]

The learned scholar says that *nubuwwat* did not include political
leadership, and that the word *mawla* used by the Prophet in Ghadir did
not mean *khalifa* (political successor) or *hakim* (ruler). In other
words, he is excluding the third dimension of wilayat from the term
"mawla" and restricting it to the second dimension (i.e., spiritual
guidance).

In his attempt to convince his audience, he makes up hypothetical and
grammatically incorrect Arabic sentences which make no sense. For
example, the sentence "*man kuntu [lahu] khalifa fa hadha [lahu]
khalifa* - for whomsoever I am his successor, this is his successor."
Was the Prophet "*khalifa*-successor" of any one from the audience? Of
course, not; and that is why he did not use the term "khalifa" in the
hadíth of Ghadir.

As discussed in one of the previous chapters, to understand the meaning
of *"mawla"* as used by the Prophet for Imam 'Ali, one does not have to
go far. Just ponder upon the question he asked the Muslims before
presenting 'Ali as their *"mawla"*: he asked them, "Do I not have more
authority over you then you have over yourselves? *A lastu awla bi kum
min anfusi kum?*"[^17] When they replied by saying, "Certainly, O
Messenger of Allah," then he said, "*Man kuntu mawlahu fa hadha 'Aliyun
mawlahu* - Of whomsoever I am the master, this 'Ali is his master."
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) is surely talking about a master who has more
authority *(awla)* over the people than they have over themselves, and
that includes authority in political matters also. And, therefore, there
was no need for the Prophet to say, *'Man kuntu ['alayhi] hakiman, fa
hadha ['alayhi] hakiman.'*

The learned scholar continues his talk:

"The Prophet (s.a.w.) when he introduces Imam 'Ali's authority in the
community, what does he say? *'Man kuntu mawlahu fa hadha 'Aliyun
mawlahu.'* What he means is that 'whoever regards me as a perfect
example to be followed to the ultimate goal of salvation, 'Ali is the
man who should be followed.' The question was of obedience. *Mawla*, one
who should be obeyed, one who should not be disregarded. In that sense,
Allah is *Mawla*. Allah is the *Mawla* of *deen*, that path on which you
cannot afford to disobey Allah (s.w.t.)..."[^18]

Is this following and obedience restricted to spiritual matters and does
it not include social-political issues?

#### The Hadíth of 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud

In order to prove his point that the declaration of Ghadir was not
explicit enough to convey the meaning of "khilafat" in the sense of
political succession, the learned scholar says:

"The Prophet never forced. After he returned to Medina from Ghadir; one
night he was home with 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud. He tells 'Abdullah that the
messenger has come and wants me to go; that I have received the news of
my death. 'Abdullah says, *by the way this is after Ghadir,* 'Appoint a
successor.' Yes, this exactly what he said. 'Why don't you appoint Abu
Bakr?' The Prophet shakes his head and says, no.

He mentions one after the other. (I don't know about the value of this
hadith; Shaykh Mufid mentions it and I am mentioning it on the authority
of Shaykh Mufid. I am not here to examine and judge how authentic is the
hadith. But I am telling you it reflects the situation in the community.
If it is authentic, it reflects the situation in the community...[^19] )

'Abdullah's hadith goes; and the Prophet is asking, 'What shall I do?'
'Abdullah says, 'Why don't you appoint 'Umar; why don't you appoint
'Uthman?' And finally, 'Abdullah says, 'Why don't you appoint 'Ali?' And
the Prophet says, and he is weak by this time, 'O I wish, they would
obey. I wish they would obey.'"[^20]

First, this conversation between the Prophet and 'Abdullah ibn Mas'úd
did not take place in Medina after the declaration of Ghadir as the
learned scholar wants the audience to believe ("by the way, this is
after Ghadir"). In the beginning of his narration, 'Abdullah says, "We
went out with the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) the night of the
delegation of jinn until we [reached and] stayed at 'Ula." 'Ula is a
place where the Prophet had stopped on his way to Tabuk.[^21]

Secondly, the event related to the delegation of jinn occurred when the
Prophet was on his way to Tabuk in the year 9 A.H.[^22] And the event of
Ghadir Khumm took place in 10 A.H.

Thirdly, according to the methodology of the Western scholars, would not
the sequence in the names suggested by 'Abdullah ibn Mas'ud itself be an
indication that this 'hadíth' was a later fabrication? Why is the
Western scholarship so quick in rejecting the ahadíth quoted by the
Shí'as that have the names of the Imams in proper sequence but not treat
such hadíth of the Sunnis with equal scepticism? I know an easy response
will be that "I said that 'I don't know the value of the hadíth...'" My
only question is: Why confuse the people and create doubt in the
explicitness of the Prophet's declaration in Ghadir by quoting such a
hadíth irresponsibly?

Then on such a flimsy basis, the learned scholar concludes by saying:

"So apparently, *there was a big question of the religious role that the
Prophet (s.a.w.) was playing in the community.* The community saw itself
organized under the leadership of the Prophet (s.a.w.). When he was
gone, someone had to replace him in the same position-in the same
authority. And this is where today we are *still* searching for the
interpretation."

*Al-hamdu lil lah,* the true followers of the Prophet understood the
real interpretation in Ghadír Khumm itself; and may Almighty Allah help
those who are still searching for the true interpretation of the term
*"mawla"* and the status of *"wali-ul-lah"*.

#### The Meaning of "Imamate"

In the same speech, the learned scholar further explains the meaning of
Imamate by saying:

"The belief system says anybody who had any right to claim obedience
after the Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) is 'Ali bin Abi Talib. That is the
meaning of Imamate; it is nothing more than that. You open any book of
*kalam*, you will find theologians describing Imam 'Ali as having the
right to become *muta'*, obeyed, one should be obeyed by the people. Why
should he be obeyed? Because he is exactly sitting in the place of the
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.)...

"Imam 'Ali was the Imam from the day the Prophet Muhammad closed his
eyes. Regardless whether he became a khalifa or not. How can he become
an Imam without becoming a khalifa, without sitting on the throne? That
was not the requirement. Because the obedience was to the position of
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.)."

In order to defend his writing in the *Bio Ethics Encyclopaedia*, the
learned scholar has divided "imamate" and "khilafat" into two different
realms: "imamate" becomes a spiritual position while "khilafat" becomes
a political position. He says, "Imamate is nothing more than that", and
even boldly asks the audience to "open any book of *kalam*
[theology]..."

Well, we opened the books of *kalam* from different eras and found the
statement of the learned scholar to be against the mainstream Shi'a
belief on the meaning and scope of "imamate".

Shaykh Mufid (d. 413 A.H./1022 C.E.) defines an "Imam" as follows: "The
Imam is the person who has the comprehensive leadership in religious
**as well as worldly matters** as the successor of the Prophet
(a.s.)."[^23]

'Allama Hilli (d. 726 A.H./1325 C.E.) defines "Imamate" as follows: "The
Imamate is a **universal authority** *(riyasa)* in the things of
religion and **of the world** belonging to some person and derived from
*(niyaba)* the Prophet."[^24]

'Abdu 'r-Razzaq Lahíji (d. 1072 A.H.) defines "Imamate" as follows:
"Know that Imamate is an authority over all those who are of legal age
in **worldly** as well as religious matter based on successorship of the
Prophet."[^25]

'Allamah Tabataba'í (d. 1401 A.H. / 1981) writes, "Thus the imamate and
religious leadership in Islam may be studied from three different
perspectives: from the perspective of Islamic government, of Islamic
sciences and injunctions, and of leadership and innovative guidance in
the spiritual life. Shí'ism believes that since Islamic society is in
dire need of guidance in each of these three aspects, the person who
occupies the function of giving that guidance and is the leader of the
community in these areas of religious concern must be appointed by God
and the Prophet."[^26] Even Murtaza Mutahhari states that when the
Shí'as use the term "Imam", it does not only reflect the spiritual
guidance and leadership, it includes the social and political leadership
also.[^27]

As you can see, all these theologians and prominent scholars of the
Shí'a faith unanimously define Imamate as a position that combines the
spiritual/religious leadership as well as the socio-political/wordly
leadership. For a Shí'a, 'Ali is the first Imam as well as the first
khalifa of the Prophet. A Shí'a would never say that 'Ali is the first
Imam but not the *khalifa bila fasl* (immediate successor) of the
Prophet. The difference between Shí'as and the Sunnis is not about the
spiritual leadership; it is on the socio-political leadership
*immediately after* the Prophet. As mentioned earlier, the view that the
Ahlul Bayt were "spiritual guides only but not political leaders" is a
belief found among the Sunnis in general and the Sufis in
particular.[^28]

### (b) "Political Also"

Then in the 6th speech of Muharram 1419, the learned scholar, in a way,
contradicts his above statement. He says:

"...The fact remains that the Qur'àn conceived the Prophet to be the
leader of an *ummah,* an *ummah* that was religious, social and
political. In other words, it was civil, moral community that was being
guided by a person, who had some kind of comprehensive authority, which
was not conceivable at that time even, by the Arab tribes. That was also
the difficulty during Ghadir.

When Ghadir happened, one of the challenging dimensions of Ghadir was an
introduction of the Qur'anic concept of leadership. *Wilayah* means that
kind of leadership, which combines the civil and moral authority in one
person. That means there is no separation of power. This is no church
and state as such, rather the civil and moral authority combines in the
person who holds the office of the wilayah. What was new about it?

The new thing about it was this that in the Arab culture, the Arabs were
never used to see a young person assuming the leadership. In Arab
culture it was impossible for a thirty year old young man to become a
leader because the Arabs believed that an older person has to become a
leader..."[^29]

Again in the 8th speech, the learned scholar says:

"The whole question is 'Is Islam a political system or it's a religious
system?' There are two opinions about it. Many scholars are fighting the
battle, including Ayatullah Khui, Ayatullah Mutahhari, Ayatullah
Khumayni, in Egypt, al-Ashmaawi, al-Jaabiri in Morocco...For me there is
a very important issue involved here. If we say that Islam is not a
political system, and Islam is simply a religion that is concerned with
moving humanity towards self-perfection and prepare humanity for the
hereafter, then we are denying a very major role played by the Prophet
in the establishment of the *ummah* itself...

"Nine-tenth of Islam is *mu'amalat,* how you deal with each other, how
you conduct your affairs in this world because whatever you do in this
world has an implication for the aakhirat. Now in that kind of religion,
to say that Islam is simply a religion without any social system is to
deny the fact of *wilayah*.

By the way, if you remember my lecture on the fifth night because
*wilayah* means moral, civil authority that can lead you to your
ultimate goal of creation, and 'ultimate goal of creation' is not only
knowing what is five times a day prayers, fasting, but knowing how to
live as human beings in a society. Otherwise there would not be civil
authority, the Prophet could just be what we call *an-nabi
ar-ruhi*..."[^30]

This is indeed true. Why then did the learned scholar say in the 2nd
speech, "The Prophet was never recognized as the political leader"? It
is good that he made it clear that the Prophet was not only a religious
leader, he was also a political leader. After WWI, there was an intense
debate in Egypt on Westernization versus Islam, and some intellectuals,
influenced by Western ideas, tried to secularize Islam by restricting
khilafat to spiritual issues and separting it from the ummah's political
system. 'Ali 'Abdu 'r-Raziq wrote *al-Islam wa Usulu 'l-Hukm* (1925)
proposing the complete separation of religion and state in Islam.[^31]
Similar ideas are resurfacing lately in the writings of some Muslim
intellectuals influenced by the liberal/secular ideas of the West.

4. Do Najaf & Qum Have Different Views on The Role of the Imams?
----------------------------------------------------------------

Then in the 9th speech, the learned scholar again dwells upon the
spiritual *vs* political role of the Prophet and the Imams. And now
surprisingly he claims that even great scholars of Qum and Najaf have
different views. He says:

"...Najaf and Qum are divided on the whole debate about the Prophet's
political role. Najaf as one of the most important centres of Shi'a
learning, and Qum, now the most important centre of Shi'a learning have
maintained two different views about the role of the Imam...Najaf has
maintained a conservative attitude to the role of the Imam.

They believe that religion has a moral function, an ethical function but
not a political one, including Ayatullah Khui, whose opinions are well
stated. He does not believe that the *wilayah* of Imam 'Ali bin Abi
Talib (a.s.) has any need for manifesting itself politically because the
Imam remains the Imam as a spiritual, moral, ethical leader regardless
whether people pay allegiance to him or not. That opinion was for the
first time contested by Ayatullah Khumayni himself."[^32]

The learned scholar wants to leave the impression in the minds of his
listeners that even the *'ulama* of Qum and Najaf had different opinions
concerning the role of the Imam in the sense that Najaf confines it to a
spiritual realm whereas Qum expands it to encompass a political sphere
as well.

Nothing could be further from the truth. The Shí'a 'ulama' of Najaf
(exemplified by the late al-Khu'i) and Qum (exemplified by the late
al-Khumayni) have identical views about the *wilayat* of the Prophet and
the Imams. The difference between them is not about the *wilayat* of the
Imams, it is about the extent of the *wilayat-e* *faqih,* the authority
of a jurist. Moreover, on the issue of *wilayat-e faqih,* the division
is not between Qum and Najaf; there are 'ulama' on both sides of the
issue in Qum as well as in Najaf.

As discussed earlier, all four dimensions of wilayat for the Prophet and
the Imams are among the *dharuriyyat al-madhhab* (the essentials of
Shí'a faith), so how could such great leaders of the Shí'a world have
differences on them?

As for the views of the late Ayatullah al-Khumayni on the *wilayat* of
the Prophet and his Ahlul Bayt, I quote from his lecture on *wilayat-e
faqíh*. He says:

"To prove that government and authority belong to the Imam is not to
imply that the Imam has no spiritual status. The Imam does indeed
possess certain spiritual dimensions that are unconnected with his
function as ruler. The spiritual status of the Imam is the universal
divine viceregency that is sometimes mentioned by the Imams (peace be
upon them). It is a viceregency pertaining to the whole of creation, by
virtue of which all the atoms in the universe humble themselves before
the holder of authority.

It is one of the essential beliefs of our Shí'i school that no one can
attain the spiritual status of the Imams, not even the cherubim or the
prophets. In fact, according to the traditions that have been handed
down to us, the Most Noble Messenger and the Imams existed before the
creation of the world in the form of lights situated beneath the divine
throne; they were superior to other men even in the sperm from which
they grew and in their physical composition. Their exalted station is
limited only by the divine will, as indicated by the saying of Jibra'il
recorded in the traditions on the *mi'raj:* 'Were I to draw closer by as
much as the breadth of a finger, surely I would burn.'"[^33]

Ayatullah al-Khumayni, while affirming the political leadership of the
Prophet and the Imams, does not deny or "de-mystify" their universal
wilayat.

Coming to the views of the late Ayatullah al-Khu'i on the *wilayat* of
the Prophet and the Ahlul Bayt, I quote from the transcripe of his
lectures in which he says:

"As for the first type of *wilayat* [*takviniya,* universal], obviously
there is no doubt in their authority over the entire creation as is
clear from the ahadíth because they are the link in creation, through
them [continues] the existence, and they are reason for creation [of the
universe]; if it had not been for them, Allah would not have created the
people altogether, the people have been created for them, through them
the people exist, and they are the means of the pouring forth [of the
Divine grace].

"Actually, they have the universal authority just below that of the
Creator Himself; this authority [of theirs] is like the authority of
Almighty Allah on the creation, however, it is weaker compared to the
authority of Almighty Allah on the creation."[^34]

Then al-Khu'í also talks about the civil/political authority of the
Prophet and the Imams, and says,

"As for the second dimension of their legislative wilayat
*(at-tashrí'iyya)* in the sense that they possess the authority to
independently administer the properties and the lives of the
people-obviously, there is no dispute on their authority of this
kind...This is proven from well attested ahadíth, and in the farewell
sermon [the Prophet said], 'Whomsoever's master I am, this 'Ali is his
master. Do I not have more authority over the believers than they have
themselves?' They said, 'Yes.'..."[^35]

Ayatullah al-Khu'í, while affirming the universal wilayat of the Prophet
and the Imams, does not deny their political authority. Actually, he
goes further to say that,

"And the presumption that the history is contrary to that [in the sense
that the Imams did not historically exercise their political
authority]...is invalid."

Thus he concludes,

"So not exercising [the authority in the historical sense] does not
prove the non-existence of the authority as is obvious."[^36]

In essence, the two great jurists of the contemporary Shí'a world
representing Qum and Najaf have identical views about the *wilayat* of
the Imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). They both believe in all dimensions of
*wilayat* -spiritual, socio-political, and universal- of the Prophet and
the Imams. The difference that existed between the two was only on the
limits of the authority of a *faqih* (mujtahid, jurist) during the
Occultation of the Present Imam (a.s.). How could the learned scholar,
who has written *The Just Ruler* on the authority of the jurist, not
know the difference between *wilayat* of the Imams (unanimously accepted
by the Shí'a jurists) and the *wilayat* of the *faqíh* (with dispute
over its limits among the Shí'a jurists)?

5. Is Not Wilayat Part of the Faith?
------------------------------------

Referring to the controversy surrounding his article in the *Bio Ethics
Encyclopeadia,* the learned scholar made the following comment in his
4th speech of Muharram 1419:

"How can such a thing divide the community when it is such a trivial
part, and it is not even part of the faith."

Referring to the event of Ghadír Khumm, he says: "That historical event:
what does it have any connection with our belief system? So if I said in
my article that the Prophet (s.a.w.) did not leave any explicit
instruction about his successor, am I treading the path which is
dangerous to the survival of the religion of the Ahlul Bayt? Or am
exercising my right as a researcher to see what the documents say?"

Is the issue of *wilayat* and imamate a "trivial part" and "not even
part of the faith"?

As we have explained earlier in this chapter, in Islam there is a term
called "*dharuriy*, pl. *dharuriyyat*" which refers to those issues that
are essential parts of our religion. The *"dharuriyyat"* are divided
into two: "*dharuriyyat ad-dín* - the essential parts of the Islamic
faith" and "*dharuriyyat al-madhhab* - the essential parts of the Shí'a
sect". It is a common view of our scholars that whoever rejects one of
the *dharuriyyat ad-dín,* then he is no longer considered a member of
the Islamic faith; and whoever rejects one of the *dharuriyyat
al-madhhab,* then he is no longer considered a member of the Shí'a
Ithna-'Ashari sect.

What is the status of the belief in the *wilayat* of the Ahlul Bayt: is
it one of the *dharuriyyat* or not? While discussing the status of the
Muslims who are not Shí'a, Ayatullah al-Khu'i has defined *wilayat* (in
the sense of love for the Ahlul Bayt) as one of the *dharuriyyat
ad-dín,* and *wilayat* (in the sense of khilafat and political
leadership) as one of the *dharuriyyat al-madhhab*. The late Ayatullah
says:

"The dimension of *wilayat* that is essential [for *dín*] is the
*wilayat* in the meaning of love and devotion, and they [the Sunnis] do
not deny it in this sense rather they actually express their love for
the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)...

"Of course, the *wilayat* in the meaning of succession (khilafat) is one
of the essential parts of the *madhhab* [of Shí'ism], but not from the
essential parts of the *dín*."[^37]

So according to Ayatullah al-Khu'i, the *wilayat* and *imamate* in the
meaning of succession (*khilafat*) is an essential part (*dharuriy*) of
Shí'ism; anyone who rejects this dimension of the *wilayat* would not be
considered as a Shí'a. He would still be a Muslim but not a Shí'a.

As for the question that by denying the explicitness of the appointment
of Imam 'Ali (a.s.), is the learned scholar "treading the path which is
dangerous to the survival of the religion of the Ahlul Bayt?"

Well, the religion of the Ahlul Bayt will surely survive because it has
an Imam protecting it even though he is in Occultation; but such
statements will surely weaken the faith of our common people and youths
in the explicit *wilayat* of the Imams. You have to see where such a
statement will lead: it minimises the wrong done against the Ahlul Bayt
and it gives a semblance of legitimacy to Sunni view of khilafat.

A Sunni would extend this argument further that since the Prophet had
not made things clear enough, the companions did what they thought was
best for Islam! A Shi'a who had attended speeches of the learned scholar
was saying that 'what is the problem if we believe that 'Ali is the
first Imam (in the spiritual sense) and the fourth caliph (in the
socio-political sense)!' With such friends we do not need an enemy.

6. The Final Correction
-----------------------

Just before he came to Toronto in 1998 for Muharram (1419), the learned
scholar sent the following correction to the publishers of the
*Bio-Ethics Encyclopaedia*:

"Muhammad died in 632 C.E., having brought the whole of Arabia under the
Medina government. However, although he had explicitly designated his
cousin and son-in-law, 'Ali, to succeed him, he had left no written
guidelines about the political process."

This he had faxed to some members of our community in Toronto and had
also mentioned in one of his speeches in Muharram 1419.

We have the following comments regarding the correction: Firstly, even
his correction is problematic. The learned scholar has tried to divide
the succession into two: religious and political. On the issue of
religious succession, he writes that the Prophet explicitly designated
'Ali to succeed him. Then he immediately qualifies the explicit
designation and excludes political succession from it by writing, "he
left no written guidelines on the political process." In the 4th speech
of Muharram 1419, he says: "Yes, al-Ghadir is an explicit *designation*,
it does not mean explicit *instruction* about the political process. No
history supports that."

Since when did "written guidelines" become important in establishing
Islamic teachings? Is not the entire structure of Islamic system based
on spoken words: the Qur'an and the sunnah? There is absolutely no
"written" guidelines left by the Prophet for anything at all, so why
create a new cushion for the Sunnis in their defence against the Shí'as
by expecting a "written" guideline on the issue of caliphate? What about
all the sayings of the Prophet on the appointment of Imam 'Ali bin Abi
Talib (a.s.) as his caliph?

Would the value of the Prophet's "spoken" guidelines be less than the
"written" guidelines? Is disobeying his "spoken" guidelines less severe
than his "written" guidelines? Almighty Allah says,

***"O you who believe! Do not raise your voices over the voice of the
Prophet..."*** **(49:2)**

If the learned scholar wanted to mention the story of Qirtas in which
the Prophet asked for a pen and paper, then he should have written the
whole story and pointed out the person responsible for not letting the
Prophet leave anything in writing.

Secondly, the play with words like "designation" and "instruction" is
disturbing. In Ghadír, the Prophet talks about his approaching death and
then gets an acknowledgement from the Muslims about the level of his
authority over them, and then he declares that "Whosoever's master am I,
this 'Ali is master." Then he says that "I am leaving two things behind:
the Book of Allah and my Progeny, as long as you hold fast to them both,
you will not go astray." And then he instructs the companions to come
and greet Imam 'Ali (a.s.) by addressing him as the "Amir - Leader".
When you see the whole context of the event of Ghadir, is it not a clear
instruction, designation, indication, inclination, appointment -or what
you would like to call it- for the leadership of Imam 'Ali after the
death of the Prophet?

To believe that the Prophet did not leave explicit instructions about
his political successor gives semblance of legitimacy to the Sunni
caliphate. If the Prophet had not clearly said anything about this
matter, then how can the Shí'as claim that Sunni caliphs usurped the
right of 'Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.)? Such a statement helps no one but
the Sunnis.

Thirdly, in light of the learned scholar's statement, one can say that
'Ali is the "Imam" (religious/spiritual successor) but not the "Caliph"
(political successor)! I do not know what the learned scholar would say
about the declaration of the Prophet in Da'wat Dhul 'Ashira that 'Ali is
"my successor - *khalifati*".

In Shi'a theology, as mentioned earlier, there is no difference between
"imamate" and "khilafat". The implication of these two titles is simple:
'Ali, in relation to the Prophet, is his khalifa and successor; and
'Ali, in relation to the ummah, is their Imam and leader. So defining
"imamate" as a religious succession and "khilafat" as a political
succession goes against the implications of "Imam" and "Khalifa". 'Ali
is the Imam of the Muslim ummah in religious as well as political
matters, and likewise 'Ali is the Khalifa of the Prophet in religious as
well as political matters. Being wrongfully deprived of his political
position does not diminish the reality of the truth. In the words of
Sayyid al-Khu'í, "Not exercising [the authority] does not prove
non-existence of the *wilayat*."

Division of leadership into religious and political has actually
happened in the Sunni version of Muslim history. The first four caliphs
assumed the political and the religious leadership which is why that era
is described as "*al-khilafatu 'r-rashida* - the rightly guided
caliphate". After that, the caliphs assumed the political leadership but
the religious leadership was assumed by others. In jurisprudence
*(fiqh),* for example, the four Imams emerged as the leaders even while
there were caliphs who ruled in their times. In theology, Abu 'l-Hasan
al-Ash'ari and Abu Mansur al-Maturidi emerged as the leader. In
spiritualism, various masters (and even some Shí'a Imams) were accepted
as guides and leaders by Sufi orders.

The Shí'as did not subscribe to the division of leadership in political
and religious realms; the Imams are their ultimate guides and leaders in
all spheres of life: religious and political, legal and theological.
Therefore, Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) for example, is not just a legal
guide for the Shí'as, he is their ultimate leader in the fullest sense
of the word, even if some dimensions of his leadership was not manifest.

[^1]: See, Murtaza Mutahhari, Wilayah: the Station of the Master (Wala'
ha wa wilayat ha), tr. Yahya Cooper, Tehran: World Organisation for
Islamic Services, 1982. [Also see Master and Mastership]

[^2]: Salawat means praying for Allah's blessings on Prophet Muhammad
and his Ahlul Bayt. This is included in the daily ritual prayers by all
Muslims.

[^3]: An authentic and sahíh hadíth narrated by an-Nasa'í, Khasa'is
Amiri 'l-Mu'minín 'Ali bin Abi Talib (Beirut: Daru 'l-Kitab, 1987) p.
101-102; the annotator, al-Athari, has given many more quotations like
Sahíh of Muslim, Sahíh of at-Tirmidhi, and others.

[^4]: Narrated by Ahmad bin Hanbal and at-Tirmidhi, both in the section
of al-manaqib, as quoted in Muhibbu 'd-Dín at-Tabari, Dhakha'iru
'l-'Uqba fi Manaqib Dhawi 'l-Qurba, ed. Akram al-Bushi (Jeddah:
Maktabatu 's-Sahaba, 1995) p. 165.

[^5]: On the rejection of the dharuriyyat, see al-Majlisi, "Risalah fi
'l-I'tiqadat," Manahiju 'l-Haqq wa 'n-Najat, ed. Sayyid Hasan Bani Taba
(Qum: Markaz-e Athar Shí'a, 1372 solar AH) p. 308-309; Sayyid Muhammad
Kadhim al-Yazdi, al-'Urwatu 'l-Wuthqa (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub
al-Islamiyya, 1392) p. 24.

[^6]: As-Saduq, I'tiqadatu 'l-Imamiyya, p. 94; in its English
translation, The Shi'ite Creed, see p. 85. Also see any standard text on
Shí'a jurisprudence in the section on "najasat" under "kafir".

[^7]: As quoted by the late 'Allamah Mir Hamid Husayn al-Musawi who then
refutes it to prove the universal Imamate of Imam 'Ali through hadíth of
Ghadír. See al-Milani, Nafahatu 'l-Azhar fi Khulasati 'Abaqati 'l-Anwar,
vol. 9 (Beirut: Daru 'l-Mu'arrikhi 'l-'Arabi, 1995) p. 311.

[^8]: Sayyid Hussain Nasr, "Shí'ism and Sufism," p. 103.

[^9]: See Mutahhari, Wilayah, p. 72; also see Mutahhari's Imamat wa
Rahbari, p. 163 as quoted by our teacher Sayyid Muhsin al-Kharrazi,
Bidayatu 'l-Ma'arifi 'l-Ilahiyya vol. 2, p. 12-16.

[^10]: The full quotation will come later on in this chapter.

[^11]: As-Saduq, I'tiqadat, p. 92-93; in its English translation, The
Shi'ite Creed, p. 84-85; al-Majlisi, "Risala fi 'l-I'tiqadat," p. 310.

[^12]: On parting of the moon, see in Shí'a sources, at-Tabrasi, Majma'u
'l-Bayan, vol. 5, p. 186; at-Tabataba'í, al-Mizan fi Tafsíri 'l-Qur'an,
vol. 19, p. 60-72 who also refutes the objections raised by the
materialist minded Muslims who like to interpret all such verses in
metaphorical sense. In Sunni sources, see al-Fakhr ar-Razi, at-Tafsíru
'l-Kabír, vol. 15, p. 26; as-Suyuti, ad-Durru 'l-Manthur, vol. 6, p.
133; Mawdudi, Tafhímu 'l-Qur'an, vol. 5, p. 230-231.

[^13]: As-Saduq, I'tiqadat, p. 92-93; in its English translation, The
Shi'ite Creed, p. 84-85; al-Majlisi, "Risala fi 'l-I'tiqadat," p. 310.

[^14]: Among Sunni references, see Ibn al-Maghazili ash-Shafi'í, Manaqib
al-Imam 'Ali bin Abí Talib, p. 313 (hadíth \# 358); as-Suyuti, ad-Durru
'l-Manthur, vol. 4 (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr, n.d.) p. 669; al-Qanduzi,
Yanabí'u 'l-Muwaddah (Beirut:, 1390/1970) p. 121. For further
references, see ash-Shahíd at-Tustari, Ihqaqu 'l-Haqq, vol. 3, p. 280,
vol. 14, p. 362-365, vol. 20, p. 75-77. For a critical review of the
counter reports cited by some Sunni scholars, see at-Tabataba'í,
al-Mizan, vol. 11, p. 423-428.

[^15]: This is again an example of saying one thing in his academic work
and saying something else when talking to the Shí'a community. Dr.
Sachedina, as mentioned earlier, has written in Islamic Messianism that
Islam began as a political movement and later on acquired religious
emphasis; now he is saying that the Prophet was recognized fundamentally
as a prophet of God and was never recognized as a political leader.

[^16]: Dr. Sachedina's 2nd speech of Muharram 1419 in Toronto. He has
inadvertently quoted the Qur'anic verse incorrectly, it is not 'wal
kafirun laysa lahum mawla', it is 'wa anna 'l-kafirín la mawla lahum.'
(47:11)

[^17]: This question of the Prophet is based on the verse 33:6 of the
Qur'an.

[^18]: 2nd speech in Toronto, Muharram 1419.

[^19]: Although this sentence is cushioned in "if it is authentic"
escape clause, it creates more questions: During the last days of
Ramadhan 1418, Dr. Sachedina made the following declaration on the
Internet: "I am taking this opportunity to state in the most ABSOLUTE
terms that not only do I believe in the unequivocal authenticity of the
event of al-Ghadir..., I believe that the statement by the Prophet
'Everyone whose master I am, also has 'Ali as a master,' to be the
explicit designation of the Imam 'Ali to the office of the Leadership of
Muslim Community, as upheld by the Twelver Shí'a faith." Then less than
four months later, in Muharram 1419, he makes such statements that cast
doubt in the explicitness of the declaration of Ghadir Khumm.

[^20]: The 2nd speech of Muharram 1419 at Toronto.

[^21]: At-Turayhi, al-Majma'u 'l-Bahrayn, ed. Mahmud 'Adil, vol. 3
(Tehran: Daftar-e Nashr-e Farhang-e Islami, 1408) p. 242.

[^22]: Al-Mufíd, Amali, vol. 13 (Musannafat Shaykh al-Mufíd) p. 35.

[^23]: Al-Mufid, an-Nukatu 'l-I'tiqadiyya in vol. 10 of Musannafat
ash-Shaykh al-Mufid (Qum: Mu'assasa Ali 'l-Bayt, 1413 AH) p. 39.

[^24]: Al-Hilli, al-Babu 'l-Hadi 'Ashar [Qum: Nashr Nawid, 1368 AH
solar] p. 184; also see its English translation A Treatise on the
Principles of Shí'ite Thought, tr. William Miller (London: Royal Asiatic
Society, 1958) p. 62.

[^25]: Lahíji, Sarmaya-e Iman (Qum: Intisharat-e az-Zahra, 1372 AH
solar) p. 107.

[^26]: Tabataba'í, Shí'a Islam, tr. Nasr (Qum: Ansariyan, 1989) p. 173.

[^27]: Mutahhari, Wilaya, p. 72.

[^28]: See p. 90-91.

[^29]: In the 6th speech in Muharram 1419 at Toronto.

[^30]: In the 8th speech in Muharram 1419 at Toronto.

[^31]: On 'Abdu 'r-Raziq's book and al-Bakhit's reponse to it, see
Hourani, Arabic Thought, pp. 184-192; on Rashid Radha's response, see
Kerr, Islamic Reform, pp. 179-185.

[^32]: The 9th speech in Muharram 1419 in Toronto.

[^33]: Khomeini, Islam and Revolution, tr. Hamid Algar (Berkeley: Mizan
Press, 1981) p. 64-65.

[^34]: At-Tawhidi, Muhammad 'Ali, Misbahu 'l-Faqahah, vol. 5 (Qum:
Intisharat-e Wijdani, 1368 A.H. solar) p. 35.

[^35]: Ibid, p. 38-39.

[^36]: Ibid, p. 39.

[^37]: Al-Gharawi, Mirza 'Ali, at-Tanqíh fi Sharhi 'l-'Urwati 'l-Wuthqa,
vol. 2 (Qum: Dar al-Hadi, 1410 AH) p. 86.


