The Splendorous Birth of Fatimah
================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فاطمة بضعة مني وهي نور عيني وثمرة فؤادي وروحي التي بين جنبيّ وهي
الحوراء الانسية
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Fatimah is a part of me, and the light of my eyes, the fruit of my
heart, and my soul… and she is Huri*[^1] *with Human qualities*.[^2]

In that year, which was the fifth year of his mission, the Prophet of
Islam (S.) was in the worst situation and isolated under the most
difficult conditions.  
 Islam was isolated and the first few muslims were severely under
pressure.  
 The environment of Mecca was dark and dim as a result of idol worship,
polytheism, ignorance superstitions, Arab tribal wars, the sovereignty
of power, and the poverty of the masses.  
 The Prophet (S) was looking forward to the future, a bright future
behind these black oppressing clouds, a future that, with regard to the
ordinary, external means (at hand), was too far and probably impossible
to reach.  
 In this same year, an important event occurred in the prophet’s life.
By the command of God, he was taken on his Ascension to observe the
Kingdom of the Heavens. And accordingly he was shown the magnificent
signs of God in the area of the exalted heavens; so his great soul
became greater and well - prepared for acceptance of a greater mission
with greater hope.  
 From a narrative emphasized by both Sunni and Shi’a, we read; the
Prophet (S) on the night of his ascension was passing through heaven,
Gabriel gave his lordship some of the fruit of the “Tooba”[^3] tree, and
when the Holy Prophet (S) returned to earth, the seed of Fatimah Zahra
was coagulated from that heavenly fruit (she was conceived).  
 It is reported that the Prophet (S) kissed Fatimah (s.a.) frequently;
one day his wife, Aisha criticized this and said: “Why do you kiss your
daughter so much!?”  
 The Prophet (S) said in reply:  
 “Whenever I kiss Fatimah, I smell the scent of the Highest Heaven in
her.”[^4]  
 It was thus that this great child, from the pure extract of Heavenly
fruit and a father such as the Holy Prophet (S) mother such as
“Khadijah”; on the twentieth day of Jamadi al-thani, came into the
world, and the taunts and reproaches of the prophet’s opposers, that he
was as they thought without a “succeeding generation”, were all made in
vain. And by the contents of the Quranic chapter Kawthar, Fatimah Zahra
(s.a.) was made the gushing spring for the continuation of the prophet’s
lineage and the guiding Imams, and great blessings through the centuries
and ages until Doom’s Day.

This heavenly lady had nine names each being more meaningful than the
other; 1) Fatimah 2) Siddiqah 3) Tahirah 4) Mubarakah 5) Zakiyah 6)
Radhiyah 7) Mardhiyah 8) Muhaddithah 9) Zahra of which each is a
statement of the qualities and blessings of her blessed being.

It is enough to say that her famous name “Fatimah” contains the greatest
of good tidings for the followers of her school, this being because it
is from the root word - “Fatm”, meaning, being separated or taken off
from Milk. According to one hadith narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) he
asked the commander of the faithful Ali (a.s.):  
 “Do you know why my daughter was named Fatimah?” Ali replied:  
 “Please say so.”  
 He said:  
 “Because she and the Shi’a, the followers[^5] of her school, are
separated from the fires of Hell.”

From among her names the name “Zahra” also has a special luminosity and
brightness; It was asked of Imam Sadiq (a.s.):  
 Why do they call Fatimah “Zahra”?  
 He replied; Because “Zahra” means shining, and Fatimah was such that
when she stood in the “Mihrab” of prayer her light was a radiance for
the inhabitants of the skies (heavens), just as the light of the stars
is for the inhabitants of earth (is radiant). Therefore she was given
the name “Zahra”.  
 When “Khadijah”, who was a lady of status famous for her greatness,
married the Prophet of Islam (S.), the women of Mecca broke off their
relations with her, saying; she married a poor, orphaned young man and
has lowered her personal status!  
 This situation continued until Khadijah. became pregnant and the fetus
was none other than Fatimah Zahra.  
 When it came time for the birth she sent for-the women of Quraish and
asked them to come to her aid in this sensitive hour full of pain and
suffering, and not leave her alone. But she was confronted with this
cold, painful answer:  
 “You did not listen to our advice, you married the orphan of Abu Talib
who has no wealth, we will not come to your aid!”  
 The faithful Khadijah was greatly saddened by this ugly, meaningless
message but deep in her heart the light of hope shone, that her God
would not leave her alone at a time like this.  
 The difficult, critical moments of giving birth began; she was alone in
her home, and not a woman who could aid her was there. Her heart grew
heavier, and the roaring waves of the people’s unkindness tormented her
pure soul.  
 Suddenly there shone a flash in the horizon of her soul, she opened her
eyes and saw four women near her, and she became greatly worried.  
 One of the four women called:  
 “Be not afraid, nor sad. Your kind God has sent us to your aid, we are
your sisters.”  
 I am Sarah! And this is Asiah the wife of the pharaoh, who will be one
of your friends in heaven. The other is Maryam, daughter of Omran; and
this fourth that you see is the sister of Musa ibn Omran; Kolthoom!  
 We have come so that at this hour we may be of aid to you.  
 And they remained with her until Fatimah the Lady of Islam Opened her
eyes to the world.[^6]  
 Yes, as evidence to this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الحق سبحانه: (ان الذين قالوا ربنا اللّه ثم استقاموا تتنزل عليه
الملائكة ألاّ تخافوا ولا تحزنوا)
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(As for) Those who say, Our Lord is Allah, Then continue in the
right way, the angels descend upon them, saying: Fear not, nor be
grieved.”***[^7]

Here in addition to Angels, women of high worldly status rushed to the
aid of the faithful persevering Khadijah.  
 The birth of this auspicious child so pleased the Prophet (S) that he
began speaking in the praise and eulogy of God, and the tongues of the
ill-wishes who called him “Abtar”[^8] were forever silenced.  
 God gave tidings of this blessed child to the Prophet in the Quranic
kawthar, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَعْطَيْنَاكَ الْكَوْثَرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely We have given you the Kawthar***

Therefore pray to your Lord and make a sacrifice; surely your enemy is
the one who shall be without posterity.

[^1]: Nymph of Paradise. (N.T.)

[^2]: Riyahein-Al-shari’a; vol. 1, pg. 21

[^3]: “Tooba” the name of a tree that exists in paradise. (N.T.)

[^4]: This Tradition has been related with minor differences in the
commentaries of Tabari, Abu Ibrahim and Sayyuti. Even though it is well
known that the Ascension occurred in the last years of the prophet’s
stay in Mecca, some traditions make it known that ascensions occurred on
several occasions; so, it is not contradicting the birth of Fatimah
(s.a.) in the fifth year of his mission.

[^5]: This hadith comes to us in many books of the sunni such as (The
history of Baghdad) and (Sawa-iqul-Muhriqah) and (Kanz-ul-ommal) and
other books.

[^6]: The contents of this Hadith has been narrated by a group of sunni
scholars, such as “Tabari” in “Thakhaer-ul- Uqba”

[^7]: Qur’an, Surat Fussilat 41:30; Translation from M. H. Shakir

[^8]: Meaning a man without offspring. (N.T.)


