Fatimah (s.a.) After the Prophet’s Death
========================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما زالت بعد أبيها معصبة الرأس باكية العين، محترقة القلب
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“After the death of the Prophet (S), she continually wore the scarf of
mourning on her head, possessing crying eyes and a burning heart.**”***
[^1]

The sweet period of the Lady of Islam's life quickly came to an end with
the death of the Holy Prophet of Islam (even though throughout her
lifetime there was no real sweet period, because there were the constant
pressures, wars, and plots of the enemies against Islam and the Prophet
of Islam (S.), taking away her spiritual peace).  
 With the death of the prophet, new storms of complicated critical
events blew up.  
 The hatred and grudges of Badr, khaibar and Honain that were during the
prophet’s time hidden beneath the ashes became visible.

The sects of the “Hypocrites” went to action to take their revenge of
Islam and also from the Prophet’s family. Fatimah Zahra (s.a.) was in
the center of this circle, of which the poisonous arrows of the enemy
flew at her from every direction

Her separation from her father; the sad, tormenting innocence of her
husband Ali (a.s.); the plots of the enemy against Islam, and the worry
of Fatimah (s.a.) for the future of the Muslims and the Quranic
heritage, all joined together, severely straining her pure heart.

Fatimah (s.a.) doesn’t wish to cause Ali (commander of the Faithful)
greater grief by relating to him her sadness, because he had already
received a severe blow by these unpleasant circumstances and misdeeds
created by the people.  
 For this very reason she would go to the grave of the Prophet (S) and
tell him of her grief. And she speaks heart - rendering words that burn
our inner soul just like burning embers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أبتاه بقيت و الهةً و حيرانةً فريدة، قد انخمد صوتي و انقطع ظهري و
تنغص عيشي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Father dear, after you, I feel lonely. I have remained perplexed and
deprived, my mouth is inclined to silence, and my back is broken, and
the wholesome water of life has become bitter to my taste.”* [^2]

And, sometimes she would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل للمُغيّبِ تَحتَ أطباقِ الثّرى \*\* انْ كُنتَ تَسمَعُ صَرخَتي وَ
نِدائيا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صُبّتْ عَليَّ مَصائِبٌ لَوْ أنَّها \*\* صُبّتْ عَلى الايَّامِ صِرنَ
لَيَالِيا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The person who smells the pure soil of the grave of Prophet (S), it is
only fair that until the end of his life he should smell no other
perfume. After you, O’ father, so much suffering has fallen upon me
that, if they were to fall upon bright Jays, they would turn into dark,
gloomy nights.”*

Why does Fatimah (s.a.) shed tears in this way?  
 Why is she so restless?  
 Why is she as wild rue on fire, without stability?  
 Why?!  
 The answer to these whys must be heard from her own words.  
 Umm Salamah says:  
 “When I went to see the Lady of Islam Fatimah (s.a.) after the death of
the prophet, and asked her how she was, in reply these meaningful
sentences were spoken by her:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أصبحت بين كمد و كرب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقد النبىِّ و ظلم الوصي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُتكَ و الله حجابه...
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولكنها أحقاد بدرية
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وثارات أحدية
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانت عليها قلوب النفاق مكتمنة
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Why are you asking me how I am Umm Salamah, when I am caught in the
middle of much sadness and suffering? On the one hand I have lost my
father, the Prophet (S) and on the other hand (I see with my own eyes
that) there has been injustice done to his successor, (Ali ibn Abi
Talib).*  
*I swear to God that they have torn the curtain of his inviolability
(reverence).*  
*But I know that these are the grudges of Badr and the revenges of Uhud,
that were hidden in the hearts of the hypocrites (non-believers).”* [^3]

All of her defences of the boundaries of the holiness of everything
noble and her support of Ali (s.a.) right during this time of pain and
suffering are not hidden from anyone.  
 Even though her life after the Prophet of Islam was as brief as she had
begged God to be, being not more than two or three months before she
rushed to the Holy Presence of God and met her father. However, in this
Period of time she didn’t omit any self-sacrificing, generous effort in
Ali’s right or for the defence of Islam.

**“Peace be upon you, O’ daughter of the Messenger of God.”**

[^1]: المناقب، ج3، ص362 “Al Manaqeb”, vol. 3 pg. 362

[^2]: “المناقب، ج3، ص362 “Al-Manaqeb” vol.3 pg. 362

[^3]: مناقب ابن شهر آشوب، ج2، ص225 “Manaqeb Ibn Shahr Ashoob”; vol. 2
pg. 225


