Preface
=======

The magnificent and auspicious celebration of the fifteenth of Sha'ban
can be observed everywhere. Every place has been decorated.

In every place joyful and cheerful gatherings can be seen.

The enthusiasm and happiness of the Shi'ites on this auspicious day is
apparent everywhere.

Indeed, what day is revered like this day by people with such elation
and glory?

The fifteenth of Sha'ban is the day in which the Shi'ites saw the
fulfilment of the glad tidings of the divine messengers.

It is the day in which the good news of Islam, the Qur'an and the
traditions (*ahadith*) of the infallible Imams will take place.

It is on his birthday that he will bring the east and west of the world
to justice, and by his powerful hand annihilate demons (*'ifrit*),
infidelity and irreligiousness.

On this day, the authority of the Last Luminous Jewel of Allah will be
established on the face of the earth. He it is who will decide the end
of the long struggle between truth and falsehood. His appearance will
mean a victory for truth and the annihilation of falsehood.

He is the same person who, by the will of Allah, will overpower fragile
doctrines, and will pursue and accomplish the objectives of the Last
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.).[^1]

He will remove ignorance and class- discrimination from the world and
will establish equality instead; he will exploit the earth's resources,
distribute them among the poor and make them sufficient.

The outburst of enthusiasm and happiness will at that time cause tears
to flow down the cheeks of enthusiasts, and the lustrous and mournful
eyes of the awaiting people will be filled with light.

Mahdism is the most genuine and fundamental Islamic belief, which even a
person with a limited knowledge of Islam will surely accept.

Since it is obligatory for every Muslim to know the "Leader of the
Age" - Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi (a.s.)[^2], it has been endeavoured here -
though in brief - to study the short history of this fundamental belief
and present a brief introduction to the life of Hujjat al-Haqq (The
Rightful Proof [of Allah] ). We hope this meagre "collection", as a
humble gift, will be accepted by the Solomon of the Age"

**15th Sha'ban, 1396**

[^1]: ( s.a.w.): is the abbreviation of the Arabic phrase salla 'llahu
'alayhi wa alih (may Allah's peace and blessing be upon him and his
progeny).

[^2]: (a.s.): is the abbreviation of the Arabic phrase 'alay-hi/ha
/himu's-salam (may peace be upon him/ her/ them)


