The Good News
=============

There is no doubt that the Holy Qur'an is the book of Allah, and that
all the Muslims of the world accept and obey its teachings and
instructions. When one opens this Book (Qur'an) and casts a glance at
its verses, one will come to what seems to be a clear vista of the
extraordinary, sensational and exciting future and end of the universe.

The Holy Qur'an says that the ultimate mission of the Holy Prophet of
Islam is to make this holy religion prevail over all other religions of
the world; and one day this holy aspiration will finally be fulfilled,
as the Holy Qur'an says:

***He it is who has sent His messenger (Muhammad) with the guidance and
the Religion of Truth, that He may cause it to prevail over all
religions, however much the idolaters may be averse.*** **(9:33)**

The divine book of the last Messenger of Allah gives the glad tidings
that rule over the earth shall finally belong to the righteous and
virtuous servants of Allah:

***The earth is Allah's. He gives it for an inheritance to who He will.
And lo I the sequel is for those who keep their duty (unto Him).***
**(7:128)**

The earth, which will be full of corruption, destruction and ignorance
like a lifeless body, will be revived with the glowing light of justice,
as referred to in the Holy Qur'an.

We also read in the Holy Qur'an:

***Allah has promised such of you as believe and do good works that***

***He will surely make them succeed (the present rulers) in the earth
even***

***as he caused those who were before them to succeed (others) and
that***

***He win surely establish for them religion which he has approved for
them,***

***and will give them in exchange safety after their fear. They serve
Me. They***

***ascribe no thing as partner unto Me.*** **(24:55)**

The Almighty Allah also says:

***Fain would they put out the light of Allah with their mouths, but***

***Allah will perfect His light however much the disbelievers are
averse.*** **(61-8)**

These are some short examples of the divine glad tidings mentioned in
the Holy Qur'an. By studying these matters and tens of other similar
matters, it shall be perceived that the Islamic message will reach its
complete fulfilment when these holy aspirations and desires have taken
place. All fabricated and superstitious objectives will disappear and
then only Islam, the unique and true religion, will be the faith of the
people in the east and west of the world.

Injustice, oppression and inequality shall vanish and instead justice
and equality which is the law of the creation of the world will be
established everywhere. The sovereignty of the divine caliphs
(*khulafa'*) will b e established in all the corners of the world. The
light of the guidance of Allah will shine and the earth belong to the
virtuous ones.

Yes, the Holy Qur'an gives the good news that a day will come when all
Muslims of the world shall wait enthusiastically for such a time.

\* \* \*

Next to the Holy Qur'an, the sayings of the Holy Prophet and the
Honourable Imams are the most important and worthiest treasure of
Islamic learning. For every Muslim, it is obligatory and essential to
follow and obey the sayings of the Holy Prophet and the Holy Imams since
obeying their commands is particularly and clearly mentioned in the Book
of Allah.

In the sea of jewels of Islamic traditions, glad tidings on the
Government of Justice can be seen. Moreover, special mention has been
made regarding the "Divine Revolution" and the divine leader who will
fulfil this holy aspiration.

The Holy Prophet of Islam said:

"Even when the entire duration of the world's existence has already been
exhausted, and one solitary day is left to embrace the eve of Doomsday,
Allah will expand that day and make it swell to such a length of time as
to accommodate the ultimate reign of a person out of my holy progeny who
will be called by my name and my agnomen ('Abu 'l-Qasim). He will then
make the earth abound with peace and justice as it will have been
fraught with injustice and tyranny before him."

The context of this precious tradition reveals a definite good news more
than anything else. and informs the people of the Government of Justice,
Achievement and Divine Promises as mentioned in most of the Shi'ite and
Sunnite sources.

In another tradition, the Holy Prophet told Amir al- mu'minin 'Ali
(a.s.), saying:

"There will be twelve Guides (*aimmah*) after me, the first of whom is
you, O' 'Ali, and the last one will be the , Support , (*al-Qa'm*), who
with Almighty Allah's grace, will gain victory over the whole of the
east and west of the world."

The Purified Imams reminded people in several traditions of the
significance of the Divine Promise and Government of the Twelfth Imam,
and told them that waiting for the Great Saviour is the most valuable
deed, and that his followers and devotees are the best and the beloved
people.

It will suffice here to quote, as an example, a few of these traditions:

1) When Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba (a.s.) held the seat of the caliphate, he
fought the hypocritical Mu'awiyah, who, with the assistance of his
cunning minister, gradually deceived the companions of Imam Hasan
(a.s.), who thus deserted and left the Imam alone. Hence, he was
compelled to make a peace treaty with Mu'awiyah in which he (Mu'awiyah)
was obliged to comply with some duties and to refrain from appointing a
successor and fighting.

On some occasions, the Imam took the opportunity to point out to the
people Mu'awiyah's errors and unjust acts. Meanwhile, some of ignorant
people started criticizing the Imam as to why he had accepted the peace
treaty Imam Hasan (a.s.) clarified for the people the meaning of the
Imam and the leader, and the necessity of obeying every command of the
Imam without asking why and wherefore. Then he explained to them about
the Government of the Twelfth Imam, saying:

"Don't you know that every one of us (Imams) has the responsibility of
taking allegiance from the oppressors of his time, except the 'Support'
(*al- Qa'im*) behind whom the Spirit of Allah (Jesus) will pray, and
Almighty Allah will keep secret his birth from some people and will
conceal his person from their sights. When he appears he will not be
responsible for taking allegiance from anyone. He is the ninth
descendant of my brother Husayn, the son of the captive princess.
Almighty Allah will prolong his age during his occultation, and by His
Perfect Power, he will appear as a young man of less than forty years so
that all people will know that Allah truly has power over all things."

2. Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) in reply to a question from one of his
followers about his successors, said:

"The Imam succeeding me is my son Musa, and the Awaited Imam is Muhammad
ibn Hasan ibn 'Ali ibn Muhammad ibn 'Ali ibn Musa."

The same Imam is quoted as having said repeatedly that:

"Every group of people is waiting for a government, and we are waiting
for our Government to be established at the End of Time."

3) The Seventh Holy Imam Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.) in a reply to one of his
companions who asked him whether he was *"al- Qa'im bi 'l-Haqq"* (he who
is supported by the Truth), said:

"I am *al-Qa'im bi'l-Haqq*, but that *'al-Qa'im'* who will remove
Allah's enemies from the earth and will fill it with justice and equity
is my fifth descendant. Since he will fear for his own life, he will be
in occultation for a long time during which a group of people will
apostate, but there will also be a group who will be firm in their
belief."

He added:

"Blessed are our followers (the Shi'ites) who, during the time of the
occultation (*ghaybah*) of the Imam of the Age, identify themselves with
our Authority (*wilayah*) and keep away from our enemies. They belong to
us and we belong to them. They have accepted our leadership and we are
pleased with their adherence Therefore, blessed are they. I swear to
Allah that they will be with us in our rank in Paradise."

4) Finally, the Eleventh Imam Hasan al-'Askari (a.s.) said:

"I see that after me differences will appear among you concerning the
Imam after me. Whoever accepts the Imams after the Prophet of Allah but
denies my son is like a person who accepts all the prophets but denies
the prophethood of Muhammad (s.a.w.), the Prophet of Allah. And whoever
denies (Muhammad) the Prophet of Allah is like one who has denied all
the prophets of Allah, for to obey the last of us is like obeying the
first and to deny the last of us is like denying the first But beware I
. Verily, for my son there will be an occultation during which all
people will fall into doubt except those whom Allah protects."

The available traditions from the Holy Prophet and the infallible Imams
are so many in number as to make us well-informed on this important
principle of faith. One can say that the most important, and the highest
recorded number, of traditions is on the subject of Imamology
(*Imamate*) in the Shi'ite books of traditions.

The subject of the leadership of the Twelfth Imam, his Government, and
other related matters, comes next to the subject of the successorship of
Imam â€˜Ali, Amir al-mu'minin (a.s) There are hundreds of these traditions
recorded both in the Shi'ite and Sunnite books. A large number of
religious scholars from all Islamic sects have independently compiled
books on this subject. Their number runs to tens of volumes.

\* \* \*

The years of Imams', Islamic leadership passed one after another along
with tyranny of the rulers contemporary with them, till the leadership
of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) came. This Holy Imam lived in a difficult
circumstances, appearing less frequently in the public gatherings. His
beloved son who is the last Divine Proof, was hidden from ,the sight of
strangers till the year 260 A. H., when the rays of his being set while
the eyes of all people were fixed at the door of Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.).


