Introduction
============

Praise is due to Allah, Lord of the Worlds. Praise to Allah Who sent,
from the gardens of His Mercy, trustees: messengers to guide people to
the straight path. Then He made Imamate and Wilayat a fountainhead from
which thirsty souls drink. Then He granted, from the mountain of His
generosity, abundance of *fiqh* after the absence of His greatest *wali*
(as) so the righteous remnant from among the seekers of the truth may
quench their thirst from it.

Since that day, hundreds of years have passed. During them, many divine
theologians came and went by; each one of them was like a torch that lit
the path for those who tread it. Some of them earned fame; their name
became prominent, whereas some of them remained unknown across these
centuries. As regarding the creed's *faqihs*, they had another pull when
they mixed biographies in the *fiqh*-related views with the conduct in
the worlds of the unknown.

Our contemporary *faqih*, Ayatullah Bahjat, is one of those described by
Imam Ali (as) in these words: "Great is the Creator in their hearts, so
everything besides Him is in their eyes small." He is a great wise man.
The light of his presence glitters in the gathering of the Gnostics, and
the souls in his revered audience shine.

His student, mentor Riďa Baqi Zadeh, author of *Bergi az Daftar Aftab*,
says the following in the introduction to this book: "Since the day when
breezes from the loved One blew upon me, when the flower of existence
opened, and I was guided to the full truth in the self, where success is
achieved through pulls of the Lord, I realized that reaching the real
loved One cannot be achieved except through guidance from one who is
familiar with the path.

I, therefore, resorted to the Imams (as) so I could uphold them and
plead to them. It is then that this sacred tradition met me on the road:
'Keep company with those whose company reminds you of Allah and whose
logic increases your knowledge.'

And thus it was. I upheld the fact that the adored One does not leave
those who seek His path alone or lets them rely on themselves. The earth
is never without divine guides. I was looking for a role model that
guides me to the path of the loved One during the absence of the sun of
the Household of Inspiration (as) so I could, through seeing him, polish
the dust away from the heart and fuse myself through remembrance of the
loved One into all existence.

During this time, I saw all of that and more. I saw it manifesting
itself in the personality of one who is unique in his time, a wise
Gnostic, one who drowns his soul into the remembrance of the loved One,
who is the light of the hearts of the seekers, the joy of the Gnostics,
the perfect Gnostic, the Salman of the time, the one who is truly loyal
to the greatest Ayatullah, the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu
Talib (as) in his knowledge and practice, namely Ayatullah Muhammad Taqi
Bahjat, may Allah prolong his wide shade.

I knew that the truth Gnostic is not known except by Allah or by a
Gnostic like him, so I kept earnestly looking for everyone who could
have breathed a fragrance of his holy breath, and about any written text
from which the fragrance of his holy soul emanates, hence this book that
is in your hands, dear reader, my final merchandise, having braved many
hardships. I present it to those who seek the role model in the pure
branches of knowledge.

So, the study of biographies of such great men can instill hope for
lighting the minds of men of virtue, scholars, students, professors of
the *hawza* (religious seminary), universities and the sons of the
nation. The book in your hands, dear reader, is the summary of what has
been written and said about this great divine Gnostic.

In it, I try to acquaint the Arab reader with this Islamic personality
that mixed between the pursuit of knowledge and disseminating it as well
as walking along the path of Allah. He is described by Imam Khomeini as
one "… who enjoys the ability for 'death by choice'; in other words, he
can extract his soul from his body then returns it any time he wants.
This is regarded as one of the lofty stations the Gnostics can reach
along the trip to the path and the Gnostic conduct."


