Excerpts From Pieces of Wisdom and Instructions of Grand Ayatullah Bahjat
=========================================================================

First Admonishment
------------------

**In the Name of Allah, the most Gracious, the most Merciful**

Praise to Allah alone, blessings unto the master of prophets, Muhammad,
and his Progeny, the pure *wasis*, and a curse be upon their enemies
from the early generations and the last. Those with reason know that the
basis of the movement of beings is knowing the engine needed for motion,
i.e. knowing what causes movement, the mechanism of movement, what is
connected to movement.

In other words, it is knowing the beginning and end as well as the
purpose behind the movement because beings move every moment towards a
certain goal. The difference between a man of knowledge and an ignorant
person is knowledge of what is behind the events or not knowing how to
deal with them, the variation of their stations in the succession, and
whatever has anything to do with the different levels of their knowledge
of initiation.

If we know what cause the movement, his good administration and wisdom
through the system which dominates the movements, we will then focus on
its creating and legislating will.

So, congratulations to anyone who knows all of this, and woe unto anyone
who does not! Regarding the outcomes of these movements, an ignorant
person will say, “How I wish I was never created!” whereas the
knowledgeable person will say, “How I wish I am created seventy times so
I may tread the path towards the pursuit then return and treat it anew
and am martyred on the path of righteousness anew!” So, do not entertain
regrets about our life.

I frankly say this: If one spends half his life remembering the One Who
truly is the Grantor and spent the other half in indifference, that half
[the first] is regarded the most precious of the days of his lifetime,
while the other half is considered among the days of his death, rather,
worse than death, because death by itself neither harms nor benefits
anyone.

A knowledgeable person obeys Allah, does whatever pleases Him, acts upon
what he knows and is cautious about what he does not know till he gets
to know. He is in a continuous state of getting to know. His deed,
hence, is conjoined with the evidence, and his success, too, is
conjoined with the absence of evidence. Can we obey Allah without arming
ourselves with knowledge, and will our life’s caravan reach the sought
goal safely?

Can our existence be originating from Allah while our weakness from
anyone other than Him, the most Exalted One? If so, the stimulating
force does not last except to the believers and is not weakness except
to others.

Now, if we in this phase possess conviction, it is for the sake of
applying these attributes and conditions. We must get to know that it is
necessary to know that this resulting movement, from beginning to end,
is an opposition to the false inner motivations. If this matter does not
achieve all our aspirations, at least it suffices us to win the
happiness of being connected with the pleasure of this supreme
principle: “The best ration of one making the trip to you is the
strength of determination.”

Praise to Allah firstly and lastly, and blessings unto Muhammad and his
pure progeny, and a perpetual curse be upon their enemies, all of them.

Holy Mashhad  
 Rabi\` al-Awwal 1417

Second Admonishment
-------------------

**In the Name of the most Exalted One**

I ask those who seek admonishment this question: “Have you acted upon
the admonishments which you have so far heard?” Do you know that Allah
Almighty lets one who acts upon what he knows inherit the knowledge of
what he does not know? If one does not act upon what he knows, is it
right that he expects more of such knowledge? Should the call to Allah
be by the tongue [alone]? Did Allah not order us to be callers to Him
but not with our tongues? Should we learn the reaching method or do we
know it already?

Can we obtain the answers to these questions in the following verse of
the Holy Qur’an:  
*“**As for those who strive in Our (cause), We will certainly guide them
to Our paths, for truly Allah is with those who do right” (Qur’an,
29:69)?***

And we can get it in the following tradition about the Infallible One
(as): “Allah will let one who acts upon what he knows inherit the
knowledge of what he does not know” and “One who acts upon what he knows
will be spared what he does not know.”

May Allah grant us success to act upon our knowledge and to be cautious
with regard to what we do not know. Indeed, my success comes only from
Allah. Upon Him do I rely, and to Him do I return, and peace be with
you, the mercy of Allah and His blessing.

Holy Mashhad  
 Rabi\` al-Awwal 1417

Third Admonishment
------------------

**In His Name, the most Exalted One**

We all know that achieving the pleasure of Allah Almighty can be in
adoring Him, in seeking nearness to Him, although He is rich in Himself
and does not need His servants’ conviction. We, therefore, know that the
servants are the ones who need to get close to the One Who initiates all
nice things, and they also need such nearness to continue.

We, therefore, know that our benefit from getting to be near to Him will
be according to the degree of our involvement in remembering Him: The
more we endeavor to obey and serve Him, the more we get closer to Him
and we benefit from this nearness, and the difference between us and
Salman the Persian, peace of Allah be with him, will be in the degree of
such obedience and remembrance.

We also know there are deeds in this world with which we will be tested,
and we have to know that these deeds, if pleasing to Allah Almighty, are
regarded as service, obedience and adoration of the most Exalted and
Great One.

We, therefore, have to know that remembering Allah and obeying Him must
be our life’s goal so we may reach the last degree of nearness to the
Divine; otherwise, we will regret after we see how others reached lofty
stations while we lagged behind from reaching our goal.

May Allah enable us to abandon being busy with doing anything but
seeking His Pleasure. We so plead in the name of Muhammad and his
Progeny, blessings of Allah be with them all.

Holy Mashhad  
 Rabi\` al-Awwal 1417

Fourth Admonishment
-------------------

**In His Name, the most Exalted One**

I said, “Alf [Alpha]”. He said, “Then what?” I said, “Nothing. This
letter suffices whoever knows what it means.”  
 I have repeatedly said and I once more say that if the Name of Allah is
mentioned to someone, and he feels comfort upon hearing it, he needs no
preaching because he knows what he should do and what he should not. He
knows he has to act upon what he knows and be cautious about doing what
he does not know.  
 And peace be with you, the mercy of Allah and His blessing.

Fifth Admonishment
------------------

**In His Name, the most Exalted One**

There is no *dhikr* better than the practical one, and there is no
practical *dhikr* better than abandoning transgression in beliefs and
deeds. It seems abandoning transgression is not done only by absolute
articulation but by continuous monitoring [of our actions].  
 Surely Allah is the One Who grants success.

The servant of Allah, Muhammad Taqi Bahjat

Sixth Admonishment
------------------

**In His Name, the most Exalted One**

Anyone who believes in the Creator and in the being a full conviction,
believing in the prophets and *wasis* (blessings of Allah be with them
all), seeking their help in the belief and in action, regulating his
movements and stillness according to their orders, ridding his heart of
everything other than Allah in his adoration, praying to Allah with a
sincere heart, being a follower of Imam al-Mahdi (may Allah hasten his
reappearance) with regard to doubts, opposing those who oppose the Imam
and agreeing with those who agree with the Imam, condemning those
condemned by the Imam, seeking mercy of Allah for those for whom the
Imam seeks mercy (even in the general sense)…, such an individual lacks
no perfection, nor does he bear any affliction.

The servant of Allah Muhammad Taqi Bahjat

Seventh Admonishment
--------------------

**In His Name, the most Exalted One**

There is a group that deals with admonishment and oratory through a
treatment having an advance intention. It is as though they speak and
listen in order to speak and hear. This is a serious mistake because
teaching and learning are not independent of each other; rather, they
are conducive to action. The Infallible Ones (as) are quoted as having
said (in order to explain this matter and to encourage others to uphold
it) the following: “Invite people to Allah but not with your tongues.
Speak through action. Learn from action. Listen practically. The teacher
should learn from the students how to teach.

We are often requested by some to pray for them, and when we ask them
about the reason, they explain to us their pains. When we describe the
medicine for them, they go back and repeat their request that we again
pray for them instead of they act upon what we had prescribed for them.
What a difference there is between what we tell them and what they want!
They mix the condition for [acceptance of] the supplication with the
supplication itself. We must not get out of the scope of our
obligations. Rather, we must deduct conclusions from the deed because it
is impossible for the deed to be the outcome, and it is also impossible
for us to earn a result with undertaking action.

I plead to Allah that we not only remain talkers but also doers. Do not
undertake an action without knowing it. Let us stop where knowledge
stops. And let us act upon what we know and be cautious about what we do
not know till we come to know, for going this way contains no regret. We
must not look at each other. Instead, we must look at the notebook of
the Shari\`a, and let us follow its commandments while abandoning its
prohibitions.  
 Peace, the mercy of Allah and His blessings be with you.

Eighth Admonishment
-------------------

**In His Name, the most Exalted One**

Praise be to Allah only, blessings be on the master of His prophets, and
upon his good Progeny, and the curse be upon all their enemies.

A group of believing men and women has requested advice, and I see a
number of confused issues about this request including the following:

1. Advice is provided about the particulars of matters, while
admonishment is more general than totalities and particularities.
Strangers do not advise each other.

2. “Allah will let one who acts upon what he knows inherit the knowledge
of what he does not know”. “One who acts upon what he knows will be
spared what he does not know.” “As for those who strive in Our (cause),
We will certainly guide them to Our paths, for truly Allah is with those
who do right” (Qur’an, 29:69). Act upon what you know and be cautious
regarding what you do not know till the matter becomes clear for you. If
it is not clear for you, be informed that you did not act upon some
information. Objection stands against one who seeks admonishment but
does not act upon it because it is certain he had heard some
admonishments but did not act upon them; otherwise, the matter would
have been clarified for him and he would have needed no admonishment.

3. All people know they must read the “practical *fatwas*” and apply
them to their actions and distinguish through them between what is
permissible and what is prohibitive. So, they cannot say, “We do not
know what we must do and what we must not.”

4. Look at the deeds of those in whom you believe. Act upon what they do
with your own choice, and stop doing what they prohibit with your own
choice. This is the best way to reach lofty goals. “Invite people to
Allah but not with your tongues.” Admonishments through actions are
better and much more effective than oral admonishments.

5. Obviously, daily recitation of the Qur’an and the reciting of
appropriate supplications in times and places as well as supplications
after prayers, frequent visits to mosques and sacred places, visiting
scholars and righteous men and keeping them company are among the
matters which please Allah and His Messenger. One who performs these
deeds can expect an increase in insight and feel happy with adoration,
*ziyara* and recitation day after day. The opposite is also true; i.e.,
keeping company with indifferent people increases one’s cruelty and
makes a servant feel uncomfortable with acts of adoration and *ziyara*.
Keeping company with those whose conviction is weak all cause it to be
impossible to reach the high degrees and lofty spiritual conditions
which result from acts of adoration, *ziyaras* and recitations; rather,
it leads to worse conditions. So, keeping company with those weak in
conviction makes one lose his good faculties. Keeping them company
increases one’s desire to follow their corrupt manners with the
exception of sitting with those one has to accompany or sitting with one
in order to show him the right guidance. “Keep company with those seeing
whom reminds you of Allah and increase your knowledge, and those whose
deeds make you desire the Hereafter.”

6. It is obvious that abandoning transgression in belief and in action
makes one need nothing else. Anything else needs them, while they do not
need anything else; rather, they increase the good deeds and prevent bad
ones. “I have not created the jinns and mankind except to adore Me.”
Adoration here is abandoning sinning in belief and in action. Some
people think that we are past the stage of abandoning transgressions!
They are heedless of the fact that a transgression is not relevant to
the well known major sins only. Rather, insistence on committing small
sins is regarded as a major sin, too. For example, a sharp look at one
expected to obey you in the intention to scare him/her is considered as
a prohibitive harm. Likewise, smiling to the transgressor in the
intention to encourage him/her is regarded as assisting one’s
transgression. The good manners according to the Shari\`a and the bad
ones have been explained in books and in practical dissertations.

Keeping a distance from scholars and the righteous will make those who
steal the creed take advantage of the opportunity to buy conviction and
those who follow it for a trifling price. This is what we have tested
and always noticed.

We plead to Allah, the most High, the most Able, to grant us success in
these sacred Islamic feasts and makes the firm and deeply rooted
determination to abandon transgression a gift for our feast because it
is the key to happiness in the life of this world and in the Hereafter
so that abandoning transgression becomes our faculty. A transgression to
one with the faculty is like a thirsty person drinking poison or like a
hungry person eating the meat of a dead person.

Of course, had this path been hard till its end, the omni-Potent and
most Merciful Creator would not have obligated us to tread upon it. My
success comes from Allah. Upon Him do I rely, to Him do I return, and
praise is due to Allah first and last, and blessings be with Muhammad
and his pure Progeny, and a perpetual curse be upon all their enemies.

Rabi\` al-Awwal 17, 1419 A.H.

Ninth Admonishment
------------------

**In His Name, the most Exalted One**

We, grownups and youngsters, must know that the only path to achieving
happiness in this life and in the Hereafter is worshipping Allah, the
most Exalted One, the most Great, and worship is abandoning
transgressions in belief and in deed.

If we act upon what we know and stop and be cautious about what we do
not know till it becomes clear for us, we will never regret at all. If
the determination to do that is firm and deeply rooted in the servant,
Allah Almighty is more apt to grant him success and to help him. Peace
be with you, the mercy of Allah with Muhammad and the Progeny of
Muhammad, and may a curse be on all their enemies.


