Tales Narrated by Grand Ayatullah Sheikh Bahjat
===============================================

1. Value of Prayer in its Early Time
------------------------------------

Sheikh Misbah says, “Ayatullah Bahjat used to quote the late Qadi
saying, ‘If one of you performs the obligatory prayer in its early time
and does not reach high stations, let him curse me!’ Or, according to
another version of the narrative, he said, ‘Let him spit in my face.’”

There is a great mystery in the early prayer time, and there is a
difference between “Safeguard the prayers” and “Uphold the prayers”. If
one who prays pays special attention to his prayer and sticks to
performing it when it is first due, this deed by itself has many effects
even if he does not pray it will a full heart.

2. Keeping Sunan Alive
----------------------

Hujjatul-Islam wal Muslimin Quddas, one of the students of Ayatullah
Bahjat, says, “The sheikh always used to advise us not to let the
*sunan* be forgotten, so much so that the innovations take their place.
One day he said this to us: ‘Ayatullah Hajj Sheikh Murtaďa Taleqani (one
of the professors of manners and one of the most brilliant scholars in
al-Najaf al-Ashraf) was invited to partake of the *iftar* with a number
of scholars, including Grand Ayatullah the late al-Khu’i. When food was
presented and everyone sat at the table, Sheikh Hajj Murtaďa Taleqani
said, ‘There is no salt on the table!’ And he did not stretch his hand
to the food although the distance between the place where the food was
served and the kitchen was quite long, and it seems that the food was
coming from another house. Anyway, the sheikh did not stretch his hand
to the food till they brought the salt. The others, too, did not stretch
their hands to the food out of their respect for the sheikh, including
the late Ayatullah al-Khu’i. After the *majlis* had been concluded, and
when they all wanted to disperse, Sayyid al-Khu’i addressed Sheikh
Taleqani saying, ‘O Sheikh, if you were tied to this Sunnah to this
extent, it would be better to carry with you a little salt so people do
not have to wait for you like that.’ It is then that Sheikh Taleqani
took out a small bag of salt which he was carrying in his pocket and
said, ‘I was carrying salt with me, but I wanted this good Islamic
tradition to be observed.’”

3. Clemency and Generosity of the Imams (as)
--------------------------------------------

Sayyid Quddas says, “One day Sheikh Bahjat talked about the generosity
and open-handedness of the Imams saying, ‘In Iraq, there is a small
village near the place where Tigris and Euphrates rivers meet called
al-Musayyab. A Shiite man used to pass by this village from time to time
whenever he went to perform the *ziyara* of the Commander of the
Faithful (as), and a Sunni man, too, was residing in this village. The
latter quite often used to make fun of the Shiite man whenever he saw
him going to visit the shrine of the Commander of the Faithful (as), so
much so that he dared once to speak ill of the holy Imam (as), so the
Shiite man was very angry and he complained about this matter to the
Commander of the Faithful (as) during one of his visit. During that
night, he saw the Imam (as) in a vision and once more complained to him
about this matter. The Imam (as) said, ‘He [the Sunni man] has done us a
favor, and we cannot punish him in the life of this world no matter what
sins he committed.’ The Shiite man asked, ‘What favor is it? Did he do
you a favor when he dared to speak ill of you?’ The Imam (as) said, ‘No,
but he was sitting one day at the meeting place of both rivers, the
Tigris and the Euphrates, and he was looking at the Euphrates.

He remembered the Karbala story and the thirst of Imam al-Husayn (as),
so he said this to himself: ‘Omer ibn Saad was wrong when he killed
those men as they were thirsty, and it was better for him to give them
water then kill them.’ A tear trickled down from his eyes out of grief
for Abu Abdullah (as); therefore, it became mandatory on us never to
punish him in this life.’ The Shiite man says, ‘I woke up from my sleep
and returned to al-Musayyab and met the Sunni man on the road who said
this to me in ridicule: ‘Did you visit your imam, and did you convey our
message to him?!’ I said, ‘Yes, I conveyed your message to him, and I
carry his message to you.’ The man laughed and said, ‘What is this
message which you carry to me?’ I narrated to him the incident from
beginning to end. The Sunni man lowered his head to the ground and kept
thinking: ‘O Lord! Nobody at that moment was near me, and I did not talk
about this incident to anyone; so, how did the Imam (as) become
acquainted with it?’ Then he said, ‘I testify that there is no god save
Allah, and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, and that Ali, the
Commander of the Faithful, is a friend of Allah and the *wasi* of the
Messenger of Allah.’”

4. Value of Ablution and Purification
-------------------------------------

Sayyid Quddas also sayd, “One day, I went to the house of Sheikh Bahjat
a few minutes before the start of the class, and I found a sheikh
sitting there. Sheikh Bahjat was paying him a special attention. A few
minutes later, the sheikh said, ‘This man does not go to bed before
performing his ablution. Even if he woke up several times during the
night, he would still perform the ablution every time he woke up.’”

5. Personality of Sheikh Muhammad Husayn Kampani
------------------------------------------------

Sheikh Misbah Yazdi says, “One day, Sheikh Bahjat said, ‘Sheikh Muhammad
Husayn was a great scholar, so much so that if you get acquainted with
his scholarly productions, you will imagine he does not do any other job
except study and research all day long. And if you became acquainted
with his worship program, you will imagine he keeps himself busy doing
nothing but worshipping.’ The late Sheikh Muhammad Husayn Kampani used
to say, ‘I attended the class of the late Akhound Khurasani, author of
the *Kifaya* book, for thirteen years. During this period, I did not
miss his class except one single night (it seems the sheikh used to
teach at night). During that night, I was going to visit both Jawad
Imams (as) in al-Kadhimiyya.

My return was chaotic, so I could not attend the class, but I used to
guess the pursuits that the professor was going to submit prior to my
attendance. When I reached Najaf and talked with the friends, I saw that
all the pursuits which the professor had submitted were the ones which I
guessed and wrote prior to my attendance, and my writings almost lacked
nothing.’ Sheikh Kampani used to commit himself to regularly attend the
class of the professor despite his lofty scholarly position. He did not
miss the class except one single night although he was capable of
writing the lesson’s pursuits prior to his attendance.

“’Besides these invaluable scholarly activities, he was committed to his
adoration programs, too. Whoever saw him worshipping could hardly
believe he was doing anything else besides adoration. He was regular in
reciting the Ashura *ziyara* and the *ziyara* of Ja\`far al-Tayyar, may
Allah be pleased with him. According to the prevailing tradition among
Najaf’s scholars who used to hold weekly commemorative *majalis* on
Thursdays or Friďays, so the *majlis* could be an opportunity for
friends, professors and students on one hand, and a means to seek
nearness to Allah on the other. Sheikh Kampani used to hold a
commemorative *majlis* every Thursday, and he used to commit himself to
sitting in the place where tea is prepared or keep himself busy
arranging people’s shoes. As he was thus engaged, his tongue quickly
moved, and he was muttering words the meaning of which we did not
understand, but we used to wonder about the *dhikr* that the sheikh was
reciting as he stood up or sat down. One day a close friend of his asked
him (this was the late Sheikh Ali Muhammad Burujardi, may Allah be
pleased with him), ‘Our sheikh! What is this *dhikr* to which you commit
yourself and not leave even when you offer the Salam?’ The sheikh smiled
and said after a short contemplation, ‘It is better if one recites Surat
al-Qadr [chapter of the Night of Power] a thousand times a day.’”

6. Feeling Pleased with whatever Pleases Allah
----------------------------------------------

Hujjatul-Islam wal Muslimin Quddas, one of the students of Sheikh
Bahjat, says, “One day I went to the house of Sheikh Bahjat a few
minutes before the start of the class becaue often the sheikh used to
attend the class room when some of his students come (even if it is one
single student), and he would narrate a story or a tradition or a moral
lesson till all the students attend.

For this reason, I went to the house of the sheikh early, hoping to hear
those pursuits. Luckily, when the sheikh heard my voice as I said, ‘Ya
Allah!’ as I entered, he came to the room early and said this to me
after the greeting and the salutation, ‘In the city of Najaf, a handsome
Iranian youth was with us from the people of Hamadan, and he was famous
for being neat and physically well formed. One day, this youth became
paralyzed to the extent he could not walk except after leaning on a
cane. I tried not to meet him because I used to think he would feel
embarrassed due to his particular condition; therefore, I used to avoid
meeting him so I would not add one more grief to his grieves.

One day, I got out of the alley and saw him standing in the street, so I
had no choice except to meet him. Without contemplating, I asked him,
‘How do you feel? (but I was upset with having said so and kept saying
this to myself: ‘What empty talk is this?! Do you not see in what
condition he is?!). But contrary to my expectation, when he opened his
mouth to answer my question, his speech was like cool water with which
he put out what I had felt inside. He kept praising and thanking Allah
with a spirit filled with activity and pleasure as if he was drowned in
blessings of Allah, the Praised and the most exalted One. I felt
relieved and my grief departed from me.’”

7. Blessing and Greatness of the Wilaya
---------------------------------------

Hujjatul-Islam Quddas also says this: “One day the sheikh talked about
the wilaya and its greatness. He said, ‘One day, a Sayyid prepared food
for ten or fifteen men from among the people of knowledge in the city of
Najaf or al-Kadhimiyya, but the messenger of this man made a mistake and
called all the students of the school whose number exceeded sixty or
seventy. When the guests arrived, the man noticed that the food was not
enough for all these guests whom the place could not accommodate. He
considered informing Ayatullah Hajj Sheikh Fath Ali al-Kadhimi.

When the latter heard about it, he said, ‘Do not do anything till I
attend.’ When the sheikh attended, he said, ‘Bring me a clean piece of
white cloth,’ then he opened the pot and looked at the rice, covering it
with the piece of cloth. He said, ‘Bring me the plates. As I cool the
food, you should distribute the food.’ He kept repeating these words:
‘This Ali is the best of humans, and whoever denies it disbelieves.’ He
fed through the blessing of Ali’s lofty status all the guests without
the food diminishing a bit.

“One of the students of the sheikh (Tehrani) narrated this incident in a
different way thus: ‘The sheikh used to narrate the incident like this:
‘One day, the late Mirza Husayn Nawari, author of *Mustadrak
al-Wasaail*, asked someone to invite a hundred persons to partake of the
food during the Thursday and FRiďay evenings, but that person invited a
hundred person to have dinner on a Thursday (whereas Mirza Husayn Nawari
had prepared food for one person only on that day, and he meant to tell
the man to prepare food—for the hundred persons—the next day). When the
Mirza realized what had happened, he said, ‘Inform the Akhund Mulla Fath
Ali Sultani (who was then residing in Samarra) about it.’ When the late
Mulla became acquainted with the matter, he said, ‘Do not do anything
till I get there.’ When he attended, he said, ‘Bring me a good piece of
cloth,’ then he put that cloth on the pot, rubbing his hand on it three
times and saying each time, ‘Ali (as) is the best of humans; whoever
denies it commits apostasy,’ then he ordered them to distribute the
food. All the guests were fed.’”

8. Value of Sincerity in Action
-------------------------------

Sayyid Quddas also says this: “One day the sheikh talked about the
rewards for a deed of righteousness (no matter how small) saying, ‘A
scholar of Najaf offered one day by way of charity one dirham to a
destitute man (whereas he had nothing in his pocket other than that
dirham), In his vision he saw that night that he was invited to a
spacious orchard where a beautiful mansion was in it the like of which
he never saw. He asked who the orchard and the mansion belonged to. He
was told they were for him. He was very surprised and said to himself,
‘I did not do anything to be worthy of all this recognition.’ They said
to him, ‘Are you surprised?’ He said, ‘Yes.’ They said, ‘Do not be
surprised; it is the reward for the dirham which you gave that poor man
by way of charity in sincerity and in love for benevolence.’”

9. Keeping a Firm Foot on the Creed
-----------------------------------

Sayyid Quddas also says the following:” One day the sheikh talked about
keeping one’s foot firm on the creed and safeguarding piety and
Godliness. He said, ‘One of the great spiritual leaders saw someone in
the courtyard of the shrine of the Commander of the Faithul (as). His
submission, humbleness and good manners drew attention to him, and his
age, which exceeded seventy, increased his dignified look. The spiritual
scholar went to that man and asked him about his condition, his state of
mind and how his life was. The man said, ‘Since I reached adolescence
and till now, I never committed a sin deliberately.’ There is no doubt
that such precision, monitoring and persistence produce such fruits.”

10. Attention Paid to the Imam of the Time (aj) of True Shiites
---------------------------------------------------------------

Sayyid Quddas also says, “One day the sheikh said, ‘A God-fearing doctor
who believed in the *wilaya* of the Commander of the Faithful (as)
wanted to know the names of the supporters of the Hujja Imam (as)
[al-Mahdi]. As he was sitting in his medical office, which was located
in his house, a man entered, greeted him then sat and said, ‘O Sayyid!
The supporters of the Hujja (as) are so-and-so,’ naming them quickly one
after the other. Among them was the name ‘Bahram’.

Anyway, the man, in just few minutes, counted three hundred and thirteen
names and said, ‘These are supporters of al-Mahdi (as),’ then he stood
up, bade the doctor farewell and went out. The doctor said, ‘When that
man left, I woke up from my unawareness and kept asking myself, ‘Who was
this man?! Was I asleep or awake? So, I asked my wife, who was in the
next room, if anyone was in my room. She said, ‘Yes, a man came and he
was speaking quickly’. I, therefore, realized I was not asleep, and that
this man was not an ordinary person.’”

11. Seeking the Lord Wholeheartedly
-----------------------------------

Sayyid Quddas also says the following, “One day the sheikh said, ‘It was
customary in Najaf al-Ashraf that the students observed the times of the
*ziyara*, performing the visit of the holy sites on foot in the form of
a crowd and groups, and they used to stop walking during the night to
perform the night prayer individually.

During one of those trips, a spiritual Sayyid (a sheikh who was
accompanying one of those crowds) kept a distance between himself and
the others so he could perform the night prayer in isolation. Suddenly,
the group heard the sound of a lion roaring nearby, so they were greatly
frightened, but they saw the lion getting closer to that sheikh. They,
therefore, said to themselves, ‘We belong to Allah, and to Him shall we
return” because they were unable to do anything at all. The lion got
closer to the man till he stood beside him as the sheikh was
(apparently) reciting the *witr* prayer. The lion stood near him for few
minutes looking at him, and the sheikh was standing without making any
motion. A few minutes later, the lion went away without harming the
sheikh in the least. When it was a little bit far from them, the group
went to the sheikh and, after the sheikh had already completed his
*witr* prayer, they said to him, ‘How courageous and firm you are! You
were not afraid of the lion and did not run away from it! How strong
your heart is, and how great your courage is!’ The sheikh said to them,
‘I was not only afraid of the lion but terrified! But I felt that
fleeing away from it would be futile because I would not then be able to
rid myself of it, so I told myself that if it was my destiny to die, it
would be better I died as I was busy worshipping my Lord, so my soul
stabilized and my firmness increased.’

“Hujjatul-Islam wal Muslimin Sayyid Tehrani narrated this incident to me
from Ayatullah Bahjat thus: ‘Sheikh Bahjat used to transmit the same
incident from time to time this way: ‘There was a man in Najaf who was
famous for being unafraid of the lion and that he stood once near a lion
in the desert. Once this man was asked about the truth in this story, so
he said, ‘No, I was indeed afraid of the lion, but I once was praying in
the desert, and as I was busy performing the prayer, a lion came to me
from the mountain side. I told myself that I would not be able to get
rid of it; so, it would be better if I continued my prayer. It would be
good if it ravished me as I was busy praying; therefore, I did not stop
my prayer, and I did not undergo any reaction till the lion got near to
me and circled me then returned from where it had come from.’”

12. Care Paid by al-Zahra (as) to her Offspring
-----------------------------------------------

Sayyid Quddas also says this: “One day the sheikh said, ‘One of the
wealthy men of Rasht who was then living in al-Najaf al-Ashraf married
his daughter off to a poor Sayyid who descended from the lineage of the
Imams (as), but she did not care about her husband and did not prepare
the food for him because she had lived in the midst of a wealthy family.
One day she saw in her dream Lady Fatima al-Zahra (peace be with her)
saying this to her: ‘Daughter! Why do you not improve your conduct with
my son, and why do you not cook food for him?’ She said, ‘I am not ready
to cook food for this man.’

Lady Fatima al-Zahra (peace be with her) insisted on her, but she did
not change her statement, whereupon Lady Fatima al-Zahra (peace be with
her) said to her, ‘Bring the ingredients needed to be cooked and place
them in the pot and on the stove, and everything would be ready.’ She
woke up puzzled about this incident, but she wanted to try the matter.
She placed the ingredients on the stove as al-Zahra (peace of Allah be
with her) had ordered her. At the time of lunch or dinner, the food was
ready, and the aroma of the stew was filling the house. This woman
continued to cook the food this way, so much so that some guests who
stayed over for the evening with her husband, having partaken of the
food, said they had never tasted such food like that as long as they
lived.’”

13. How Friends of Allah Live
-----------------------------

Sayyid Quddas also says this: “The sheikh said the following one day:
‘They carried the coffin of one of the good persons in al-Najaf
al-Ashraf for burial there, and the coffin was escorted by a man who
recited the Holy Qur’an and whom they had rented to accompany the coffin
and recite the Qur’an till they would reach their destination. One
night, everyone was asleep when the man started reciting Chapter Yasin.

When he reached this sacred verse ‘Did I not take your pledge, O
descendants of Adam, … etc.’, he did not articulate the word ‘pledge’
properly, so he kept repeating the word trying to pronounce it
correctly. It was then that he heard a voice from the coffin pronouncing
this word correctly twice or three times. The senses of the man who was
reciting the Qur’an were shaken, for how could a deceased person who had
been dead for days to articulate this word like that?’

“Hujjatul-Islam wal Muslimin Sayyid Tehrani, one of the students of this
sheikh, wrote this incident to me like this: ‘I remember that the
professor (Sheikh Bahjat) used to narrate this incident to us from time
to time as follows: ‘They were bearing the coffin of one of the scholars
of al-Najaf al-Ashraf. When they reached a house on the way [to the
cemetery], they placed the coffin in an unsuitable place. One of the
persons who attended the funeral said, ‘I saw the place was not suitable
for the coffin, so I moved it somewhere else and sat beside it and
started reciting Surat Yasin. When I reached this verse: ‘Did I not take
your pledge, O descendants of Adam, … etc.’, I could not pronounce the
word ‘pledge’ properly because I am not an Arab. As I was reciting this
verse, I heard a voice from inside the coffin articulating this word
twice in a clear voice and in a sound Arabic pronunciation.’”

Sayyid Quddas also says this: “During the time of the Czar, a person had
a room in one of the science schools in Tehran. This person was well
known for his *karamat*, but he was restricted so he could not do
anything that would indicate his status. One day, it was circulated
among the students that the man could die of his own will whenever he
wanted. Some people went to him and said, ‘We came today to you so we
could see one *karama* [temporal miracle] performed by you.’ He tried
his best to be excused from having to do that, but they did not accept
his excuse, so he felt forced to accept (and I do not remember whether
or not he took a pledge from them never to talk about this matter as
long as he was alive) and said to them, ‘I am going to sleep; so, do not
pronounce my name and leave me alone.’ He slept facing the Qibla,
articulated the Shahada, then his soul departed from his body. They
turned his body from one side to the other, but he really was dead. They
burnt his foot with a match so he would make sure he was dead. He was,
indeed, dead. A few minutes later, the man breathed again and woke up,
sitting. He said to them, ‘Did I not tell you to leave me alone?’”

14. Cultivating the Nafs: a Condition to Earn Serving the Imam of the Time (aj)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hujjatul-Islam wal Muslimin Quddas says that the sheikh one day said,
“In Tehran, there was a scholar teaching the ‘two lam\`as’.

One day, this scholar heard that one of his ordinary students was
undertaking supernatural deeds. The knife of the professor which he used
to use quite often for writing (they used to write at that time with
reeds for which they needed a knife to arrange their pens) was lost, so
he was angry with his sons and family members thinking they were the
ones who took it away from his pocket then lost it somewhere. Several
days passed by and the knife could not be located.

The professor did not forget about his knife even after the passage of
this period. One day that student said to the professor after the end of
the class, ‘O Sheikh! You forgot your knife in the pocket of your old
vest; so, what sin did your children commit?’ The professor remembered
that he actually had put the knife in the pocket of his vest, but he
wondered about the student and how he came to know about it. He realized
that the student was connected with the friends of Allah, so he said
this to him one day, ‘I have some work with you after the class.’ After
the students had gone out, he said to him, ‘I am sure you are connected
with the Imams (as); so, can you meet the Imam of the Time (aj)?’ He
kept insisting on him to answer this question, so the student had to
admit that he was connected with the Imam of the Time (aj), whereupon
the professor said to him, ‘If you see the Imam again, convey my Salam
to him and tell him that I am eager to see him, and I request him that
we meet even if it is for just few minutes.’

“Several days passed by and the student said nothing. The professor did
not dare to ask him because he was concerned lest the Imam (as) should
have refused to accept to meet him, but he found himself forced to ask
him after his patience had run out: ‘Did you convey my message to the
Imam (as), and what was his answer?’ The student tried to dodge the
answer but the professor said to him, ‘Tell me and do not be shy, for
you are only a go-between messenger (“And the Messenger has only to
convey the clear notification”). The student said, ‘The Imam said, ‘It
is not necessary that we should appoint a time for him to meet; so, let
him cultivate himself, and I shall go to him myself.’”

15. Result of Seeking Nearness to Allah Through the Medium of Imam Al-Riďa (as)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sayyid Quddas also says, “One day the sheikh told us that one of the
scholars of al-Najaf al-Ashraf came from Tehran for medical treatment
after being afflicted with a serious illness. Having visited the doctors
and undergone complete tests, he was told he had to undergo a brain
surgery. The sheikh, therefore, was very sad and asked the doctors to
permit him to travel to holy Mashhad. After receiving this honor and
pleading to Allah through the medium of Imam al-Riďa (as), he saw in a
vision one night that a gracious man came to him and said, ‘Why are you
sad like that?

We saw it is right that you should be treated by only medicine, and you
do not need the operation.’ He woke up and said to those in his company,
‘I have obtained the result; so, let us go to Tehran.’ When they went
back to Tehran, the doctor said to him, ‘Do not grieve, for we have seen
we should treat you with medicine only, and you do not the surgical
operation.’ He, hence, became more convinced, having seen how this
statement which he heard when awake was similar to that which he had
heard in the vision. He was healed from his sickness after having thus
sought help from Allah through the medium of pleading to Imam al-Riďa
(as).’”

16. Real Ziyara
---------------

Sayyid Quddas also says that one day the sheikh said, “People in the
past used to travel to the holy city of Mashhad on backs of camels and
mules. Once, some farmers of the Chasib area of holy Qum went to visit
the shrine of Imam al-Riďa (as). After their return, they saw on the
road a man from their village carrying a large bundle of animal feed.
They reprimanded him saying, ‘O old man, leave working for this world,
for it will not avail you, and go to Mashhad at lest once,’ and they
kept chiding and speaking ill of him. The sheikh said to them, ‘You went
to visit the Imam; did the Imam answer your greeting?’ They said, “What
is this you are talking about? Can a dead Imam respond to the greeting?’
The sheikh said, ‘What is the meaning of a dead or a living person? The
Imam sees and hears our speech, and what is the use of a visit if it is
undertaken by one side?’ They said to him, ‘Can you do that yourself?’
He said, ‘Yes.’ Then he stood in the direction of Mashhad and said,
‘Peace be with you, O Eighth Imam!’ An answer was heard saying, ‘And
peace be with you, so-and-so!’ The farmers, thereupon, regretted what
they had said to the old man and felt ashamed of themselves.”

17. Satisfaction of Sheikh Ansari
---------------------------------

Sayyid Quddas also says this: “The sheikh was talking one day about the
conviction of Sheikh Ansari, may Allah elevate his station, saying, ‘The
mother and grandmother of the sheikh by his daughter were living with
the sheikh in the same house. One day, the sheikh wanted to discipline
his grandmother, so she sought shelter with her grandmother. The mother
of the sheikh asked him, ‘What has she done?’ The sheikh said, ‘I gave
her bread, but she cries and insists on getting food other than bread;
does fresh bread need any other sort of food with it?’”

18. Seeing the Lights of the Qur’anic Verses
--------------------------------------------

Ayatullah Tehrani says that Grand Ayatullah Bahjat had said, “During the
time of our youth, there used to be a blind man who would open the
Qur’an and put his finger on any verse he is asked about. I wanted to
tease him one day, so I asked him, ‘Where is such-and-such verse?’ He
opened the Qur’an and put his finger on the verse. I said to him, ‘No it
is some other verse!’ He said to me, ‘Are *you* blind?! Do you not see
the verse?!’”

19. Significance of Student Culturing
-------------------------------------

Ayatullah Sayyid Musa Shubairi Zenjani says that Ayatullah Bahjat
transmits this incident: “When Sheikh Mahmoud al-Hilli went to Najaf, we
went to welcome him, then he came to our house to reciprocate the visit.
When Ayatullah al-Khu’i heard about the sheikh coming to our house, he
came to visit him so people may have more regard for the sheikh. But
Sheikh Mahmoud was one hour late from the time, and Sayyid al-Khu’i kept
waiting till he came to the house. Sayyid al-Khu’i said to him, ‘I
wished you had told us something about Agha Hasan Ali Nakhudki Isfahani
so we may not depend on Qur’anic verses and narratives alone to prove
the highest world but benefit from some individuals and their spiritual
statuses, too.’

Sheikh Mahmoud al-Hilli said, ‘Sheikh Hasan Ali used to enjoy an
abridged record of pursuits and worlds, and if you continue this branch
of knowledge (culturing the students) with a generous amount of care,
you will serve Islam better. Moreover, Sheikh Hasan Ali was the pioneer
of one of you.’ Sayyid Bahjat said, ‘He meant Sayyid Burujardi.’”

20. Contemplation is Better than a year’s Adoration
---------------------------------------------------

Sayyid Quddas says that Sheikh Bahjat said the following once: “One day,
a scholar in al-Najaf al-Ashraf woke up during the *sahar* (pre-dawn)
time to perform the night prayer. He called upon his son who was
sleeping in his room to rise and perform the night prayer. The son said,
‘Alright, I will rise.’ The sheikh busied himself with the prayer, but
the son did not leave his bed, so the sheikh called upon him once more
to rise and pray. The son said, ‘Alright, I will rise right now,
father.’ The sheikh rose to complete his prayer, but the son did not
move from his place, so the sheikh called upon him for the third time,
whereupon the son said, ‘Father! I was thinking about the same thought
about which Imam al-Sadiq (as) said, ‘One hour’s meditation is better
than a year of adoration.’ Ayatullah Bahjat yelled at him and said…,
well, Sheikh Bahjat did not articulate that word, but we understood it
from the tone of his statement, that is, he said to him, ‘You son of…!
The thought which is better than a year of adoration (or better than
sixty years according to some narratives) is the one that calls upon one
to perform the night prayer, not to lie down on his bed till (morning)
prayer time due to this excuse.’”

21. Success Coming from Protection against Sinning
--------------------------------------------------

Sayyid Quddas also says, “One day, the sheikh talked about the scholars
and the righteous committing no sins, not even before they reach
adolescence and said, ‘One of the great scholars of Najaf used to say:
‘During my childhood, I was safeguarded from sinning in an obligatory,
not optional, way. Whenever I wanted to do something prohibitive,
something happened to me and prevented me from doing it.’”

22. Impact of the “Wahsha” Prayer on the Dead
---------------------------------------------

Sayyid Quddas also says that one day Sheikh Bahjat talked about the
impact of the righteous deed and the acceptance of the pure deed. He
said, ‘The late Ayatullah Hajj Sheikh Fath Ali Kadhimi (one of the grand
Ayatullahs who combined in them the knowledge of *fiqh*, *Usul* and
*irfan*) was teaching in the holy precincts of the Jawad Imams (as).
People used to quite often bring a coffin during his class, so it became
customary for him to perform the “wahsha” prayer during the night for
each coffin that he saw. One night he saw in his vision one of the dead
dignitaries of al-Kadhimiyya from among his kinsfolk, so he asked him
about his condition. He said, ‘My condition was bad, but the prayer of
the sheikh came to my rescue and eased my condition.’”

23. Role of Obligations in the Lifestyles of Great Men
------------------------------------------------------

Sayyid Quddas also says that one day the sheikh [Sheikh Bahjat] said,
“Some Tehran merchants came once to al-Najaf al-Ashraf and went to
Sheikh Ansari to pay the *khums* of their wealth to him. When they say
the life of the sheikh and the simplicity of his house, they kept
whispering to each other saying, ‘This is the meaning of imam and
leader: living simply and humbly like the way Imam Ali (as) used to
live, not the life of Mulla Ali Kunni who lives in a mansion.’ The
sheikh over-heard them thus talking as he was busy writing, so he yelled
at them saying, ‘What are you saying?! I deal and live with some
students, and I do not need a life more complicate than this one. But
the Akhund Mulla Ali Kunni lives with the likes of King Nasir ad-Deen.
If he does not commend a life such as this, Nasir ad-Deen would not go
to his house, for the Mulla is living his life in order to protect the
creed.’”


