A Quick Look at Some Biographies of Professors of Grand Ayatullah Sheikh Bahjat
===============================================================================

In this Chapter, we will cast a quick look at the life of some great
professors who played a major role in building the scholarly life of the
sheikh, his manners and spirituality. Ayatullah al-Mashkini says, "The
professors of Sheikh Ayatullah Bahjat enjoy a lofty scholarly station
and a great prominence which make us look at them as we look at the
stars in the sky."

Grand Ayatullah Sayyid Ali Agha Al-Qadi
---------------------------------------

Al-Hajj Mirza Sayyid Ali Agha al-Qadi was born in the city of Tabriz on
the 13th of the month of Thil-Hijja of 1282 A.H. Having finished his
preparatory study, he was tutored by his father, the late Hajj Sayyid
Husayn al-Qadi. Then he attended the lectures of the late Mirza Musa
al-Tabrizi, author of the book titled *Hashiyat al-Rasaail*. He also
attended the classes of Mirza Muhamamd Ali al-Qaraj Daghi and completed
the classes in Arab and Persian literature of the famous poet Mirza
Muhammad Taqi al-Tabrizi who is known as "Hujjatul Islam" and the one
given the title "Nir". He quoted many poetic verses by him in both
Arabic and Persian languages. Then he migrated to the city of al-Najaf
al-Ashraf and was honored to reside in it in 1308 A.H. when he was then
26 years old. In the city of Najaf, he was taught by these Ayatullahs:
Fadil al-Sharabyani, Sheikh Muhammad Hasan al-Mamqani, Sheikh Shari'at,
Akhund al-Khurasani and al-Hajj Mirza Husayn al-Khalili.

Sayyid al-Qadi was one of the most respected of the students of al-Hajj
Mirza al-Khalili. He also studied in his presence the cultivation of
manners. Sayyid al-Qadi was a Gnostic, a faqih, and a man of a great
stature. He also had some miracles and revelations. Allama Sheikh Agha
Buzurg al-Tehran wrote the following lines in his book Tabaqat A'lam
al-Shi'a in his biography: "Sayyid Ali Agha Tabatabai Tabrizi al-Qadi,
son of Mirza Husayn son of Mirza Ahmad son of Mirza Raheem, is a
scholar, a *mujtahid,* a man of piety and asceticism. I befriended him
and kept him company for scores of years, and I found stability in his
style, youth in his nature and attributes, generosity in his own self
and in his nature. He wrote an exegesis of the Qur'an which starts from
the beginning of the Qur'an and ends with the ninety-second verse of
Surat al-An'am: 'Say: Allah, then leave them in their wading sporting'".

As for his father, he, too, wrote an exegesis of the Holy Qur'an, and
their household was since antiquity a house of knowledge, virtue and
piety. '*Allama* Hasan Zadeh al-Amuli says the following in his regard:
"Ayatullah Sayyid al-Qadi was one of the wonders of time." Then he says,
"One of the powerful statements of the late al-Hajj Sayyid Ali al-Qadi
is this: 'If one spends half his life looking for a perfect teacher, he
does not make much of an achievement." *Allama* Hasan Zadeh quotes
*\`allama* Tabatabai saying the following while detailing the biography
of Sayyid Ali al-Qadi: "The Sayyid was an amazing man. He nurtured many
students and was tutored by many professors. He had very strong
revelations, let alone his testimonial and Gnostic perfections, conduct
and moral behavior."

Grand Ayatullah al-Gharawi al-Isfahani
--------------------------------------

*\`Allama* Sayyid Muhammad Husayn al-Isfahani, who is famous as
al-Kampani, is one of the prominent *mutjahids* and great authorities of
his time. Actually, he was a man of *fiqh* the like of whom is quite
rare in all times.

The Sayyid was born in the city of al-Kadhimiyya on the second of
Muharram of 1296 A.H. in the environments of a revered family known for
its adherence to the creed and piety. His father, the late al-Hajj
Muhammad Hasan, was a well known merchant in al-Kadhimiyya. He was given
the title "al-Isfahani" because his ancestors were affiliated with the
city of Isfahan. His father died when he was still a child, leaving him
a huge fortune which he spent on the study of branches of knowledge and
Islamic teachings as well as on achieving good manners.

Signs of intelligence and genius emanated from his face since his
childhood. He completed his preparatory study in the city of
al-Kadhimiyya, then he left it to be honored by residing in the city of
knowledge and *ijtihad*, al-Najaf al-Ashraf, when he was no more than
twenty years old. He studied *fiqh* and *Usul* at the hands of a band of
prominent professors such as al-Hajj Agha Riďa al-Hamadani, Sayyid
al-Fisharki, and Akhund Mulla Kadhim al-Khurasani, and he attended
lessons in philosophy and Gnosticism in the presence of the famous man
of wisdom, al-Hajj Mirza Muhammad al-Istihbanati. He sat on the teaching
chair in the city of al-Najaf al-Ashraf shortly after having resided
there due to his genius and general acquisition.  
 He left behind precious works dealing with *fiqh*, *Usul* and
philosophy. We would like to point out to some of them:

• His comment on *Maq'ad Kifayat al-Usul fi \`Ilm al-Usul*

• His comment on *Al-Makasib fi \`Ilm al-Fiqh*

• A poem titled "the wise man's precious jewel" which deals with
philosophy

• He also left a *diwan* in Arabic and Persian poetry.

He returned to the mercy of his Lord on the fifth of Dhul-Hijjah of 1361
A.H. at an age exceeding 65 and was buried in the city of al-Najaf
al-Ashraf beside the shrine of Imam Ali, peace be with him.

Grand Ayatullah al-Hajj Sheikh Muhammad Kadhim al-Shirazi
---------------------------------------------------------

The mentor was born in 1290 A.H. in the city of Shiraz. He was honored
by making the pilgrimage to the holy sites in Iraq in the company of his
parents in 1300 A.H. and resided in the city of holy Karbala where he
started learning Arabic. His parents returned to Shiraz two years later,
but he remained in Karbala and kept himself busy with the elementary
study. He returned to Shiraz fourteen years after his residence in
Karbala.

He studied *al-Mutawwal* and *al-Ma\`alim* in the presence of the
perfect scholar, al-Hajj Sayyid Muhammad al-Kazruni who is well known
for his skill in teaching *al-Mutawwal*. He returned to Karbala two
years since his residence in Shiraz, then he went to Samarra in 1310
A.H. in order to continue his studies. He studied the *rasaail* and
*makaasib* in the presence of the perfect scholar, Sheikh Hasan Ali
al-Tehrani, who is famous for his knowledge and piety, and he attended
the classes of the late Ayatullah Mirza Muhammad Taqi al-Shirazi, and he
regularly attended his classes till the day the mentor died.

He left Samarra for al-Kadhimiyya where he taught, then he migrated to
the city of al-Najaf al-Ashraf in order to establish a theological
seminary. It is worth mentioning that he used to oversee the answers to
most religious edicts of Ayatullah al-Isfahani.

In 1366, one year before his demise, he left the city of al-Najaf
al-Ashraf with the intention to make the pilgrimage to the shrine of
Imam al-Riďa, peace be with him. The theological seminary in holy Qum
and its dignitaries, such as Ayatullah Burujardi, Hujjat, al-Faydh,
al-Khunsari and al-Sadr, welcomed him. In 1367 he died and was buried in
one of the chambers of the shrine of Imam Ali, peace be with him.

Grand Ayatullah Mirza Muhammad Husayn al-Naeeni
-----------------------------------------------

Ayatullah al-Naeeni was one of the most famous religious authorities of
his time, one of the greatest critics and verifiers in the sciences of
*fiqh* and *Usul*, so much so that he was known as the *mujaddid* in the
science of *Usul* and the one who excelled in it.

The *\`Allama* was born in a family known for its knowledge and
distinction on the 17th of Dhul-Qi'da of 1376 A.H. in the city of Naeen
in the governorate of Isfahan. He completed his elementary study in his
home town then migrated to the city of al-Najaf al-Ashraf in order to
continue his higher study in *fiqh* and *Usul*. He was taught by Grand
Ayatullah al-Hajj Mirza Muhammad Hasan al-Shirazi the Senior and
distinguished himself among his students. He also used to attend the
classes of Ayatullah Akhund Muhammad Kadhim al-Khurasani in order to
show his humbleness and respect for his status.

The *\`Allama* stood out among the scholars of al-Najaf al-Ashraf due to
the abundance of his knowledge and to his acquisition of the sciences of
mathematics, wisdom, philosophy, Gnosticism as well as skill in *fiqh*
and *Usul*. He cultivated the science of *Usul*, coining anew in a new
form distantly from difficulty and complexity, winning the admiration of
those who were familiar with this art.  
 He also wrote books many of which were published including the
following:

 a dissertation in what is doubtful to wear  
  *Wasilat al-Najat*  
  Reports in the science of *Usul* (which was printed several times)  
  a dissertation in "there is no harm…"

Ayatullah Naeeni paid special attention particularly to cultivating
himself, so he never abandoned the performance of the night prayer, nor
was he ever heard articulating a bad word. He used to organize his
precious time and not waste it at all. He used to spend his time in
either a scientific research, or looking after the affairs of people, or
in helping them with their needs. He was moderate with regard to what he
ate or put on, and he was extremely cautious in faring with the public
funds.

He never took advantage of the blessed "Imam's share" and other rights
stated in the Shari'a for his own personal benefit. Rather, he used to
meet his life's expenses from his own income. As regarding his political
and social services, he wrote a book titled *Tanbeeh al-Umma wa Tanzeeh
al-Milla* [notifying the nation and clearing the name of the creed]
during the black dictatorial epoch in Iran. In it, he explained through
logic and wisdom the norms of despotism and dictatorship, reminding the
scholars and jurists of their religious duty towards the situation then.

He also explained in the book the limits of the powers of the ruler and
the Islamic government, pointing out to the chapters of the admonishment
by Imam Ali (AS) to Malik al-Ashtar. This book won the attention of the
struggling authorities at the time; therefore, Ayatullah Akhund
al-Khurasani and Ayatullah Sheikh Abdullah al-Mazandarani issued their
authorization, supporting the revolution of the constitution and
announcing its origins as being derived from the Islamic faith of the
Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings of Allah be with him and his
progeny.

Ayatullah Naeeni and a group of his distinguished students were banished
together with Ayatullah al-Isfahani and Ayatullah al-Khalisi to Iran
because of their struggle to change the government in Iraq. Ayatullah
Naeeni entered the city of Qum after a short stay in the cities of
Kermanshah and Hamadan, and he was busy teaching and performing the
congregational prayer service. He returned to al-Najaf al-Ashraf one
year after his stay in the holy city of Qum. He joined his Lord on the
26th of Jumada I of 1358 A.H. after a lifetime of service, struggle and
perseverance for nurturing a united generation that carries a Qur'anic
message.

Grand Ayatullah Agha Diya ad-Deen al-Iraqi
------------------------------------------

Grand Ayatullah Agha Diya ad-Deen al-Iraqi was born in the city of
Sultan-Abad (Persian Iraq, Arak) in the year 1278 A.H. He completed his
preparatory study in his home town then migrated to the city of al-Najaf
al-Ashraf in order to complete his study. He attended classes by great
Ayatullahs such as Muhammad al-Fisharki, Akhund al-Khurasani, Sayyid
Kadhim al-Yazdi and the mentor of the Shari'a, al-Isfahani.

Signs of his intelligence and genius were obvious during the first years
of his study. He started teaching at an early age, and many students
gathered round him because of his oratory and the ease of his
explanation. He distinguished himself among great teachers following the
demise of his professor, the late Akhund al-Khurasani. He studied *fiqh*
and *Usul* for more than thirty years and many students were nurtured by
him. Some of them became later on sources for *taqlid*. Among his works,
one can point out to a book containing articles about *Usul*. Finally,
this working scholar moved to the mercy of his Lord in the city of
al-Najaf al-Ashraf in the year 1361 A.H.

Grand Ayatullah Sayyid Abu al-Hasan al-Isfahani
-----------------------------------------------

Ayatullah Sayyid Abu al-Hasan al-Isfahani was born in the Madisa
village, one of the villages of Lanjan district of the city of Isfahan.
He completed his elementary study in the Nimarud School in Isfahan where
he was taught by Mirza Abu al-Ma'ali al-Kalbasi, benefiting greatly from
him. He migrated to Najaf al-Ashraf in 1307 A.H. in order to complete
his study and attended classes by its great professors.

He earned the degree of *ijtihad* in the classes offered by Ayatullah
Akhund al-Khurasani. He rose to distinction with Ayatullah Naeeni after
the demise of the late Ayatullah Akhund al-Khurasani and Ayatullah
Muhammad Taqi al-Shirazi. After the death of Ayatullah Naeeni, he became
the only religious authority for most of Shiite lands. Imam al-Khomeini
and another group of contemporary jurists commented on his scholarly
dissertation (*risala*) due to its inclusion.  
 This great scholar joined his Lord on a Monday, the 9th of the month of
Dhul-Hijja of 1365 A.H. in the city of al-Kadhimiyya. Addressing his
holy body, Ayatullah Muhammad Husayn Kashifal-Ghita made these
statements: "Congratulations to you the ascension to your Lord! How
happy you have been alive and dead! Your life was joined with management
and greatness, making people through it forget the past great ones,
following the coming ones.

You were also born twice: Once you earned experience and knowledge, and
once you acted upon what you had earned!" He, may Allah have mercy on
his soul, was characterized by good attributes and characteristics, and
his pure soul inspired one to be firm and steadfast for the sake of the
Adored One. He surpassed his peers in managing the affairs, in
administration and knowledge, and he was generous, articulate, orator,
making his classes the most busy and popular among those offered at
Najaf al-Ashraf's theological seminary.

He participated in the struggle of the Muslim Iraqi people against
colonialism and was banished to Iran together with some struggling
scholars. He had honorable stands towards the incidents at the Guharshad
Mosque in the holy city of Mashhad.

Grand Ayatullah Sheikh Murtaďa al-Taleqani
------------------------------------------

Sheikh Murtaďa al-Taleqani was born in 1280 A.H. in the city of Taleqan.
He learned the Qur'an and Persian literature in the *katateeb* of the
city then migrated to Tehran and from there to Isfahan so he could
attend classes by its great scholars such as Ayatullah Abu al-Ma'ali
al-Karbalai, the man of wisdom al-Qashqa'I Mulla Muhammad al-Kashi and
others. He migrated to the city of al-Najaf al-Ashraf and was tutored at
the hands of its great scholars such as Akhund al-Khurasani, Sayyid
Kadhim al-Yazdi, the mentor of the Shari'a al-Isfahani, Mirza Muhammad
Taqi al-Shirazi and others.

He paid attention to nurturing himself and purifying his soul so he
could fold the stages of perfection and reach the ultimate objective.
The mentor, may Allah have mercy on him, abandoned the world and spent
most of his time teaching the students and cultivating them. Many of
them later on rose to distinction, becoming authorities and great
scholars in our time. The mentor, may Allah have mercy on him, lived
single all his life, and he was residing in the school of Sayyid
al-Yazdi of the reliable niche in the city of al-Najaf al-Ashraf till he
died there in 1364 A.H.

The wise \`Allama Sayyid Husayn Badkubah-Ay
-------------------------------------------

The *\`Allama* was born in 1293 A.H in the village of Dalan in the city
of Badkubah. He was tutored at the hands of his father and completed the
preparatory study and that of literature in his presence. He migrated to
Tehran after the death of his father and resided at the Sadr School in
that city. He studied mathematics and philosophy at the hands of the
late Sayyid Abu al-Hasan Jalwah and the late Mirza Hashim al-Ashkuri. He
also studied logic for seven years of continuous effort in the presence
of his professors teaching this science.

He migrated to al-Najaf al-Ashraf and attended the classes of Grand
Ayatullah Akhund al-Khurasani. This coincided with the first days of
writing the *Kifaya* book. He also studied *fiqh* at the hands of
Ayatullah Sheikh Muhammad Hasan al-Mamqani. Soon many virtuous scholars
gathered round him to benefit from his views and theories. Finally, he
moved to the mercy of his Lord in the eve of the 28th of the holy month
of Shawwal of 1358 A.H. in the bath house of the sacred shrine and was
buried in the neighborhood of his holy grandfather, Imam Ali ibn Abu
Talib, peace be with him.

Grand Ayatullah the authority Kuwah-Kamrah-Ay
---------------------------------------------

The authority Ayatullah was a scholar who acted upon his knowledge, a
perfect jurist, a virtuous traditionist, a skilled wise man, a precise
man of *Usul*, a verifier of narrators of hadith, a man who acquired
knowledge of what is rational and what is transmitted. He was born in
the month of Sha'ban of 1310 A.H. in the city of Tabriz in a religious
family known for its piety.

His revered lineage goes back to the most respected Sayyid Muhammad
al-Masri who is nicknamed al-Hijazi, one of the offspring of Ali
al-Asghar son of Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn Zain al-Abidin, peace be with
him. The authority Ayatullah enjoyed an exceptional intelligence and a
swift roving intellect whereby he was able to complete his preparatory
study at an astounding pace so he could study after it fiqh, *Usul*,
mathematics, rationale, ancient and modern medicine as well as a
generous amount of modern sciences such as physics and chemistry.

He completed the *Sutooh* stage in *fiqh* and *Usul* at the hands of his
father, the late Sayyid Ali Kuwah-Kamrah-Ay. He migrated to al-Najaf
al-Ashraf in 1330 when he was twenty years old. He attended classes of
great professors such as the *\`allama* al-Yazdi of Al-Urwah al-Wuthqa
(the reliable niche), the mentor of the Shari'a al-Isfahani, Mirza
Naeeni and Agha Diya ad-Deen al-Iraqi.

In 1349 A.H., he returned to the holy city of Qum and was one of the
greatest of its scholars and senior professors of its seminary. He won
the attention of Grand Ayatullah al-Haeri, founder of the theological
seminary in Qum, who asked him to lead the congregational prayer service
in his place during the late years of his holy life. He also taught in
his place after his demise and continued to teach and answer requests
for edicts. He looked after people's affairs till the last moment of his
life despite his weakness and deteriorating health.

The Sayyid, may Allah have mercy on him, was a distinctive testimonial
for the tradition transmitted from the Infallible Imams, peace be with
them, which says [in describing a true believer], "He disobeys his
desires, obedient to the command of his Lord, protecting himself,
safeguarding his creed." He kept the secrets to himself, so much so that
even the closest people to him did not know him as he should have. He,
may Allah have mercy on him, was among those who won the honor of
meeting the Imam of the Time, may Allah hasten his reappearance. And he
was precise in utilizing his time, an avid reader of scholarly and
juristic books, not abandoning research or study even on his wedding
night.  
 He left several books in various fields. We would like here to point to
some of them:

1. Kitab al-Biya' [a book about real estate]

2. A collection of traditions and *Usul*

3. his commentary about the book titled *Al-Kifaya*

4. *Lawami' al-Anwar al-Gharawiyya fi Mursalat al-Athar al-Nabawiyya*

5. *Mustadrak al-Mustadrak*

The Sayyid predicted the hour of his death; so, he gathered some
scholars of the seminary and requested some pure soil from the shrine of
Imam al-Husayn which he put on his tongue and said, "The last of my
ration from the world is the soil of al-Husayn." He consulted the Qur'an
regarding his destiny, so the 14th verse of Chapter al-Ra'd [thunder]
came up: "To Him belongs the call of the truth". He, therefore, said in
an audible voice: "We belong to Allah, and to Him do we return," then
his sacred soul left his body.

Having come to know about his demise, Ayatullah Burujardi said, "Now my
spine has been broken. The chamber may become a school of a mosque
(after the example of the mosque and school of the Hujjatis)," and he
instructed the chamber located beside the mosque to be a cemetery for
himself and the members of his family. This will was inspired to him in
a vision.

Grand Ayatullah Burujardi
-------------------------

Grand Ayatullah Burujardi belongs to a respectable family known for its
knowledge and piety. He is one of the Sayyids who belong to the
Infallible Imams, peace be with them. His lineage reaches Imam al-Hasan,
the chosen one. The Sayyid was born in 1292 A.H. in the city of
Burujard. He was taught by scholars of this city and finished a good
deal of his preparatory study at the hand of his father.

He migrated to Isfahan in 1310 A.H. in order to continue his studies and
acquire religious studies, and he was then eighteen years old. He was
tutored by senior scholars of Isfahan such as the grand Ayatullahs and
those bearing the title "Hujjatul-Islam" such as Abu al-Ma'ali
al-Kalbasi, Sayyid Mir Muhammad Taqi al-Mudarrisi and Akhund Mulla
Muhammad al-Kashi, Mirza Jehangir al-Qashqai. He also taught
jurisprudence and *Usul* in his study in this city.

He migrated to al-Najaf al-Ashraf in 1318 A.H. eight years after having
resided in Isfahan and his earning the degree of *ijtihad* in it, and he
was then twenty-six years old. He benefited from attending classes by
great Ayatullahs such as the Akhund al-Khurasani, author of Al-Kifaya,
and *\`allama* al-Yazdi, author of Al-Urwat al-Wuthqa. He distinguished
himself among the students of the late Akhund for he wrote commentaries
about his book titled *Kifayat al-Usul*.

He returned to the city of Burujard in 1328 A.H. after a residence that
lasted for ten years in the city of al-Najaf al-Ashraf during which he
earned the *ijtihad* degree which was awarded to him by the most
distinguished of its scholars. During his stay in Burujard, which lasted
more than 36 yers, he founded a theological seminary to teach the
researches of *Kharij al-Fiqh* and *Usul* in this city. During this
period, he was emulated as an authority for *taqleed* by most residents
of the western and southern parts of Iran and some districts in the
Khurasan governorates and other areas.

He resided in the city of Qum for few months after returning from making
a pilgrimage to the shrine of Imam al-Riďa, peace be with him, as
insisted by Grand Ayatullah al-Haeri and a group of other men of virtue
in the theological seminary. During that period, he studied the *Kharij
al-Fiqh* and *Usul* researches then returned to his birthplace, the city
of Burujard. He returned to holy Qum in the holy month of Muharram of
1364 A.H. after having become the greatest authority for the Shiites in
the world.  
 More than 1,200 men of virtue and prominent mujtahids used to attend
his classes in the seminary.


