His Scholarly Status and Particular Teaching Method
===================================================

He has many works some of which are:

1. his commentary on *Al-Kifaya*

2. his commentary on *Al-Nihaya* by Sheikh al-Tusi

3. A dissertation in *Mustamsak al-Saheefa al-Sajjadiyya*

4. *Mustamsak al-Tahdheeb*

5. *Mustamsak Rijal al-Kashi*

6. *Tajrid Rijal al-Nejashi*

He left behind him many perpetual relics, including the grand mosque and
its library in the holy city of Qum and the large mosque in the city of
Hamburg in Germany.

He passed away on a Thursday, the 13th of the holy month of Shawwal of
1380 at an age exceeding eighty-eight years. His sacred body received an
awesome sending away amidst crowds, and he was buried beside the resting
place of Lady Fatima, the infallible one, peace be with her.

In this chapter, we will cast a quick look at the scholarly status of
Grand Ayatullah Bahjat, his genius and precision, and we will talk about
his own method in teaching, then we will talk about his works and
students.

Scholarly Status
----------------

Ayatullah Bahjat enjoys precision, genius and a lofty scholarly status.
His professors, classmates and the most prominent of his students
testified to it. Among these testimonials we would like to state the
following interesting anecdote:

Once the mentor objected to one of his students, the late Akhund, when
the latter was teaching the requirements of the book *Kifayat* due to
his being imprecise in determining these requirements, but he was faced
in the next session anger and a great deal of objection from the
students prior to the attendance of the professor due to his young age
compared to them. As they were thus, the professor entered the class and
saw how they were. He, therefore, addressed them saying, "Leave the
mentor Bahjat alone and do not pay attention to him." Everyone became
silent, and they turned to the professor who said to them, "I reviewed
yesterday the reports of the late Akhund and realized that the mentor,
Bahjat, was quite right in his objection." He, then, started lauding the
brilliance of the mentor, his genius and seriousness.

One of the scholars of al-Najaf al-Ashraf says that the mentor was one
of those who asked the most complex questions and was a major critic
during the class of the late Kampani. The late Ayatullah Sheikh Murtaďa
al-Haeri says, "Sheikh Bahjat attracted the attention of the professor
through his precise theories and important queries, so much so that I
remember the class went out of its normalcy once and this continued for
several days. As for us, we benefited from these criticisms and queries,
but the mentor did not continue to criticize fleeing away from fame. Had
he continued, he would have proven that he was not less qualified than
the others if not the best among them."

The late *\`allama* Muhammad Taqi al-Ja\`fari says, "When we were being
taught the *makasib* by the late Sheikh Kadhim al-Shirazi, the mentor,
Bahjat, who now is residing in Qum, used to attend his class, too. I
very well remember that the late Sheikh Kadhim al-Shirazi used to listen
and often verifies when faced by a confusing question by mentor Bahjat.
Since then, Sheikh Bahjat became famous for his distinction and
Gnosticism in the city of al-Najaf al-Ashraf.."

Ayatullah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn al-Tahrani says the following in his
book *Anwar al-Malakut*: "Ayatullah al-Hajj Sheikh Abbas al-Qochani had
willed to Sayyid Ali al-Qadi to say that Grand Ayatullah Sheikh Muhammad
Taqi Bahjat used to attend the *fiqh* and *Usul* classes of the late
Grand Ayatullah al-Hajj Sheikh Muhammad Husayn al-Gharawi al-Isfahani,
who is famous as al-Kampani. When he returns to his chamber in the
school of the late Sayyid, some students go to him and ask him to
explain to them what they could not understand from their lesson. Quite
often, they would find him asleep, so they would still ask him even as
he was asleep, and he would provide them with a sufficient and
satisfactory answer. When he would wake up and they would talk with him
about what they had asked him and his answers, he would say he had no
idea at all about the whole thing."

Ayatullah al-Mashkini says, "The sheikh whose biography is discussed
occupies a prominent status among the *faqihs* of the Shiites from the
scholarly standpoint (with regard to *fiqh* and *Usul*). Hujjatul-Islam
wal Muslimin Amjad sayd, "The scholarly status of the mentor is very
lofty. He is a great jurist, and I think the *mujtahids* have to sit in
his class to learn the particulars of the sciences and what is
interesting about them. In fact, the *Kharij* researches have to be
taught by men of virtue such as Ayatullah Bahjat, rather than
individuals who contend themselves with just relaying statements."

Scholars Urge Students to Attend his Classes
--------------------------------------------

Sheikh Misbah Yazdi says, "The moral and spiritual attractiveness of the
mentor was the main reason which attracted me to his class in the
beginning. But I realized, as time went by, that the mentor was
distinguished by a prominent scholarly and juristic status; therefore, I
tried to attend one of his classes so the class may be a medium to
benefit from his knowledge and means to benefit from his perfections and
moral accomplishments. I, therefore, started studying the book of
*tahara* (the cleansing methods) in his presence.

In the beginning, I used to attend the class with some of my brethren in
the chamber in the Faydi School. One year later, we moved to one of the
chambers of the Khan School (the school of the late Ayatullah
Burujardi), and we used to study in that chamber for one or almost two
years. After that we used to go to his house to benefit from his lecture
because of his weakness. I finished a course in *tahara* in his presence
then I learned a course in *makasib* (profit means) and options, and
these researches exhausted more than fifteen years. We used to attain
pursuits in his presence which were not submitted in many classes."

The mentor professor Mutahhari used to often advise us to attend the
classes of Ayatullah Bahjat saying, "You must attend his classes,
especially the *Usul* class, because the mentor was one of the students
of the late Muhammad Husayn al-Isfahani al-Kampani."

Professor Khosro-Hahi says, "I used to attend the "kharij al-khayarat"
class in fiqh taught by the late Grand Ayatullah Sheikh Murtaďa
al-Haeri, but his health deteriorated during the last days of his holy
life; therefore, most of his classes were suspended because he could not
continue them. One day I found him getting out of the sacred precincts
of Lady Fatima the Infallible, peace be with her, so I went to him,
greeted him then said, 'Are you going to continue the class, professor?'
He said, 'No.' Then he added saying, 'You are an ambitious young man,
and I wish to teach you this criterion in choosing the suitable
professor.' He went on to say, 'I advise you to attend the classes of
professors who do not contend themselves with just relaying statements.
Rather, you ought to attend classes of one who helps the student
transform the *ijtihad* ability from the strength phase to the phase of
action.' I said to him, 'Whose classes do you suggest I should attend.'
He said, 'Excuse me from having to answer this question.' I said to him,
'I am now attending the class of Grand Ayatullah Bahjat.' It is then
that indications of pleasure appeared on his face, and he said with a
smile, 'The class of Ayatullah Bahjat, as far as precision and context
are concerned, meets this criterion. You must continue attending, for it
is a useful class and constructive from the scholarly as well as the
ethically standpoint.'"

Mentor's Teaching Method
------------------------

Sheikh Misbah says the following about the mentor's teaching method:
"The mentor used to try to submit a query in the beginning from the book
by Sheikh Ansari, then he would transmit what he sees as important from
among the views of others, especially the author *Al-Jawahir* and the
late Hajj Riďa al-Hamadani. After that, he would start explaining his
own viewpoint if he had an opinion about that query.

"On one hand, this method helped the student to be familiar with the
views of senior professors. On the other, it would save them a lot of
time. Of course there is another teaching method which some professors
may adopt. In it, the professor submits each query independently,
stating the viewpoint of each professor about it. This method may be
more useful for the beginner student, but it takes a lot of his time due
to the repetition of pursuits and views in its regard.

"Through our review of classes by the mentor, we were able to earn many
pursuits, important and minute points, most of which the mentor had
orally obtained from his great professors."

Ayatullah al-Mas\`udi, who attended classes by Ayatullah Bahjat for many
years, becoming acquainted with the teaching method of his professor,
says, "Mentor Bahjat has his own teaching method. What is common among
the scholars and religious authorities is that they submit a query in
the Kharij topic and transmit the viewpoints of others in its regard.
Then they reject some of these views and support the others. In the
conclusion, they accept one of these viewpoints or adopt another.

But the sheikh did not follow this method. Rather, he would first submit
a query then explain the sequence of deriving the conclusion for that
query. If the student is familiar with the views of the scholars,
acquainted with their theories, before attending the class, he will know
the person who adopts the viewpoint submitted by the professor in his
class, and he will also realize that the professor critiques any
viewpoints and supports any of them. So, one who wants to attend the
classes of the mentor is supposed to review the scholarly principles and
should familiarize himself with the viewpoints of others prior to
attending the classes."

Ayatullah Muhammad Husayn al-Ahmadi, the Yazdi *faqih*, says the
following about the professor's teaching method: "When the professor
starts submitting some queries or sub-queries, he compares the topic of
the research with the other alike researches, taking into consideration
the particulars of the tradition, narrative or sacred verse which leads
to the topic.

The professor does so with particular rational and intellectual
mentality, then he earns the result in the research which is often a new
scholarly outcome. In fact, the pursuits submitted result from the
greatness of his intellect and the soundness of his view which he earned
from Islam and from the Imams, peace be with them, and this is the
correct meaning of *ijtihad*."

Exhortation in Class
--------------------

Hujjatul-Islam wal Muslimin, the FRid’ay imam in the city of Kalajay,
who attended classes of Ayatullah Bahjat for many years, says, "It was
customary for Ayatullah Bahjat to admonish the students for almost ten
minutes before starting the class. The admonishment itself was not his
goal; rather, he wanted to remind us of the conditions of the past
scholars. It was obvious the goal of the attendance by Sheikh Misbah of
the classes of *Kharij al-Fiqh* presented by the mentor for more than
fifteen years was to benefit from the morale of the mentor and his
angelic spirit in addition to the scholarly benefit from the pursuits
submitted by the mentor in his class."

Sheikh Misbah says the following in this regard: "Quite often, Ayatullah
Bahjat would transmit to us a story or tradition which stirred our
amazement, for we did not realize his insistence on explaining some
obvious matters. One of the matters which he insisted on tackling prior
to starting his class is the issue of the Imamate of the Commander of
the Faithful (as). We used to be stunned about this matter, not
comprehending its philosophy and wonder with ourselves: Does any of us
doubt the Imamate of the Commander of the Faithful (as) so the mentor
should make a reference to the evidences regarding his Imamate?!

Is it not better that he submits to us other ethical and moral pursuits
so we may benefit from them? But after we were fifty or sixty of age, we
realized the benefit of those pursuits which he was dictating to us more
than forty years ago. It is as though he knew that there were matters
which will be doubted or bypassed in the future. Had it not been for
taking a special interest in these topics, we would not have had the
sufficient catalyst to review these matters. I benefit even nowadays
from my own works relevant to the doctrinal issues or to other issues
relevant to the queries which the mentor used to dictate to us more than
forty years ago."

Mentor's Works
--------------

The Sheikh (mentor) wrote many books in *fiqh* (jurisprudence) and
*Usul* (basic principles), but he did not publish most of them, so much
so that he did not sometimes allow some people to publish these books at
their own personal expenses without benefiting from the ways derived
from the Shari'a which make such publication possible [a reference to
the *khums* tax some of which goes to the promotion of the creed via the
publication of quality Islamic literature]. He used to refuse their
request saying, 'The books of many great scholars have not yet been
published. You, therefore, must publish their books. As for these, their
turn is yet to come to be published.'"

As regarding the list of his works some of which were published through
the insistence and follow-up of his students, they include:

Published Works
---------------

1. A dissertation in explaining queries (in Arabic and Persian),

2. Rituals of the pilgrimage. Some men of virtue wrote both these books
based on the verdicts of Sheikh Bahjat and were published after earning
his support, may Allah safeguard him,

3. *Waseelat al-Najat* (salvation method). This book contains the
mentor's jursdic views in most chapters of jurisprudence listed in
*Waseelat al-Najat* by Abul-Hasan al-Isfahani the first volume of which
was published after obtaining the support of the mentor,

4. *Jaami\`' al-Masaail* (collection of queries). This book contains a
group of commentaries by the mentor about the book titled *Dhakheerat
al-Ibaad* by the late Ayatullah al-Gharawi al-Isfahani who is known as
al-Kampani. It also contains the rest of that book to the end of *fiqh*.
This book was first published with bad typesetting and in few copies,
and it was distributed to his students and close friends. Then the first
volume of it was published and was given the title *Jaami\` al-Masaail*
due to the abundance of branches of *fiqh* added to the original book
and to their inclusion, and this book is supposed to be published in
five volumes.

Author's Ready-to-print Works
-----------------------------

1. The first volume of the book on prayers. The mentor presented in this
book in his own way his new views, organizing the chapters and
researches according to the order in existence in the book titled
*Jawahir al-Kalaam*,

2. The first volume of the collection of the science of *Usul*. This
book was written according to the order employed in the book titled
*Kifayat al-Usul* and was reviewed by the professor several times. This
book contains the new views of the mentor about many researches of the
science of *Usul*,

3. his commentaries on the *Manaasik* [rites] book by Sheikh al-Ansari.
This book contains the views of the mentor about the pilgrimage rites,

Works yet to be Published
-------------------------

1. the remaining volumes of the group on the science of *Usul*,

2. his commentary on the *Makaasib* of Sheikh al-Ansari. The mentor
commented in this book about this work by al-Ansari from the beginning
to the end, then he submitted the researches which were not stated in it
on the basis of the text of the book titled *Sharaai\` al-Islam*. The
mentor also submits in this group his new viewpoints in the juristic
researches,

3. the collection of *Kitaab al-Tahara* (book on cleansing). The sheikh
submits in this book his ideas in an innovative way and in brief
according to the order of the topics in the book titled *Jawahir
al-Kalam*,

4. the remaining volumes of the collection on *Kitab al-Salat* (the book
on prayers).

The mentor also collaborated with the late al-Hajj Sheikh Abbas al-Qummi
in writing the book titled *Safeenat al-Bihar*. A large portion of this
book was written by the hand of Ayatullah mentor Bahjat.

His Students
------------

Although the mentor was teaching at his house in order to shun fame,
many students benefited and are still benefiting from his company, and
many of them earned the degree of *ijtihad*.


