The Marji`iyya of Grand Ayatullah Sheikh Bahjat, his Wisdom and Political Awareness
===================================================================================

The Marji'iyya
--------------

Sheikh Bahjat is regarded as one of the most famous *faqihs* (jurists)
in our time. He taught the subjects of Kharij al-Fiqh and *Usul* for
more than thirty years, but he, despite all of that, was always avoiding
becoming a *marji\` taqlid*.

Commenting about the reason why the mentor [finally] accepted to be a
*marji\`* and how his condition did not change following his acceptance
of this responsibility, Sayyid Misbah says, "The house of Ayatullah
Bahjat did not change after his acceptance of the *marji\`iyya*. Since
it was not possible the meetings and visits to be held at his house,
these meetings took place at the Fatimiyya Mosque during the *Eid*
(feast) days and on commemorative occasions. I think the acceptance of
the mentor of the marji\`iyya responsibility is one of his *karamat*,
may Allah safeguard him. In other words, the circumstances of his life
and age, which exceeded eighty years, did not require him to shoulder
such a responsibility. The individuals who knew him closely could not
believe that he would agree to bear the banner of the *marji\`iyya* and
accept its responsibility. There is no doubt that the acceptance of the
Sheikh of this responsibility was only due to his deep feeling that
accepting this matter was a specific obligation. We have to say that the
conduct of the Sheikh in our time, despite all this piety and
asceticism, had driven the argument home against others. One can be a
religious authority (*marji\`*) and at the same time live with
simplicity and without changing the way he dressed himself, ate, resided
and undertook his other matters of life."

After the demise of the late Ayatullah Sayyid Ahmad al-Khunsari, the
Sheikh started correcting the first and second volumes of the book
titled *Dhakirat al-\`Ibad* which is now called *Jami\` al-Masaail*. He
ordered it to be distributed to only a select group from among his
students. He also permitted the publication of his scholarly
dissertation (the collection of his edicts, *fatawa*) prior to the
demise of the able authority, Grand Ayatullah al-Araki.

Finally, when the teachers' university published an explanation
introducing seven persons, including Grand Ayatullah Bahjat, with regard
to the marji\`iyya, and after notifying his marji\`iyya by another
number of scholars such as Ayatullah al-Mashkini, Ayatullah Jawadi
Amuli, etc., and after continuous insistence and persistence, the mentor
agreed to get his practical dissertation (his *fatawa*) to be published
and distributed in large numbers. But he did not agree to print his name
on the book's cover. One of those connected with the Sheikh says the
following in this regard, "The Sheikh sent a recommendation to the
university of the teachers of the *hawza* (theological seminary) after
having become familiar with the fact that this university wanted to know
his name as a *marji\` taqlid* in which he said, 'I do not accept to
mention my name'."

After the demise of the late Araki and a statement was issued by the
university of the teachers of the *hawza*, and after the mentor saw that
his name had been printed, he said, 'Do not permit my edicts to be given
to anyone'. He was requested to explain what he had meant, so he said,
'Be patient till everyone publishes his edicts. After that, if there is
someone who remains without emulating others and wanted to emulate us,
it is then that you should print my edicts.' Several months (after this
statement), the dissertation of the Sheikh was published by some
Lebanese brothers.

His Political Views
-------------------

Hujjatul-Islam wal Muslimin Qadas wrote the following lines about the
author: "Sheikh Bahjat, in the *khiraj* chapter, the distribution of
prohibitive earnings, and before delving into the chapter about *wilayat
al-faqih* and whether this *wilayat* is absolute, or whether it is
restricted and limited by some *fiqh* chapters (quoting the gist here),
'We all know that the easy-to-practice Islamic faith is the last
religion, and that the Islamic laws and rulings are the last laws and
rulings put forth by Allah Almighty for people. No other prophet will
come after the Seal of Prophets (P), nor will Allah send any book after
the Holy Qur'an, this book has to remain as a book for law till the
Judgment Day and the Purified Progeny (as) remains explaining this book.
It is obvious the Islamic nation that follows Muhammad (P) during the
time of the Infallible Imam (even if the Imam is jailed or exiled) can
know its obligations even with a great difficulty through the path of
the Infallible Imam (as)'."

But the talk is about the time period of the great *ghaiba*
(occultation) of the Imam of the Time, may Allah hasten his
reappearance. There can be no more than three assumptions in this time:
The first assumption is the idling of the Book, the rulings and the
theological laws. The second assumption is to keep these rulings
standing on their own, that is, they themselves become the means for
self-sustenance. The third assumption is that these rulings need a
manager, a ruler and someone who explains them who is the *waliyy
al-amr* or the *mujtahid* who is qualified for this leadership.

As regarding the first assumption, it is false for reasons, rational and
textual evidences, due to the Islamic creed, which is easy to practice,
being the last and will remain dominant till the Resurrection Day.

As for the second assumption, it, too, is false because the law cannot
be carried out and safeguarded except by one person or persons. So, we
have to accept the third assumption and say that *waliyy al-amr* is the
one who must safeguard the Islamic community in all its affairs and
dimensions.

On the other hand, the Islamic community needs several institutions such
as the army, education and culture, justice courts, etc. The hand of the
juristic *waliyy*, therefore, has to remain spread out in all moral and
financial affairs and the faqih remains explaining and clarifying the
rulings of the Shari’a, a guide for people and one who solves their
problems. We conclude from this that the juristic *waliyy* must enjoy
all the affairs of the Infallible Imam (as) save being the Imam himself
so he may be able to implement the legislative code of Islam; otherwise,
in the case there are no official governmental institutions, the enemies
of Islam will not invite him to implement the codes with ease and
convenience. We can also use evidence from the posterity and say that no
society, nor any state, can endure when chaos and anarchy prevail;
therefore, there has to be a law and a government. It is obvious the
government of apostasy and oppression in the Islamic community will
eradicate the Islamic creed, and this violates our first assumption in
which we said the Islamic creed must endure till Judgment Day via
rational and cited evidences. Allah Almighty has said the following in
His Book:

*“**If anyone desires a religion other than Islam (submission to Allah),
it will never be accepted from him, and in the hereafter he will rank
among those who have lost (all spiritual good)”*** ***(Qur’an, 3:85).***

Then Sheikh Bahjat tackles, after this introduction, the limitation of
the privileges of the *faqih waliyy*.

Wisdom and Political Awareness
------------------------------

In the beginning, we will present the views of two of the mentor’s
students in this field:

Sheikh Misbah Yazdi says, “Allah blessed the mentor with unique
attributes and self abilities that are not acquired. He enjoys
particular brilliance and discretion, has a clear and precise vision in
individual, social and political issues, something which wins him one’s
admiration; so, how can a man who has so deeply delved into the
practical and worship issues realize matters as precise as these?”

People who see the Sheikh from a distance as he prays or teaches may
think he does not care about political and social issues. But I tell you
that the Sheikh encouraged me the most to intervene in political and
social issues. He used to admonish his friends and students to care
about these issues, and he used to think that the non-interference of
the adhering believers would let those who are not qualified take
control of them and be in charge of political and social issues, and the
Islamic community will then swerve from the straight path. When the
Sheikh was teaching us *fiqh* or ethics, he used to emphasize we should
not remain distant from the political and social issues.

He always used to admonish us to carry out activities in these fields,
especially in the field of cultural work, so much so that he used to
dispatch special recommendations to Imam Khomeini about some political
issues, and I and one of the brothers carried one of these
recommendations to the Imam once.

Ayatullah al-Mas\`udi used to say this: “The enemies of Islam, since the
inception of Islam and till our day, have been able to harm Islam as
much as they were able to.” He used to sometimes talk about what he used
to say to the shah saying, “These folks have destroyed everything; they
want to finish Islam.” I remember (in 1963 or 1964), when the imam
started his struggle against the shah, how the mentor was asked this
question: “Do you not think that Sayyid Khomeini is moving faster than
he is asked?” The mentor answered, “Do you not think he is moving at a
pace less than what is required of him?!”

It seems what is meant by the slow pace here is the belief of the mentor
that the imam had to declare *jihad*. Hujjatul-Islam wal Muslimin Fiqhi
says the following in this regard: “When the imam [Khomeini] was
banished to Turkey, Sheikh Bahjat said once during his class, ‘Is there
anyone who would kill some traitor leaders in this state?’”

Quite often, individuals affiliated with various political sides used to
go to the sheikh and talk about their opposition to some political
issues, but the sheikh was not impressed by their statements. Rather, he
always treaded the straight path, maintaining his independence and
personal norm of conduct. He never defended those with vested interests
or the dissidents; rather, as one of the prominent scholars says (and he
is one of the top officials in the system of the sacred Islamic Republic
and a student of Sheikh Bahjat), “Many prominent men of virtue in the
theological seminary enlisted in the political activity and the struggle
against the buried Pahlevi regime with encouragement and assertion from
the sheikh.”

Yes, the sheikh referring to political issues in his class, his
dispatching recommendations to Imam Khomeini, his receiving
revolutionaries and *mujahids*, his assistance for them during the days
of the Islamic Revolution and holy defense, imam Khomeini and Sayyid Ali
Khamenei visiting him at his house and their continuous link with this
in-depth *faqih*… indicate the awareness of the sheikh and his interest
in political issues.

We must also point out to the releases of the sheikh on the occasion of
the elections after his becoming the *marji\` taqlid*, may Allah
safeguard him. The sheikh explained in these releases the conditions of
the voter and the candidate for the post of President of the republic,
the Islamic Shura council and the command council of experts. Following
is the full text of the two releases which were issued by the office of
the sheikh on the occasion of the elections:

First Call
----------

***In the Name of Allah, the most Gracious, the most Merciful.***

Praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds, and blessings unto the master of
prophets and unto his progeny, the pure, the custodian masters. I have
repeatedly been asked about the ruling of attending elections, and
following is the answer to this question:

I will in my answer deal with the negative and positive aspects. Anyone
who wants to attend the elections has to remember that those who deserve
to be the protectors of the creed of the believers and their lives,
their representatives in dealing with their affairs, have to be
believing men who enjoy full and sufficient reason and not fear anyone
while obeying Allah. They must also be distant completely from bribes,
intimidations and the like. They must not look at matters as they were
but as they should be and how they should not be, and they must be
pious, God-fearing, preferring to please Allah rather than anything
else.

But if they lack some of these attributes, they cannot be relied upon
and electing them will be false (having no positive effect). Nay! It is
not permissible, and anything doubtful must be avoided. The
investigation (into the suitability of the individuals) must be full and
distant from love and hatred and psychological matters, for Allah
witnesses and sees how you fare in the elections and nominations.

As regarding those who are characterized by these merits and their
election is permissible, to elect them will be a duty on anyone who is
able and capable if it is possible the candidates who lack such
attributes would win enough votes. Look at the countries of disbelief
how they elect and how they get elected, who the voters are, what ways
were there through which they were elected, what views they submitted in
their meetings, what deeds their countries do on the basis of their
man-made laws and in violation of the laws of reason and creed, even
contrarily to the laws of their man-made creeds, for any sound mind
realizes the extent of corruption of these matters and how much
corruption they can incur.

You must oppose these corrupt deeds, their causes and outcomes the
origins of which do not agree with the principles of any genuine creed
or any law accepted by reason. May Allah protect you and our own selves
from all slips through Muhammad and his pure progeny, peace and
blessings of Allah be with them all, and peace be with you, the mercy of
Allah and His blessings.

(Signed) the servant of Allah Muhammad Taqi Bahjat.

Second Call
-----------

***In the Name of Allah, the most Gracious, the most Merciful.***

Praise to Allah, Lord of the Worlds, peace and blessings with the Master
of Prophets, Muhammad, and with his progeny, the masters, the
custodians, the purified ones.  
 In answer to a repeated question about the subject of elections, and
while taking into consideration the reminders to which we pointed out
last year and which were not relevant to any particular time or place,
we pointed out in it at the time the necessary attributes with which the
voters and the candidates should be adorned, and this method is the
best, the most general, the most complete and the most enduring in
pointing out individuals by name, I say the following: It is narrated
about Hudhaifah, Allah be pleased with him, that he said, “They used to
ask the Messenger of Allah (P) about goodness, and I used to ask him
about evil.”

We must know what evil is and who are the evil ones so we may avoid
them, and we must know what goodness is and who are those who act upon
it so we may embrace them. The voters and the candidates must work with
awareness and caution while applying major things in minor things, whole
things in particularities, and they have to prefer the Pleasure of Allah
over pleasing others. They must also examine the matter from the
religious and righteous wise persons and not stop in the light while
continuing their movement in the dark.  
 They must be fully distant from paying bribes or accepting them, for it
is the method of the unbelieving states, and they must not befriend
anyone other than the wise religious persons who are familiar with the
matters related to the Shari’a, the faithful in their ideology and
practice, the God-fearing, the good managers, the courageous ones, the
moderates in ideology and in direction, and they must not create
problems for the Muslims which cannot be solved with regret.

They must be fully distant from selling the country and from those who
sell their country and who are embraced by the states of apostasy.
Notice the final ends of those who sell their country. We saw in the
past, and we now see, that the states of apostasy have no mercy towards
even those who used to serve them. Nothing, hence, remains except regret
and the evil outcome for those who follow them. You must know that all
shortcomings in existence in the Islamic states originate from the
states of apostasy. As regarding the shortcomings of the self, they
originate from shortage in belief and shortcoming from applying Islam.

Nobody except the Infallible Ones (as) can say this: “I know” or “I see
everything”. Also, nobody can say, “I do not know, nor do I see
anything”. Rather, every ordinary worker knows some matters and he has
to move and not stop in the way but deduct what is unknown from what is
known as much as possible, and he has to take precaution and stop and
examine the matters which he does not know till he feels comfortable
about them and not regret having done them.

These pursuits are in answer to questions by the faithful which they
submitted in this field and to drive the evidence home against them so
they may not themselves stay nor cause the other believers to stay.

As regarding the individuals who are undecided, I said to them in the
past and I now say again: See which party is closer to the *wilaya* of
the Commander of the Faithful Ali (as), which is more firm in its
practical belief in Imam al-Mahdi (may Allah hasten his reappearance),
which of them is more waiting for him and wants to change the religious
issues and which of them does not want it, which one is moderate in its
way of thinking, which changes color in belief or in action, which one
enjoys piety, truthfulness and trustworthiness, which is more in its
attributes like apostasy and hypocrisy and which is distant from that.
Finally, they must know which of them is closer to Allah Almighty and to
the Seal of Messengers and of the *wasis*, blessings of Allah be upon
them all, and may Allah hasten their ease.

I plead to Allah, the Great, to grant success to the faithful to act
upon whatever pleases Him and to avoid whatever He detests in every
place and time, and peace be with you, the blessings of Allah and His
peace.

(Signed) the most insignificant one, Muhammad Taqi Bahjat


