Fountain of Wisdom, a Group of Teachings and Instructions by Grand Ayatullah Sheikh Bahjat
==========================================================================================

In this section, we will discuss short statements by the sheikh that are
fraught with wisdom and some of the precious brief answers which
Ayatullah Bahjat presented in answer to some questions in various
subjects and issues.

1. Treatment of Pretension and the Value of Knowledge
-----------------------------------------------------

A virtuous man in Qum’s theological seminary writes the following:  
 “They asked Ayatullah Bahjat: ‘One may do a good deed in the way of
Allah in which he conforms to all sincerity, but the insinuations of the
devil, such as love for fame, showing off and reputation may find their
way to his mind. Will this state of mind be regarded as pretension, and
will it void the good deed?’ The sheikh answered, ‘Pretension is
relevant to acts of worship. Pretension in worship is prohibitive, and
it is said it voids [good deeds], too. But there is no problem with
pretension in issues other than adorations. But pretension itself can be
a cure for pretension. This takes place when pretension is lifted
through sound contemplation. Let me give you an example: One may need to
earn the respect of the police commissioner and attract his attention.
In this case, he may go to a policeman and try to influence him to make
him a link between himself and the commissioner. It is better this
person must here pay attention and say to himself: ‘This policeman is
only a link. Even if he writes something or mediates in the issue, the
one who will put the paper in the right place and in the end settles the
matter is the police commissioner. Therefore, what is right is to
attract the attention of the police commissioner directly and without an
intermediary. In other words, pretension must be applied to a higher
end.’”

Had this person been wise and knew that there is a higher station than
that of the police commissioner, such as the minister, the prime
minister or the president, for example, he will then say this to
himself: It is better that I present my good deed to the minister or the
prime minister or the president of the republic. That is to say, one
must act upon pretension to impress the strongest ranks. If this
happens, pretension will be a cause for treatment for pretension itself.
So, if pretension in acts of worship is for the sake of the Strongest,
the One Who has the highest position in the world, that is, Allah,
Praise and Exaltation belong to Him, there is no problem in this
pretension, and it will be a treatment for itself.

Traditions state that one who turns during the prayer to make a show to
people will be herded by Allah in the form of a donkey. This in fact is
the reality. Is not the one who shows his deed to the policeman in the
presence of the minister or the police commissioner a donkey?! Yes, he
is a donkey in the human form to which he is accustomed. If you tell him
that he is a donkey, he will be angry with you. But we must tell him not
to be angry because his deeds all day and night long is like that; so,
“Why are you angry?!”

But Help, Help from ignorance, for it takes man to Turkistan instead of
Mecca! Since Day One, the ignorance of Iblis was the reason for Adam’s
problem. Satan said, ***“**Then, by Your might, I will put them all in
the wrong, except Your servants among them, the sincere and purified
ones”* ***(Qur’an, 38:82-83).*** Iblis was ignorant, although before
then he used to be a worshipper but not a man of knowledge, and his deed
was incomplete. Did he not say to Allah Almighty when He ordered him to
prostrate to Adam: “I am better than him: You created me from fire, and
You created him from clay” (Qur’an, 38:76)?! This was the minor argument
of Iblis. As for his major one, it is his reasoning that anything
created out of fire is higher, whereas anything created out of clay is
lower! We must ask: Why so and according to what proof?!

This outward outfit is not angelic. Look at the symmetry and beauty of
the peacock and the difference between it and the other animals.
Likewise, the soul of man cannot be compared with that of jinns or of
the angels. The human soul can ascend to whatever Allah wills even if it
is outfitted with an outfit made of clay. An outfit does not make an
attribute. If one wears a mantle made in Naeen and another wears a
mantle made in Afghanistan, will that be an evidence for one’s
inferiority and the other’s superiority? When we, too, become ignorant,
we will then be like Iblis, and we will stray as he did. The
characteristic of straying is that it transgresses; i.e. a staying
person causes others to stray, too; so, beware of ignorance.

It is ignorance if that person says that the Holy Qur’an contains this
verse: ***“**It is He Who has spread out the earth for (His)
creatures**” (55:10)***; therefore, there is no difference among people;
all are equal in possessing and utilizing the earth. He does not know
that the wording of the verse connotes an outcome and benefiting, and he
also does not know that he must take note of the other verses which
interpret this verse.

These ignorant folks cause others like them to stray. They come and
bring the Qur’an with them in the beginning, but their goal is to take
away the Qur’an from the hands of people in the end. There will be none
to object when they say, “Burn the Qur’an!” We laugh at this matter,
finding it amusing, but the truth is that unless we are strong in our
argument, they will chase us out. They spend wealth and buy these
ignorant folks.

The result is that this ignorance will create a new religion. Did not
one Bahaai person say that the name of “Sayyid Ali Muhammad al Bab”
exists in your Qur’an, too, in this verse: “Hee-Meem-Ayn-Seen-Qaaf”
which means “The Qaim is Sayyid Ali Muhammad” when it is read from left
to right?! So, we nowadays need knowledge and deduction more than
anything else because the matter is one of creed. We have to stand in
the face of this ignorance and these imported ignorant folks; they want
to train their henchmen and spend their wealth on them; so, we have to
learn logic very well so we may be able to answer them; otherwise, the
wolves will eat us and digest us.

2. Conditions of Vigilance of the Heart, Finding Pleasure in Adoration and Prayer
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sayyid Gharawiyan writes the following: “The mentor was asked once the
following question: ‘Ayatullah Bahjat the mentor! Our lifespan has
expired while we are yet to feel the pleasure in our adoration
especially in our prayer. What should we do in order to taste a little
of what our Infallible Imams (as) have said?’ The mentor shook his head
and said, ‘It is a general affliction and a pain which we all feel.’
They said, ‘Anyway, the matter is relevant, and it has many levels. Some
people, such as yourself, have sublime levels, whereas others, such as
ourselves, have no level. What should we do?’ He answered saying,
‘Perhaps I wish to be in your own level.’ They said, ‘O sheikh! It is
not a matter of courtesy; it is a fact.” With particular humbleness, the
sheikh answered saying, ‘Your aunt is like you,’ meaning by this axiom
that ‘I am just like you.’ Anyway, after some lengthy insistence, the
sheikh said, ‘The feeling of pleasure during the prayer requires two
types of introductions. The first type is the introductions beyond the
sphere of prayer. The second type is the introductions within the
framework of the prayers. The matters which we should uphold before the
prayer, that is, outside its sphere, is that one does not commit sins,
nor should he pollute the heart with acts of disobedience to the
Almighty. Disobedience taints the purity of the soul and puts out the
light of the heart. As regarding the matters which must be observed in
the prayer, they are: One must surround himself with an iron barrier so
he fears none save Allah. In other words, he has to shift his thinking
from anything other than Allah, and his concern is about nothing except
Allah. If his mind is occupied by something else unconsciously, he has
to stop mentioning that thing as soon as he becomes aware of it.’”

Ayatullah Quddas, one of the students of Sheikh Bahjat, says this: “I
asked the sheikh once what I should do so my heart may become more
attentive during the prayers. The sheikh lowered his head in
contemplation. Then he raised his head and said, ‘It is only that the
heater is too little.’ I understood what he meant. He wanted to say
this: ‘Your knowledge and inner conviction is weak; otherwise, it is not
possible for the heart not to be attentive when the knowledge is
present.’” Ayatullah Muhammad Hasan al-Ahmadi, the *faqih* from Yazd,
said the following in this regard: “When you face the *qibla*, and when
you recite the Hamd Chapter and the other chapter, be attentive to their
meanings so the connection may remain safeguarded.”

Professor Khosroe-Shahi says, “Once Ayatullah Bahjat was asked this
question: ‘What should we do in order to achieve our heart’s full
attention during the prayer?’ He said, ‘One of the major factors which
cause the heart being attentive during the prayer is that we should
control our five senses (vision, hearing, etc.) all day long because we
must prepare the necessary introductions in order to gain the heart’s
attentiveness during the prayer.’”

In another place, someone asked the sheikh this: “What should we do so
our earnestness may increase in obeying the commandments of Allah
especially with regard to the prayer?” The Sheikh said, ‘Seek help from
the Imam of the Time (aj) before performing the prayer, then carry out
the obligation in its absolute completeness.”

Another person asks this question: “What should we do so our mind may
focus and our heart may be attentive during the prayer?” The sheikh
wrote this in his answer: “In the Name of the Almighty: At the moment
when you face [the *qibla*], go with your own choice.”

3. Sincerity of Intention, Conjoining Knowledge and Deed
--------------------------------------------------------

The sheikh was asked, “What should we do so our intention may be sincere
when we seek to wear the turban?” The sheikh answered, “Let the Shari\`a
be the criterion for your deeds. Look and see if this deed agrees with
or violates the Shari\`a. If we want to have such doubts, we should
doubt all our acts of adoration and prayers, for what would inform us
whether our intention is sincere or not? Should we abandon the
performing of the obligations simply because we are not sure about the
sincerity of our intention?” The sheikh added saying, “So, let your
intention be to conjoin your knowledge to your deed, and neither should
lag behind the other. Most of our calamities result from knowledge and
deed being separate from each other. The knowledge of some people lag
behind their deed, whereas it is ahead of that of others, such as in
your case. The knowledge of some once lags behind their deed and once
goes ahead of it; therefore, your intention must be to act upon your
knowledge, and let your knowledge accompany your deed.”

Sayyid Hosroe-Shahi says the following in this regard, “Ayatullah Bahjat
used to always emphasize the necessity of knowledge being inseparable
from deed. One day he said, ‘A man with knowledge but without deed is
like the lamp that lights the path to people while burning itself by
itself.’”

4. Reliance on and Trust in Allah
---------------------------------

Sheikh Misbah says, “Once Sheikh Bahjat said, ‘I was sitting in the room
but I kept hearing the voice of the children who were playing in the
courtyard. The son of our neighbor was playing near the door. A beggar
came to him and said, ‘Go home and bring me something from there.’ The
child said, ‘Why do you not ask your mother [for something]?’The beggar
said, ‘I have no mother; so, go to your mother and bring me something
from her.’ The sheikh adds saying, ‘I understood from the dialogue of
this child with that beggar that the child thought he could get anything
he wanted from his mother due to his trust in her and reliance on her.”
Then he deducts this: If we trust in Allah Almighty as this child trusts
his mother and ask Allah, the most Exalted One, to grant us what we
need, we would not have suffered from any problem and all our needs
would have been taken care of.”

5. Result of Human Perfection
-----------------------------

Hujjatul-Islam wal Muslimin Quddas says, “I said this once to the
sheikh, ‘A student saw in a vision that he was praying at a holy site.
Whenever he prostrated, he would hear the sands praising the Almighty
with him.” The sheikh said, “When man reaches perfection, he will see
and hear this even when he is awake.”

6. Serving the Imam of the Time (aj)
------------------------------------

Hujjatul-Islam wal Muslimin Quddas also says, “I said this to the sheikh
once, ‘My going to one of the villages and presence there for Islamic
propagation has a good impact. People in this village are very merciful.
They listen to the speech and follow it, but they are poor. They do not
pay for the months of Muharram and Ramadan except very little, unlike
other areas which are spiritually weaker but financially stronger.’ The
sheikh said, ‘If you are busy serving Imam al-Mahdi, the Imam of the
Time, may Allah hasten his reappearance, do you think the Imam will
neglect and not think about you?!’”

7. Precision in Narrating Traditions
------------------------------------

Hujjatul-Islam Quddas also says, “Forty-five years ago, I talked once
with the sheikh about my work program during the blessed month of
Ramadan and said to him, ‘I do not ascend the pulpit in the daytime
during the blessed month of Ramadan and do so during only the nights.’
The sheikh asked why. I said, ‘I am not certain about the accuracy of
many pursuits which I present on the pulpit and am concerned some of
them may be false.’ The sheikh asked me, ‘Are you sure about their
accuracy during the night?!’ I then realized from the statement of the
sheikh that this method was not sound.”

8. Practical Call
-----------------

Hujjatul-Islam Lutfi says, “I went once to Sheikh Bahjat following the
morning prayer and asked him to admonish me. He said, “Be callers upon
people to the path of Allah but not with your tongues.” It seems, the
author says, the sheikh wanted to attract the attention of the seeker of
the admonishment, who is one of the men of spirituality, to the best
call: the practical call.

9. Avoiding Transgressions
--------------------------

Ayatullah Sheikh Jawad al-Karbalaai, one of the scholars of ethics,
says, “I was honored to know Ayatullah Bahjat since distant time and
benefited from some of his perfections and admonishments. Here are some
of these perfections and admonishments:

“The sheikh used to always emphasize abandonment of transgressions and
say, ‘Allah has bestowed His boon on all classes of His friends through
His special niceties, making the abandonment of transgressions a means
to seek nearness to Him. Since the levels of man’s knowledge and love
for his Creator are numerous, so are the levels of abandoning
transgression, too, so much so that it has been said that the good deeds
of the righteous are the bad ones of those who are close to Him.”

One of the students who had just joined the theological seminary in Qum
said, “I went to Sheikh Bahjat and said to him, ‘I have come to the
theological seminary in order to pursue theological sciences. What
should I do in order to be a successful student?’ The Sheikh lowered his
head in contemplation then said, ‘There is no difference between a
student and a non-student; what is important is to avoid
transgressions.’”

Somewhere else the sheikh was asked about the best *dhikr*. He said, “I
think the best *dhikr* is the practical *dhikr*, i.e. abandoning
transgression in belief and in action. Everything needs this matter,
whereas this does not need anything: It generates everything good.”

The sheikh was also asked, “Through what deed, other than teaching and
caring about the Book of Allah and the exegesis of Ahl al-Bayt (as), can
we strengthen ourselves for piety and treading towards the Adored One?”
Answering this question, the sheikh wrote saying, “In His Name, the most
Exalted One. It is through continuous determination to abandon
transgression in belief and in action.”

One of the men of virtue says, “I wrote a letter to Ayatullah Sheikh
Bahjat and asked him this question: ‘What should we do so our love for
our Creator and for the Imam of our Time (as) may increase?’ He wrote
this in his answer: ‘Abandon transgressions and perform the prayers as
soon as they are opportune.’”

Sayyid Quddas says the following in this regard: “One day I talked with
Sheikh Bahjat saying, ‘Have we considered a program and a specific time
for this distraction (of disobeying the Lord and not acting upon His
commandments)? That is, will a day come when we abandon transgression?
Or will we continue as we are? If our intention is not to continue this
status, let us sit and put a specific time for it, say a month, six
months, a year or many years. What is important is that we must realize
the seriousness of this situation and at least put an end to it.’”

10. Secrets of the Prayer
-------------------------

Somewhere else, the Sheikh wrote the following: “The similitude of the
prayer is like the Ka\`ba and the *Takbirat al-Ihram* in it: It is
abandoning everything save Allah and entering in His Holy Presence.
Standing in it is like the lover speaking to the one he loves. Bowing is
the slave bowing down before his Master. Prostration is the ultimate
submission, the feeling of nothingness and of humility to Him. When a
slave finishes the prayer, he offers the greeting as a gift. Such is the
trip that is filled with mysteries.”

11. Ethics of Ziyara
--------------------

Hujjatul-Islam wal Muslimin Khosroe-Shahi says, “Once, I and some
friends were determined to visit the shrine of Imam al-Riďa (as). We
went to Ayatullah Sheikh Bahjat and asked him about the ethics of
*ziyara*. He contemplated for a short while then said, ‘One of the most
important norms of ethics of *ziyara* is that we should believe that
there is no difference between the life and death of the Infallible Ones
(as).’ He did not say anything else other than this statement. After we
had sat with some friends contemplating on the gist of this statement,
we deducted that the ethics of *ziyara* may be summarized in this
statement. And I asked him once, ‘It has been said with regard to the
*ziyara* of the Infallible Lady (as) that whoever visits her shrine
fully knowing her esteem will deserve Paradise. So, what is the meaning
of ‘fully knowing her esteem’?’ He answered me in one sentence thus: ‘He
must believe that her status is less than that of the Infallible Ones
and greater than that of others.’”

12. Conforming to Moderation in Teaching and Educating the Offspring and Finding Diversity for Them
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In a special meeting with the genius child who knows the Holy Qur’an by
heart, namely Muhammad Husayn Tabatabai, and his father, Sheikh Bahjat
addressed the son thus: “I hope you will not shrink from moderation. Do
not pressure him [the child], nor should he pressure himself. For
example, do not require him to memorize *Nahjul-Balagha* or the *Saheefa
Sajjadiyya* after having memorized the Qur’an. Let his task be easy,
distant from hardship. I also ask him to travel quite often, to set
aside some of his time to play and legitimate pastime, and I commend to
him to change his environment because this is very effective. Some
people travel abroad to replace their blood, but I think traveling by
itself compensates for it. I plead to Allah to grant you success to
cultivate him outwardly and inwardly, in form and in essence.”

They said to the sheikh, “What type of travel do you mean since Muhammad
Husayn travels always abroad? Do you mean making such trips more often?”
The sheikh said, “No. Let his contacts be more. For example, he goes to
Chamkran Mosque every week. This by itself is a good change. Seeking the
means of nearness is very useful. You should visit the resting places of
the Sayyids who belong to the Imams (as) because each of these Sayyids
has his own characteristic and impact, just like the fruits each one of
which has a particular vitamin. By the will of Allah, you should not
forget this. If this is not available, walking in an open space and
being regular in offering supererogatory supplications following the
obligatory prayers has a great deal of impact. Anyway, we just have to
remind you of these matters.”

During that meeting, we sensed some cultivating points to which we would
like to point out as follows:

1. When Muhammad Husayn Tabatabai (the flag-post of guidance) entered
the chamber of the sheikh, the sheikh welcomed him warmly. As he was
shaking hands with him, he said, “Lord! Let him one of the spiritual
scholars who act upon their knowledge!” Then he seated him in his own
place, on his own bedding, as he sat near him on the carpet.

2. The sheikh asked Muhammad Husayn’s father: “Does he recite the Qur’an
every day?” Sayyid Tabatabai said, “Yes. He recites one chapter every
day.” The sheikh said, “This much suffices to retain in memory. Let him
divide this chapter on the prayer times.” After that the sheikh recited
two traditions relevant to memorizing the Qur’an: “One who memorizes the
Qur’an gets the prophetic mission inscribed between his sides except he
receives no revelation.” “One who is with the Qur’an is with the
Prophet’s Progeny, and one who is with the Prophet’s Progeny is with the
Qur’an.”

3. Sayyid Tabatabai thanked Sheikh Bahjat and asked him to pray for
Muhammad Husayn. The sheikh said, “If one of you wants to memorize the
Qur’an, let him recite this supplication three times every morning and
evening,” then he rubbed Muhammad Husayn’s head with his hand as he
recited this supplication: “Lord! Let me be in Your shielded fort in
which You place whoever You please!”

13. Value of the Tahajjud and the Standing During the Ashar
-----------------------------------------------------------

Ayatullah Muhammad Husayn Ahmadi, the *faqih* of Yazd, says, “The sheikh
used to highly recommend *tahajjud* and prayers during the *ashar*
[pre-dawn times], so much so that he often used to say, “The Prophet (P)
earned divine knowledge due to his *tahajjud* and standing during the
times of the *ashar*.”

The sheikh believes the night prayers and the *tahajjud* during the
*ashar* as well as regular prayers and optional adoration are all very
important. It is narrated about the senior scholars upon whom Allah
bestowed sublime stations that they used to resort to the *ashar* and to
celebrate the Names of Allah during them if they wanted to ask something
of Allah or earn His boons because dedicating time solely to Allah
Almighty and to worshipping him during the ashars has its own effect.
The sheikh used to always emphasize this fact.

14. Continuous Dhikr
--------------------

Ayatullah Muhammad Husayn Ahmadi also says this: “One of the attributes
to which the sheikh used to point out often is that one must always be
engaged in performing *dhikr* because one who does so will always see
himself in the presence of the Lord, talking to Him. The sheikh used to
mention some narratives in this field from time to time.

15. One Should not Admire his Good Deeds
----------------------------------------

Professor Khosroe-Shahi says, “Ayatullah Bahjat used not to see the acts
of righteousness and adoration which he performed and always used to
say, ‘What a better person is that who, when doing something good, says
he has not done anything, but if the same deed is done by others, he
says how great it is!’ In other words, he believes we have to
underestimate our deeds while admiring and magnifying those of others.”

16. First Step in Treading the Path Towards Allah
-------------------------------------------------

Professor Khosroe-Shahi also says this: “Ayatullah Bahjat used to say,
‘The first station earned by one who treading the path of seeking
nearness to Allah is seeing the distance between him and his Lord. He,
therefore, maintains this distance and not distances himself from the
Lord. If he cannot shorten the distance, he must not lose hope. What is
important is to maintain this distance, that is, he must not first
distance himself, then he has to gradually shorten this distance and
gets closer to his Lord, the most Exalted, the most Great.’”

17. Earning Support of the Imam of the Time (aj)
------------------------------------------------

He also says, “The sheikh used to say the following in his chats: ‘We,
students [of theology], have to think about how we can earn the support
of our Lord, the Imam of the Time, may Allah hasten his reappearance.
That is, we have to know how to study and work in order to win his
support and pleasure. Every students must keep this matter on the top of
the list of his priorities (at every time, during his study and after he
completes it). He must always think about how his deeds and norms of
conduct should be in order to win the support of the Imam (as). If the
student thinks about this matter and treads this path, he will not face
in his life any deviation in action, speech and conduct. He will not
then undertake any conduct which does not suit him, and the crises will
not confuse him.’”

18. Necessity of Avoiding Moral Lowliness and the Way to Reach this Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Khosroe-Shahi also says this: “The sheikh used to stress avoiding moral
sins and say, ‘Prolong the prostration is one of the acts of adoration
which break the back of Satan. If one prolongs his prostration, he has
to stand before a mirror and notice the place of prostration marked on
his forehead, whether the prostration left a mark on his forehead or
not. If there is a mark, he must rub it till he wipes it out so that he
may not be characterized by pretension.’”

Somewhere else, Ayatullah Bahjat describes the role of knowing the
Truthful One as a very important and essential role in removing moral
sins. He says, “All moral sins originate from weakness in knowing Allah,
Praise and Exaltation are His. If one realizes that Allah, the most
Praised and Exalted One, is always and in any condition more beautiful
than everything beautiful, he will never then abandon feeling
comfortable with Him.”

In another place, the sheikh was asked, “What should we do so we may
distance ourselves from pretension?” He said, “You must greatly stick to
believing in a perfect creed.” Somewhere else the sheikh was asked about
a treatment for anger. He said, “You must perform abundant prayers with
full conviction.”

The sheikh was also asked, “What is the cure for conceit?” He wrote the
following in answer: “In His Name, the most Exalted One. Sticking
greatly to perfect conviction is the treatment for conceit.” Someone
asked him about a treatment for unholy insinuations. He wrote this in
answer: “Abundant testimony about the Unity of Allah is the cure for
such insinuations.”

19. Value of Intellect and of Contemplation
-------------------------------------------

Khosroe-Shahi says, “The sheikh used to stress monitoring what the
tongue utters and say, ‘We have to safeguard our tongue, think twenty
four hours but speak for only one hour. That is, we have to contemplate
and meditate all day long but talk for one single hour. And even this
lone hour may be too long.”

20. Status of Information and Knowledge
---------------------------------------

Khosroe-Shahi also says, “Once, on his way from home to the shrine, the
sheikh said to the students in his company, ‘What a great blessing it is
when Allah made you among those who tread the path of seeking knowledge,
for knowledge is indeed a great blessing!” Then the sheikh made a
comparison between knowledge and wealth and said, “Knowledge is better
for you than wealth because it guards you while you guard wealth. There
is another difference between knowledge and wealth: Spending depletes
wealth, whereas knowledge increases when disseminated.’ Thus did the
sheikh encourage the students to earn knowledge”.

21. Student’s Duties
--------------------

Khosroe-Shahi also says this: “In the area of encouraging education,
culturing and encouraging beginner students to undertake this matter,
the sheikh used to emphasize that the students should not abandon
learning, studying and researching under any circumstance. He used to
say, ‘What should be observed at the beginning of educational
achievement is acting upon the obligations as they should be and
avoidance of prohibitions.’

But he talks differently with the students who undertook a long stride
along the path and arrived at a relatively high academic level. I
remember he said this to me once when he was going from home to the
mosque to lead the congregational prayers: ‘The students started their
studies with the *Muqaddimat* (Introductions). They will then study the
*Ma\`alim* (Features) and *Maghna* (indispensable studies).’ Then he
asked me, ‘What will they study thereafter?’ I said, ‘They will study
the Lam\`a.’ He asked, ‘Then what?’ I said, ‘Al-Makaasib’ Then he asked,
‘Then what?’ I said, ‘Al-Kifaaya.’ He asked, ‘Then what?’ I said, ‘The
Kharij studies.’ He asked, ‘Then what?’ I said, ‘They attain the status
of ijtihad.’ He asked, ‘Then what?’ This was a great lesson and an
important piece of advice which the sheikh provided in this short
phrase: ‘Then what?’ It seems from his statement that he thinks
knowledge is not sought for itself but as means seeking nearness to
Allah. This point was a signal and a warning to the students who earned
a higher academic level.”

22. Non-Reliance on Life
------------------------

Khosroe-Shahi also says the following: “Ayatullah Bahjat used to say
that life is a large hotel: We do not know from where people come to it
or who goes to it.”

23. Interest in Spirituality
----------------------------

Hujjatul-Islam wal Muslimin Khosroe-Shahi also says this: “Ayatullah
Bahjat used to say, ‘Had one looked after his soul as much as looks
after his body, he would not have had any worry or conver. But
unfortunately humans endeavor to secure their physical needs only. For
example, one goes to the doctor and asks about the useful nutrition, but
he does not attempt to know what benefits his soul. At any rate, had one
endeavored to attain spirituality as much as he attempts to earn
material things, he would not have suffered any grief in his life. We,
therefore, have to know the things that benefit our souls. What is
commendable, for example, is useful and effective, and we have to
endeavor to perform them.’”

24. Moderation in Apprehension and Anticipation
-----------------------------------------------

Also, Khosroe-Shahi says the following: “Once I asked Sheikh Bahjat
about fear and hope emphasized by scholars of ethics a great deal. He
said, ‘It is the apprehension and the sought anticipation which do not
go beyond the limits of moderation. If it goes beyond the limit of
moderation, it is not useful because non-moderate fear causes one to
lose hope of the mercy of Allah. Non-moderate anticipation causes one to
be rude towards the Lord.’ I also heard this narrative from him: ‘It has
been narrated about the Messenger of Allah (P) that the believer stands
between two kinds of fear: fear of what has passed and fear of what
remains.’ In other words, we must be concerned about falling short and
must not undertake it once more.”

25. Reliance on the Lord
------------------------

He also is quoted as having said once, “If we trust our Master as the
small child trusts his parents, all our affairs would have improved.”

26. Acting Upon Knowledge
-------------------------

He has also said that Ayatullah Bahjat used to say, “Had people acted
upon their knowledge, all their affairs would have improved. That is, if
they perform their duties, abandon what is prohibitive and endeavor to
perform what is commendable as much as they can, their affairs would
have improved.”

27. Love for what is most Perfect Prevents Evils
------------------------------------------------

A man asked Ayatullah Bahjat, “I have loved a woman, and loving her has
captivated me; so, what should I do?” In answer, the sheikh wrote the
following: “A wise man loves perfection, completion, what is more
beneficial and most lasting, and he gives precedence for such love over
loving anything else. Also, loving what is most perfect shuns
afflictions, contrarily to loving anything else.”

28. Great Status of Prayer
--------------------------

Sheikh Bahjat was requested to write a brief and wise statement about
prayer so it would be engraved in memory. The sheikh wrote this: “Among
the wise statements about the great status of prayer in its lofty
station is the famous speech of the Infallible One: ‘Prayer is the
ascension of the faithful’ for those who are convinced about the truth
in this statement and seek this station without shrinking from
conviction.’ Peace, blessing and mercy of Allah be with you.” (Signed:)
Servant of Allah Muhammad Taqi Bahjat.

Hujjatul-Islam wal Muslimin Fiqhi says, “One day, Ayatullah Bahjat said,
‘If one adheres to performing the prayer on its time, he will arrive at
the anticipated station.”

29. Path of Nearness to Allah
-----------------------------

A man asked the sheikh this question: “I wish to seek nearness to Allah,
the most Exalted, the most Great; so, what is the path and the norm of
conduct [for achieving this goal]?” In answer, Ayatullah Bahjat wrote
the following: “In His Name, the most Exalted One. If the seeker is
truthful, abandoning sins suffices for one’s lifespan even if it may be
a thousand years.”

Somewhere else a man asked him this question: “I have set my mind to be
near to the Lord. I hope you can provide me with guidance: Does this
deed need a professor or what?” The sheikh wrote this in answer: “In the
Name of the most Exalted one. Knowledge is the professor, while the
teacher is the means and nothing else. You have to act upon what you
learn and be persistent on it. This will suffice because ‘One who acts
upon what he knows will be permitted by Allah to inherit the knowledge
with which he is not familiar’. The Holy Qur’an states this:

***‘And those who strive in Our (cause) We will certainly guide them to
Our paths, for truly Allah is with those who do right’*** ***(Qur’an,
29:69).***

If you get no result, be informed you did not perform the deed properly.
You should also set aside an hour a day to study theological sciences.’”

Somewhere else the sheikh was asked: “Does the path to Allah require the
presence of a professor? If there is no professor available, what should
be done?” Answering this question, the sheikh wrote the following: “In
the Name of the most Exalted One. Your professor is your own knowledge.
Act upon what you know, it will suffice you for that which you do not
know.”

A man wrote this to the sheikh: “Tell me, please, how one can attain the
feeling of being in comfortable company with Allah and with the Purified
Imams (as).” In answer, the sheikh wrote the following: “This is
possible through obeying Allah, His Messenger (P) and the Imams (as) as
well as abandoning the sins in belief and in action.”

30. Method of Self-Discipline
-----------------------------

It was said to the sheikh that some students in Lebanon asked for
ethical admonishments and necessary instructions in this regard, and
they inquire about a method for self-discipline. “We,” they added,
“hence request you to guide us in this field.”

The sheikh said, “One of the most useful things in this regard is to
remind the students who attend your daily classes one Shari’a-related
narrative in the chapter of self-discipline stated in the book titled
*Wasaail al-Shi’a* and also the narratives transmitted in a chapter on
the ethics of companionship in the Hajj chapter in *Wasaail al-Shi’a*.
Of course, this deed must be accompanied by contemplation and doing all
what you know.”

Ayatullah Bahjat, in another recommendation in this regard, says,
“Anyone who brings about every day one tradition in the chapter of
self-discipline in the book titled Wasaail al-Shi’a and contemplates
about the clear matters in it and acts upon it will see that he is
transformed completely only one year from that time.”

31. True Asceticism
-------------------

The sheikh was asked what true asceticism is and how we can be truly
ascetic. He said, “Asceticism is that you control your self and monitor
the permission of Allah Almighty to do or not to do each action.”

32. Method to Firm the Relationship with Ahl al-Bayt (as) especially with the Imam of the Time (aj)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The sheikh was also asked: “How can we firm our relationship with Ahl
al-Bayt (as), especially with the Imam of the Time (aj)?” He said,
“Obedience of Allah, after having come to know Him, causes love for Him
just as it causes loving those whom Allah Almighty loves, namely the
prophets and *wasis*. The one who is the most loved by Allah from among
the latter is Prophet Muhammad (P) and his Progeny (as), and the nearest
to us from among them is the Imam of the Time, may Allah hasten his
reappearance and ease.”

33. The Path of Knowing Allah
-----------------------------

The sheikh was asked, “What is the path to knowing Allah?” He said, “The
path to knowing Allah is knowing the self (*nafs*). We know we did not
create ourselves and we can never do that. Likewise, others like us did
not do it either. So, the One Who created us is the Absolutely Able One,
Allah Almighty. The path to getting close to Him and to thanking His
blessings is to obey Him. The hardship in this obedience is only in the
beginning and will not endure for long till it becomes to those who seek
nearness to Allah sweeter than anything else.”

34. Foot Kissing is not Prohibitive
-----------------------------------

Ayatullah Bahjat was asked, “Is it prohibitive to kiss one’s foot or
not?” He said, “No. There is no problem with kissing one’s foot, but
there is a problem in prostrating before anyone other than Allah.”

35. Status of Supplication
--------------------------

The sheikh believes supplication enjoys a lofty status and is convinced
that Allah is the One Who judges all affairs of life. Professor Hadawi
says, “My daughter was once sick, so I went to the sheikh and asked him
to supplicate for her. The sheikh said, ‘You have to recite this
supplication three times a day: ‘Lord! Do cure her with Your own cure,
give her Your own healing, and grant her health from You.’ After the
third time, recite this ‘Through Imam al-Kadhim, for she is Your
bondmaid and the daughter of Your slave.”


