Preface
=======

The tragedy of Karbala is an unparalleled event of the history of
mankind. The great sacrifice made by Imam Husayn, the grandson of the
Holy Prophet, on Ashura (the l0th of Muharram 61 A.H.) and the
steadfastness shown by him is a beacon of light for everyone who has
faith in his mission and is keen for its success.

When one studies the bewildering events of this incident, a number of
questions arise in one's mind such as: What was the purpose of Imam
Husayn's rising? Did he want to avoid taking oath of allegiance to Yazid
or did he take this step in response to the invitation received from the
people of Kufa? Did he wish, in the current terminology, to bring about
a revolution?

Did he know that he would be killed or was he under the impression that
his life would be spared? Did he act according to a predetermined plan
or took decisions in the light of every new development?

When he received the news of the martyrdom of Muslim bin Aqil while he
(Imam Husayn) was on his way to Kufa why did he suggest to his
companions to go away and leave him alone, and thereafter why did he
approach various persons to assist him?

Why did he ask all his companions during the night of Ashura to go away
but also sent Habib bin Mazahir to the tribe of Bani Asad to seek their
help? Why did he seek help from Ubaydullah bin Hurr Juafi in the palace
of Bani Maqatil and why did he say to the sons of Aqil during the night
of Ashura: "You should go away. It is sufficient that from amongst you
Muslim bin Aqil has been killed?"

Why did he seek help from Zahhak ibn Abdullah Mashriqi and his friend
and Zuhayr bin Qayn, in spite of their strong refusal, and insisted and
even expressed willingness that Zahhak ibn Abdullah should help him till
the last moment and then go away? Does all this not show that Imam
Husayn was not aware of the final result and had no definite plan in
mind?

Does the step taken by him not amount to endangering his life? Does a
person, who knows that he would be killed, proceed towards death along
with his kith and kin including the suckling?

Many baseless answers and incorrect explanations have been given to
these questions. Some have said that as the Imam was not prepared to
take oath of allegiance to a person like Yazid and to recognize his
unlawful government, he was obliged to leave Madina in a state of fear
and reached Makkah. He considered Makkah to be a haven and intended to
stay there, but the Kufians invited him and assured him of their
assistance.

The Imam himself, too, was afraid lest he should be assassinated in
Makkah and thereby the sanctity of the Ka'bah should suffer. He,
therefore, accepted the invitation of the Kufians and went towards
Karbala. Consequently he and his dear ones and companions were killed
and the other members of his family were made captives.

Some have narrated that the Imam did not think that he would be killed;
otherwise he would not have taken such a bold step.

Still others say that the Imam rose because he was under the impression
that on account of his relationship with the Holy Prophet he would
certainly not be killed, or he was fully convinced that even if he did
not rise he would be killed disgracefully at the hands of Ibn Ziyad or
someone else. He, therefore, preferred being killed while performing
jihad (the Holy war) to dying a disgraceful death.

Some say that the step taken by the Imam amounted to endangering his
life, but as the Almighty Lord had given orders in this behalf he was
obliged to obey the same.

Some opponents, and those, who consider that everyone wishes to be a
sovereign, also, say that love for rulership placed Imam Husayn in this
perilous situation, but it was not proper to kill him in such a tragic
manner. It would have been better to control and dissuade him by means
of threats and allurements.

The correct answer to all these questions is that the factors for such a
movement had commenced from the very beginning of the rule of Mu'awiya
and were becoming stronger day after day. At last the matters had taken
such a turn that if Imam Husayn bin Ali had not taken this step all the
traces of Islam would have been obliterated and the pains taken by the
Holy Prophet would have been wasted, neither the Qur'an nor Islam would
have survived.

The root cause of all these events was the drama that was staged at
Saqifa Bani Saida immediately after the demise of the Holy Prophet. The
most important development was the unprecedented method that was adopted
for the selection of the Caliph. In violation of the Peace Treaty that
Mu'awiya had concluded with Imam Hasan and according to which the
Muslims were to choose the Caliph after him, he began obtaining the oath
of allegiance for Yazid.

Furthermore, he sent a circular letter to the governors and agents in
the provinces saying: "Note carefully that in all the departments of the
army and the State if it is proved that someone is a Shi'ah (supporter)
of Ali or Ahlul Bayt (the progeny of the Prophet), you should withdraw
his grant, cross out his name and violate his rights".[^1]

Then Mu'awiya sent another circular letter saying: "If any person is
suspected of being a supporter of Ahlul Bayt he should be subjected to
torture and his house should be demolished". This order was implemented
so strictly that as written by Ibn Abil Hadid, the Shi'ah took refuge in
the houses of their relatives and friends. Even then they were afraid of
their slaves and slave-girls lest they should divulge the secret,
because if anyone was not on good terms with another he reported to the
authorities that such and such person was a supporter of Ahlul Bayt. The
people were, therefore, arrested on mere accusation and suspicion and
were tormented and made homeless.

This persecution was more severe in Iraq during the rule of Ziyad bin
Sumayya as compared with other places. In spite of Imam Ali's brilliant
past record and the honor enjoyed by him in Islam it was made necessary
that, in all the Islamic countries and the areas, which formed part of
the territories of Islam, he should be abused and cursed in the sermons
of Friday prayers and also at other times, and Mu'awiya and Yazid should
be honored and praised. Mu'awiya wrote officially to Ziyad bin Sumayya,
the Governor of Iraq, that the evidence given in any matter by a person,
who was known to be a Shi'ah, should not be accepted, and those, who
provided him shelter should also not be treated to be honorable.

Hujr bin Adi, Rashid Hujari and their eleven companions were subjected
to the severest persecution and torture, so much so that Mu'awiya killed
six of them who were at that time the best persons. There were many,
whose hands and feet were amputated and pins reddened in fire were
thrust into their eyes, and some others were buried alive.

The evil propaganda of Mu'awiya and his agents in Syria and other
Islamic territories misled the people. Whosoever uttered a word against
Mu'awiya was treated to be a murderer of Uthman and shedding his blood
was considered lawful. Credulous persons, who are numerous in all ages,
and are easily impressed by evil propaganda, came to believe that
Uthman's blood was shed without any justification, and those, who were
satisfied with this act deserved to be punished.

This was how Mu'awiya and his agents poisoned the public mind. The
Khawarij, too, who were inimical towards both Mu'awiya and Imam Ali kept
quiet with regard to Mu'awiya on account of fear, but abused the
Commander of the Faithful openly and treated him to be an infidel. This
thing in itself rendered great help to Mu'awiya and created a grudge in
the hearts of the people against Imam Ali and his followers, so much so
that when on the day of Ashura Imam Husayn mentioned the reason for his
coming towards Kufa and then asked his opponents as to why they had
gathered to kill him they replied: "It is due to the grudge which we
have against your father".

The only tragedy was not that the newly-converted ignorant Muslims, who
constituted the majority of the society of that time, hated Ali owing to
the evil propaganda of Mu'awiya. A tragedy many times greater than this
was that they did not know Mu'awiya properly and considered him to be a
distinguished companion of the Holy Prophet and scribe of the
revelations! This belief about Mu'awiya was not new.

During the time of the Commander of the Faithful also (i.e. in the 37th
and 38th year A.H.) most of the ignorant sanctimonious persons and
those, who were more harmful to Islam than anything else, considered
Mu'awiya to be honorable, a true Muslim, pious and a mujtahid or at
least hesitated in believing him to be a hypocrite. Hence, they desisted
from fighting against him in the Battle of Siffin and also obliged Imam
Hasan to make peace with Mu'awiya.

In Kitab-e Siffin, Nasr bin Muzahim quotes on his own authority from
Asma bin Hakam Fazari to have said: "In the Battle of Siffin we belonged
to the battalion of Ammar Yasir and were serving under his command. One
day while it was noon we had taken shelter from the heat of the sun
under a sheet of a red cloth, which we had fixed on our spears. Suddenly
we saw a man, making his way through the ranks of the army, coming
towards us. Approaching us he enquired about Ammar. Ammar introduced
himself.

The man said "O Aba Yaqzan![^2] I wish to enquire about something.
Should I mention it openly or in private?" Ammar said: "As you like".
The man said: "It will be better to enquire about it openly". Then he
said: "I left my house with perfect perspicacity and faith in my
rightfulness and had no doubt about the fact that these people i.e.
Mu'awiya and his followers were misled. I held this belief till I
reached here and saw that our mu'azzin says: 'I testify that there is no
deity but Allah and that Prophet Muhammad is His Prophet' and their
mu'azzin also utters the same words. We believe in offering prayers and
they also offer prayers like us. Similarly we make supplications and
they also make supplications like us. Our Book is the Qur'an and their
Book, too, is the Qur'an. Their Prophet and our Prophet is the same.

Having seen this I fell into suspicion and Allah knows how uneasy I
became. I approached Imam Ali, the Commander of the Faithful in the
morning and placed the matter before him. He asked me: "Have you met
Ammar Yasir?" I replied in the negative. Thereupon he said: "You must
see him and accept whatever he says". Now I have come to you to find out
what you have to say.

Ammar Yasir said: "Do you know who is holding that black standard, which
is before us? He is Amr bin As. I, who am Ammar Yasir, have fought
against that very standard thrice in the company of the Holy Prophet of
Allah at Badr, Uhud and Hunayn. It is now for the fourth time that I am
fighting against it and as compared with the previous three occasions it
has not become better but has become worse". Then he said: "Have you or
your father witnessed those battles?" The man replied: "No". Thereupon
Ammar said: "You must know that the centers of our standard are the very
centers of the standard of the Holy Prophet at the time of Badr, Uhud
and Hunayn, and their standard, too, is at the place of the standard of
the polytheists.[^3]iii

Nasr also says that while Imam Ali was on his way to Siffin some
companions of Abdullah bin Mas'ud including Ubayda Salmani and others
met him and said: "We are prepared to accompany you to Siffin, but we
shall not join your army until we are satisfied as to which group is on
the right, and which is on the wrong, so that we may fight against the
wrong". Likewise he mentions some others, who were not willing to
cooperate with Imam Ali, and said: "We have become suspicious about this
fighting".

All these things go to prove that most of the Muslims had not yet
realized the hypocrisy of Mu'awiya and considered him to be one of the
distinguished companions of the Holy Prophet. They were not, therefore,
prepared to fight against him in support of Imam Ali or Imam Hasan. Now
that a period of twenty years and even more had passed since the event
of Siffin, and Mu'awiya had propagated as much as he could in his own
favor and against Bani Hashim and especially Imam Ali, and most of the
companions, who had heard about the merits of Imam Ali from the Holy
Prophet had departed from the world, and the belief that Mu'awiya was
one of the companions of the Holy Prophet, a scribe of the revelations
and the maternal uncle of the Muslims, definitely became more firm and
gained currency.

Thus if the matters had made their way in the same manner a day would
have come when Muslims would not have recognized real Islam except that
introduced by Mu'awiya and all the troubles taken by the Holy Prophet
during the period of twenty three years would have ended to the benefit
of the descendants of Abu Sufyan, the sworn enemy of Islam.

Abu Sufyan and Mu'awiya, who fought against the Holy Prophet for twenty
years and did all they could to exterminate Islam by all possible means,
and professed Islam at the time of the conquest of Makkah, which took
place in the seventh year of migration, were recognized by the people as
the foremost persons of Islam and Imam Ali, who, according to the
narrations of both the sects, was the first to embrace Islam, was now (
God forbid! ) treated by the people to be accursed, and cursing him was
considered to be one of the greatest articles of Islamic worship. There
were persons, who considered it obligatory for themselves to make amends
for the lapse of this 'worship' if they forgot on any day to perform it.

Although the Holy Prophet used to say: 'When heresies appear, and those,
who have embraced Islam later, curse the early Muslims i.e. those, who
expressed faith in the Prophet at the very outset, and one knows and
does not manifest. One’s knowledge is like one who conceals the Divine
faith. A person who can distinguish between the Sunnah (The path of the
Holy Prophet of Islam) and heresy should rise and save the people from
deviation otherwise he will become subjected to Divine wrath.[^4]

According to this very authentic Hadith (tradition) Imam Husayn
considered himself to be responsible, and did not deem it permissible
for him to be negligent. He considered himself commissioned by Allah to
defend Islam and the Muslim ummah from the danger of annihilation.
During the ten years of his actual Imamate, therefore, he was not
sitting at ease, and, as far as possible, did not remain silent. Letters
were exchanged between him and Mu'awiya and he used to criticize
Mu'awiya severely.

The subject matter of the letters, which he wrote to Mu'awiya, was
publicized in Madina or in Makkah at the time of Hajj and almost
prepared the ground for his rising, so much so that once when some
wealth was being taken from Yemen to Syria via Madina for Mu'awiya, Imam
Husayn confiscated it and distributed it amongst Bani Hashim. Later he
sent its receipt to Mu'awiya along with a letter of reproof [^5]. These
things themselves indicate that the Imam was thinking of revolution, for
otherwise such an act would not have behooved the Imam.

All this was done by him to discharge his responsibility, and to prepare
ground for his rising when it was necessary. He, therefore, performed
this duty by means of letters, addresses and preaching. So much so that
in reply to a letter of Mu'awiya, expressive of complaint, he wrote: "O
Mu'awiya! I consider it a fault to give up campaign against you and deem
myself responsible before Allah if I remain quiet and do not rise
against you".

Until the time for formal movement and rising arrived, he acted
according to the duty entrusted to him by Allah and the Holy Prophet in
the form of ordering to do good and restraining from evil.

As regards his being commissioned by Allah it may be said that this
claim is supported by a hadith (tradition), which has been quoted by
Ya'qub Kulayni on a very reliable authority from Zurayr Kanasi, who
says: "Hamran bin A'yun Shaybani said to Imam Baqir: "Have you observed
what events took place during the period of Imam Ali and Husayn? They
performed jihad but were defeated and were eventually killed at the
hands of the tyrants".

The Imam replied: "Whatever happened had, of course, been ordained for
them by Allah. He Himself ordered it, made it inevitable and then put it
into force. The jihad performed by Imam Ali, Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn
(Peace be upon them) was according to the previous knowledge and
instructions, which they had received from the Holy Prophet, and every
Imam who remained quiet also did so according to the same previous
knowledge and instructions".

This tradition goes to show that the Holy Prophet had prescribed the
duties of every Imam in advance, in accordance with the Divine Command,
and each one of them carried out the Divine assignment during his own
time.

It is possible that someone may doubt the correctness of such traditions
or may be hesitant about their true meaning. Even then he cannot
entertain any doubt about the rational fact that the leader of the
Muslims must be loyal to Islam. It is also obvious that if the Islamic
Government falls in the hands of the enemies of Islam and they gain
strength, they will uproot it. And Yazid, whose father Mu'awiya obtained
oath of allegiance for him from all, during the period of his power and
domination, was the very person, who made it a point to violate the
Islamic commands. His corruption, deviation and blasphemies as contained
in the verses composed by him before he attained to the caliphate are
well-known and have been quoted by both the Sunni and the Shi'ah
scholars.

Yaqubi and other historians have recorded that when Mu'awiya sent Yazid
at the head of an army to conquer the Roman territories, the Muslim army
camped at Ghazqazuna, where there was a convent named Murran. In this
convent Yazid had an illegal sexual alliance with a woman named Umme
Kulsum. In the meantime fever and small-pox broke out in the Muslim army
with such severity that the soldiers began dying and falling like autumn
leaves. They insisted upon Yazid leaving the place as early as possible,
but he did not pay any heed to their suggestion and composed the verses
as translated below: "What do I care if the entire army of Islam dies of
fever and small-pox. I am resting on a soft pillow and am embracing Umme
Kulsum".

There are also some verses composed by him, wherein he has praised wine,
and which show his mentality. In these verses he says inter-alia: "If
wine is unlawful in the religion of Ahmad (Islam), you should take it in
accordance with the religion of Jesus son of Mary".

Yazid led an extremely voluptuous life and cared for nothing except
revelry and merry-making. He spent most of his time in the convents of
the Christians which constituted the fifth column at that time, and
indulged in debauchery and amusements, so much so that even his father
Mu'awiya wrote letters to him and admonished him.

Qalqashandi has quoted [^6] that when it was reported to Mu'awiya time
and again that Yazid was leading a voluptuous life, he wrote a letter to
him saying: "I am greatly concerned regarding the reports which I have
received about you. They have pained me and destroyed the hope of my
affinity to you". He added: "O Yazid! You have thrown yourself into
destruction and entrusted your soul to indecency and reproach, and have
chosen for yourself, destruction, disgrace and unlawful conduct instead
of sublime deeds, virtues and noble acts. O Yazid! I wish that you had
died at the very moment you were born. You made me happy and hopeful in
your early youth. Having grown up, however, you have pained me and made
me weep. Alas! Alas!"

These are the specimens of the personality of Yazid! Now Mu'awiya
introduced to the Muslims as the successor of the Holy Prophet of Islam
such an element, in whose person all the impurities were centered, and
who was an embodiment of corruption and wickedness (as became very clear
later) and completely ignorant of Islamic tenets. He made him dominate
those on account of whose swords the father and grandfather of Yazid had
adopted Islam, although not more than forty years had passed since the
demise of the Holy Prophet, and his companions and even some of his
wives were still alive.

It is, of course, evident that when rulership goes to a person, who does
not believe in Allah and the Holy Prophet, does not offer prayers,
drinks wine as if it were water, and insults all that is sacred
according to religion, one should say goodbye to Islam and the Qur'an.
In the circumstances was it possible that a godly person like Imam
Husayn, the grandson of the Holy Prophet should be prepared to witness
these crimes and see the religion of Allah a plaything in the hands of
degraded persons, and endorse all this silently, or take the oath of
allegiance to such a ruler? Certainly not!

Furthermore, it was not only Imam Husayn who refused to take the oath of
Yazid. No Muslim who was acquainted with the Qur'an and recognized Allah
could agree to bear this insult, just as a number of the inhabitants of
Kufa and Basra, and all those belonging to Madina, opposed Yazid from
the very first day.

Imam Husayn knew well that the descendants of Abu Sufyan were basically
hostile to Islam. They had tried their best to exterminate Islam and
were not at all prepared to tolerate that the name of the Holy Prophet
should continue to exist. Therefore, the Caliphate remained with the
descendants of Abu Sufyan so that no trace of Islam could remain.

Mas'udi, the renowned historian has quoted the following event: Mutarraf
bin Mughira said, "My father and I were the guests of Mu'awiya in Syria.
My father visited the court of Mu'awiya very often and praised him. One
night when my father returned after meeting Mu'awiya, he was very sad
and disturbed. I enquired from him the reason. He replied: 'This man
i.e. Mu'awiya is a vicious person, rather the most abominable person of
the age'. I said: 'But what has happened?'

He replied, 'I suggested to Mu'awiya: 'Now that you have achieved your
object, and attained to the Islamic Caliphate, it will be better that
you should behave justly towards the people, and should not misbehave
towards Bani Hashim so much, because, after all, they are your relatives
and nothing is now left with them on account of which you may fear that
they will rise against you'.

Mu'awiya said: 'Alas! Alas! Abu Bakr became Caliph and administered
justice, and nothing more than this happened that he died and his name,
too, was eliminated. Umar and Uthman also died and although they behaved
well towards the people, nothing except their names survived and they
perished. As regards the Hashimi brother (i.e. the Holy Prophet),
however, his name is pronounced in the world of Islam loudly five times
a day and it is said: 'I testify that Muhammad is the Prophet of Allah'.
What remains to be done when the names of the three Caliphs die and the
name of Muhammad remains alive except that his name too should be buried
and eliminated". [^7]vii

Mas'udi has cited this event from the book Muwaffaqiyyat by Zubayr bin
Bakar which is one of the reliable documents. He says, "In the
circumstances, could Husayn bin Ali sit and remain patient, and quietly
observe those people fighting against Islam and the Qur'an, and
endeavoring to eliminate them? Certainly not"!

During those days the Islamic Caliphate had assumed the shape of the
kingdoms of Kisra and Caesar. Mu'awiya, according to his corrupt
thinking, decided to leave it as inheritance in his own family and there
were two great impediments that hindered the achievement of this object.
One of these impediments was the incapability of Yazid, who was known to
the nobles of that time and the dignitaries of the Islamic territories,
as a frivolous, incapable, shameless and wicked person, and the chiefs
of the Islamic country had no regard for him. The other impediment was
Imam Hasan with whom Mu'awiya had agreed in a peace treaty that after
him, he (i.e. Mu'awiya) would not introduce anyone as the prospective
Caliph.

As regards the first impediment, Mu'awiya found the remedy for it by
suppressing the religious sentiments of the people with gifts, grants
and big awards, and, if the object could not be achieved by these means,
he would silence them with threats, cancellation of grants and dismissal
from employment. He accomplished this task as quickly as possible.

In order to remove the second impediment he took steps to kill Imam
Hasan and eventually poisoned him with a strange deceit through Ju'dah
daughter of Ash'ath bin Qays. He then thought that the way was now clear
and did not believe that any other impediment could exist after the
death of Imam Hasan.

Later he realized that in the presence of a person like Imam Husayn in
Madina, which was more important than all other Islamic territories. Its
inhabitants would not at all take the oath of allegiance to Yazid. He
was, therefore, obliged to resort to another deceit. The historians have
written thus in this behalf: After the death of Imam Hasan, Mu'awiya
resolved to obtain allegiance from the people for Yazid, whom he wanted
to appoint as his successor.

He, therefore, wrote letters to all the governors of Islamic provinces
including Sa'id bin As Umavi, the Governor of Madina, whom he wrote:
"Obtain oath of allegiance for Yazid from all the Muhajirs and Ansar and
their descendants. Show harshness and severity in the matter, and do not
be lax and negligent. However, do not exert pressure on a few persons,
but leave them alone, like Abdur Rahman bin Abi Bakr and Husayn bin
Ali."

When Sa'id bin As received Mu'awiya's letter he invited the people of
Madina to take oath of allegiance to Yazid. However, all of them
declined to do so and said that they would take the oath when the above
persons also had done it otherwise they would not. Sa'id wrote a letter
to Mu'awiya telling him that all the people of Madina followed those few
persons, and so long as they did not take the oath of allegiance, it
would not be possible to obtain it from others even through harshness.
Mu'awiya wrote in reply: "It does not matter. Do not disturb anyone till
I have thought over the matter".

In the same year he decided to perform Hajj and came to Madina and
brought a large number of Syrians along with him. Then he met those few
persons in Madina and expressed his displeasure. When they observed that
they had been insulted, they left Madina for Makkah to perform Umra
individually. However, Mu'awiya stayed in Madina till the Hajj season.
During that period he bestowed abundant presents on the people of Madina
in order to soften their hearts and win them over.

Later he proceeded to Makkah. When the people came to see him on his
arrival, he met Abdullah bin Umar, Abdullah bin Zubayr, Abdur Rahman and
Imam Husayn. He showed them great respect, spoke affably to them, and
ordered that an animal of riding might be brought for each one of them.
He addressed each of them according to their status. He called Imam
Husayn, the chief of the Muslim youth, Abdullah bin Zubayr, the cousin
of the Holy Prophet, Abdur Rahman, the chief and master of Quraysh and
so on.

After performing Hajj he summoned them. Imam Husayn was asked by others
to have a talk with Mu'awiya but he declined. They made the same
suggestion to Abdullah bin Zubayr and he accepted it. They met Mu'awiya,
who showed them due respect and said: "You have seen yourselves how kind
I am to you. You are my kith and kin and I have great affection for you.
As regards Yazid he is your brother and cousin. What I desire is that he
should hold the title of Caliph whereas all the affairs of the State
should be in your hands and you should exercise authority in all
matters".

All of them kept silent. Mu'awiya asked them to give a reply but they
said nothing. Mu'awiya repeated his words for the third time and turning
to Ibn Zubayr he asked him to speak. Abdullah bin Zubayr said: "O
Mu'awiya! You can do one of these three things, either, as it is said
that the Holy Prophet departed from the world without nominating any
successor, you should act in the same way and leave the selection of the
caliph to the people, or you should nominate a person who is not related
to you and is fit to hold that office, as was done by Abu Bakr, or you
should leave the matter to a consultative council, as was done by Umar".
Mu'awiya asked: "Is there no way other than these three courses?"
Abdullah replied in the negative.

Mu'awiya then turned to the others and said: "What is your view?" They
replied: "Our view is the same as put forward by Abdullah bin Zubayr".
Mu'awiya said: "All right. I shall be talking about it tomorrow and none
shall have the right to object to what I say. If I speak the truth it
shall be beneficial for myself, and if I tell a lie I myself shall
suffer for it, but if anyone opposes me he shall lose his life".

On the following day a general meeting was called by Mu'awiya. It was
attended by all those persons, who had come from different parts of the
Islamic territories to perform Haj. Those few persons were also summoned
and two armed men were stationed beside each one of them. Mu'awiya
mounted the pulpit and the Syrians gathered round him.

He delivered a speech in which he said: "I have seen that people say
many baseless things. They say that Husayn bin Ali, Abd ur Rahman bin
Abi Bakr, Abdullah bin Zubayr and Abdullah bin Umar have not taken the
oath of allegiance to Yazid. They are the best and the most
distinguished persons among the Muslims. No task can be firm and
permanent without them and nothing can be done without consulting them.
I myself talked with them about the matter and found them submissive.
All of them took the oath of allegiance to Yazid without raising any
objection".

At this stage, as had already been settled, the Syrians shouted: "These
few persons don't matter much. If they don't agree, you should permit us
to chop off their heads".

Mu'awiya said; "How strange it is that people have become so hostile to
Quraysh, and they don't want anything except shedding their blood. Keep
quiet and don't repeat these words". Having said this he came down from
the pulpit and his agents began taking the oath of allegiance from the
people, whereas he himself mounted his animal and left Makkah.

After Mu'awiya's departure the people rushed towards Imam Husayn and
others, and began criticizing them. They asked them: "How is it that you
agreed to take the allegiance when you had been saying that you wouldn't
do so?" Although they said that they had not taken the oath of
allegiance and Mu'awiya had told a lie, and had deceived them, the
people did not accept their words. They said: "You are lying. If it was
as you say, why did you not repudiate his allegation in the meeting?"
When they replied that if they had done so they would have been killed,
but their saying all this was of no use.[^8]

Ya'qubi has quoted the words of Abdullah bin Umar and Abdullah bin
Zubayr which they uttered when Sa'id bin As Umavi, the Governor of
Madina, suggested to them to take the allegiance. He says: "When Sa'id
bin As asked them to take the oath of allegiance to Yazid they declined
and said: "What excuse shall we have before Allah if we take the oath of
allegiance to one who plays with monkeys and dogs and drinks wine and is
a confirmed licentious man. Can we cooperate with him and approve his
actions?"

Ibn Jauzi says: “A group of persons went from Madina to Syria to observe
the ways and conduct of Yazid. On their return they said: "We have come
after seeing a man who doesn't at all have any religion. He drinks wine,
plays on musical instruments and also plays with dogs. Abdullah bin
Hanzala, Ghasilul Malhika used to say: "Yazid is a man, who doesn't
spare even his mother, daughter and sister. He drinks wine and doesn't
offer prayers".

Mas'udi says in Murujuz Zahab: "Yazid was notorious as a habitual
drunkard. In the circumstances it was the duty of all Muslims not to
agree to take the oath of allegiance to him, because such an oath meant
approval of all his actions and an acknowledgement to assist him in
whatever he did, and Islam does not permit the Muslims to remain quiet
and observe patience, if Islam is being destroyed, the Qur'an is being
trampled upon and the Divine religion becomes a plaything in the hands
of idiots and bullies. Silence at such a stage is like the silence of
the mean sufi, quoted by Syed Murtaza Dai Razi in Tabsaratul Awam.
[^9]ix

Imam Husayn considered silence in such circumstances to be unlawful and
one of the points of the tradition of his grandfather, the Holy Prophet,
which he quoted before the army of Hurr while he was on his way to Kufa
is this: ''. If a person observes such affairs and does not oppose them
and keeps quiet, Allah will be entitled to include him with the
oppressor and tyrant and subject them both to similar torture". [^10]x

During the last years of the life of Mu'awiya, therefore, Imam Husayn
invited all those persons, who had seen the Holy Prophet and had the
honor of being his companions, as well as their descendants, scattered
in all Islamic regions, and wrote letters to all of them. About 1000
companions and Tabi'in gathered together in Mina and he addressed them
in these words: "You can see how this bully treats us and our
supporters. You should narrate to your fellow countrymen in your cities
whatever is said in this meeting". Then he narrated one by one the
virtues and merits of his father, Imam Ali, and exhorted them to enjoin
others to do good and to restrain them from evil.

As is evident from the wording and sentences of the sermon[^11]
delivered before this gathering, it was there that the Imam commenced
his mission of revolution.

We reproduce here, by way of specimen, a few sentences from that sermon
so that the matter may become clear. After reciting the Qur'anic verses
about the necessity of enjoining to do good and restraining from evil,
he said: "O brave persons! You are well-known for your wisdom, virtue
and benevolence and have created respect for you in the hearts of others
through Allah. The noble persons honor you and the weak ones accord you
respect. And those, who are your equals and are under no obligation to
you, consider you to be superior to them".

Thereafter he said: "I am afraid lest you should get involved in
difficulties, because you have attained a position of respectability
which is not held by others, and you enjoy superiority over the people.
Good persons aren't being respected and you are honorable among the
people for the sake of Allah. You see with your own eyes that the
covenants of Allah are being violated and His laws are being opposed,
and you are not alarmed, although you are worried and alarmed when the
covenants made with your ancestors are broken.

The covenants made with the Holy Prophet have been broken and have
become worthless, and are being held in contempt and you do not attach
any importance to this fact. The blind, the dumb and the cripples in all
the regions are without guardians and are not pitied. You don't
discharge your responsibilities, and do not work according to your
ability. You do not also pay attention to one, who performs his duty in
this behalf, and do not show humility. You keep yourselves relieved by
indulgence and collusion with the oppressors.

"All this is due to the fact that while Allah has ordered prevention of
unlawful acts, and restraining the people from committing them but you
have neglected this duty, because you have been slack in protecting the
honor and respect of your scholars and have not been able to preserve
their status and have made others prevail over that rank. I wish you had
realized this or had made an effort in that behalf."

He added: "The reins of administration should be in the hands of those
who are well-versed with the Commands of Allah i.e. lawful and unlawful
things. It was you, who occupied this position, but you were deprived of
it owing to your separation from truth and your differences about the
Sunnah of the Holy Prophet in spite of clear proofs, if you had been
patient and steadfast and had shown forbearance in the path of Allah,
you would have assumed the reins of administration once again. However,
you vacated your seat for the oppressors and handed over the Divine
government to them, so that they might act in a dubious manner and
pursue their carnal desires.

"It was your disregard for death and taking delight in this transient
life which made the weak their subjects so that they might enslave and
subdue some of them and deprive others of even a morsel of food. They
ransack the Islamic territories for their personal benefit, and their
cardinal desires bring disgrace to them. They follow the wicked person
and have no fear of the Almighty Allah. In every city they make a
preacher of their own mount, the pulpit and all the Islamic territories
are under their control. They do whatever they like and the people are
their slaves. They cannot defend themselves against any maltreatment
meted out to them. Tyrants and obstinate persons oppress the weak.

"There are some rulers who do not believe in Allah and in the Day of
Judgment. How astonishing this situation is! And why should I not be
astonished when the land is possessed by either a deceitful person and a
tyrant, or a wicked tax-collector, or a ruler, who is so cruel to the
believers? Now it is Allah who can decide matters between us[^12]"

It is learnt from what has been stated that the Imam was thinking of
bringing about a revolution before the question of taking oath of
allegiance to Yazid arose, and he was waiting for an appropriate
opportunity. Hence his movement should be treated to have commenced from
the invitation which he extended to the companions and the Tabi'in in
Mina.

Keeping in view the conditions of the Muslims in those days it was not
an easy task to awaken the people and invite them to truth and this task
could not be accomplished by means of correspondence and addresses and
by sending messages. The Imam therefore, decided to bring about a
revolution by means of which the inhabitants of all the Islamic regions
might realize that if Yazid came into power Islam would be uprooted and
no trace of it would be found anywhere.

The persons whose ancestors had considered Mu'awiya more than twenty
years earlier to be a distinguished companion of the Holy Prophet, or at
least doubted his falsehood and hypocrisy, could not be awakened with
messages and addresses and could not be made to understand what a true
Islamic Government should be. Moreover, Mu'awiya's agents were busy
propagating in every town and region and making the people deviate from
the right path.

Persons like Hujr bin Adi and Rashid Hujari and his friends and Amr bin
Humuq Khuzai were being killed and none could pick up courage to
protest, rather they were usually considered to be guilty. It was,
therefore, necessary to start a sudden movement and bring about a
revolution in the Islamic territories. It should thus influence all the
regions, and its effects should continue for a very long period and
should not cease till the matters were reformed, and the intentions of
Bani Umayya in general and of the descendants of Abu Sufyan (who always
wished that the people should cease to utter the name of the Holy
Prophet and should no longer understand Islam were known to the people.
The people should consequently recognize them (Bani Umayyah) and join
their opponents, and the campaign should start. In this their rulership
should come to an end. Hence the Imam started his movement with the
purpose of enjoining to do good and restraining from evil.

In the testament which Imam Husayn wrote and handed over to Muhammad bin
Hanafiya, while leaving Madina, he said after expressing his belief in
Allah, in the Prophethood of his grandfather Muhammad bin Abdullah, in
the Day of Judgment, and in Paradise and Hell:

"I have not come out with the intention of violence and rebellion or in
obedience to my passions, and it is not my object to create mischief on
the earth or to oppress anyone. My only object is to reform the affairs
of the Muslim nation and to act according to the conduct of my father
and grandfather".

When he decided to depart from Madina he went to his grandfather's grave
many times at night and said: "O Allah! I love good deeds and hate bad
deeds".

Imam Husayn commenced jihad knowing fully well that he would be martyred
and his men and women would be made captives, but Islam and its commands
would survive and the opposing powers would be annihilated; Yazid, whom
his father had nominated his successor during his own lifetime, contrary
to the practice followed by the previous Caliphs, and made him dominate
the Muslims, would not be able to repeat this act; Mu'awiya bin Yazid
would not be at the helm of the State; Mu'awiya's scheme would come to
nought; all the people would wake up from slumber with the assistance of
the organization itself and distinguish between: real and artificial
Islam. Consequently Bani Umayya would be disgraced and their dead bodies
would always serve as an eye opener denouncing cruelty and oppression.

It is possible that an objection may be raised at this stage as Allah
says:

***Do not subject your lives to destruction with your own hands (Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:195)***

and discharging the responsibility of enjoining to do good and
restraining from evil is itself subject to certain conditions. It may be
said in reply that Imam knows better than all others the conditions
pertaining to enjoining to do good and restraining from evil and his
action is in itself the best authority.

It is, of course, true that it is not permissible to subject oneself to
destruction, but the jihad performed by Imam Husayn did not amount to
this. If a person considers being killed for the sake of Allah to be
subjecting oneself to destruction, he must also place most of the
battles fought by the Holy Prophet under the same category. He must also
consider whether confronting of twenty Muslim warriors with two hundred
enemies in the early battles of Islam, when the Muslims were not
numerically strong enough, amounted to subjecting themselves to
destruction! But the Muslims unanimously agree that this viewpoint is
not correct.

Furthermore, the Qur'anic verse does not mean that the Muslims should
not perform jihad, because in the event of their being killed they have
subjected themselves to destruction with their own hands. In fact this
verse was revealed when the Muslims had been ordered that in the event
of war every one of them should provide equipment, arms, foodstuffs and
animals of riding according to his capacity. Apparently some persons
were making excuses in the matter and were not prepared to make
necessary contributions.

It was then that this verse was revealed saying:

***Spend your wealth for the cause of Allah and do not subject
yourselves to destruction with your own hands (on account of negligence
or stinginess). (Surah al-Baqarah, 2: 195)***

This meaning is confirmed by the narration of Huzayfa bin Yaman, a
distinguished companion of the Holy Prophet, who has been reported to
have said that this verse was revealed in connection with expenditure.
This narration has been quoted by Ibn Ali Hatim and Bukhari from Huzayfa
and A'mash, and by Suyuti from Ibn Abbas, Mujahid, Ikrima, Sa'id bin
Jabir, Ata, Zahhak, Hasan Basri, Qatada, Saddi and Maqatil bin Hayyan.
All of them were companions or *Tabi'in*.

In another narration, Aslam bin Yazid Abu Imran says: "During the siege
of Constantinople one of our soldiers attacked the enemy and split their
rows. Some of our men said: "This man has subjected himself to
destruction". Abu Ayyub Ansari was with us. He said: "We know the
meaning of this verse better and you only guess. This verse was revealed
about us, the Ansar, who had the honor of receiving the Prophet and
becoming his companions.

When Islam flourished, we became negligent in assisting the Holy Prophet
and said to ourselves: "Now that Islam has gained popularity and become
powerful, we should take care of our families. We, therefore, paid no
attention towards helping the Holy Prophet.

Thereupon this verse was revealed: Spend your wealth for the cause of
Allah and do not subject yourselves to destruction with your own hands.
Destruction was involved in spending on one's wife and children and in
abandoning jihad. Hence, one subjects oneself to destruction by
abandoning jihad and not by performing it.

This narration has been quoted by Abu Daud Sijistani, Tirmizy, Nisai,
Abd bin Hamid, Ibn Abi Hatim, Ibn Jurayr Tabari, Ibn Marduya, Abu Yala
and Ibn Habban in Sahih and Hakim Nishapuri in 'Mustadrak'. All of them
have quoted it from the tradition of Yazid bin Abi Habib through Aslam.
Tirmizy declares that this tradition is authentic.

In another narration Abi Ishaq Sabi'i has been quoted as saying: A man
said to Bara bin Azib. "If, during a battle, I attack the enemy alone
and am killed, will it amount to my subjecting myself to destruction
with my own hands?" Bara replied: "No, because Allah says to His
Prophet:

***So fight in the way of Allah. You are not responsible except for
yourself." (Surah al-Nisa, 4:84)***

Then Bara added: "This verse relates to spending money at the time of
war. This narration has been quoted by Ibn Marduwayh and by Hakim in
Mustadrak. Hakim says that this tradition fulfils the conditions laid
down by the two shaykhs {Bukhari and Muslim).

A similar remark of Huzayfa bin al-Yaman has also been quoted in
Tafsir-e 'Ayyashi and reproduced in Tafsir-e Burhan. In Luhuf Sayyid bin
Tawus has also given the same meaning to this verse on the authority of
these very narrations.

Furthermore, the verse relating to destruction occurs in the context of
defensive jihad and a reference to the context makes the position clear.

The basic thing is that, in the terminology of Islam, being killed for
the cause of Allah is not taken to mean destruction. The Holy Qur'an
says about the martyrs of Islam thus:

***Think not of those who are slain in the way of Allah, as dead. They
are alive with their Lord and receive sustenance from Him. (Surah Ale
Imran, 3:169)***

In one of his sermons[^13] Imam Ali said to his companions at the time
of the Battle of Siffin: "Your death and destruction lies in your being
subdued and your life consists of death when you are predominant. The
life which makes one submit to every worthless person is worse than
dying and being destroyed a thousand times".

However, at this stage, Imam Husayn was not prepared to be martyred like
his father and brother, because such martyrdom could not produce the
desired results. It was possible that none might have paid any heed to
such martyrdom and the Imam's blood might have been shed in vain.

Those who think that the Imam was not aware of the consequences of the
step taken by him are gravely mistaken, because apart from the
traditions saying that the Imam, who does not know what he is going to
face is not the vicegerent of Allah, and the Imams were also aware when
they would die, and they had an option in the matter.

The question of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn was basically well-known in
the family of Bani Hashim and especially in the household of Imam Ali.
Umme Salama, Umme Ayman and others had all heard from the Holy Prophet
(S) that Husayn would be martyred in Karbala.

Besides this in the sermon, which he delivered in the sanctuary of the
Holy Ka'bah before his departure, the Imam said: "Man is destined to
die". It is quite clear that the Imam knew that he would be martyred, or
else he would not have I said: "I can see as if the desert wolves are
piercing my body between Nawawis and Karbala". Similarly it becomes
clear from what he said on other occasion that he was fully aware of the
consequences and to deny this is nothing except baseless contention.

Muhammad bin Hasan bin Farrukh Saffar says in the beginning of Basairud
Darajat and similarly Kulayni says in Kafi, that a man belonging to
Kufah met the Imam in Thalabiya (and apparently dissuaded him from going
to Kufah and warned him that he would be killed). Imam Husayn replied to
him: "If I had met you in Madina I would have shown you in my house the
signs of Jibril bringing revelations to my grandfather. O brother Kufi!
How can it be that the source of knowledge of the people should be with
us, and they may know whereas we may be ignorant".

Furthermore, at the time of his departure from Madina he said: "Whoever
accompanies me will be martyred and whoever lags behind will not share
the victory".

If anyone says that Sayyid Murtaza has been quoted as having said that
Imam Husayn did not know that he would be killed, we say in reply that
Imam Baqir and Imam Sadiq have been quoted as saying that he was aware
that he would be killed. And if an objection is raised that when he knew
that he would be killed why did he take his women and children along
with him, which resulted in their being made captives, our reply is the
same as given earlier.

It was not his intention merely to be killed along with his companions.
What he aimed at was to draw the attention of the people to the
malpractices of Bani Umayya and to the fact that their rule was not an
Islamic rule, and their aim was to efface and destroy Islam and
especially the name of the Holy Prophet Muhammad.

Hence, he acted according to a correct plan and proved to the world that
they were not prepared to let any member of the family of Bani Hashim
live, and would make even a suckling the target of their arrows. He also
proved that they treated the members of the Holy Prophet's family more
harshly than they treated the polytheist captives of Turkey and Dailam,
and they had no intention except that of effacing Islam and the
traditions of the Holy Prophet and ruling unjustly over the people. We
have said earlier that the people had not recognized Bani Umayya
correctly.

They were mostly mistaken and they honored them. Mu'awiya, who had been
an infidel and a polytheist during the larger part of his life and was
obliged to embrace Islam at the time of the conquest of Makkah, was
considered by them to be a peer of Ammar Yasir and Zush-Shahadatain and
Ibn Tayyahan and even Imam Ali ibn Abi Talib.

Rabi bin Khuthaym who was one of the distinguished Tabi'in and was
considered to be a great ascetic, came to Imam Ali at the time of the
Battle of Siffin and said: "O commander of the Faithful! Though we are
aware of your rank and position, we are doubtful as to whether this
battle is justified or not."

There were many other persons also upon whom the people depended for
guidance. Public opinion had been completely perverted and this was
especially the case with the Syrians and those, who had been under
Mu'awiya's influence from the very beginning.

Nasr bin Muzahim says: "Hashim Marqal, along with a group of the
reciters of the Holy Qur'an of Kufa, was busy fighting against the
enemy. In the meantime a Ghassanian came in the field and began reciting
epic verses and abusing Ali and insisted on cursing and vilifying him.
Hashim Marqal said to him: "Young man! There is a time when one has to
account for whatever he says. You should fear Allah to whom you have to
return, because he will question you about your stand and your aim". The
man turned and said: "I am fighting against you, because I have been
told that your chief does not offer prayers and the same is the case
with you people". Hashim then admonished him and removed the
misunderstanding which had been created in his mind and he went back.
[^14]

What we mean to say is that more than twenty years before the rising of
Imam Husayn the people of Syria did not know Imam Ali in spite of all
his virtues quoted from the Holy Prophet and the matters had turned much
worse during Mu'awiya's twenty years rule. During this period he carried
out intensive and extensive propaganda to distort the Islamic realities.
His agents were putting his orders into practice in all Islamic regions
and the foundation of Islam had terribly shaken. Lawful things had
become unlawful and vice versa. And during the rule of Yazid bin
Mu'awiya the Islamic traditions would have been eliminated further and
the position would have been what was assessed by Imam Husayn himself
who said: "If the Muslim ummah becomes subjected to the rulership of a
person like Yazid one should say goodbye to Islam and abandon it".

There are some, who say that the Imam was invited by the Kufians and as
he was afraid lest his blood should be shed in Makkah and the sanctity
of the sanctuary violated, he accepted the invitation of the Kufians and
started his movement from that time, and in case they had not invited
him he might not have possibly taken this step. They mean to say that in
fact there was no movement at all, and the Imam took the decision,
because he was compelled by the circumstances to do so.

In reply we ask: "When he came to know that Muslim bin Aqil had been
martyred and became sure that the Kufians were not faithful and no
assistance could be expected from them, why did he not return from that
very place and did he not hide himself in the desert especially when
Hurr's army had not yet arrived?" And he could return even after
encountering Hurr's army i.e. he could fight against them. Furthermore,
why did he deliver the wonderful fiery sermon which has been quoted by
Tabari etc. and in which he said: "Whoever sees the cruel ruler making
the unlawful things lawful and breaking Allah's pledge...."

If the question was of accepting the invitation of the Kufians why did
he write letters from Makkah to the five chiefs of Basra namely Yazid
bin Mas'ud Nahshali, Malik bin Musma, Ahnaf bin Qays, Munzir bin Jarud
and Mas'ud bin Amr and sought assistance from them?

Certainly Imam Husayn wanted to bring about a revolution, and its voice
should be heard in all Islamic territories and the victorious enemy,
intoxicated with his power, should himself drag the family of the Holy
Prophet to various cities and regions so that the people should see them
from close view and learn that Bani Umayya did not believe in Allah and
in the Holy Prophet and the fact of his being oppressed should become
known universally, so that Bani Umayya might be uprooted. Otherwise, how
could the people who heard Imam Ali being cursed from the pulpits for
more than twenty years, distinguish between truth and falsehood?

How could the Syrians, who had never perhaps heard the names of Hasan
and Husayn being uttered with honor (and did not possibly know about one
out of thousands of the merits of Bani Hashim) be made aware of truth
and awakened from slumber?

This could be done only by Imam Ali ibn Husayn (Imam Sajjad) mounting,
in the center of Yazid's regime, the same pulpit from which propaganda
had been carried on against Imam Ali and telling the Syrians about his
virtues disgracing Yazid and Mu'awiya and causing the Syrians to revolt
against Yazid, so that the tragedy of the martyrdom of his father and
brothers in Karbala should be discussed by the Syrians for a long time
in their assemblies, and the inauspicious effects of Mu'awiya's
propaganda should be totally eliminated so that notwithstanding all his
despotism, he should not be able to distort the facts.

Imam Ali was martyred while he was praying in the arch of the Kufa
Mosque. The Syrians wondered at this event and said: "Did Ali also offer
prayers that he came to the mosque and was killed in the arch?”

It is possible that someone may raise an objection and say: If Imam
Husayn intended to rise, why did he say on the day of Ashura: "Let me
go. I shall proceed to a safe place." We say in reply: It is true that
such a statement of the Holy Imam has been quoted by Tabari in different
words but this does not prove that the Imam said: 'I am prepared to
return and abandon my mission and shall no longer enjoin others to do
good or restrain them from evil'. No, not at all. Of course, the Kufians
had invited him and then went back on their words whereupon he said:
"Now that you are regretful for what you said and wrote, it doesn't
matter, and I am prepared to return". He did not say that he wanted to
abandon his mission.

As regards his seeking assistance from various persons it was because
they were usually those Iraqis, who wielded influence in their regions.
Now whether they responded to his call like Zuhayr bin Qayn, Zahhak etc.
or not, all of them played their part sincerely in supporting the
revolution.

Let us take the case of Zahhak Mashriqi[^15]. He observed all the
happenings of Ashura with his own eyes and later mentioned the same to
everyone in Kufa. Most of the events of Ashura have been quoted from
him. He thus proved to be a true recorder of the events and proclaimer
appointed by the Imam. Or else what benefit can one derive from the
company of such a person for a few hours when he is sure that he is
going to be killed?

Another person was Ubaydullah bin Hurr Juafi, who served under Mu'awiya
in the Battle of Siffin, and was one of those, who claimed to be the
avengers of the murder of Uthman. Although he did not come to the Imam's
help and excused him- self, but when the Ahlul Bayt (the family of the
Holy Prophet) proceeded from Kufa to Syria, Ibn Ziyad summoned the
nobles of the city one by one and made enquiries about them, but could
not see Ubaydullah bin Hurr amongst them.

After a few days Ubaydullah bin Hurr arrived in Kufa and went to see Ibn
Ziyad, who asked him: "Where have you been and why did you not assist
us?" He replied: "I have been sick." Ibn Ziyad said: "Was it your heart
that was sick or your body?" Ubaydullah bin Hurr replied: "My heart was
not at all sick. I was not feeling well for a few days and Allah has
cured me." Ibn Ziyad said: "You are lying. You were with our enemy". He
replied: "If I had been with your enemy this would have been evident and
could not remain hidden from you."

The narrator says: Ibn Ziyad being inattentive, Ubaydullah bin Hurr
suddenly went away from there and mounted his horse. In the meantime Ibn
Ziyad became conscious of this and said: "Where is Ubaydullah? Bring
him". The guards ran out and said to him: "The emir has summoned you and
you must respond". He spurred his horse and said: "Tell him that I swear
by Allah that I shall never come to him voluntarily". He then left and
dismounted at the house of Ahmar bin Ziyad Tai. His friends and
companions gathered round him there, and all of them went to Karbala. He
was very much grieved on seeing the graves of the martyrs and composed
some verses lamenting the death of the Imam. Possibly he was the first
person who visited the grave of the Imam and composed an elegy for him.

Later Hurr rose in company with Mukhtar to avenge the murder of Imam and
opposed the government of the time and continued harassing it till the
end of his life. In his well-known book, Najjashi, the biographer of
muhaddithin (traditionalists) has included him among the pious
predecessors and says that he compiled a book consisting of the sermons
of Imam Ali.

Another person from whom the Imam sought help was Zuhayr bin Qayn. He
was one of the notables of Kufa and wielded great influence over his
tribe named Bujayla. At the time of the Battle of Siffin he was one of
those, who claimed to avenge the murder of Uthman and later on supported
the government of Kufa. Now that he joined the Imam this had a very good
effect on others.

Furthermore, his being killed grieved the tribes of Kufa, and,
consequently, they refrained from cooperating with the government and
were always awaiting an opportunity to take vengeance. And it was not
Zuhayr alone whose martyrdom became the source of indignation and
rancour among the tribe of Bujayla but other tribes also associated with
them against the government. The martyrdom of all those belonging to
Basra and Kufa, who lost their lives along with the Imam, wounded the
hearts of most of the tribes, because all of them were the nobles and
dignitaries of these two cities, and most of the tribes residing there
mourned their death. The government had to pay dearly for their
bloodshed.

From the very early days the Shi'ah of Kufa became active and formed a
secret party. Every night they used to gather in the house of one of
them, mourned the martyrs, and secretly put the people on their oath
that they would oppose the government and avenge the blood of Imam
Husayn. Their number increased gradually and the political conditions of
Iraq became more dangerous day after day. After three years and a few
months when Yazid died they formally made their call public and arrested
Amr bin Hurayth, the Governor of Kufa and expelled him from the city.

They gathered in the Masjid of Kufa and all the chiefs of the tribes
also attended the meeting. Names of a few persons were recommended for
the interim government, one of them was Amr bin Sa'id [^16]according to
Tabari, and Umar bin Sa'd as stated by Haj Farhad Mirza in his book
entitled Qumqam**.** On hearing this, the women of Hamdan tribe poured
out of their houses and began lamenting. Later the women of Nakha Rabia
and Kehlan tribes also joined them. Their men, armed with swords,
guarded them on all sides, and the women gathered round the pulpit,
lamented and cried and said: "Is it not sufficient for Umar bin Sa'd
that he has killed the son of Fatima? Now he wants to govern us and to
become the ruler of Kufa!" They reminded themselves of the tragedy of
Imam Husayn. Till that day formal mourning for the martyrs of Karbala
had not taken place in the central Masjid of Kufa.

Disturbance also took place in Basra as in Kufa. Ibn Ziyad began to be
opposed from all sides and he had to flee Basra to Syria in disguise. In
Makkah Abdullah bin Zubayr took the oath of allegiance from the people
for himself, and in Syria also a strange revolution took place which
culminated, after Yazid's three or four years hideous rule, in the
extinction of the caliphate for which Mu'awiya had been strenuously
trying for four years. Thereafter none of the descendants of Abu Sufyan
attained to the caliphate.

As regards the Imam's permitting his companions to leave and insisting
upon it, it was evident because he did not wish to keep in the dark
anyone, who might have joined him for worldly gains. It was necessary
that his steps as well as those of others, who were going to be martyred
along with him should have been identical. They should not have acted
blindly but with perfect cognition, and no coercion should have been
involved. This in itself is one of the distinctions of Islam that all
its soldiers are vigilant and intelligent and know what they are doing
and this shows the difference between truth and falsehood.

The pretenders who recruit soldiers for themselves are not at all
prepared to lose even one of their devotees easily. However, the godly
persons are not like this. They leave the people free to choose their
path with their own will and only point out to them the right path.

Imam Husayn had not undertaken this journey with the object of acquiring
a kingdom so that he should have kept with him by all possible means
those, who had accompanied him, and should not have allowed them to go
away. On the contrary he said in very clear terms: "I think that a
battle will take place with these people. I release you from the oath of
allegiance taken by you. Now that it is night time and it has enveloped
you in its darkness, you should avail of the opportunity and go away".

However, his companions and Bani Hashim gave a pertinent reply. They
said unanimously: "Praised be Allah, who has honored us with martyrdom
in your company. Even if it be supposed that this world had been eternal
and we had to live in it for ever, we would certainly have preferred to
be killed along j with you to living in this world".

Furthermore, the Imam wanted to put them to test and granted them full
freedom, so that those, who were cooperating with him willingly, might
be distinguished from those, who I were reluctant, and none of them
should regret his action later, and say that he had become involved in
difficulty and had no way out, or show weakness before the spiteful
enemy, so that it might be said that Husayn bin Ali duped the people for
the sake of rulership and worldly gains. He, therefore, said in very
clear words: "You should disperse and go to your homes, because these
people are after me only and if they succeed in subduing me they will
have nothing to do with anyone else". He said this so that they should
select the right or wrong path after careful consideration.

In short Imam Husayn did such a job that his martyred body became the
symbol of Islam till eternity, and his memorial continues to be a
permanent threat to the oppressive regime and will always be combating
against the enemies of Islam..

Bani Umayya and Bani Abbas always restrained the people from visiting
the grave of Imam Husayn. To achieve this end they constructed watch
towers and forts around his grave and posted a large number of soldiers
there for the purpose of observation. The supervision was so strict that
a pilgrim could hardly escape. Usually they had to face torture and
death. As persecution by the caliphs increased insistence by the people
on visiting the grave of the Imam grew more intense and as the
resistance gained strength the administration became more worried and
took serious measures in the matter. Consequently many hands were
amputated, many heads were chopped off, and many limbs were cut into
pieces. However, all these actions were absolutely ineffective.

During the days of Bani Abbas the grave of Imam Husayn was repeatedly
demolished. However, as soon as the people felt that the government was
inattentive they prepared it immediately. Hence, when one studies the
history of the grave of the Imam, it becomes obvious as to when and by
whom it was demolished, and who ordered its demolition, but it is not
usually clear as to who repaired it, and who bore the expenses of its
construction and repairs. This in itself shows the devotion and
sincerity of the people in the matter.

What could be the reason for restraining the people from visiting the
grave of Imam Husayn except that the oppressive regimes of the time
considered the enthusiasm of the pilgrims and their assembling there to
be a threat to their very existence. The pilgrims of Imam Husyan knew
well that he was martyred, because of his upholding justice. He laid
down his life to check oppression and to maintain the principle of
enjoining virtue and restraining the people from vice. He made the
supreme sacrifice, but did not submit to the tyrannical, despotic and
oppressive regime and opposed it valiantly. Hence, none of the rulers
could bear the devotees of Imam Husayn and their being ready to lay down
their lives for the sake of pilgrimage of his grave and mourning for
him.

Although the sentry posts and guards of the regime were constantly
vigilant, the people reached the grave of Imam Husayn, taking advantage
of the darkness of night, and took refuge before sunrise to places like
Ghaziriya and Naynava which are situated near Karbala. This statement is
confirmed by the following incident:

Abul Faraj Isfahani has quoted in Maqatilul Talibiyin Muhammad bin
Husayn Ashnani as saying: "On account of fear I had not visited the
grave of Imam Husayn for a very long time. At last I said to myself:
"Come, whatever may be the consequences, I must go and pay homage to the
sacred grave of the Imam". Accompanied by a perfumer I left for Karbala.
We used to hide ourselves during daytime and traveled at night till we
reached Ghazariya.

We left Ghazariya at mid-night and, passing through the watchmen, who
were asleep, slowly approached the sacred grave of Imam Husayn. However
as the grave had been demolished, its exact location could not be easily
found. We found it after great difficulty. A box that covered the grave
had been thrown aside and was half-burnt. The grave had been watered and
consequently the earth had caved in and assumed the shape of a ditch. We
paid homage to the sacred grave. The place was giving a pleasant smell.
I asked my companion who was himself a perfumer as to what smell it was.
He replied: "I swear by Allah that I have never smelt such a sweet smell
so far." We then departed from the grave and left certain signs at some
places. After Mutawakkil was killed we visited the grave with some of
the descendants of Abu Talib and restored it to its original shape with
mutual assistance."

This incident shows the interest which the people took in the matter.
Imam Husayn was recognized to be the criterion of truth. Whoever opposed
Husayn in any manner, even though the opposition consisted of
restraining from mourning his martyrdom or visiting his grave, was
considered to be false and was opposed.

Of course, it should not be forgotten that the Holy Imams who succeeded
Imam Husayn encouraged the people to perform the pilgrimage to his
grave. It is learnt from the narrations that the Holy Imams considered
the pilgrimage of the grave of the Chief of the martyrs to be a vital
matter for Islam. In the case of the pilgrimage of the grave of Imam
Husayn, however, the Holy Imams have said that as the danger from and
prevention by the enemy increases, the spiritual reward for the
pilgrimage also increases.

Now how can it be that the performance of the ceremony of Haj, in spite
of all its importance, should not be permissible if there is danger for
life, whereas pilgrimage to Karbala should be recommended emphatically
although there was ninety per cent possibility of one's being
killed[^17]. Its only reason can be that in those days the Holy Imams
considered the continuance of the ceremony of Haj and the pilgrimage of
the House of Allah to be dependent upon the pilgrimage of the grave of
Imam Husayn. Otherwise there can be no occasion for such narrations.

There is a well-known tradition of the Holy Prophet in which he has been
reported to have said: "Husayn is from me and I am from Husayn". By this
sentence the Holy Prophet did not mean to say only that Husayn was a
part of his body, because every child is a part of the body of his
father and grandfather and there is nothing particular about it.
Supposing that we take this meaning of the first part of the sentence
what will be meaning of its second part i.e. "I am from Husayn?" The
correct meaning of the tradition, therefore, is that the Holy Prophet
said: "Husayn has acquired his existence through me and is the means of
the survival of my religion".

During most of the risings of the Alavis against Bani Umayya and Bani
Abbas after the martyrdom of Imam Husayn their slogan was vengeance for
the blood of Husayn and they usually took the oath of allegiance from
one another by the side of his sacred grave. Hence the rulers were
afraid of the grave of the Holy Imam as their very rulership was in a
state of instability. Otherwise what reason could there be for their
preventing the people from the pilgrimage to his grave? Bani Umayya
remained at the helm of affairs after his martyrdom for seventy years,
and their agents regularly obstructed the people from reaching there.

It may also be said that they were justified in doing so, because Husayn
had been killed by the Umayyad administration and it was a matter of
shame for them that the people should go to perform pilgrimage to his
grave. But the question arises as to why Bani Abbas, who were not the
culprits themselves, opposed the pilgrimage to his grave so much? In
fact it was Bani Abbas, who were harsher and who cut off the hands and
heads of the people, who wanted to go to perform the pilgrimage of the
sacred grave of Imam Husayn.

However, Bani Umayya did not destroy the grave of the Imam for seventy
years, but Bani Abbas demolished, watered and ploughed it. Why did they
do all this? Evidently it was because they were afraid of even the
martyred body of Imam Husayn, because they knew very well that the dust
of the Martyrs of Ashura always tells the intelligent pilgrims
expressly: O passerby! Tell our supporters that our bodies were cut to
pieces because we opposed the oppressive government. It made us welter
in our blood.

We endeavored to restrain the rulers of the time from their wicked deeds
and they butchered us. Our bodies were torn to pieces and crushed under
the hooves of the horses of the tyrants, because we supported Islam.
However, we did not give up struggle and endeavored to disgrace the
spiteful enemy in the eyes of mankind. With our devotion and
self-sacrifice for the protection of Islam we opened an institution for
the maintenance of Islamic law for the inhabitants of the world.

Now O you, the future comers! Recognize the worth of your religion and
do not sell it for petty gains, because the blood of millions like us
has been shed to support and protect it. Honor the blood of the martyrs,
believe in the worth of your religion, and do not be negligent in the
matter of piety. The meaning of pilgrimage coupled with sincerity is
that the pilgrim should know whose pilgrimage he is undertaking, what
his real message is, what his position is, and why he has attained to
this position?

Ali Akbar Ghifari

[^1]: Sharh-e-Nahjul Balāghah by Ibn Abil Hadid, vol. III, p. 15.

[^2]: The patronymic appellation of Ammār Yāsir.

[^3]: Kitāb Siffin, p. 320, second edition (Egypt).

[^4]: J'ame'us Saghir Suyuti, vol. I, p. 31 narrated by Mu'az bin Jabal.

[^5]: Sharh-e-Nahjul Balāghah, Ibn Abil Hadid, vol. IV, p. 327.

[^6]: Subhul Ā'shi, vol. VI, p. 387.

[^7]: Murujuz Zahab, vol II. p. 266, printed at Bolaq, Egypt and Ibn
Abil Hadid in Sharh-e Nahjul Balāghah has also alluded to it.

[^8]: This incident has been mentioned by Ibn Abdu Rabih Undulusi in
Iqdul Farid, vol. II, p. 248, by Ibn Qutaybah in al-lmāmah Vas Siyāsah,
vol. I, p. 138 and in the foot note of Amāli Qāli, p. 177.

[^9]: Refer to Maqālāt-e Sufiya chapter sixteen. The story has not been
reproduced here on account of its being obscene.

[^10]: The complete text of the tradition will be given later.

[^11]: Tuhaful Uqul.

[^12]: The Imam addressed those persons who were distinguished among the
people. Their responsibility in the Muslim society was greater than that
of others, but they were negligent of their duties, and were, therefore,
reproached. They were evidently the very persons, who were invited by
the Imam and addressed in Mina which is a part of the sanctuary and a
place of peace, because it could not be that the Imam might have mounted
the pulpit formally in Madina and gathered together and addressed the
remaining Muhajir and Ansar, who were then reckoned to be the chiefs in
the Islamic society and the ruler of the time might not have restrained
him from doing so. This is confirmed by the contents of the later part
of the tradition and there are other indications also in the light of
which it cannot be said that the Imam addressed the people on these
lines in Makkah after the death of Mu'awiya.

[^13]: Nahjul Balāghah.

[^14]: Kitāb Siffin, p. 354, second edition (Egypt).

[^15]: A detailed account of this man will be given later.

[^16]: Tabari's account is absolutely incorrect and we are not aware of
any person named Amr bin Sa'id who might have participated in the murder
of Imam Husayn. Exactly the same error has appeared in Ibn Qutaybah's
al-Imamah vas Siyasah wherein he has throughout written Amr bin Sa'id
instead of Umar bin Sa'd.

[^17]: Kamiluz Ziyārāt by Ibn Quluyah, p. 261.


