Chapter 12: Departure of Imam from Madina
=========================================

After his departure from Madina Imam Husayn reached Makkah on 3rd of
Shaban and sent his cousin Muslim bin Aqil to Kufa in the middle of
Ramazan. From that time till the 8th of Zilhaj he continued to stay on
in Makkah. None could imagine that on the 8th of Zil-Haj when the people
were putting on Ehram (pilgrim's garb) to perform Haj the son of the
Holy Prophet of Allah and child of Makkah and Mina would leave Makkah
without performing the ceremonies of Haj and would abandon Ehram after
performing Umra.

However, the Imam decided to depart from Makkah. He went round the
Ka'ba, performed Sa'i between Safa and Marwa and then abandoned Ehram,
because there was the danger of his being arrested or killed within the
precincts of the sanctuary, and in case he was killed in that way his
object could not be achieved. The Imam did not leave Makkah to escape
from being killed. He left Makkah so that if he was killed it should be
in such a way that Islam should always benefit from his martyrdom.

According to Luhuf the Imam addressed a gathering before his departure.
After praising the Almighty Allah he said: "Death has marked the human
beings in the same manner in which a necklace leaves its mark on the
neck of a young woman" (i.e. every human being is destined to die). In
these words he hinted at the fact that during those days the social and
religious corruption could not be remedied except by the martyrdom of a
person like him, who was the son of the daughter of the Holy Prophet of
Allah.

In the discourse delivered before his departure from Makkah he speaks
about martyrdom, death, going before his grandfather, the Holy Prophet
of Allah, and before his parents and falling into the clutches of the
hungry wolves of Karbala. He told the people that his journey would end
in this manner. We know that Imam Husayn delivered this discourse
earlier than the 8th of Zil-Haj and possibly on the seventh of that
month before a gathering of the pilgrims of the House of Allah.

At that time the political conditions were apparently favorable for Imam
Husayn, and the people thought generally that Yazid bin Mu'awiya would
soon step aside and his caliphate would topple down and the Imam who was
entitled to the caliphate would attain to it. This was because Muslim
bin Aqil, his special representative, had sent a report from Kufa
saying: "All the people are with you and do not recognize the caliphate
of anyone else. They are also not prepared to acknowledge anyone as
their ruler except you. Hence you should come as early as possible".

Apparently the conditions were very favorable and reassuring, but in
spite of this Imam Husayn was talking about death and martyrdom and the
fierceness of the Iraqi wolves.

The fact is as already stated by us i.e. Imam Husayn wanted to tell the
people that he had already assessed that no result could be achieved and
nothing useful and positive could be done without his own martyrdom as
well as that of his friends. That is why he said that man cannot avoid
death.

He said: "I am keen to see the Prophet of Allah, Ali, Hamza, Ja'far and
my mother Fatima in the same way in which Ya'qub was keen to see Yusuf.
A site of martyrdom has been selected for me by Allah and I am going
there". It transpires from this sentence that this was a Divine plan and
not one drawn by Husayn bin Ali. The Almighty Allah had destined since
eternity that such deviation and corruption, could take place in the
Muslim society, and Husayn bin Ali would make an unprecedented
self-sacrifice and meet martyrdom to remedy the situation.

The Imam said: "I can see as if the desert wolves of Iraq are attacking
me between Nawawis and Karbala and tearing me into pieces. They are
filling their hungry flanks and empty pockets. It is for them to fill
their pockets and to feed themselves to satiety, and for me to fight
against this social and religious corruption. This is the plan devised
by Allah and it is He who has considered my martyrdom to be the remedy
and the means of reforming the present state of affairs. It is
impossible to escape from whatever has been destined by Him.

We, the family of the Holy Prophet, are happy with what Allah is pleased
with, and like whatever He likes. We bear with patience all the
difficulties which He makes us face and He also gives us full reward
which is admissible to the patient people. I am a part of the body of
the Prophet of Allah and a part of his body cannot remain separate from
him. I shall join him in Paradise so that he may be pleased to see me
and fulfil the promises made with me. Only he, who is prepared to
sacrifice his life for my sake and to meet Allah, should accompany me.
God willing I intend to depart tomorrow morning".

The Divine religion, the rights of the people and the interests of the
Islamic society can be defended at different times in different ways. It
may be by spending money in the path of Allah. It may be by speaking for
the sake of Allah and bringing the people to the right path by means of
useful and instructive words. It may be by writing a book for the sake
of Allah and bringing the people nearer to truth and reality with useful
publications and increasing their religious and moral insight.

However, Imam Husayn declared that at that juncture the problem with
which Islam was faced could not be solved with financial assistance or
through writing or verbal benevolence. On the contrary the matters had
taken such a turn that it was not possible to restrain corruption and
eradicate its foundation except by means of self-sacrifice and
martyrdom.

It would not have been right for anyone to think that as Imam Husayn was
going to take a step forward in the path of Allah he too would
contribute some money or present five swords, seven coats of mail and
four spears to him or say like Ubaydullah bin Hurr Juafi in response to
the Imam's call that he would give him a strong horse.

Husayn bin Ali did not, however, require swords, lances, horses or
money, but was prepared to accept only that person who was sincerely
prepared to lay down his life for his sake. He said: "Only that person,
who is prepared to sacrifice his life for the sake of Allah and to meet
the Almighty, can join me in this journey. God willing I shall be
departing tomorrow morning".

It is surprising that in spite of all these emphatic pronouncements of
the Imam many unfortunate opportunists also joined him under the
impression that the circumstances were favorable and perhaps most of
them remained with him till the news of the martyrdom of Muslim bin Aqil
was received. The fact is that from the very beginning these people
sided with him, who became caliph and assumed authority.

They were not prepared to support the Imam who was going to die and meet
martyrdom, who was to be deprived of water, and whose companions were
one day going to die the honorable death of martyrs.


