Chapter 14: Imam Husayn Encounters Hurr
=======================================

Imam Husayn encountered Hurr and his companions on the 1st of Muharram,
61 A.H. and provided them water to satiate their thirst. It was now the
time for noon prayers and Hajjaj bin Masruq Juafi, one of the honorable
martyrs of Karbala, pronounced *azan* (call to prayers) under the orders
of the Imam.

The Imam then came out of his tent and conversed with them after the
call to prayers. Then after praising the Almighty Allah he said, "O
people! My excuse before Allah and you Muslims of Kufa is that I did not
proceed to Iraq without reason. Your representatives came to me and you
wrote in your letters that you had no Imam and asked me to come to you
so that Allah might guide you through me. I have come now. If you are
prepared to assure me by renewing your promises and covenants I shall
come to your city, but if you don't do so or are worried and disturbed
on account of my arrival I am prepared to return to the place from which
I have come". Hurr and his companions did not, however, give any reply
to the Imam.

As directed by the Imam, Hajjaj pronounced *iqamah* and both the armies
offered congregational prayers led by the Imam, and after taking rest
they also offered the afternoon prayers in a similar way.

After the prayers the Imam spoke to the companions of Hurr once again
and said: "O people! If you fear Allah and are pious and recognize the
right of the rightful persons Allah will be pleased with you (here also
by the word 'right' the Imam did not mean to tell the people that, for
example, they should not pare the wall of their neighbor while they are
constructing a building, or should not try to board a vehicle earlier
than another passenger who enjoys priority. The Imam meant the right,
which is the basis of all the rights i.e. the right of Imamate and
leadership of the Muslims of the world, for if that right is secure all
other rights are also secure, but if that right is eliminated all other
rights are also violated).

Then he said: "We the members of the family of the Holy Prophet are the
fittest persons to govern you and to exercise authority over you in
material and religious matters as compared with the persons, who are at
the helm of affairs these days. They are unreasonable persons and claim
to hold a very sacred and delicate office which they do not deserve.
They oppress you. Such persons cannot be recognized to be the successors
of the Holy Prophet, Imams of the Muslims, defenders of the sacred
religion of Islam and the protectors of the Holy Qur'an".

Hurr bin Yazid Riyahi said in reply to the remarks of the Imam: "I swear
by Allah that I am not aware of the letters and the messengers." The
Imam asked Uqbah bin Saman (who was made captive on the day of Ashura
but was set free later) to place the letters of the Kufians before Hurr
and his men."

However, Hurr said again: "We have not written any letter and we shall
not leave you until we take you before Ibn Ziyad". The Imam said: "This
is not possible before death". The Imam and Hurr mounted along with
their respective companions and adopted a route that led neither to
Madina nor to Kufa. In the meantime Hurr said to the Imam by way of
sympathy and advice: "I entreat you in the name of Allah not to fight,
because if you fight you will be killed". The Imam got excited and said:
"Do you threaten me with death? Will you be comforted by killing me? My
reply is the same which the man from Aws tribe gave when he wanted to
support the Holy Prophet, but his cousin warned him of being killed and
said: "Where are you going? You will be killed".

That Awsi man replied: "I have selected my path and for a brave man,
whose intentions are good, who does not lose the spirit of Islam in the
path of jihad and does not care for his life in assisting the good
people, keeps aloof from the ignoble persons, and does not accompany the
wicked, it is not a matter of shame to die honorably. If I live I will
not have to regret and in case I lay down my life in this path I shall
not be reproached. The baseness of man lies in the fact that he should
live an ignominious and shameful life."

Imam Husayn and Hurr accompanied by their respective companions reached
a halting place called Bayza. Here also the Imam spoke to those people
and made it clearer than before that at that time he was under an
obligation to perform a duty. The contents of this speech of his are as
follows:

"Yazid is a tyrannical and oppressive caliph, who considers lawful the
things declared by Allah to be unlawful. He breaks Divine covenants,
opposes the path of the Prophet and oppresses the people. The Holy
Prophet has said that in such circumstances if someone does not restrain
such a caliph with his words and conduct from committing evil deeds it
is necessary for Allah to send him to the same place to which He sends
that oppressive caliph".

It is the same thing to which the Holy Qur'an has alluded in these
words:

***We have made some of the Imams {leaders} lead their followers to the
Fire. (Surah al-Qasas, 28:41)***

All the leaders do not take their followers to Paradise. Some of the
Imams and leaders of the nation guide the people towards Paradise and
good fortune, and that Paradise means in the general sense of progress,
prosperity and greatness in this world as well as in the Hereafter.
However, according to the Holy Qur'an and historical experience some
Imams, like Yazid, drag their followers towards fire, torture and
certain downfall.

The Imam then explained more explicitly the conditions prevailing during
those days in 60 A.H. and said: "You should know that these people
namely the agents of the Caliphate of Bani Umayya follow Satan, carry
out his orders and do not forsake his obedience. In the same proportion
they have disobeyed Allah and started committing crimes openly and have
suspended the Divine punishments.

They have appropriated the property of the Muslims to themselves i.e.
they have allocated to themselves the money which should have been
credited to the public treasury of the Muslims; spent for their own
selfish desires. They have treated the things made lawful by Allah to be
unlawful and those made unlawful by Him to be lawful. Now that they have
created these conditions, who can be more responsible to change them and
eliminate the causes of the decline of the Muslims in accordance with
the orders of the Holy Prophet than myself. I am Husayn bin Ali, the son
of Fatima, and one of those for whose sake the verse of Purification
(33:33) and the verse of Mubahila (3:61) were revealed, and I am the
disciple of Imam Ali, the Commander of the Faithful".

Indeed, who could perform the task performed by Husayn bin Ali? Who
could obtain friends like his friends and who could take his place in
this movement?

Ibn Abbas was a great scholar and commentator of the Holy Qur'an, a
distinguished companion of the Holy Prophet and his cousin. However, he
could not perform the task performed by Husayn bin Ali. Muhammad bin
Hanafiya was the brother of the Imam and son of Ali ibn Abi Talib but he
was not equal to this occasion.

Habib ibn Mazahir Asadi was a companion of the Holy Prophet, but was not
capable of doing what Imam Husayn did. Same was the case with Muslim bin
Awsaja and Hani bin Urwa Muradi. Imam Husayn's cousin Muslim bin Aqil,
his worthy and honorable brother Abbas, and his dear, brave and pious
son Ali bin Husayn were all very great and magnanimous persons, who
displayed astonishing valor and self-sacrifice in this great Islamic
movement and cooperated with him fully.

However, notwithstanding all their magnanimity and great personality
none of them could become the central point of this sacred movement. The
nucleus and the spiritual power of this Divine movement was hidden in
the personality of Imam Husayn. It was this very spiritual power which
guided this movement till its last stage and even prepared his survivors
for its guidance till they were subjected to extreme torture and
captivity.

Then the Imam said: "I am in receipt of your letters through messengers
telling me about your allegiance and steadfastness in the path of truth.
You have written that whatever the circumstances might be you would not
forsake me and would not surrender me to the enemy. Now if you stick to
your oath of allegiance and your decision and, as was written by you, do
not desist from assisting me you will enjoy good luck, for I am the son
of Ali and Fatima and shall remain with you in this sacred jihad.

My wives and children will share the fate of your wives and children. It
does not also behoove you to hold the lives of your wives and children
dearer than the lives of my family. When I am ready to sacrifice my own
life as well as the lives of the members of my family, you, too, should
not spare your own lives as well as the lives of the members of your
family".

In other words he said: "Now that I am prepared for being martyred along
with my companions and for my women and children being made captives in
the path of enjoining to do good and restraining from evil and have
brought my dear ones along with me so that you may have no excuse left,
it is also your duty that you should follow your Imam and should not
falter in the path of Allah. You should not be distressed on account of
being killed or made captives, and should not lag behind in assisting
the Imam of the time and son of your Prophet.

However, if, in spite of all this, you break your promise and abandon
allegiance to me I swear by my life that such an action by people like
you will not surprise me, because you have behaved in this very manner
towards my father Ali, my brother Hasan and my cousin Muslim bin Aqil. A
person who trusts you and becomes proud of your promise is deluded.
Nevertheless you should know that if you do so the loss will be yours.
You will be deprived of good luck. Whoever breaks his promise is a loser
himself and it is possible that Allah may soon make me independent of
your assistance".

The Imam delivered this address before one thousand persons who were the
companions of Hurr and all of them heard it, but there was only one
person who was impressed by it and showed after a few days that he had
properly comprehended the lesson taught by the Imam.

That person was Hurr bin Yazid Riyahi. In the morning of the day of
Ashura he went to Umar bin sad and said to him: “Are you really going to
fight with Husayn bin Ali? Umar replied: "I swear by Allah that I shall
fight with him and it will be a tough fight too". Hurr said: "Is there
any harm if you accept one of the offers made by the Imam?" Umar
replied: "If I had possessed authority there would have been no harm and
I would have accepted it, but Ibn Ziyad is not prepared to accept anyone
of them."

It was at this time that a dangerous conflict commenced between the
intellect and passions of this lucky man. It was necessary that he
should submit either to the spiritual power or the Satanic temptation.
At last, however, the celestial spark which the Imam's words had kindled
in his heart prevailed over the devil of his passions and he chose the
Divine path and said: ..By Allah; I have reached a place where the ways
to Paradise and Hell part. By Allah, even if I am cut to pieces and
burnt a number of times I shall not prefer anything to Paradise".

Then Hurr proceeded to the camp of the Imam. There he confessed his sin,
adopted the right path and said: "Almighty Allah knows that I was not
aware that the matters would take such a turn. I have now come to
repent, but I do not know whether my repentance can be accepted". The
Imam replied: "Of course, Allah will accept your repentance and shall
forgive you". Then the Imam asked his name. He replied: "I am Hurr bin
Yazid".

The Imam said: "You are a free person as your mother named you Hurr
(free). You are free in this world as well as in the Hereafter. You
should dismount now:' He said: "Will it not be better that I should
combat with these horsemen for some time and dismount after attaining
the honor of martyrdom?" The Imam replied: "May Allah bless you. You may
do as you like".

Hurr returned to the people of Kufa and began talking to those persons
who were his colleagues and fellow-soldiers an hour earlier. He
reproached them for their betrayal and faithlessness and spoke thus to
the army of which he himself had been a commander: "O people of Kufa!
May you die and may Allah make your mothers mourn. You invited this
servant of Allah, and when he accepted your invitation and came to you,
you withheld your assistance from him. You, who promised earlier that
you would sacrifice your lives for his sake, have encircled him today
and have drawn your swords to kill him.

You have besieged him and made it impossible for him to breathe. You are
troubling him from every side and do not wish that he should be free,
and he and the members of his family should find refuge somewhere. You
have made him helpless like a captive. You have deprived him and his
women, children and companions of the water of the river Euphrates which
is drunk by all Muslims and non-Muslims, and in which the desert birds
of Iraq bathe. They are almost exhausted on account of thirst. How badly
you have treated the descendants of the Holy Prophet after him! If you
do not repent even now, and do not abandon the idea of killing him,
Allah will not quench your thirst on the Day of Judgment".

These were the words of the fortunate man who had one day blocked the
way of the Imam of his time, alarmed his women and children, made him
camp under the orders of Ibn Ziyad in a desert away from human
habitation and had collaborated with his enemies from the 2nd of
Muharram till the morning of the l0th Muharram.

However, within less than an hour his spirit underwent a change and he
suddenly began to crave for martyrdom. He became so self-sacrificing in
the path of truth that he could no longer content himself with worldly
thoughts and hope for life; he did not forsake eternal happiness. Allah
says:

***Allah is the Guardian of the believers. He takes them out of darkness
into light. (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:257)***

The same invisible Hand, which pulls out the undeserving persons from
martyrdom and eternal good name, aids the people of noble spirit from
different places into the domain of martyrdom and self-sacrifice and
places Hurr bin Yazid Riyahi, the commander of the enemy's army into the
row of Habib ibn Mazahir Asadi and Burayr bin Khuzayr Hamdani and even
in the row of Ali bin Husayn, Qasim bin Hasan and other Hashimi young
men.


