Chapter 17: Imam Husayn consoles Lady Zaynab
============================================

Imam Husayn made her sister recover her senses and repeatedly requested
her to remain patient and persevering. He said:

"Dear sister, be tranquil and patient. It is not that only the
inhabitants of the world die. Those in the heavens do not also continue
to live. Everything dies except the Almighty, Who has created the people
with His power, and will one day bring them to life again, whereas He
Himself is Unique. Dear sister! My grandfather was better than me. My
father was better than me. My mother and brother were better than me. It
is necessary for every Muslim to follow the Prophet of Allah". After
these consolatory remarks the Imam said: "Dear sister! I administer an
oath to you that you will follow my advice. Do not tear your dress on
account of my suffering, do not scratch your face and do not lament".

The night of Ashura came to an end - the night which will never come
again in the history of mankind, because the great personalities who had
prepared themselves during that night for martyrdom in the path of Allah
and were waiting for the morning to repay their debt to the Holy Prophet
and Imam Ali cannot make their appearance once again. How can time
reproduce such personalities when the conditions in which they appeared
and attained so much perfection cannot be repeated.

The night of Ashura and the eleventh night of Muharram can be repeated
only if another Qur'an is revealed once again and a prophet as great as
the Last Prophet is appointed to the prophetic mission and a father like
Ali and a mother like Fatima come into existence, and an atmosphere like
that of Ahlul Bayt is present in the world.

That night can reappear only if the conditions are like those in which
the seventeen young men of the family of Bani Hashim could return, men,
about whom the Imam said that they were matchless on the face of the
earth, and the means for the appearance of men like Habib ibn Mazahir
Asadi and other companions of the Holy Imam come into existence.

That night can come again only if Islam is threatened by the dangers
which it had to face in those days from Bani Umayya, and all the
favorable and unfavorable conditions which prevailed in the year 61 A.H.
come into existence once again.


