Chapter 18: Morning of Ashura
=============================

During the night of Ashura the Imam and his companions offered prayers,
sought Divine forgiveness, and made supplications. The night eventually
came to end and the morning of their day of glory arrived. It has been
written by Shaykh Mufid in his book entitled al-Irshad and by Tabari in
his Tarikh that after dawn prayers the Imam arrayed his companions, out
of whom thirty two were mounted and forty were on foot. He entrusted the
command of the right wing to Zuhayr bin Qayn and that of left wing to
Habib ibn Mazahir and also entrusted the standard to his brother Abbas.

Umar bin Sad also arrayed his forces in the morning of that day. He
entrusted the command of the right wing to Amr bin Hajjaj Zubaydi, the
left wing to Shimr bin Jawshan, the mounted soldiers to Azra bin Qays
Ahmadi and the infantrymen to Shith bin Rabie and gave the standard in
the hand of his slave.

On the day of Ashura the Imam addressed the people, and delivered
speeches a number of times. However, he commenced the day with
supplication and every time before he addressed the enemy he sought
strength and guidance from Allah. All the invocations and addresses of
the Imam are couched in highly eloquent and expressive language. He
addressed the soldiers of the enemy army with a perfectly calm and
composed mind as if all of them were his friends and devotees and had
gathered together to assist him, although he knew very well that after
these addresses those very people would attack him with 30,000 spears
and kill him.

These speeches were being delivered by an orator, who was thirsty and
did not have even a drop of water to moisten his lips. He was an orator,
who knew that after a short time his women and children would be made
captives by his impudent and sworn enemies. He was an orator, who had
not eaten any food and was also thirsty, although on the day of Ashura
he did not complain about hunger on account of his lofty character and
patience and mentioned thirst only.

Imam Sajjad has said: "The son of the Prophet's daughter was killed when
he was thirsty and hungry".

It is really surprising that an orator, who is hungry and thirsty,
should speak before thousands of enemies who are ready to kill him.
Though there are numerous causes of his anxiety and uneasiness, yet he
speaks in such a way that whatever he says is eloquent and expressive.
He speaks with perfect peace of mind and courage. Whatever he says is
firm and logical. He seldom expresses helplessness and
broken-heartedness.

As his companions are killed and the place around him becomes vacant his
speech becomes all the more eloquent, and he displays more courage and
greater peace of mind. Where can one find such an orator in the history
of mankind -a helpless and friendless orator, whose speech is not
affected by the prevailing conditions and who is perfectly calm and
composed, although there is nothing to mitigate his anxiety and mental
disturbance.


