Chapter 1: Regime of Mu'awiya
=============================

The topic of this book is an account of the sacred rising of Imam
Husayn, which is a glorious chapter in the history of Islam. We propose
to state briefly the important events of this period of less than a year
which is quite short from the viewpoint of duration but extremely
effective and eternal so far as its role is concerned.

Distortions have taken place and continue to take place in every chapter
of Islamic and non-Islamic history. They change the very shape of events
and make the task of the future researches more difficult. Usually these
distortions are made either by the extravagant supporters or by spiteful
opponents. There is not a page of history that has escaped distortion.
We find that treacherous hands have changed the real features of
historical facts.

It can, however, be said in connection with the event of the rising of
Imam Husayn that the spiteful enemies have not been able to temper with
this chapter of history and this movement has been so explicit, clear,
sacred and unblemished that even the enemies of his father Imam Ali and
his brother Imam Hasan have bowed their heads respectfully before him
and admired his movement whole-heartedly. Of course the circumstances in
which this movement was started and the condition of the Islamic
government of that time have helped understand the need for this
movement, and whoever has undertaken to write about it has admitted the
greatness, bravery, frankness, courage, and love for freedom, of its
leaders.

It is a matter of great regret, however, that many baseless matters,
vulgar stories, and misleading falsehoods by ignorant supporters and
extravagant friends have become a part of the writings and speeches
about this movement. One of the greatest services, which can be rendered
to the Doyen of the martyrs, is to keep the event of Karbala free from
every sort of falsehood, myth and baseless matter. However, this is a
task, which the common and illiterate people cannot be expected to
perform, because it is they, who have been instrumental in bringing
about this calamity. They act against the sacred object of the leader of
this revolution and think that it is possible to promote truth by means
of falsehood, honesty by means of treachery and piety by means of
impiety and carelessness.

To segregate the event of the movement of Imam Husayn from all sorts of
unreliable, irrational and baseless matters and to content themselves
with the writings of the writers of third and fourth centuries A.H. is
the task of pious research scholars, and it is their duty to tell the
truth with their tongues and pens and promote it, and refrain from
telling false and baseless things in their writings and speeches. It is
possible that one day this very sacred, clear, and explicit chapter of
the history of Islam as befits the magnanimous and infallible leader may
be based on truth and honesty in writing and speech. It is in this way
only that the value of this great movement, and the greatness of its
leader, will become evident all the more, and even in the mourning
groups signs of his greatness, devotion, sincerity, jihad, steadfastness
and manliness will be clearly apparent.

About fifty years after the death of the Holy Prophet, twenty years
after the martyrdom of Imam Ali, and ten years after the martyrdom of
Imam Hasan, Mu'awiya bin Abi Sufyan breathed his last in the middle of
the month of Rajab of the year 60 A.H. He was the governor and caliph in
Damascus for about 42 years. He held the office of the governor of Syria
for five years under the Second Caliph and for twelve years under the
Third Caliph. He also ruled over Syria for a little less than five years
during the Caliphate of Imam Ali and for about six months during the
Caliphate of Imam Hasan and campaigned against both of them. He also
held the Islamic Caliphate for a little less than twenty years, and
towards the end of his life he obtained oath of allegiance from the
people for his son Yazid for the office of Caliph.

Mu'awiya was the progenitor of the fourteen Umayyad caliphs, who were
the descendants of Abu Sufyan and Marwan and held the Islamic Government
in their hands for one thousand months from 41 A.H. to 132 A.H.

During the time of his caliphate Mu'awiya had complete control over the
situation and could violate openly the agreement that he had concluded
with Imam Hasan; for example, one of the conditions of the peace treaty
was that the supporters of Imam Ali would not be persecuted and killed
and all of them would enjoy security.

The name of Hujr bin Adi Kindi, who was one of the companions of the
Holy Prophet and a supporter of Ali was specially mentioned in the Peace
Pact. However, as the Islamic historians have written unanimously,
Mu'awiya killed Hujr bin Adi and six of his companions, and one of them
named Abdur Rahman bin Hannan Ghazzi was buried alive by Ziyad bin Abihi
in Iraq. Mu'awiya's power and domination had assumed such proportions
that he did what he liked and none could raise any objection.

Ali bin Husayn Mas'udi, one of the greatest Muslim historians and
geographers of the 4th century writes thus in his book entitled Murujuz
Zahab: At the time of return from the Battle of Siffin, a Kufian,
mounted on a camel, came to Damascus.

One of the Syrians disputed with him and said: "This she-camel which you
have mounted is mine. It was looted in the Battle of Siffin and has
fallen in your hands". Their dispute got prolonged and both of them went
to Mu'awiya. The man belonging to Damascus produced fifty witnesses, who
deposed that the she-camel belonged to him. On the authority of the
evidence given by fifty persons Mu'awiya also decided that the she-camel
belonged to the Syrian and compelled the Iraqi to surrender it to him.

The Iraqi said: "May Allah bless you. It is a he-camel and not a
she-camel". Mu'awiya, however, said: "I have already given a decision
and it cannot be altered". When the people dispersed Mu'awiya called the
Iraqi and asked him as to what his she-camel was worth. Then he gave him
something more than the price of the he-camel and said to him: "Tell Ali
that to fight against him I have 100,000 men, who do not distinguish
between a he-camel and a she-camel" (i.e. if I say that a he-camel is a
she-camel or vice versa, they will not dispute).

After narrating this story Mas'udi writes that Mu'awiya acquired such a
grasp over the people that at the time of proceeding for the Battle of
Siffin he called them to Friday prayers on Wednesday and offered Friday
prayers with them, but none asked him as to why Friday prayers was being
offered on that day when it was Wednesday.

Thereafter he has narrated another incident which we reproduce below in
detail from the book entitled An-Nasayah al-Kafiya Li Mun Yatawalla
Mu'awiya: Ammar Yasir was killed in the Battle of Siffin at the hands of
Mu'awiya's men. As narrated by Bukhari in his Sahih, as well as by
others, Ammar was striving more than others at the time of the
construction of the Masjid of Madina and when the Holy Prophet saw him
he said: "Alas! Ammar! An oppressive group will kill him at a time when
he will be calling them to Paradise and they will be calling him to
Hell".

Ammar's being killed made truth manifest, and it was established that
the oppressive group was Mu'awiya and his supporters. In order to
extricate himself from this difficulty he said: "We have not killed
Ammar. He has been killed by him, who brought him in the battlefield"
(i.e. by Ali). When Imam Ali was informed about the stand taken by
Mu'awiya he said: "If that be so Hamza, the Doyen of the Martyrs was
killed by the Holy Prophet, because he brought him along with him to
fight against the polytheists".

However, as Mu'awiya was confident that his friends would accept
whatever he said, he remarked: "It is true that we have killed Ammar,
but the word Baghiya used by the Holy Prophet does not mean unjust and
oppressive. On the contrary it means one, who seeks or demands, and it
is we, who have risen to seek vengeance for the murder of Uthman. Hence
the meaning of the Holy Prophet's remark is that Ammar would be killed
by those who rose to seek vengeance for the murder of Uthman and there
is nothing wrong about it".

This argument of Mu'awiya was also absurd and the later part of the
tradition provides a reply to it, because the Holy Prophet said: "Ammar
will be killed by those, who will invite him to Hell, and whom he will
invite to Paradise". However, Mu'awiya had become so powerful and
dominant that none could convince his followers by argument.

We do not intend to study the period of Mu'awiya's rule and the short
account given above appears to be sufficient to invite the attention of
the readers to the social and religious conditions of those days. In
case, however, someone desires to become fully conversant with the
period of Mu'awiya's rule he should refer to An-Nasayah al-Kafiya Li Mun
Yatawalla Mu'awiya and then judge fairly.


