Chapter 20: Sermon of Imam to the Army of Yazid
===============================================

Then the Imam mounted his camel and addressed the people with a very
loud voice, which could be heard by most of them:

"O people of Iraq! Listen to me and do not make haste to kill me so that
I may tell you what I must, and appraise you of the reason for my coming
to Iraq. If you accept my excuse, believe in what I say, and behave
towards me fairly, you will level for yourselves the path of prosperity,
and then you will have no reason to kill me. And even if you do not
accept my excuse and deviate from the path of justice, you must ponder
over the pros and cons of the matter before you kill me, and should not
undertake such a delicate task rashly and without deliberation. My
supporter is the Almighty Allah Who has revealed the Qur'an. Allah
guards His deserving slaves".

When the Imam's speech reached this stage, he heard the wails and
lamentations of his sisters and daughters, who were hearing him.
Thereupon he said to his brother Abbas and his son Ali: "Go and silence
these women, because hereafter they will have to weep much". When the
voice of the ladies of the Holy and impeccable family was no longer
heard the Imam praised Allah and invoked blessings for the angels and
the prophets.

He spoke in more eloquent and expressive words than any orator, who had
existed before him, or would come after him, and said to the people of
Kufa: "O people! Identify me and see who I am. Then you will come to
your senses and reproach yourselves. You should reflect carefully
whether it is permissible for you to kill me and to disregard the
reverence due to me.

"Am I not the son of your Prophet's daughter? Is the *wasi* (vicegerent)
of your Prophet and his cousin and the first person, who expressed
belief in Allah and confirmed what was brought by His Prophet, not my
father? Is the Doyen of Martyrs Hamza bin Abdul Muttalib not the uncle
of my father? Is the martyr Ja'far bin Abu Talib who has two wings and
flies with Allah's angels not my uncle?

Have you not heard that the Holy Prophet has said about me and my
brother: "These two sons of mine are the chiefs of the young men of
Paradise". If you think that whatever I am saying is true so much the
better. I swear by Allah that I know Allah hates the liars, and I have
never told a lie. And even if you do not believe in my words and refute
me, there are still some companions of the Holy Prophet amongst you who,
when asked, will apprise you of the facts.

Ask Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari, Abu Sa'id Khudari, Nahl bin Sadi, Zayd
bin Arqam or Anas bin Malik, so that they may tell you that they have
heard these words from the Holy Prophet about me and my brother. Is this
tradition itself not sufficient to restrain you from killing me? If you
are doubtful about this tradition can you doubt even this that I am the
son of your Prophet's daughter? I swear by Allah that between East and
West there is no son of the daughter of a Prophet except me either
amongst you or amongst others.

"You should tell honestly whether I have killed anyone from amongst you
so that you may take revenge! Is it that I have appropriated your wealth
and you are claiming it? Have I injured you for which you have risen to
compensate?" None of them, however, came forward to give a reply to what
the Imam said.

He was, therefore, obliged to call some of them by their names and
addressed them in these words: "O Shabath bin Rabie, Hajjar bin Abjar,
Qays bin Ashath and Yazid bin Harith! Did you yourselves not write
letters to me saying: "The fruits have become ripe and the lands are
green and fresh and the soldiers of Iraq are ready to sacrifice their
lives for you and you should, therefore, proceed to Iraq as early as
possible?"

Tabari writes that in reply to the Imam they said: "We did not write any
letter and are not aware of what you are saying." Truly speaking it is
the height of meanness and foul play that the same persons who invited
their Imam by means of a large number of letters and had signed those
letters, were replying to him with utmost impudence that they had
neither written any letters to him nor invited him!

Here we introduce to the readers one of those mean persons so that they
may come to know to what extent one can go on account of worldliness and
lack of will-power. They appear before the people in one guise today and
in another guise tomorrow. One day they draw their swords for the sake
of Allah and on another day against Him. If they are friends of Ali on
one day they become his enemies on the following day. One day they kill
Imam Husayn and on another day they claim to be the avengers of his
murder.

Shabath bin Rabie i.e. the very person who was the Commander of the
Iraqi army on the day of Ashura and one of the killers of the Imam was
at one time the mu'azzin of Sajah and he accepted this office when he
claimed to be a prophet in the tribe of Bani Tamim. However, when Sajah
was disgraced he embraced Islam. He had also a hand in the murder of
Uthman. Then he became one of the followers of Ali. Later he revolted
against Ali, became one of his opponents and joined the Khawarij. After
some time he left the Khawarij also and went in seclusion.

In 61 A.H. he participated in killing Imam Husayn and his companions
with great savagery. Afterwards when Mukhtar bin Abi Ubayd Thaqafi rose
to avenge the murder of Imam Husayn, he (Shabath) who himself was one of
the murderers of the Imam joined Mukhtar as an avenger of the Imam's
murder. Later he became the chief of Kufa police. He had a hand also in
the murder of Mukhtar bin Abi Ubayd. He died in about 80 A.H.

How can those persons who do not have the least moral sense benefit from
the celestial spirit of Husayn bin Ali and how can their untalented and
corrupt souls receive any reflection of the sublime soul of the
infallible Imam.

The Imam continued his address till he said: "By Allah I will not swear
allegiance to these people like weak and mean persons and will not flee
the battlefield like slaves while fighting against the rascals. I seek
refuge in Allah from the mischief of you people and of every arrogant
person who does not believe in the Day of Judgment".

In the meantime the preliminaries of the battle began to take place
gradually. Umar bin Sad drew his bow, shot an arrow towards the
companions of Imam Husayn and said: "You should bear witness before Ibn
Ziyad (the governor) that I have started the battle earlier than
everyone else".

Severe fighting continued till about noon. Most of the companions of the
Imam were killed. The Imam offered the noon prayers along with his
surviving companions in the form of emergency prayer (Salatul Khawf)
i.e. he offered two rakats. The fighting continued after the prayers
till all the young men of Bani Hashim were killed. They met martyrdom
one after the other. Even young children and sucklings had also the
honor of being martyred. Gradually the moment arrived which changed the
course of the history of Islam and recorded the honor of martyrdom for
them in the pages of history. It is definitely so and there is no
tragedy like the tragedy of Imam Husayn.

The exact number of the persons who were martyred on the day of Ashura
is not known. It is usually said that seventy two persons were martyred
with Imam Husayn. Tabari writes that seventy two companions of the Holy
Imam were martyred. Shaykh Mufid writes that Amr bin Sad sent the head
of Imam Husayn to Ibn Ziyad on the very day of Ashura and ordered the
heads of his companions and Ahlul Bayt to be severed from their bodies
and these heads were seventy' two in number.

Furthermore, in the homage (Ziyarat) which has been quoted in Iqbal of
Sayyid bin Tawus the names of 72 martyrs of Karbala have been mentioned.
This Ziyarat, the date of issue of which is 252 A.H. from the sacred
region of Samarra (Iraq), must have been issued by Imam Hasan Askari and
not by Imam Mahdi because in that year i.e. 252 A.H. Imam Mahdi was not
born and his father Imam Hasan Askari remained alive for another eight
years i.e. till 260 A.H. In this Ziyarat the names of seventeen members
of the family of Bani Hashim followed by the names of fifty five other
companions of the Imam have been mentioned.

In fact it is necessary to study the performance of these seventy two
persons more minutely so that we may understand how this small group
could bring this marvelous and eternal movement into existence. If Imam
Husayn and his companions had a worldly motive and had they been killed
like ordinary persons in order to achieve a material objective it would
not have been possible for them to acquire such greatness in the world.

Moreover, the very shape of this movement shows that it was not a
material rising tainted by worldly and personal motives. The importance
which this movement acquired in the history of Islam, rather in the
history of the world, was for those very reasons which have already been
mentioned and explained i.e. the conditions of the world of Islam of
that time had cast a responsibility on the Imam. He assessed that he
must rise and sacrifice his life, as the safety of Islam depended upon
his rising.


