Chapter 21: Negative Attitude towards the Tragedy of Karbala
============================================================

Imam Husayn rose for the sake of a sublime object. It was not his object
that Yazid should cease to wield authority and instead of him he himself
should come at the helm of affairs. In other words he had no personal
grudge against Yazid. He supported truth in whatever shape it made its
appearance and opposed falsehood whether it was headed by Yazid or
someone else.

These seventy two persons, whose number becomes seventy three with the
addition of the Imam himself, rose so that religion might continue to
live in history, and if it had not been so they would not have achieved
the result from their grand sacrifice. They did not rise so that their
sins might be forgiven. Their case was quite different from those who
commit sins throughout their lives. They were different from those
persons who accumulate wealth by unlawful means and then purify
themselves by paying a visit to Karbala or Makkah.

They even endow a part of this unlawful wealth so that Allah may over-
look the balance amount. These seventy two persons were mostly neither
sinners nor debtors. The leader of this movement was the infallible Imam
and had not committed any sin throughout his life. The young men of the
Bani Hashim family were pious persons and enjoyed an impeccable
position. The companions of the Imam were also distinguished persons of
their time in the matter of piety.

Did the martyrs, as many persons imagine, met martyrdom so that they
might become a haven for the sinners of the ummah? In other words if the
Muslims or Shi'ah before the martyrdom of Imam Husayn committed sins
with anxiety and concern they may feel relieved, commit sins with
impunity, deceive the people in any manner they like and may not feel
any fear of accountability before Allah and of Divine punishment,
because Imam Husayn was martyred to intercede for the sinners.

The Imam met martyrdom so that the sins of the ummah might be forgiven.
The people committed sins in the past and will continue to commit sins
in future and the Imam made atonement for their sins. Jesus was
crucified and the Christian sinners were relieved. Imam Husayn was also
killed and guaranteed the salvation of the sinners of the ummah!

We seek refuge in Allah! This explanation and this way of thinking which
may perhaps be preferred by most of the common people is exactly opposed
to the real object of the Imam in this movement. He rose so that the
people might fear Allah more, be on their guard more from the
consequences of sin, which they have to endure in this world and in the
Hereafter and pay more attention to the performance of their religious
duties. He rose to eliminate sin, to restrain the people from doing
unlawful things and to revive the spirit of piety in their hearts.

He rose to enjoin the people to do good and to restrain them from evil,
to forestall corruption and sins, to strengthen the fear of Allah in
their hearts and to draw their attention to Him so that the teachings
provided by the Holy Qur'an might be put into practice in the Muslim
ummah. Consequently it should be a nation which does not tell lies, does
not commit treachery, is honest in whatever it does, is brave and
courageous, does not worship anyone except Allah, does not submit to
anything except truth, and does not tolerate anything except law and
reasonable words.

The Imam was not killed so that he might tell the people: After my
martyrdom there is no need to tell the truth, to be honest, to worship,
to acquire lawful property, to refrain from unlawful acts and to have
regard for the rights of the people'.

The Imam did not say: 'I have been killed so that my supporters may
remain immune from inconveniences and commit sins throughout their lives
with perfect peace of mind'. This way of thinking is shameful for the
Muslims and pains the sacred souls of the martyrs, who laid down their
lives struggling in the path of Allah against sin and impiety. It is not
at all possible that a man should be distant from Allah and close to the
Imam, and may displease Allah and please the Imam; and may set aside a
part of his sins for the Imam so that Allah may not call him to account.

Those people who think on these lines not only betray Islam and the
spirit of the movement of Imam Husayn but it may be said that with the
capital of the martyrdom of the Imam they have set up an organization of
their own against the things declared lawful and unlawful by Allah and
the reward and punishment prescribed by Him.

How unlucky is the Muslim, who does not offer prayers or observe fast or
respect the rights of the people or does unlawful things or earns his
livelihood by means of usury or other unlawful occupations, and then
imagines happily that he is a disciple of Imam Husayn. Such a Muslim
should be asked: "Why do you claim to be a disciple of Imam Husayn when
neither you like his deeds nor he liked yours? He spoke the truth and
you tell lies. He was honest and you commit treachery.

He asked for extension of time during the night of Ashura so that he
might spend that night in offering prayers, supplications, asking Divine
forgiveness and reciting the Qur'an, whereas your nights are spent
mostly in committing sins and doing undesirable things. He sacrificed in
the path of Allah everything which he possessed whereas you cannot
dispense with even a small coin for the sake of Allah.

Many persons claim to be the disciples of Imam Husayn and this is due to
the fact that they have not recognized him properly and think that they
can win his favor by means of usual homages, greetings and compliments.
They are exactly like most of the persons who await the appearance of
the Imam of the time and do not know that the appearance of the Imam is
not profitable for them and the Imam of their imagination will not
appear at all, as the Imam who will appear will not distribute money and
posts among his disciples.

A person who has a true concept of Prophethood and Imamate does not get
involved in such errors and does not attribute anything to the Prophet
and Imam opposed to the Divine organization. He knows that the greatness
of the Prophet and the Imam is based on obedience to Allah and one
cannot benefit from the Prophet and the Imam except through obedience to
the Almighty.

In spite of all the hardships on the day of Ashura and the fact that the
enemies did not agree to postpone fighting for a few moments for the
performance of prayers, Imam Husayn offered noon prayers in congregation
while fighting was still in progress and made two of his companions
namely Zuhayr bin Qayn Bajali and Sa'id bin Abdullah Hanafi stand before
him so that they might counteract the attacks of the enemies and enable
the Imam to offer his prayers. How can such an Imam be willing that
instead of offering prayers one may simply mourn his martyrdom and
abandon necessary duties relying on his intercession and favor and
commit unlawful acts?

Mourning for the Imam should make the people understand religion. It
should bring them nearer to Allah and keep them away from sin. It should
make them love religion all the more and revive the spirit of monotheism
in them. They should realize that the gatherings held to mourn the
martyrdom of Imam Husayn can please Allah and become the means of reward
in the Hereafter only when they take place within the limits of
obedience to the Almighty Allah and do not consist of falsehood and
unlawful acts, because Allah cannot be worshipped by means of sin, and
unlawful things cannot be made the basis of worship.

It is so, because Allah accepts only that act which is performed within
the limits of piety. It reforms human soul and takes him to a higher
spiritual stage. It is not possible that a good deed is done and it has
no effect on the soul of man. It is the effect of a good deed which
appears in the shape of spiritual reward in the Hereafter and unless a
deed has a good effect on human soul it is meaningless to say that it
carries spiritual reward.

Similarly unless a deed has bad effect on human soul it is meaningless
to say that it carries punishment in the Hereafter. Those persons who
apparently do good deeds, but do not have the least effect on their
souls and do not reform them are sadly mistaken. They remain at the same
spiritual stage and still think that they have acquired abundant
spiritual reward.

Good deeds should provide food for spiritual faculties to man and should
I improve and reform his inner self. They should eradicate base, motives
from their mind and should develop good morals in their place and
strengthen them. In case good deeds do not produce good effects it
should be concluded that the deeds in question were not really good and
were not performed properly. For it so happens very often that, contrary
to what is imagined, such deeds have bad effects on human soul.

Allah says:

***Whoever desires to meet his Lord should strive to do good deeds.
(Surah al-Kahf, 18:110).***


