Chapter 23: The Sermon of Imam Sajjad in Kufa
=============================================

The fourth Imam addressed the people of Kufa and delivered a sermon
before them. After making a sign to them to keep silent, he said: "O
people! Whoever knows me knows me, and he, who does not know me, should
know that I am the son of that person, who was dishonored and whose
entire belongings were looted and plundered, and whose women and
children were made prisoners......... "

Of course, if the fourth Imam had not mentioned the plundering and
maltreatment by the enemy, and had not revealed openly the details of
the event one or two days after it had taken place, when the agents of
the regime were still jubilant on account of their apparent success, and
did not know that they had dug their grave with their own hands, it was
not unlikely that the matter might have been given a different color in
the history of Islam, and it might have been said that the Ahlul Bayt
were taken to Kufa and Syria with a view to showing them honor and
consoling them, and no constraint or force was involved.

However, the fourth Imam depicted the true scene of the tragedy of
Karbala in the very first sentence of his sermon and imprinted it on the
hearts of the people. Eventually these very speeches and writings were
recorded in the third century in reliable Islamic history books and it
became impossible even for the succeeding Ummayyad dynasty to change
even one line of it, in spite of all their power, or at least to delete
from the pages of history the incident of the plundering of the tents
and stripping the body of the Imam. They could not make the Muslims
forget these shameful deeds.

The Ahlul Bayt (family) of the Imam, who had been made prisoners,
deprived Bani Umayya of even this power, and performed such a glorious
deed that it not only became impossible for the enemy to tamper with the
facts, but minute details of the hideous acts of the murderers of the
Imam were also recorded in history.

Have not Shaykh Mufid and Tabari written that whatever dress was there
on the body of the Imam was plundered after his martyrdom? The Imam's
shirt was removed from his body by Ishaq bin Haiwa. His vest was taken
away by Bahr bin Kab Tamimi. His turban was taken by Akhnas bin Marthad.
His sword was taken by a man belonging to the tribe of Bani Darm. Qays
bin Ashath bin Qays took possession of his Qatifa (mantle). Qays was
later known in Kufa as Qays of Qatifa.

The Imam's shoes were removed from his feet by a man named Aswad, who
belonged to the tribe of Awd. Then they made a rush on the tents and
plundered everything including clothes and camels. They displayed their
utmost meanness by removing even the head-dresses of women. Who wrote
and recorded these detailed historical facts? It was these very speeches
and addresses of Ahlul Bayt which transferred the true facts of Ashura
clearly and explicitly to the pages of history. History has not only
recorded that Ibn Ziyad gave orders to Ibn Sad to let the body of the
.Imam be trampled upon by the horses, but has also given full details of
this proceeding.

Shaykh Mufid, Tabari and other historians have written that Ibn Sad
reached the tents, when some persons wanted to kill the fourth Imam. He,
however, ordered that none should molest the ailing person or
inconvenience the bereaved women in the tents. And when it was brought
to his notice that the tents had been plundered he ordered those who had
taken away something from them to return it. However, not a single
person returned anything. Then to comply with Ibn Ziyad's orders, Ibn
Sad called the volunteers to trample upon the sacred body of the Imam.
He was perhaps also cautious in the matter and he did not himself
nominate some persons to carry out the orders lest they should decline
to undertake such a shameful act. However, this precaution was
unnecessary and the possibility was quite remote.

As said by great historians ten persons volunteered themselves for the
purpose. They mounted their horses with great enthusiasm and performed
the job according to his wishes. What is surprising is that the names of
these heartless bastards have also been recorded in history and the
Islamic historians have mentioned the names and particulars of all of
them. Tabari and Mufid have mentioned their names only and recorded that
one of the aforesaid ten persons was Ishaq bin Haiwa Hazrami who looted
the shirt of the Imam and the other was Akhnas bin Murthad, who took
away his turban from his head.

If Imam Sajjad had kept quiet on account of his illness, fatigue caused
by the journey, captivity and dejection, and had not proclaimed in the
bazaar of Kufa what he had seen on the day of Ashura, and if Umme Kulsum
and Zaynab, daughters of Imam Ali and Fatima and daughter of Imam Husayn
had also not spoken in the bazaar of Kufa, and had not checked the enemy
of an opportunity to tamper with history, how could Bani Umayya permit
that the story of their indelible shame and disgrace should form a part
of the history of Islam and Bani Hashim should expel their rival forever
from the field of humanity, virtue and piety.

When these speeches were being delivered and these addresses were
reaching the ears of the people it was the speakers themselves who knew
very well what they were saying and doing, and they made no mistake in
assessing the value of their words. Other people could not, however,
realize as to what power the speeches of Ahlul Bayt, which were being
delivered at times in the bazaars, at the doors and in general
gatherings and at times in the masjids, would give to the tragedy of
Karbala and to what extent they would change the thinking of the people
in the course of time.

Most of the people did not understand more than that the persons, whose
father had been killed, and who were bereaved, were telling the tale of
their woe, crying and shedding tears owing to the calamity which had
befallen them. They had no idea that the Ahlul Bayt were in fact
performing their part in the Divine mission of this rising.

The task undertaken by the Imam could not be completed without the
explanation and interpretation which was being given by them. There was
a real danger that this Divine campaign which had been led by the most
sacred personalities of Islam might, at a later stage, be made to appear
a material movement prompted by worldly motives and the factual position
might be concealed from the Muslims and their future generations
forever, leaving them with a few pages of history containing fabricated
tales.

It was for this reason that Ali bin Husayn ignored his illness and
mourning, and lady Zaynab, her sister, and nephew also forgot their
captivity and bereavement. Instead of assuming the posture of helpless
and bereaved persons or flattering the enemy, they commenced their
mission of informing the people of the true facts with perfect
determination, and I availed of even the smallest opportunity to achieve
their end. So much so that even if anyone abused them on account of
ignorance or perversion, they considered it to be a valuable opportunity
I and made it an excuse to talk with him. By this means they changed the
heart of the reviler in such a way that he repented immediately, became
a supporter of Ahlul Bayt and expressed regret for what he had said.

The Ahlul Bayt acted so intelligently that they benefited even from the
abuses hurled upon them. Even if someone addressed them slanderously or
tauntingly they considered it an opportunity to talk to him and to
remove misunderstandings from the minds of the people.

After mentioning the misconduct of the enemy in a few words which were
recorded in history , Imam Sajjad said thus while addressing the people
of Kufa: "I am the son of the man who was beheaded on the bank of the
Euphrates although he had not shed the blood or usurped the right of
anyone. (i.e. he was killed without any offence committed by him). I am
the son of the man who was attacked by a huge number of people and
martyred when he was no longer capable of fighting and had fallen on the
ground owing to weakness. This is sufficient honor for us".

By uttering these words the fourth Imam obliged the people to make more
investigations about the heart-rending martyrdom of Imam Husayn, because
merely being killed cannot be reckoned to be an honor, particularly an
honor in the presence of which no other honor should be needed. Imam
Zaynul 'Abidin said: "It is a sufficient honor for us that our blood was
shed, our property was looted, we were insulted and our women and
children were made prisoners".

The Imam wanted the people to ponder as to what the object of this
rising was, what its leader desired, and what he did. If he wanted to
become the ruler, and as another person had attained to this office he
was unhappy, and sacrificed his life and property in an effort to
achieve his object, being killed in this way can never be a source of
pride, rather it would be a matter of shame. Then how could the fourth
Imam feel proud of it and say: "This honor is sufficient for us?"

On hearing these words the people must have wondered as to how this
event could be a source of pride. They might have thought: ' Are people
not killed? Are there no casualties in political wars? Is there little
loss of property and life in social disturbances? What sort of honor is
it that one's property is looted, his tents are set on fire and his near
ones are killed. These are afflictions but not a source of pride'. But
the words of Imam Sajjad obliged the people to make a deeper study and
investigation to assess the importance and value of this rising in the
history of Islam and to find out what these persons were saying and what
weight their words carried and why they were not calm and quiet like
other people and why they were not willing to accept any offer made by
the ruler in power.

What was the harm if Imam Husayn had taken the oath of allegiance to
Yazid and lived honorably among the Muslims with- out losing his friends
and his own life? These very expressions of the fourth Imam prepared the
people to hear, stimulated their thoughts and roused them from slumber.
Possibly many persons might have been saying: "It is good that these
people have been killed, life has returned to normal, the roads to Iraq
which were blocked for some days have been re-opened and the traffic and
transportation which had become difficult has returned to its usual
course'.

While the people were thinking on these lines the fourth Imam cried
suddenly: "They killed us and plundered whatever we had and this is a
sufficient honor for us". This interpretation gave a jerk to the people
and created in them a desire to make further investigations.

Then Imam Sajjad said: "O people! I put you on your oath to tell me in
the name of Allah, whether you know that at one time you wrote letters
to my father and then deceived him. You made firm promises with him and
then rose to fight against him. May Allah destroy you, may you reap the
harvest of your misdeeds in both the worlds, and may you be disgraced
for the indecent policy which you have adopted. How will you face the
Prophet of Allah when you are brought before him on the Day of Judgment
and with which eyes will you look at him? At that time the Holy Prophet
will tell you: "You have killed my children and behaved towards me
dishonorably. You are not my followers".

These few sentences of the Imam changed the thinking of Ii the people of
Kufa and the smiling faces of those persons who had mostly come to see
the prisoners blushed with shame. They tried to control themselves but
could not do so. At last the groanings and lamentations of the people
could be heard from different sides. They began reproaching one another.
One of them said: "What an evil thing you have done! You annihilated
yourselves". Another replied: "But what can we do now?"

While the people were weeping and sighing the Imam addressed them once
again in these words: "May Allah bless those, who accept my advice and
put into practice my recommendations about their duty to Allah, the
Prophet of Allah and the Progeny of the Prophet, for it is incumbent
upon us to follow the Prophet of Allah".

This brief address brought about such a turn in the minds of the people
that they cried: "O son of the Prophet of Allah! All of us will hear
what you say and obey your orders. We will honor the promises made with
you. We will not forsake you and will not side with anyone else. We are
ready to act upon whatever you say. We will fight with him, against whom
you fight, and will make peace with him, with whom you make peace. We
are prepared even to take steps to arrest Yazid. We hate those who
oppress you".

It would appear from these statements of the people as quoted by Ibn
Tawus that they had not yet understood the object of the Imam. They
perhaps thought that he intended to fight and wished to mobilize an army
for the purpose. They did not know that part of the movement which
involved armed rising and martyrdom had already been completed, and
there was no need any longer of warfare and bloodshed. What remained to
be accomplished were these very speeches, sermons and addresses which
were the only means of reflecting the events of Ashura in the history of
Islam and in the minds of the Muslims.

Moreover, the promises, which they were making with the fourth Imam, and
the assurances, which they were giving him, were not dissimilar to the
assurances and promises, which they had held out to Imam Husayn. As such
the assurances given by them had no value and could not be relied upon.
They fell in the category of the oath of allegiance taken by them to
Muslim bin Aqil and the letters written by them to Imam Husayn.

Hence, Imam Sajjad said: "O unfaithful and inconstant people! You will
never succeed. Do you want to have towards me in the same manner in
which you behaved towards my forefathers? N O, it cannot be so. I swear
by Allah that the wounds of my heart have not yet healed up. Yesterday
my father and his companions met martyrdom. I have not yet forgotten my
being bereaved of the Holy Prophet, my father and my brothers have not
overcome this grief. What I want you to do is that you should neither
support us nor oppose us. Husayn bin Ali's being martyred is also not
surprising. Was not his father Ali better than him and was he not
assassinated? O Kufians! It was you, who killed Ali. May I be sacrificed
for my father who was martyred on the bank of the Euphrates. The
punishment for his killers is Hell".

Then he added: "We shall be perfectly satisfied with you if you give up
the practice of siding with us on one day and opposing us on another
day".

The fourth Imam did not speak more and could not get an opportunity to
speak till the Ahlul Bayt were brought one day before Ibn Ziyad in a
public assembly. There also he availed of the opportunity to speak. By
uttering a few sentences though they were brief, he impressed the
gathering.


