Chapter 25: Journey of Ahlul Bayt to Kufa and Damascus
======================================================

The history of the sacred movement and rising of Imam Husayn is one of
the most glorious chapters of the history of Islam. Although this period
of less than a year was very short and transient from the point of view
of length of time, it was very forcible and everlasting from the point
of view of quality and the results which it produced.

This short historical period may be reckoned to have commenced in the
last days of the month of Rajab of 60 A.H. i.e. with Imam Husayn's
departure from Madina to Makkah and may also be treated to have ended
with the return of the Ahlul Bayt to Madina, although the date of the
arrival of the Ahlul Bayt to their house is not known and we are not
aware for how many months they stayed in Damascus, when they left Syria
for Madina, and how much time was spent in their journey from Syria to
Madina.

In short, it may be said with certainty that a year had not yet passed
since the departure of Ahlul Bayt from Madina in the month of Rajab when
the fourth Imam returned to Madina along with his Holy Family after
spending the period of captivity. They came from Damascus to Madina
direct or via Karbala.

However, as regards the incident that Ahlul Bayt came from Syria to Iraq
and reached Karbala on the 20th of Safar is entirely incredible and no
reliable evidence is available to support this historical myth. The
Ahlul Bayt went from Madina to Makkah in the month of Rajab of the year
60 A.H. and proceeded from Makkah to Iraq in the same year in the month
of Zil-Haj.

In the month of Muharram of the year 61 A.H. they were taken to Kufa as
prisoners after the martyrdom of Imam Husayn and his illustrious
companions. After they had remained in Kufa for quite some time they
were sent to Syria in compliance with the orders received from Yazid.
They remained there for a period which is not exactly known, and then
returned to Madina.

The fact is that the dates of the departure of Ahlul Bayt from Kufa for
Syria, their arrival in Damascus, the period of their stay in the
capital of Yazid, the dates of their departure from Damascus and arrival
in Madina are not exactly known. It may, however, be said on the basis
of probability and guess and not with certainty that after the family of
Imam Husayn arrived in Kufa on the 12th of Muharram of the year 61 A.H.
they remained imprisoned in Kufa for about a month i.e. till after the
middle of the month of Safar and were sent to Syria a day or two before
the 40th day of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn and his companions.

As written by some historians they reached Damascus in about the middle
of the month of Rabiul Awwal. It cannot be said as to how long they
remained in Damascus; when they departed from there and on which date
they arrived in Madina. If reliable evidence had been available to the
effect that the Ahlul Bayt came to Karbala at the time of the Arba'in
(40th day) of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn, it could be said that this
happened when they went to Syria and not at the time of their return
from there.

This is so because if, as stated by some historians, the Ahlul Bayt were
sent to Syria, on receipt of orders from Yazid, within about three days
after the first half of the month of Safar, it does not seem impossible
that they went via Karbala where they paid homage to the sacred resting
places of their dear ones and martyrs on the 20th of Safar and then
proceeded to Damascus. However, we do not have any reliable evidence
even for this statement and only some sporadic evidences in this behalf
can be culled from history.

It is not possible to believe that the Ahlul Bayt reached Syria on the
day of Arba'in or left Damascus for Madina or reached Madina on such a
day. It is, therefore, advisable that such baseless matters should not
be mentioned in connection with Ashura and Arba'in and one should
content oneself with only those things which are reported from reliable
sources.

Neither Imam Sajjad came from Syria to Iraq, nor the Ahlul Bayt came to
Karbala on their return from Syria, nor did Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari
and Atiyya bin Sad bin Junada Awfi meet the fourth Imam and the Ahlul
Bayt when they went to perform pilgrimage to Karbala on the day of
Arba'in. In the narrations related to homage by Jabir and Atiyya it has
not at all been mentioned that they met Imam Sajjad or Ahlul Bayt. This
story has been invented by the story-tellers.

Only Sayyid bin Tawus has written in Luhuf, contrary to the historical
and geographical evidence, that on return from Damascus the Ahlul Bayt
proceeded to Iraq when they reached the parting of the ways to Iraq and
the Hijaz (a place which is not identified even by the geographers) and
on the 40th day of the Ashura they reached Karbala. Sayyid bin Tawus
was, no doubt, a great person. Allama Hilli has acknowledged that he
performed unusual feats and there is no denying the fact that he enjoyed
high status.

However, it is not possible to attach any value to this statement of his
from the historical viewpoint and it is not known whether he himself
believed in this narration which is not based on any authority. In any
case this matter needs investigation and research.

As a matter of principle it is opposed to common sense that everything
should be accepted without any investigation, study and comment. Even if
Sayyid bin Tawus had been our contemporary we would not have approached
that great scholar in this particular matter, and his remark in a book,
which according to the researchers was written in his youth, would not
have carried any historical value for us. It is a vulgar and foolish way
of thinking that whatever is said by anyone or is written in any book
should be accepted as correct and free from errors.

The path of research and criticism is always open to the intelligent
persons and research scholars of history .According to the Muslims of
the world in general there is only one person whose remarks cannot be
erroneous in the least and he is the Holy Prophet. According to the
Shi'ah school, however, this distinction is enjoyed by the Holy Prophet
as well as by Lady Fatima Zahra and the twelve Imams whose infallibility
is proved by reason as well as by narrations.


