Chapter 26: Events of Karbala Remained Safe from Distortion
===========================================================

Notwithstanding all that has been said above it should be kept in mind
that the tragic event of Karbala has remained more safe and immune from
distortion as compared with most of the other historical events, and the
event was so clear, explicit and unexpected that even the enemies of
Imam Ali ibn Abi Talib and Imam Hasan bowed their heads before it in
respect and praised it.

Whoever has written on this subject, whether he be the historian Tabari
or Abul Faraj Isfahani or Ibn Wazeh Katib or Shaykh Mufid, the great
Shi'ah scholar of the later part of the fourth century, has written
nothing except the greatness, valor, frankness, courage, liberty and
manliness of Imam Husayn- the leader of this rising.

In the year 60 -61 A.H. the campaign by Imam Husayn was accomplished in
such circumstances that it may be said that even those persons who did
not hesitate from making any distortion in history could not pick up
courage to tamper with the sacred chapter of history and to tarnish the
brilliant face of the movement of Imam Husayn.

Those persons, who tamper with historical events or show a personality
contrary to what it actually is, do so only when they find the
circumstances favorable for this purpose, and are able to lead the
people into error. However, it often happens that even the adversaries
cannot help admitting and praising one's greatness, purity and piety.

In 7 A.H. the hostility of the Umayyad Abu Sufyan demanded that he
should have spoken ill of the Holy Prophet before the Roman Emperor as
far as possible, concealed his honesty, magnanimity, and truthfulness
and introduced him as an avaricious person and a liar. However, he could
not find an opportunity to do so. Contrary to his own inclination and
policy he praised the Holy Prophet and mentioned his greatness and
magnanimity in a much better way than even a friend of the Holy Prophet
could do.

In the beginning of 7 A.H. the Holy Prophet wrote letters to the Kings
and rulers of the territories adjoining the Arabian Peninsula inviting
them to embrace Islam. As written by the author of Tabaqat six
messengers of the Holy Prophet left Madina in the month of Muharram of 7
A.H. with six letters. Amr bin Umayya Zamari proceeded with a letter to
the Negus, the Emperor of Ethiopia, Dahyah bin Khalifa Kalbi with a
letter for Caesar, the ruler of the Eastern Roman Empire, Abdullah bin
Huzayfa Sahmi with a letter to Khusro Perviz, the King of Iran, Hatib
bin Abi Balta with a letter to the King of Alexandria (Egypt), Shuja bin
Wahab Asadi with a letter for Harith bin Abi Shamir Ghassani, the King
of Syria, and Salit bin Amr with a letter to Hawza bin Alayya Hasani,
the King of Yamamah.


