Chapter 27: Abu Sufyan Admits the Greatness of the Holy Prophet
===============================================================

According to Insanul Uyun, Seera-e Nabawiyya, Tarikh-e Tabari and Kamil
Ibn Athir, when the Caesar received the Holy Prophet's letter he became
curious and ordered a man from the Hijaz to be found out and brought to
him so that he might make investigations about Muhammad. By chance at
that time Abu Sufyan and some other Qurayshites had gone to Syria for
the purpose of trade. They were taken to Jerusalem and were presented at
the Caesar's court.

He asked them: "Who amongst you is most closely related to the man who
claims to be the Prophet of Allah?" Abu Sufyan replied: "I am more
closely related to him than all others". It was a fact because none of
the Qurayshites in the caravan, except Abu Sufyan, was a descendant of
Abd Munaf. Caesar said: "What is your relationship with Muhammad?" Abu
Sufyan replied: "He is the son of my uncle". Caesar said: "Come nearer".
After this he ordered the companions of Abu Sufyan to stand behind him.

Then he turned to the interpreter and said: "Tell the companions of Abu
Sufyan that I have made him sit before them so that I may question him
about the man who claims to be the Prophet of Allah and I have made them
sit behind him so that if he tells a lie they may not feel ashamed on
account of looking him in the face and may contradict him. Abu Sufyan
used to say later: "I swear by Allah that if I had not been afraid that
if I told a lie those persons would contradict me, I would have told a
lie. However, I felt ashamed and spoke the truth against my wish".

The following conversation took place between the Caesar and Abu Sufyan:

Caesar: To what sort of family does this proclaimer of prophet hood
belong?

Abu Sufyan: He belongs to a noble family.

Caesar: Did anyone amongst you make such a claim earlier?

Abu Sufyan: No.

Caesar: Did he ever tell a lie before he claimed to be a Prophet?

Abu Sufyan : No.

Caesar: Has there been any king among his ancestors?

Abu Sufyan: No.

Caesar: How is his wisdom, understanding and intelligence?

Abu Sufyan: We have not observed any defect in his wisdom, understanding
and intelligence.

Caesar: What kind of people has embraced this religion? The nobles and
aristocrats or the middle class and the poor?

Abu Sufyan: The middle class and the poor.

Caesar: Are his followers increasing or decreasing?

Abu Sufyan: They are increasing day after day.

Caesar: Does it so happen that someone of them may hate the religion of
Islam and apostatize?

Abu Sufyan: No.

Caesar: Does Muhammad break promises?

Abu Sufyan: We have not seen any such thing from him so far.

We have since concluded a covenant with him and do not know how he will
act in future (Abu Sufyan meant the 10-year's covenant concluded at
Hudaybiya).

Caesar: Have you fought any battle against him so far?

Abu Sufyan: Yes.

Caesar: What was the result of your fighting?

Abu Sufyan: Sometimes we won and sometimes he was victorious. In the
Battle of Badr he was successful against us, but I did not participate
in that battle. A year later, (i.e. in the Battle of Uhud) we launched
an attack on his city and split the bellies and cut off the ears and
noses of the people.

Caesar: What does he order you to do?

Abu Sufyan: He orders us to worship Allah and not to associate anything
with Him in the matter of authority .He forbids us to worship the idols
which have been worshipped by our ancestors. He asks us to offer
prayers, give alms, speak the truth, observe chastity, honor the
promises and covenants and not to commit breach of trust".

The Caesar considered the investigation sufficient about the personality
of the Holy Prophet. He, therefore, said to Abu Sufyan: I asked you
about his ancestry and you replied that he comes from a noble family.
All the Prophets of Allah are of noble birth in their tribes. I asked
you whether someone from amongst you claimed to be a prophet earlier and
you replied in the negative. Of course, if someone from amongst you had
made such a claim it might be said that he was imitating what had been
said earlier.

Then I asked you whether he had been telling lies before he claimed to
be a prophet and you yourself admitted that there had been no such thing
and he had never lied to the people. I then concluded that there was no
reason why a person who did not lie to the people should calumniate
Allah. I asked you whether there had been any king among his ancestors
and you replied in the negative. Of course, if there had been any king
among his ancestors it might be said that he too had risen to regain
kingship.

Then I asked you whether the aristocrats and powerful persons or the
poor had embraced his religion and you replied that they were the poor
people. And the followers of the Prophets of God are always these poor
people (i.e. the penniless and not those, who accumulate wealth by fair
and foul means in the prevailing conditions, and oppose everyone, who
aims at bringing about a revolution to reform the society).

The Caesar continued: "Thereafter I asked you whether the number of the
followers of Muhammad was increasing or decreasing gradually and you
replied that their number was increasing day after day. Faith in God and
His true Prophets produces such results i.e. it attracts more adherents
day after day till it attains perfection. I also asked you whether it so
happened that someone from amongst the Muslims has shown hatred against
Islam or has turned apostate and you said that there had been no such
case.

This is the case with faith, because when one's heart acquires relief
and comfort by means of faith it does not feel sad. Then I asked you
whether you had ever fought with him and you replied that battles had
taken place between you and him, and in some of them you were successful
whereas in others he was victorious. That is what happens to the
Prophets of God. At times they get into difficulties but eventually
their advancement and success is certain.

Then I asked you what he ordered you to do and you replied that he
ordered you to offer prayers, give alms, observe piety and chastity,
honor your promises and not to commit breach of trust. You have admitted
that he has never been dishonest, deceitful and unfaithful. This is how
the Prophets of God behave. They are not dishonest, deceitful and
unfaithful. In the light of these enquiries I am certain that he is the
Prophet of God".

This was an example of how an enemy becomes helpless and humble before a
sublime personality and cannot muster up his courage to tamper with the
realities.


