Chapter 2: Regime of Yazid
==========================

When Yazid attained to the caliphate, the Governors of Madina, Makkah,
Kufa and Basra were Walid bin Utba bin Abu Sufyan, Amr bin Sa'id, Nuaman
bin Bashir and Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad respectively. In the first instance
Yazid decided to obtain oath of allegiance from Husayn bin Ali, Abdullah
bin Zubayr and Abdullah bin Umar, who had not acknowledged him
heir-apparent during the time of Mu'awiya. He, therefore, wrote a letter
to Walid bin Utba, the Governor of Madina, desiring him to obtain
allegiance from these three persons as early as possible and not to
accept any excuse from them.

To accomplish this task Walid called Marwan bin Hakam for consultation,
ignoring their previous strained relations. Marwan said: "Summon them
immediately, and ask them to take the oath of allegiance to Yazid. If
they agree to take the oath well and good otherwise execute them before
they come to know about the death of Mu'awiya, because, if they learn
about his death, each one of them will become a claimant for caliphate
and refuse to obey, excepting Abdullah bin Umar, who need not be feared,
because he is not the type of man, who may rise or oppose".

Walid sent Abdullah bin Amr bin Uthman to Imam Husayn and Abdullah bin
Zubayr. He found both of them in the mosque and conveyed to them the
message of Walid. They said to him: "You may go back and we too shall
meet Walid soon" Then the Imam said to Abdullah: "I think Mu'awiya is
dead and the object of this untimely call is that we should take the
oath of allegiance to Yazid".

Imam Husayn summoned a group of his men and told them to arm themselves.
He said to them: "Walid has called me just now, and I think that he will
propose something which I may not accept. In that event I cannot trust
him. You should, therefore, come with me and when I enter his house you
should stay at the door and as soon as you hear me speaking aloud enter
the house to prevent him from doing me any harm ".

The Imam went to meet Walid and saw that Marwan was also there. Walid
informed him about the death of Mu'awiya and also conveyed to him the
orders of Yazid. The Imam said: â€œI will certainly not be contented with
my taking the oath secretly and would like that I should take it in the
presence of the people". Walid said: "Yes".

Thereupon the Imam said: "Then you should wait till tomorrow so that I
may arrive at a decision in the matter". Walid said: "All right. You may
go now and come tomorrow along with the people to take the oath of
allegiance".

Marwan said: "I swear by Allah that if Husayn bin Ali leaves this place
without taking the oath of allegiance it will no longer be possible for
you to lay hands on him without bloodshed. You should, therefore, detain
him till he takes the oath and in the event of his refusing to do so,
you should chop off his head. On hearing the words of Marwan the Imam
got up from his place and said: "O bastard! Is it you, who will kill me
or Walid? By Allah you have told a lie and become a sinner".

Then he departed and reached his house along with his men. Marwan said
to Walid: "Now that you have not accepted my advice I swear by Allah
that you will not be able to lay your hands on him again". Walid said:
"Marwan! What are you saying? You have suggested to me something that
must spoil my faith. By Allah, even if the entire wealth of the world is
placed at my disposal I will never kill Husayn bin Ali. Should I kill
him if he declines to take the oath of allegiance to Yazid? By Allah I
believe that whoever sheds the blood of Husayn, the grandson of the Holy
Prophet, shall be very unlucky and helpless before Allah on the Day of
Judgment". Marwan who did not like Walid's words said to him: "It is all
right if you think so".

On the following day which was Saturday the 28th of Rajab 60 A.H. Walid
sent for the Imam again so that he might take the oath of allegiance
from him. The Imam, however, told his messenger to tell him to wait for
that night, so that he might take a decision by the following day.
During the same night he left Madina along with his wives, brothers and
nephews and most of the members of his family, and proceeded on his
journey to Makkah, remembering the words of Prophet Musa, son of Imram:

***"So he left the city afraid and cautious saying: Lord! Protect me
against the unjust people." (Surah al-Qasas, 28:21)***

When it was said to Imam Husayn that it would have been better if he had
adopted a deviated path so that the enemies might not have been able to
lay hands on him he replied: "By Allah I shall not go by a deviated
path. Let that which Allah wills happen". Eventually he arrived in
Makkah on Friday night after the 3rd of Shaban. Remembering the story of
Prophet Musa, he said:

***"When he started his journey to Midian he said, "Perhaps my Lord will
show me the right path '." (Surah al-Qasas, 28:22)***

The pilgrims used to visit the Imam in Makkah. Even Abdullah bin Zubayr,
who knew very well that none would take the oath of allegiance to
anybody in the presence of the son of the Holy Prophet and the Imam
enjoyed a position higher than everyone in all respects, came to see the
Imam every day.

The news of the death of Mu'awiya spread throughout Iraq and the people
also came to know that Imam Husayn and Abdullah bin Zubayr had declined
to take the oath of allegiance to Yazid and had gone to Makkah.

The distinguished supporters of Imam Ali gathered in the house of
Sulayman bin Surd Khuzai and thanked Allah for the death of Mu'awiya.
Sulayman bin Surd then said addressing those present: "Mu'awiya has
departed from the world and Husayn bin Ali has declined to take the oath
of allegiance to Yazid and has gone to Makkah. You are the supporters of
Husayn as well as of his father Ali. If you think that you are ready to
assist him and to fight against his enemy and can lay down your lives
for his sake, you should inform him of your readiness through a letter.
In case, however, you are scared that you will show slackness and will
abstain from rendering him assistance, you should not deceive him by
claiming unduly to be his supporters and devotees".

When Sulayman bin Surd said these words he had in mind the fact that so
long as there is no question of making sacrifices the people can
distinguish very well between truth and falsehood and make no mistake
about it. They understand clearly as to who is truthful and who is a
liar, where lays the truth, and where lay the falsehood; who is wise and
who is ignorant and who is a guide and who is a bandit.

However, they can make such a correct assessment only so long as the
question of profit and loss does not arise and they do not suffer any
loss by supporting the truth and fighting against falsehood. But when
the preliminaries for test become available and truth and falsehood
stand facing each other most of the people side with falsehood, and as
truth cannot be supported without sacrifice the views of the people
alter and they abandon truth and support falsehood.

Sulayman bin Surd knew well that the sentiments of the people at that
time could not be relied upon, because it might so happen that if Husayn
bin Ali rose against Bani Umayya later and they employed their full
strength to kill him and rendering him help became something dangerous,
the same people might turn away their faces from him, ignore the letters
written by them, close their doors in his face and even join his
enemies.

They might consider it a religious duty to kill him and might put him
and his friends to sword to gain the pleasure of Allah and His Prophet.
And after killing those godly persons they might stand and cry: "Allah
is the Greatest. I testify that there is no God but Allah and I testify
that Muhammad is His Prophet"; as if they had committed no sin at all!

It was for this reason that he explained the position to the
distinguished supporters and said: "Even now you should judge the result
in your minds and visualize the situation which is bound to arise and
then decide whether you can make him hopeful of your assistance and
invite him to Iraq with perfect confidence and final determination.

It should not be that today, when your sentiments are roused, you should
be writing letters, making covenants and taking oaths and pull the son
of the Prophet of Allah from Allah's sanctuary to Iraq, but tomorrow
when the enemy surrounds him and compels him either to take the oath of
allegiance or lose his head you should desert him and forget the
promises made by you".

The distinguished supporters replied with one voice: "We are prepared to
perform jihad and make sacrifices and shall lay down our lives for the
sake of our Imam". Thereupon Sulayman said: "In that case you should
write a letter to the Imam". They, therefore, wrote a letter as follows:

***In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***

This letter is being written by Sulayman bin Surd, Musayyab bin Najbah,
Rafa bin Shaddad Bajali, Habib bin Mazahir and other Muslim and faithful
supporters of Husayn bin Ali residing in Kufa. They write to Husayn bin
Ali: Peace be upon you. We join you in praising the Almighty Allah
except whom there is no god. Praised be Allah Who has destroyed your
oppressive and spiteful enemy, the man who prevailed over this nation,
assumed unlawfully the reins of government, usurped the public treasury
and became the ruler of the Muslims without their consent. He then
killed the pious persons and spared the bad ones and placed the property
of Allah at the disposal of the oppressors and the rich. May Allah
deprive him of His blessings as He deprived the people of Thamud.

At present we, the Iraqis, do not have any leader and Imam. Hence, we
request you to proceed to us. Maybe the Almighty Allah may draw us
together on truth through you. We have nothing to do with Nau'man bin
Bashir in the matter of Friday and Eid prayers. He is alone in the
governor's House. If we come to know that you have left to join us we
shall turn him out and shall, God willing, pursue him up to Syria".

They sent this letter through Abdullah bin Suba Hamdani and Abdullah bin
wal and instructed them to leave for Makkah immediately. They reached
the Imam in Makkah on the l0th of Ramazan, 60 A.H. and delivered the
letter to him.


