Chapter 30: Self Sacrificing Ladies
===================================

One should not, however, be oblivious of the fact that during the course
of this everlasting and important event which took place in 61 A.H.,
some great and magnanimous women also participated and made sacrifices,
so much so that some of them were even martyred in this path and their
honorable names have been mentioned in the glorious history of the
rising of Imam Husayn with honor and respect.

We now mention here the names of each of these great women in the
historical order and the role played by them.

Lady Dulham: The first whose name deserves to be remembered with honor
and respect was the wife of Zuhayr bin Qayn Bajali. She was the woman
who acquired the most honorable position in the history of Islam for all
times to come.

A man belonging to the tribe of Bani Fazara says: "We were returning
from Makkah along with Zuhayr bin Qayn Bajali and were proceeding to
Iraq. At that time Husayn bin Ali was also on his way to Iraq. However,
we did not wish to halt at the same halting-place at which Husayn
halted. Hence as and when Imam Husayn departed from a place, we halted
there and when he halted at a place we moved on. However, on one
occasion it so happened that we were obliged to halt at the same place
at which Husayn bin Ali halted. We pitched our tents on one side and he
pitched his on the other. While we were taking our meals there suddenly
a messenger of the Imam came. He saluted us and said: "O Zuhayr bin
Qayn! Husayn bin Ali has called you".

We disliked this message so much that we put down the morsels which we
had in our hands and all of us were perplexed. However, Dulham, the
daughter of Amr who was the wife of Zuhayr said to him: "The son of the
Holy Prophet of Allah has sent someone to you and called you; are you
not prepared to go to him? Allah be praised! What is the harm if you go
and see him, hear what he has to say and then return!" The words of this
woman had, the desired effect and she placed her husband in the category
of the greatest martyrs of Islam. Zuhayr was impressed by the words of
his wife and presented himself before the Imam. After some time he
returned with a face beaming with happiness and ordered his tent to be
pitched adjacent to the camp of the Holy Imam.

***Indeed, Allah is the guardian of those who believe. He takes them out
of darkness into light. (Surah al-Baqarah, 2: 257)***

Zuhayr went with the Imam and met martyrdom, and his wife returned to
her relatives.

Another honor which is recorded in history about this woman has been
mentioned in the book entitled Tazkira-e Sibt. According to it when
Zuhayr was martyred his wife said to his slave: "Go and shroud your
master". The slave came and saw the Imam without a shroud. He said to
himself: "Should I shroud my master and leave the Imam without a shroud?
By Allah I will do no such thing". He, therefore, shrouded the sacred
body of the Imam first and then he shrouded his master.

Lady Umme Wahab: The second lady who deserves to be praised for her
lofty character and sacrifice was the wife of Abdullah bin Umayr Kalbi.
Abdullah bin Umayr was a resident of Kufa and belonged to the tribe of
Bani Ulaym. One day he saw that a large army had gathered in the
date-palm garden of 'Kufa. He enquired about the army. He was informed
that those people were going to fight against Husayn, son of Fatima, the
daughter of the Holy Prophet.

Abdullah said: "Allah knows that I have been keen to fight against the
polytheists for His sake. However, I now hope that the spiritual reward
for fighting against these people who are going to kill the grandson of
the Holy Prophet will be not less than that for fighting against the
polytheists. Abdullah decided to leave and informed his wife Umme Wahab,
daughter of Abdullah about his intention.

His wife said: "It is an excellent idea. May Allah guide you in all
circumstances. Please also take me with you". Both of them left Kufa at
night and perhaps reached Karbala during the night of the 8th of
Muharram. When fighting was started by the enemy in the morning of
Ashura two slaves of Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad came forward for a single
combat. Habib bin Mazahir Asadi and Burayr bin Khuzayr Hamdani got ready
to fight with them, but the Imam asked them to wait. At this moment
Abdullah bin Umayr sought the Imam's permission to fight. He faced both
the enemies alone and killed them.

When the woman observed her husband fighting with them she also picked
up the stick of a tent and entered the battlefield. She said to her
husband: "May my parents be your ransom Sacrifice your life for the sake
of the children of the Holy Prophet". The Imam said to her: "May Allah
give you a good reward! May Allah bless you! Return towards the women
and stay with them in the tent, because women are not required to
perform jihad". Abdullah was the second person to be martyred on the day
of Ashura; the first being Muslim bin Awsaja.

Lady Rubab: The third lady whose illustrious name has been recorded in
the history of Ashura was Rubab, daughter of Imraul Qays, a wife of the
Holy Imam. She was the only wife of the Imam who accompanied him during
his journey to Karbala.

As regards Shehr Banu, the daughter of Yazd Gard, the last King of
Persia and the mother of the fourth Imam, she had died about 24 years
earlier than the tragedy of Karbala.

The name of Layla, daughter of Abi Murrah bin Urwah bin Mas'ud Thaqafi
the mother of Ali Akbar, has also not been mentioned in connection with
this tragedy and it is not known whether or not she was alive at that
time. No mention has also been made of the mother of Ja'far bin Husayn,
who belonged to the tribe of Quza'a. There is also no mention in the
event of Ashura of the mother of Fatima, daughter of Husayn i.e. Umme
Ishaq daughter of Talha bin Ubaydullah Taymi. Her daughter Fatima was,
however, present in Karbala. She also went to Kufa and Syria.

The Imam's only wife who was with him during this journey was,
therefore, the said honorable lady viz. Rubab, daughter of Imraul Qays
Kalbi. Imraul Qays was a Christian.

During the period of the Caliphate of Umar he embraced Islam. From the
very first day the caliph made him the chief of the tribe of Quza'a.
Besides the honor of becoming a Muslim and an Islamic chief he also
acquired another distinction. He had three daughters and he gave one of
them in marriage to Ali, the second to Hasan and the youngest namely
Rubab to Imam Husayn. Thus he became the father-in-law of three Imams.

Lady Rubab had one daughter and one son from Imam Husayn who were named
Sukayna and Abdullah respectively. The son who was a suckling was killed
on the day of Ashura and she herself as well as her daughter Sukayna
were made prisoners. The name of this lady, however, has not been
mentioned in connection with the events of the day of Ashura.

The fourth lady whose name may be mentioned in connection with the
events of the afternoon of the day of Ashura belonged to the tribe of
Bakr bin Wa'il. She enjoys an eminent position in depicting the tragedy
of Karbala. She has recorded on the pages of history a precise picture
of the meanness of the enemy in a few words.

She was with her husband in the army of Ibn sad. However, when she saw
that the soldiers of Kufa had made a rush on the tents of the children
of Imam Husayn and were looting even the dresses of the ladies she
picked up a sword, proceeded towards the tents of Imam Husayn and
shouted: "O children of Bakr bin Wa'il! You are alive and in spite of
this these people are plundering the tents of the daughters of the Holy
Prophet. Allah is the only Arbitrator. Come on, and avenge the
bloodshed". By means of these brief words she showed to what extent the
enemy had become mean. It seems as if the cry of this lady is still
resounding at the doors of the tents of Imam Husayn.

While studying the history of Ashura we come across the names of many
magnanimous women who rose to support truth and the godly persons with
perfect sincerity and they are not the only four women mentioned above.
However, just as none of the martyrs, whether Hashimite or
non-Hashimite, in spite of their greatness, magnanimity and
self-sacrifice, can attain to the position of Imam Husyan, who was the
leader of this revolution, none of these great women who displayed an
eminent performance at the time of the martyrdom of the martyrs or
during captivity, could acquire a position equal to that of lady Zaynab,
the eldest daughter of Imam Ali.

It was she who could truly take the place of her brother during
captivity and followed the same movement from the afternoon of the day
of Ashura till her arrival in Madina. She truly followed what her
brother said: â€œAbjectness and humiliation are far removed from us, the
Ahlul Bayt". She thus discharged the responsibility devolved upon her.
We may say that it was due to the education given to her by her mother,
Lady Fatima Zahra. She ought to have been as patient in the path of
faith as her mother Fatima and her grandmother Khadija had been.

Was it not lady Khadija who was the first to believe in the Prophet hood
of the Prophet of Allah, and who made greater sacrifices than anyone
else for the advancement of his religion and supported him in all
difficulties and hardships for about ten years i.e. from the first year
of his prophetic mission till the tenth year when she died?

Was lady Zaynab not the grand-daughter of the same lady Khadija and was
the path pursued by Imam Husayn any other path than the advancement of
religion and the revival of the call of the Holy Prophet? Hence, in case
it was necessary that, for the sake of the true religion of Islam and
for the Holy Qur'an, women should become captives and as a consequence
of this should address the people in the bazaars and the streets so as
to nullify the unjustified propaganda of the enemy and to make the
reality known to the people, who could be more suited for this task than
the daughter of Imam Ali who had inherited self-sacrifice from Khadija,
the greatest self-sacrificing lady of Islam, and Imam Ali the greatest
supporter of the Prophet of Allah.

Lady Zaynab, who was the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib and also the
grand-daughter of Khadija addressed the people in the bazaar of Kufa and
spoke eloquently like her father. It might be said that she was speaking
with the tongue of Imam Ali. By making a sign to the people she made
them quiet as if they had ceased to breathe, and suppressed the tumult.

Ahmad bin Tahir Baghdadi (d. 280 A.H.) has given three versions of her
address in his book entitled Balaghatun Nisa, one of which is reported
to have come down from Imam Sadiq.

Umme Kulsum, the sister of Zaynab also addressed the people in the
bazaar of Kufa. Both the sisters severely reproached the Kufians who
were touched so much that they began to weep and lament.

Fatima, the daughter of Imam Husayn also addressed the people in the
bazaar of Kufa and invited their attention to the great sin which they
had committed and the bad luck and adversity in which they had involved
themselves.

The task of Ahlul Bayt in the bazaar of Kufa came to an end, and then
they got an opportunity to speak in the court of Ibn Ziyad. The daughter
of Imam Ali came in the court in a very simple dress. She was encircled
by her slave-girls. She went and sat down in a corner of the palace. Ibn
Ziyad asked: "Who is the woman who has gone and sat down in a corner
along with her slave-girls?" None gave him a reply. He then repeated his
question. Thereupon one of the slave-girls of lady Zaynab said: "It is
Zaynab and she is the daughter of the same Fatima who was the daughter
of the Prophet of Allah".

At this moment a heavy responsibility devolved upon Zaynab. It was
necessary that she should exercise self-control. She should also give a
reply to Ibn Ziyad and should not give him a chance to let the matter be
ambiguous in the eyes of the people.

Ibn Ziyad said: "I thank Allah that He has disgraced you and killed you
and made the people aware of your fresh lies". Ibn Ziyad uttered three
blasphemous words on account of his being arrogant of his victory.
Otherwise what fresh lie had Bani Hashim told? Was it a fresh lie on
their part that they said, "Muhammad is the Prophet of Allah", or did
they tell any other lie?

In any case lady Zaynab said immediately in reply to Ibn Ziyad: "Allah
be thanked that He has honored us by means of His Prophet Muhammad and
purified us of every impurity. You have said that we have been disgraced
but it is a libertine who is disgraced and you have said that we have
lied but lies are told by the wicked. And I thank Allah once again that
others, and not we, are the libertines and the wicked".

In spite of this prompt reply by the daughter of Imam Ali Ibn Ziyad said
again: "Have you seen what Allah has done with your family?" It appears
that by saying this Ibn Ziyad wanted to remind her of those who had been
martyred two days earlier so that she might be moved and possibly say
something according to his wishes or make some requests. He was,
however, oblivious of the fact that the Ahlul Bayt did everything very
intelligently and did not utter even a word which was not worthy of
their position, and whatever they said was well calculated and according
to a plan, so that the object which they had in view might be achieved.

In reply to Ibn Ziyad's question: "Have you seen what Allah has done
with your family?" Zaynab replied: "Nothing new has happened. These
martyrs of our family were persons for whom Allah had destined
martyrdom, and they achieved this blessing, and embraced martyrdom.
However, a day will come soon when Allah will summon you and them for
the settlement of accounts and there you will grapple and dispute with
each other".

On hearing this Ibn Ziyad was so much disturbed and annoyed that if Amr
bin Harith had not reproached him, it was possible that he might have
ordered the sister of the Imam to be killed. However, of what use could
it be to him? Zaynab had already said what she had to say. She had also
identified the libertines and the wicked and introduced the pure and
sacred family of the Holy Prophet.

After a month or a few days more had passed, the daughter of Imam Ali
arrived in a more important and more delicate assembly. Here also it was
her duty to speak more clearly. As compared with the Kufians the Syrians
were more mistaken and more unacquainted with the Ahlul Bayt. It was,
therefore, necessary that she should mention the reality and introduce
the Ahlul Bayt more emphatically.

This assembly was organized in Damascus, the Islamic capital. Here, too,
lady Zaynab addressed the people and spoke to them. This speech has also
been mentioned by Ahmad bin Tahir Baghdadi in Balaghatun Nisa. He says:
"When Yazid saw the prisoners belonging to Ahlul Bayt and found them
standing before him he ordered the head of Imam Husayn to be brought in
a tray.

He hit the teeth of Imam Husayn with a stick which he had in his hand
and recited some poetic verses which are summarized thus: "I wish that
my ancestors, who were killed in Badr, had been alive today so that they
might see the present condition of the descendants of Muhammad and had
rejoiced and said: 'O Yazid! May your hands never ache". He added: "May
I not be a descendant of my ancestors if I don't take revenge upon the
children of Muhammad".

When the matters took such a turn, and Yazid, who killed Imam Husayn,
now rose to oppose and take revenge upon the Holy Prophet. Was then lady
Zaynab justified in ignoring his words and deeds and in keeping quiet
before one who claimed to be the successor of the Holy Prophet and ruled
in that capacity, and killed the most pious persons of Islam avenging
the murder of the polytheists of Makkah, who were killed by the Prophet
in the Battle of Badr? Could she remain silent when she saw that the
Syrians had accepted the words of Yazid as true and believed them?

Evidently Lady Zaynab could not keep quiet at this stage. Whatever she
said was her duty that she performed. Allah also preserved her speech
and it was not eliminated like many other religious documents. We should
be thankful to the Almighty Allah for this blessing.


