Chapter 32: Sermon of Lady Zaynab in the court of Yazid
=======================================================

Now we propose to study the sermon of lady Zaynab which she delivered in
the court of Yazid and which is recorded in a book written in the third
century A.H. [^1]

Yazid recited the blasphemous poetic verses of Abdullah bin Zab'ari
Sahmi which he had composed while he was an unbeliever and also added
some poetic verses of his own and said openly that he wanted to take
revenge upon the descendants of Muhammad because Muhammad and his
companions had killed his polytheist ancestors.

Zaynab, the daughter of Ali rose and began speaking. She added a new
chapter to the history of the Caliphate of Yazid which covered a period
of three years and a few months, and said: "O Yazid! Allah and His
Prophet have said that committing sins and considering the signs of
Allah to be false is ridiculing them", i.e. deny the sign of Allah today
and hold them in derision and have become happy, and recite poetic
verses on account of the martyrdom of the children of the Holy Prophet
just as the polytheists of Makkah became happy and sang songs because of
the martyrdom of some Muslims in the Battle of Uhud, and talk about
taking revenge upon the Holy Prophet.

This is how you become like them and how you have reached this stage?
You have reached this stage because you have committed too many sins.
Whoever treads the path of sin and persists in committing sins will,
according to the verdict of the Qur'an, deny the signs of Allah one day
and eventually will ridicule them and then deserve Divine punishment.

She added: "O Yazid! Do you think that we have become humble and
despicable owing to the martyrdom of our people and our own captivity?
As you have blocked all the paths for us, and we have been made captives
and are being taken from one place to another, do you think that Allah
has taken away his blessings from us? Do you think that by killing the
godly persons you have become great and respectable and the Almighty
looks at you with special grace and kindness?

For this reason and on account of this incorrect thinking you have
become elated and arrogant. You have become boastful because you have
seen that the matters have taken a turn in your favour. You have,
however, forgotten what Allah says:

***The disbelievers must not think that our respite is for their good We
only give them time to let them increase their sins. For them there will
be a humiliating torment." (Surah Ale Imran, 3: 178)***

Then lady Zaynab reminded Yazid that on the day of the conquest of
Makkah which took place in 8 A.H. the Holy Prophet did favor to all the
men and women of Makkah and set them free. Yazid himself was a
descendant of those freed persons. His father Mu'awiya, his grandfather
Abu Sufyan and Mu'awiya's mother were among those who were set free at
the time of the conquest of Makkah. On that day the Holy Prophet very
magnanimously set all of them free irrespective of what they had done in
the past and said: "Go, for all of you are free".

In the second part of her speech the daughter of Imam Ali made the
conquest of Makkah her topic and said: "O son of the freed ones! Is it
justice that you keep your women and slave-girls in seclusion but have
made the helpless daughters of the Holy Prophet ride on swift camels and
given them in the hands of their enemies so that they may take them from
one city to another".

Then she said: "Why shouldn't Yazid be spiteful against us, it is he,
who looks at us with hostility. You say with perfect intrepidity and
without imagining that you are committing a sin: 'I wish that my
ancestors who were killed in Badr had been present here today'. Then you
strike Imam Husayn in his teeth with a stick in your hand!

Why shouldn't you be like this, although you have done what you wanted
to do and have pulled out the roots of piety and virtue! You have shed
the blood of the sons of the Holy Prophet and have hidden the brilliant
stars on the earth from amongst the descendants of Abdul Muttalib under
the clouds of oppression and injustice.

However, you shall go before Allah soon. You shall meet your ancestors
and shall also be taken to their place. At that time you will wish that
you had been blind and dumb and had not said that it was a day of
rejoicing for your ancestors".

At this stage the daughter of Imam Ali prayed to Allah and said: "O
Lord! Procure our right and take revenge upon those who have oppressed
us". Then she turned to Yazid and said: "By Allah you have pulled off
your skin and cut off your flesh. You will soon go before the Prophet of
Allah and will see with your own eyes that his children are in Paradise.

It will be the day when Allah will deliver the descendants of the Holy
Prophet from the state of being scattered and will bring all of them
together in Paradise. This is the promise which Allah has made in the
Holy Qur'an. He says:

***Do not think of those who are slain for the cause of Allah as dead.
They are alive with their Lord and receive sustenance from Him. (Surah
Ale Imran, 3: 169)***

O Yazid! On the day when Allah will be the Judge and Muhammad will be
the petitioner, and your limbs will give evidence against you, your
father, who made you the ruler of the Muslims, will receive His
punishment. On that day it will become known what reward the oppressors
earn, whose position is worse and whose party is more humble.

O enemy of Allah and O son of the enemy of Allah! I swear by Allah that
I consider you to be humble and not fit even to be reprimanded and
reproached. But what am I to do? Our eyes are shedding tears, our hearts
are burning, and our martyrs cannot come to life by our reprimanding and
reproaching you. My Husayn has been killed and the partisans of Satan
are taking us to the fools so that they may get their reward for
insulting Allah.

Our blood is dripping from their hands and our flesh is falling down
from their mouths. The sacred bodies of the martyrs have been placed at
the disposal of the wolves and other carnivorous animals of the jungle.
If you have gained something today by shedding blood, you will certainly
be a loser on the Day of Judgment. On that day nothing but your deeds
will count. On that day you will curse Ibn Marjana and he will curse
you. On that day you and your followers will quarrel with one another by
the side of the Divine scale of Justice.

On that day you will see that the best provision which your father made
for you was that he enabled you to kill the children of the Prophet of
Allah. I swear by Allah that I do not fear anyone except Him and do not
complain to anyone else. You may employ your deceit and cunning efforts,
but I swear by Allah that the shame and disgrace which you have earned
by the treatment meted out to us cannot be eradicated".

The daughter of Fatima Zahra ended her speech with offering thanks to
Allah. She said: "I thank Allah Who has concluded the task of the chiefs
of the youths of Paradise with prosperity and forgiveness and
accommodated them in Paradise. I pray to Allah that He may elevate their
ranks and favor them more with His kindness, for Allah is Omnipotent".

[^1]: BalƒÅghatun Nisa', Abul Fazl Ahmad bin Abi Tahir, (208- 280 A.H.).


