Chapter 36: Invitation of the Prophet to His Kin
================================================

On the very first day when the Holy Prophet made his call public
according to the Command of Allah and was commissioned by the
revelation: ***Warn your near relatives (Surah Ash-Shuara, 26: 214)***
to invite them to the true religion of Islam he said to his near
relatives time and again: "Do not deviate from the path of Allah relying
on my relationship with you. You should understand it clearly that the
matter is not in my hands and I cannot do you any good or save you from
any loss contrary to the Divine law.

If you can gain something it is by the same method which has been
specified by Allah, and if you sustain a loss it will be according to
the same law, which has been prescribed by Him. None should imagine that
the accounts will be nullified for the sake of Quraysh or Bani Hashim or
Bani Abd Munaf or Bani Abdul Muttalib or my daughter Fatima or my aunt
Safia and their misdeeds will be overlooked".

After the revelation of the aforesaid verse the Holy Prophet called
Quraysh together and said: "O Quraysh! Save yourselves from the Fire of
Hell, because your profit and loss is not in my hands" i.e. there is a
law for profit and loss and reward and punishment. If you do good deeds
you will benefit and gain spiritual reward, but if you do evil deeds you
will sustain loss and will be awarded punishment.

O Bani Kab bin Lu'ee! Deliver yourselves from the Fire, for your profit
and loss is not in my hands. O Bani Qusay! Deliver yourselves from the
Fire, because I cannot provide you spiritual reward nor can I turn away
punishment from you. 'O Bani Abd Munilf! You yourselves should procure
means to save yourselves from Divine punishment, for I cannot do
anything for you i.e. if you are pious you will go to Paradise but if
you are polytheists you will go to Hell.

I have not been given a key to take my polytheist relatives to Paradise
through a backdoor and I have also not been given an authority to exempt
my friends and relatives from the responsibilities imposed upon them by
Allah. O Bani Zohra bin Kilab! Deliver yourselves from Divine
punishment.

O Bani Abdul Muttalib! You should act in such a way that Allah may not
punish you, and you should know that I cannot help you in the matter. O
Bani Murra bin Kab! O Bani Hashim! O Bani Abdush-Shams! Deliver
yourselves from the torture on account of polytheism by worshipping
Allah, for I cannot do anything for you in this regard.

O Abbas, (uncle of the Prophet)! You, too, should free yourself from
Divine torture. O Safia, (aunt of Muhammad)! You too should think of
your freedom and deliverance for I cannot do anything for you. Neither
your profit in this world nor your share in the Hereafter is in my
hands. So you must believe in Allah and say: "There is no deity but
Allah".

O Fatima daughter of Muhammad! You must also endeavor to save yourself
from Divine punishment because your father cannot help you in the matter
and has no control over your gain and loss. Of course, you are my
relatives and I shall discharge the duties which devolve on me on that
account".

If relationship with the Holy Prophet cannot take the place of faith and
pious deeds, and the daughter of the Holy Prophet must also follow the
same path for her good future which it is necessary for other persons to
follow, and not only for the daughter of the Holy Prophet but for the
Holy Prophet himself, there should be no means to acquire Divine
pleasure except faith and good deeds.

Then how can it be possible that after the martyrdom of Imam Husayn all
these Qur'anic verses, reports, traditions and the sermons of Nahjul
Balagha should be treated as of no consequence and some method other
than faith and good deeds should be found to enter Paradise? Can it be
so that before the tragedy of Karbala the Muslims were in need of
truthfulness, honesty and uprightness and paying attention to articles
of worship and religious duties and abstinence from telling lies,
drinking wine, usury and acquisition of wealth by unlawful means, but
now these things are not needed to that extent?

It is now possible that a man may get ahead of the murderers of Imam
Husayn in the matter of cruelty but may at the same time be contented by
sending greetings to the Imam and his magnanimous friends and may also
be associated with the Imam and his friends on the Day of Judgment! The
friends of Imam Husayn were an embodiment of greatness of soul,
sincerity, faith and truthfulness.

It is by studying about the sacrifices performed by them that we
understand the true meaning of support. The friends of Imam Husayn have
explained to us the meanings of the words love, faith, support and
self-sacrifice. Even the epic verses which they recited before the
enemies on the day of Ashura reflect their personality and spiritual
greatness so that one who says Ya Lay Tani Kuntu Ma'akum (I wish that I
too had been with you and had been honored and exalted with you) should
reflect a little and judge fairly whether this sentence of his will fall
under the category of truth or falsehood, and whether he really wishes
that he had been with Abis bin Abi Shabib Shakiri and had, at the time
of stoning by the enemy, removed his coat of mail from his body, and his
helmet from his head like him, whose body had been smashed with stones
in support of truth! Or he wishes to have been their companion, because
he has never pondered as to what grand sacrifices the companions of the
Imam offered and what blows of the enemy they faced with firmness.

Consequently he utters things which are contrary to reality and perhaps
hopes that his words will be treated to be at par with those of the
companions of the Imam. The companions of the Imam had, however, reached
such a stage of purity and faith that the light of conviction was
reflected even in what they said to console the Imam.


