Chapter 37: Confident Companions of Imam Husayn
===============================================

Tabari writes that after the Imam had offered the noon prayers, Zuhyar
bin Qayn engaged the enemy. While fighting he continued to say: "I am
Zuhayr bin Qayn. I drive the enemies away from my Imam with my sword".

Then he placed his hand on the shoulder of the Holy Imam and said: "Step
forward and do not be worried. You are our Divine guide. Why should you
be anxious in connection with this occurrence? Is it anything other than
that today you will see your grandfather, the Prophet of Allah, your
brother, your father Ali, your uncle Hamza, the Doyen of Martyrs, and
become happy?

What a high position Zuhayr had attained in the matter of faith and
spiritual insight! He consoled the Imam and said: "Do not be worried on
account of what has happened, because there is no need for anxiety and
regret". It would not be surprising if, as written in some books, Imam
Ali is reported to have said: "Even if the curtain is lifted and the
hidden realities are manifested it will add nothing to my faith".

Whether Ali did or did not say this he definitely enjoyed this position
and did possess such a sublime faith. It is not something unexpected and
nothing else could be expected from Imam Ali. What is surprising is that
Zuhayr bin Qayn also enjoyed this position to some extent.

What he said to the Imam shows that he was telling him: "I who am Zuhayr
and one of the devotees of the son of the Commander of the Faithful have
arrived at such a position after attending upon the Imam for some days
that even if the curtain is removed from my eyes nothing will be added
to my faith". This very faith and clear sightedness kept the friends of
the Imam on the right path in all circumstances and they did no stumble
in the least.

Nafe' bin Hilal Jamali, one of the companions of the Imam, was shooting
down the enemies with arrows and was reciting the following epic verse:
"I am Hilal Jamali. I follow the path of Ali" i.e. even when fighting
was in progress he was advocating the cause of Ali and was mentioning
his name and praising his faith. He killed twelve men of Umar bin Sad
and also wounded some others. Eventually, however, his arms were broken
and he was disabled and arrested. When he was brought before Ibn sad he
asked him: "O Nafe', why have you subjected yourself to this calamity?"
Umar was perhaps expecting that like many others he would regret his
action and apologize.

However, Nafe' said: "Allah is aware of my intention with regard to what
I have done"; and while blood was flowing down from his beard he added:
"I swear by Allah that I have killed twelve of your men and also wounded
some others. I do not regret my action and if I had not broken my
shoulders and arms you could not have arrested me". Nafe' was the first
of the companions of the Imam to be arrested and executed.

At the time of his death also he furnished a clear proof of his faith
and correct assessment, and history, too, recorded it with perfect
honesty. When the sword was raised to cut off his head he said: "I thank
Allah that I am going to be killed at the hands of the worst people".

This was the spiritual condition of the persons to whom we send
greetings and then say with boldness: "We wish that we too had been with
you and had been honored and exalted like you". Why don't we ever say:
"Thank Allah that we were not present on that day and did not get
involved in such a test and did not participate in shedding the blood of
the pure and virtuous persons like you". Was that day nearer to reality
and truth or is this thanksgiving and rejoicing?


