Chapter 38: Martyrs of Ale Abi Talib in Karbala
===============================================

In the year 61 A.H. Imam Husayn went from Madina to Makkah and from
there he reached near Kufa. At all these places he invited the people to
assist him and to defend truth and reality, and delivered various
speeches. This campaign lasted for more than six months but as it is
well-known he did not find more than seventy two sincere supporters. Out
of them seventeen belonged to his own family. Two of them were his own
sons namely Ali Akbar and Ali Asghar -the suckling child of the Imam.
There were the sons of his brother Imam Hasan viz. Qasim, Abdullah and
Abu Bakr.

There were also five brothers of the Imam namely Abbas, Abdullah, Ja'far
and Uthman, sons of Ummul Baneen, and Muhammad bin Ali. There were also
two sons of Abdullah bin Ja'far named Awn and Muhammad. Besides them
there were five descendants of Aqil viz. Ja'far bin Aqil, Abdur Rahman
bin Aqil, Abdullah and Muhammad sons of Muslim bin Aqil and Muhammad bin
Abi Sa'id bin Aqil. The names of these seventeen persons have been
mentioned in *Ziyarat-i Nahiya*.

As regards others not more than fifty five accompanied the Imam. Even if
some more persons have accompanied him in the beginning they deserted
him when they became aware of the political conditions in Kufa and Iraq.
However, if the supporters of the Imam in these days are counted they
will be found to be innumerable. The question, therefore, arises: Were
the people in those days very bad and do those belonging to the present
age excel them in the matter of recognition of the Imam and
self-sacrifice? No. That is not so. During those days also until the
people were put to test and Muslim and Hani were hanged, there were
innumerable devotees of Imam Husayn and he was greeted vociferously from
all sides.

In fact it may be said that it was a very good time because by means of
his eloquence, personality and the antecedents peculiar to him, Imam
Husayn was able to find, during the period of his six month's journey
from Madina to Makkah and then to Iraq, seventy two enlightened and
sincere supporters and he did not really need any more. He had not gone
with the object of conquest so that he might have needed a larger army.

For the purpose of achievement of the object which the Imam had in view
these seventy two great and honorable men and children were sufficient.
Besides them were the brave and magnanimous ladies who said in all
conditions what they had to say. They informed the people about the true
facts and the great services rendered by their self-sacrificing men.
They related the events of Ashura in every town where they were taken,
and told the people about the enemy stopping the supply of water, making
the horses trample the bodies of the martyrs and killing the suckling
child.

They performed a great duty in Syria when they changed the ideas of the
people of Damascus and its suburbs who had been misled by anti-Ahlul
Bayt propaganda for a period of forty two years. In the bazaar of
Damascus they told the people that the Verse of Purification had been
revealed about them and also explained the rights of the relatives of
the Holy Prophet. Notwithstanding the fact that they were bereaved and
mournful they eventually returned to Madina with a relieved mind.

It is possible that some followers of the Ahlul Bayt may not relish our
saying that they returned to Madina with a disburdened and relieved
mind. However, if we deliberate upon what has been said so far and take
into account the definite successes which the Ahlul Bayt achieved during
this journey, we shall have to admit that their sentiments cannot be
interpreted in any other way. We have before us the same interpretation
of the daughter of Imam Ali and we have only followed that great lady
about whose bravery and magnanimity we have definite proof with us.

As narrated by Ibn Tawus, when Ibn Ziyad said to lady Zaynab: "Have you
seen what Allah has done to your family?", she replied: "I have not seen
anything bad. They were destined to be martyred and, therefore, went to
Paradise. Soon Allah will bring you and them together. Then the matter
will be settled and we shall see in whose favor the decision is taken. O
Ibn Marjana! May your mother weep for you".

Enormous blessings be upon you, O great lady, who were made prisoner and
that too by one who had inherited grudge for the Ahlul Bayt from his
father, but in spite of that you spoke so explicitly and frankly. In our
opinion this example of the courage and bravery of the daughter of Imam
Ali is more explicit and valuable than even the speeches which she
delivered in Kufa and Syria.

Can there be found in the history of mankind any other woman, whose six
or seven brothers were martyred, whose son was martyred, whose ten
nephews and cousins were martyred and who was made prisoner also along
with her sisters and the children of her brothers, and even in the state
of captivity who defended herself and her martyrs and that too in a city
which was her father's capital at one time and where she had stayed for
about four years during the time of her father's caliphate?

However, in this condition and in the presence of all causes of worry
and dejection she should not complain about what she had to suffer but
should say with perfect frankness: "We have not experienced anything
contrary to our liking and inclination. If our men have met martyrdom
they had come for this very purpose. If this had not happened it would
have been a matter of worry and uneasiness. Now that they have performed
this Divine duty decently and acquired the honor of martyrdom it is only
appropriate that we should thank Allah for this success".


