Chapter 3: Letters of the Kufians to the Imam
=============================================

After two days the people of Kufa sent about 150 letters, each of which
was from one, two or four men. Most of these letters were brought from
Kufa to Makkah by Qays bin Mashar Saidawi, Abdur Rahman bin Abdullah bin
Shaddad Arhabi and Ammara bin Abdullah Saluli. Two more days passed and
then the supporters of Kufa sent a letter to the Imam through Hani bin
Hani Sabi'i and Sa'id bin Abdullah Hanafi. The following are the
contents of the letter:

***In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***

This is a letter to Husayn bin Ali from his Muslim and faithful
supporters. Be quick and hurry up, for the people are waiting for you,
and they do not look towards anyone other than you. Hurry up. Hurry up.
We repeat: Make haste. Make haste. And peace be upon you."

Thereafter Shabath bin Rabie, Hajjar bin Abjar, Yazid bin Harith bin
Ruwaym, Urwah bin Qays, Amr bin Hajjaj Zubaydi and Muhammad bin Amr
Taymi wrote the following letter:

"The gardens and the deserts are green and fresh and the fruits have
ripened. Proceed whenever you like. Your Iraqi soldiers are ready to
receive you. And peace by upon you".

Letters from the Kufians piled up with the Imam and the messengers from
Iraq gathered in Makkah. The Imam sent the following reply to the
Kufians:

***"In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.***

From Husayn bin Ali to the believers and Muslims of Iraq. Hani and
Sa'id, your last messengers, have brought your letters. I have read what
you have written and pondered over it. You have written that you do not
have an Imam and asked me to come to you so that Allah may perhaps draw
you together on truth and guidance through me. Now I am sending to you
my cousin Muslim bin Aqil in whom I have full confidence.

If he writes to me that your elders and wise men confirm what your
messengers say and what you have written in your letters I may proceed
towards you soon. I swear by my life that a true Imam and leader is only
he who takes decisions according to the Qur'an, establishes justice,
promotes the Divine religion and dedicates himself to the path of Allah.
And peace be upon you".

The Imam sent this letter through Hani and Sa'id. Then he ordered Muslim
bin Aqil to proceed to Iraq along with Qays bin Mash'ar Saidawi, Ammara
bin Abdullah Saluli and Abdul Rahman bin Abdullah Araji. He instructed
him to tread the path of piety, to keep his mission secret, to be
lenient and moderate, and to inform the Imam immediately if he found
that the people supported the rising and revolution.


