Chapter 39: Role of Islamic Training
====================================

It has been narrated by Waqidi that during the Battle of Uhud when many
Muslims met martyrdom and even the martyrdom of the Holy Prophet was
rumored in Madina, an Ansari woman named Hinda daughter of Amr bin Hizam
and aunt of Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari, came to Uhud and collected the
corpses of three of her martyrs viz. her son Khallad, her husband Amr
bin Jumuh and her brother Abdullah bin Amr. She loaded them on a camel
and proceeded to Madina with the intention of burying them there.

While on her way she met the wives of the Holy Prophet who were going to
Uhud to obtain news about the welfare of the Holy Prophet and were
worried. One of the wives of the Holy Prophet asked Hinda: "What is the
news?" She replied: "There is good news. The Holy Prophet is alive and
safe and whatever other calamity may have befallen the people is
immaterial."

Hinda who was carrying the corpses of her dear ones to Madina to bury
them there said with a feeling of strong devotion, courage and faith:
"When the Prophet of Allah is alive why should we be sad and when this
good news is there what other news can make us unhappy?" Then she said:
"I have brought other good news also from Uhud. Firstly, Allah has
honored some of our faithful men with martyrdom and secondly the
following verse has been revealed: ***Allah repulsed the disbelievers in
their wrath; they gained no good. Allah sufficed the believers in
fighting. Allah is Mighty. (Surah al-Ahzab, 33:25)***

She was asked: "What have you loaded on the camel?" She replied: "My
brother, son and husband have met martyrdom and I am now carrying their
corpses to Madina".

As narrated by Ibn Ishaq the husband, brother and father of a woman
belonging to Bani Dinar tribe were martyred in the Battle of Uhud. When
she received the news of the martyrdom of her dear ones, she enquired
about the Holy Prophet and was told that he was quite well and was not
exposed to any danger. She, however, said: "I must go and see the Holy
Prophet myself". When she saw him and knew that he was safe, she said:
"Now that I have seen you alive and in good health every other calamity
that may have befallen us is of no consequence".

Indeed if Islamic teachings and training of the Holy Prophet could make
a woman, who was previously an unbeliever and idol-worshipper, so
faithful, sincere and self-sacrificing in the path of Allah that finding
the Prophet alive made her tolerate every other grief, and she
considered every other affliction to be immaterial it deserves
consideration as to what a deep impression this training and these
teachings must have made on the daughter of Ali and Fatima and what an
enormous faith, sincerity and devotion they must have created in her.

If the Muslim women belonging to the Aws and Khazraj tribes could
display so much spiritual greatness, lady Zaynab must have acquired a
much higher stage of spiritual greatness and it was on this account that
in spite of all that she had to suffer she said with perfect calmness
and peace of mind: "I have seen nothing except goodness". This was the
secret of the greatness and the rapid and astonishing advancement of the
Muslims. It was the sublime faith which dazzled the eyes of the enemy
and made him humble and helpless.

It is possible that some persons may say and it is also perhaps written
in many books that the Muslims had to suffer heavy losses in the Battle
of Uhud and many of their dear ones were martyred. However, the Battle
of Badr was very fruitful. Many men of the enemy were killed and some of
them were also taken prisoners and excepting those who were freed
without ransom, 1000 to 4000 dirhams per head were realized to redeem
them.

However, this way of thinking i.e. to consider the Battle of Badr more
beneficial for the advancement of Islam as compared with the Battle of
Uhud, shows that proper attention has not been paid to the results which
were gained from the Battle of Uhud and which could not be produced from
the Battle of Badr. In Badr the Muslims displayed such physical strength
that the enemy realized that even if they (the Muslims) were 313 in
number and had only six coats of mail and seven swords they could rout
950 armed men, kill some of them, make some of them captives and put the
remaining ones to flight.

However, Quraysh could not yet imagine that if one day the dear ones of
the residents of Madina met martyrdom for the sake of the Prophet of
Allah and their women lost even their husbands, brothers and sons they
would still be happy on account of the Prophet being safe. And when the
Holy Prophet asked them to pursue the enemy, those wounded in the battle
would collect their baggage and make haste to pursue the enemy as if
they had not sustained any wound. The Battle of Uhud was more effective
in terrifying the enemy than the Battle of Badr and the test on this day
was more fruitful than the test on that day.

There are many people who show enthusiasm at the time of gaining
victory, taking the enemies prisoners and acquiring war booty, but
become weak, abject and demoralized when they have to suffer affliction
and hardship and are faced with death or are taken prisoners. After the
Battle of Badr Quraysh were confident that if they gained victory over
the Muslims one day and killed the dear ones of the Ansar and the
residents of Madina, their enthusiasm to support the Prophet would cool
down and they would be discouraged and would desert him. They could not
imagine that it made no difference to the Muslims whether the Holy
Prophet returned to Madina with seventy prisoners and a large booty or
with wounded companions with amputated limbs after more than seventy of
them had been martyred.

The prisoners of Karbala made the same impression on the mentality of
the enemy during their journey to Kufa and Syria as the bereaved women
and men of the Ansar had made after the Battle of Uhud. The conduct of
Ahlul Bayt during this journey could not be predicted. It could not be
imagined that after all their sufferings they would be able to stand
erect, deliver speeches everywhere, bring the victorious and powerful
enemy to his knees and change the public opinion so much that even the
prevailing regime would be affected by it and say, on the very first
day, to the prisoners belonging to Ahlul Bayt:

"May Allah curse the son of Marjana. If there had been any relationship
between you and him he would not have treated you in this manner and
would not have sent you to Syria in this terrible plight".


