Chapter 40: Allegiance of the Madinites to the Prophet
======================================================

We have already mentioned that in the thirteenth year of the Prophet's
mission the elders of Madina took the oath of allegiance to him in the
valley of Mina, and Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib took a promise from them
that they would not fail to assist the Holy Prophet. Some historians say
that Abbas addressed them thus: "O people of Khazraj! Now that you are
inviting Muhammad to come to your city you should know that he is
honored and enjoys amongst us a position about which you are well aware.
I swear by Allah that we, Bani Hashim, who have expressed belief in him
as well as those who have not done so, are prepared to sacrifice our
lives for him and will defend him as a matter of faith and also as a
matter of family honor. Muhammad is respected and honored in his own
city as well as in his own family.

Now that out of all the people he has chosen to go with you, you should
think over the matter very carefully. If you feel that you will remain
faithful to him and support him against his enemies and are strong,
brave and experienced in warfare and able to withstand the enmity of all
the Arabs who will rise collectively to fight against you, only then you
should pursue the task which you have undertaken to accomplish.

In case, however, you are afraid that after taking him to your city you
will withhold support from him and leave him friendless, you should
leave him alone just now, because he is respectable and powerful amongst
his relatives and in his city. You should consult one another and take a
decision in the matter and should not disperse without a final decision,
because the best words are those which are truer".

After Abbas had spoken, Bara bin Marur, one of the distinguished
companions of the Prophet, said: "We have heard what you have said. By
Allah if we had thought of something other than that mentioned by you,
we would have spoken about it. However, we are determined to support the
Prophet sincerely and not to spare even our lives in the path of Allah
and His Prophet".

Abbas bin Ubada said: "O people of Khazraj tribe! Do you know on What
matter you are taking the oath of allegiance to this man?" They replied
in the affirmative. Thereupon he said: "You are taking the oath of
allegiance to him with the intention that you will fight for his sake
with the red and the black people. In case, therefore, you feel that you
will desert him when you are required to spend your wealth for his sake
or when your elders are killed you should abandon the idea of taking the
oath of allegiance just now, because by Allah such an action is the
cause of disgrace in this world as well as in the Hereafter.

However, if you feel that even after spending wealth and in spite of
your nobles and elders being killed you will remain faithful to him, you
must not forsake him, because I swear by Allah that in this lies the
happiness of both the worlds. Thereupon all of them said with one voice:
"We are ready to take the oath of allegiance notwithstanding the fact
that we have to sacrifice our wealth and our elders are killed".

Then they asked the Holy Prophet: "What shall we gain if we remain
faithful?" He replied: "The Paradise". They said: "Then stretch forth
your hand so that we may take the oath of allegiance to you". According
to Ibn Ishaq the Holy Prophet commenced his discourse by reciting the
Holy Qur'an, inviting them to Allah and encouraging them to embrace
Islam. He then said: "I accept your allegiance on the condition that you
will support me in the same manner in which you support your women and
children".

Bara bin Marur held the hand of the Holy Prophet and said: "I swear by
Allah who has sent you as the true Prophet that we will certainly defend
you in the same manner in which we defend our women and our honor. O
Prophet of Allah! Do accept our oath of allegiance. By Allah we are
well-versed in fighting and are ready to fight. In fact we have
inherited warfare as our way of life from generation to generation".

At this stage Abul Haitham bin Tayhan who was one of the elders of the
Ansar and the martyrs of Siffin interrupted Bara bin Marur and said: "A
Prophet of Allah! There are relations between the Jews and us and we are
going to sever them now. Let it not be that we should leave our
confederates and later when Allah makes you successful you should return
to your people and leave us helpless", The Holy Prophet smiled and said:
"This will never happen and the contrary your blood is my blood and my
honor is your honor. I belong to you and you belong to me. I will fight
against anyone who fights against you, and will be at peace with him who
is at peace with you". Upon this the Ansar declared: "We accept the
invitation of the Holy Prophet and take the oath of allegiance to him
and are prepared to give our wealth and property in this path, even
though our elders may be killed".

Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib who was holding the hand of the Holy Prophet
said: "Speak in low tones because spies have been appointed to keep a
watch on us. Keep your aged persons in the front so that we may talk
with them and you should disperse after taking the oath of allegiance
and every one of you should return to his own place".

The first person who took the oath of allegiance to the Holy Prophet was
Bara bin Marur. According to another narration it was Abul Haitham ibn
Tayhan and according to still another narration it was As'ad bin Zurara.
Thereafter the remaining seventy persons put their hands in the hand of
the Holy Prophet and took the oath of allegiance. Then twelve persons
were selected from amongst them as Naqib (guards) and made responsible
to look after the affairs of their people. In this way Yathrib i.e. the
city which was named Madinatur Rasul (the city of the Prophet) after the
Holy Prophet's migration, became the greatest center of Islamic
propagation.

The migration of the Muslims to Madina began in the month of Zil-Haj of
the thirteenth year of the Holy Prophet's mission, because after the
return of the seventy five persons to Madina, who took the second oath
of allegiance at Aqaba and the Quraysh having come to know that the
tribes of Aws and Khazraj had made a pact with the Holy Prophet and
taken the oath of allegiance to him, the persecution of the Muslims by
them became severer. They began abusing and torturing them more than
before and life became unbearable for the Muslims in Makkah.

They, therefore, sought the Holy Prophet's permission to migrate and the
Holy Prophet permitted them to go to Madina and join their brethren, the
Ansar, and said to them: "The Almighty Allah has made Yathrib, a place
of peace for you and its residents your brothers". The Muslims proceeded
from Makkah to Madina in groups and the Holy Prophet also awaited the
Command of his Lord telling him to migrate from Makkah and go to Madina.
The Quraysh, too, conspired to kill the Prophet of Allah and drew a plan
in this behalf with great precision.

They did not, however, know that Allah intended to take out His Prophet
from the city of his relatives and kin, and place him amongst the people
who were more kind and devoted than any father or brother and ready to
support him and make sacrifices for his sake. The idolaters were
planning to kill the Holy Prophet and Allah also willed to protect him
for the advancement of Islam as a universal religion. Allah says:

***The unbelievers planned to imprison, murder or expel you (Muhammad)
from your city. They make evil plans, but Allah too plans and Allah's
plans are the best. (Surah al-Anfal, 8:30)***

The Prophet of Allah left Makkah during the first night of the month of
Rabiul Awwal of the fourteenth year of his mission. After remaining
hidden for three nights in the cave of Thaur he proceeded to Madina
accompanied by two Muslims as well as a polytheist, who had been hired
as a guide. On the 12th of Rabiul Awwal he arrived in Quba, a place in
Madina. The people of Madina accorded him a hearty welcome and the gay
voices of the people were resounding in the city.

They recited the poetic verses thus: "The full moon has risen from
Thaniyatul Wida (name of a place). So long as one prays to Allah it is
necessary for us to thank the Almighty for this blessing. O you, who
have been raised amongst us by Allah! You have come and arrived amongst
us in such circumstances that we are prepared to obey all your orders"


