Chapter 41: Historical days of Madina
=====================================

In those days the city of Madina was witnessing important historical
events. There was a day when in the Battle of Badr, which took place in
the month of Ramazan 2 A.H., 313 Muslims gained a victory over 950
polytheists. They killed more than seventy of them and made more than
seventy of them prisoners.

The good news of this victory reached Madina and the Holy Prophet and
his companions returned to their homes successful and victorious. Then
there was the day when the Muslims fought against 3000 polytheists of
Makkah in the Battle of Uhud in the month of Shawwal 3 A.H. In that
battle more than seventy distinguished Muslims met martyrdom and the
Holy Prophet and the Muslim Mujahids returned to Madina mournful and
bereaved.

There was a day in 4 A.H. when the news of the martyrdom of forty or
seventy distinguished Muslims at Bayr Mauna reached Madina. In that very
year the news of the martyrdom of nine companions of the Holy Prophet in
the Sarya (battle) of Rajie spread in Madina. In 5 A.H. 3000 Muslims
gained victory in the Battle of the Ditch over an army of 12,000 or as
stated by Masudi in al Tanbih wal Ashrar 24,000 polytheists. Allah
helped His Prophet and made the enemies return disgraced and defeated.
In the 2nd, 4th and 5th A.H. the Jews belonging to the tribes of Bani
Qaynuqa, Bani Nazir and Bani Qurayza received the punishment which they
deserved and the surroundings of Madina were cleared of these
treacherous people.

In 7 A.H. the Muslims gained victory over the Jews of Khayber and the
news of this great victory reached Madina. When Ja'far bin Abi Talib and
many others who had migrated to the Christian State of Ethiopia,
thirteen years earlier, returned safely to Madina and the Holy Prophet
was so pleased on their arrival that he said: "I do not know what makes
me more happy today the conquest of Khayber or the return of Ja'far from
Ethiopia".

In the year 8 A.H. the news of the martyrdom of Ja'far bin Abu Talib,
Zayd bin Harith and Abdullah bin Rawaha at Mota (Syria) reached Madina.
The Holy Prophet and 30,000 Muslims returned to Madina safely from the
Battle of Tabuk. It was indeed a very dangerous occasion. In the month
of Ramazan 8 A.H. the Holy Prophet conquered Makkah and entered the city
accompanied by 12, 000 armed men. The good news of this great victory
spread in Madina and idol-worship came to an end in the Arabian
Peninsula for ever. In the early part of the 11 A.H. the Holy Prophet
breathed his last. This great tragedy made all the residents of Madina
mournful and bereaved.

After his demise also the city of Madina witnessed many important
historical events everyone of which had effect to some extent on the
political and social life of the Muslims till 61 A.H. arrived and after
Bani Hashim and the Muslims of Madina had experienced severe sufferings
for about six months the news of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn and his
devoted companions reached this city. This event reflected once again
the situation which was created on the day of the demise of the Holy
Prophet.

Shaykh Mufid and Tabari write that when Imam Husayn was martyred and his
head was brought before Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad he summoned Abdul Malik bin
Abil Harith Salami and said to him: "Proceed to Madina and convey to
Umar bin Sa'id bin As, the Governor of Madina, the good news of Husayn
bin Ali's assassination".

It is, of course, surprising that within a short period of fifty years
after the demise of the Holy Prophet the Muslims became so ungrateful
that the news of the murder of his children and dear ones was conveyed
as "good and great tidings" to the Governor of the city of Madina i.e.
the place where the Holy Prophet migrated and where he was buried. Abdul
Malik bin Abi Harith was reluctant to convey that news to Madina, the
place of habitation of Bani Hashim and the kith and kin of the Imam and
felt ashamed to undertake that task.

He, therefore, requested Ubaydullah to excuse him from performing that
duty. However, Ubaydullah who wielded authority and had become more
severe after killing the Imam threatened Abdul Malik and said to him:
"You must go and convey this happy news to the Governor of Madina and it
should not reach Madina before you".

He also gave him some money and said: "Do not coin excuses and depart as
early as possible. If your camel ceases to be fit to perform the journey
arrange for another camel and abandon the first one". Ibn Ziyad did not
yet realize that all that insistence was harmful to him and when the
details about the martyrdom of the Imam would reach the ears of the
people they would become a part of history and the source of disgrace
for him and Yazid and it would not do any harm to the Imam.

The Imam would have stood to lose (if this interpretation be correct) if
the tragedy of his martyrdom had not become public and the immorality
and corruption of the enemy had not been recorded in the history, the
contemporary and future Muslims had remained ignorant of the true facts.
Ibn Ziyad was one of those persons who dig their grave with their own
hands, insist on their own foolishness and publish their disgrace
everywhere.

Almighty Allah says:

***They think to beguile Allah, and the believers; in fact they beguile
none save themselves, but they perceive not. (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:9)***

The more they insist on these indecent acts and take pride in them the
more they provide a document in the hands of their enemy and block the
way of their escape from the court of justice of history. Ibn Ziyad did
not know with what disgrace his name would be mentioned in the history
of Islam and what would be the judgment of history about him. He was
also not aware in what manner the brilliant names of Imam Husayn and his
companions would manifest themselves and shine in the history of Islam
and how his religious movement and Divine rising would find its place
amongst the greatest and most important risings of mankind.

Anyhow, as Abdul Malik Salami was not in a position to oppose Ibn Ziyad
he proceeded hastily to the Hijaz in compliance with his orders and
reached Madina. When the people saw that a messenger had come from Iraq,
they concluded that he must have brought news about the happening there.
A man from amongst Quraysh whose name has not been mentioned in history
saw Abdul Malik and having come to know that he had come from Iraq asked
him with great anxiety: "What news have you brought from Iraq?" What he
wanted to know was how the conflict between Husayn bin Ali ended and
what was the result of the rising of the Kufians against the caliph.

Abdul Malik said only this in reply: "Whatever the news may be it is
with the Governor of Madina" i.e. he would communicate the news to the
governor and the people would learn it through him. This brief reply was
sufficient for the intelligent people to realize the position. They
understood that when the information about the developments in Iraq was
being furnished to a governor who had been appointed by Yazid and was
himself an Umayyad it meant that Husayn bin Ali had been removed from
the stage of caliphate and politics and the rulership of Yazid and the
family of Abu Sufyan had been established. On hearing the brief reply
the said Qurayshite understood what had happened and said: "We are from
Allah and to Him we have to return. It appears that Husayn bin Ali has
been slain".

Abdul Malik says: "When I met Amr bin Sa'id bin As Umawi he too was
unaware of the state of affairs in Iraq. He, therefore, asked me
anxiously as to what news I had brought from Iraq. I replied that I had
brought news which would make the Governor of Madina happy and that news
was that Husayn bin Ali had been killed and thereby the conflict had
come to an end. On hearing this news Amr bin Sa'id bin As became
extremely happy and said: "Go and inform the people that he has been
slain".

I went out and proclaimed to the people that Husayn bin Ali had been
martyred in Iraq. I swear by Allah that on hearing this, the ladies of
Bani Hashim began to lament in a manner which I had never witnessed
before. When Amr bin Sa'id heard the lamentations of the Hashimite women
for the Holy Imam he laughed and said: "The women of Bani Ziyad lamented
in the same manner in which our women lamented in the Battle of Urnab".
[^1]

Then he said: "The present lamentation of Hashimite women should be
compared with the lamentations of Umayyad women who were bereaved and
who mourned over the murder of Uthman". Amr bin Sa'id was also under a
false impression like Yazid and Ibn Ziyad and imagined that it was
possible to confuse and mislead history. He wanted to connect the
killing of Imam Husayn with that of Uthman and to show that Imam Ali and
his sons had taken part in it, although the fact is that when Uthman was
in trouble their role consisted of advice, love and benevolence. They
did not take any part in Uthman's murder. On the contrary they had done
their best to make the f disturbance subside and had also carried water
for him during the days of siege.

Amr did not know that these falsehood, calumnies and idle talks could
not produce any result except disgrace for those who uttered them. He
arrived in the Masjid of Madina, mounted the pulpit and announced that
the Imam had been killed. However, as the women and men belonging to
Ahlul Bayt had entrusted a document to history on each occasion and
expressed reality in reply to the nonsensical talk of the enemy, a lady
belonging to the Holy family also gave a reply to the idle words of the
Governor of Madina on this occasion.

It has also been recorded in the pages of history. It has been written
that at this time a girl belonging to the family of Aqil bin Abi Talib
came out of her house along with the ladies of Bani Hashim, proceeded to
the sacred grave of the Holy Prophet, embraced the grave and while
wailing, uttered the two poetic verses translated below. In them she has
summarized the history of Ashura:

"The Day of Judgment will come. The grandfather of this very Husayn bin
Ali whom you have killed and whose martyrdom is being mentioned by you
as a happy news will come face to face with you and will ask: 'What did
you, who were the best of the communities, do and how did you behave
towards my children and the members of my family after my death? You
killed their men and made them welter in their blood and made their
women and children prisoners".

[^1]: This is the poetic verse of Umar bin Ma'd Yakrab Zubaydi. The
Battle of Urnab took place between Bani Zubayd and Bani Ziyad and Bani
Ziyad bin Harith bin Ka' b were defeated by Raht Abdul Madan.


