Chapter 42: Holy Family Returns to Madina
=========================================

The people of Madina came to know about the martyrdom of the Imam in
this way and awaited the return of the Ahlul Bayt who had been made
prisoners. At last Imam Sajjad and his companions reached Madina. He
dismounted near Madina and made the ladies descend. He then sent a man
to Madina to inform the people about his arrival. The messenger says
that when he arrived in Madina he went to the Masjid of the Prophet of
Allah. There he wept loudly and said: "O people of Yathrib! With what
hope can one continue to live in this city? Husayn bin Ali has been
martyred and the eyes of the people are shedding tears for him".

The Imam's messenger could content himself with saying this. However, he
did not consider it sufficient to explain his own object as well as that
of his Imam. He did not desire that people should weep and lament much.
However, he wanted to add a document to the documents about the tragedy
of Karbala so that the study of the event might become easier for those
who came later.

It was not the only object of the rising of Imam Husyan that spiritual
reward should be earned by arranging meetings for mourning his martyrdom
and it should not always be made the subject matter of religious
discourses from the pulpit as a touching event which provokes tears. The
event of the rising of Imam Husayn is in itself a very important event
and has a vital significance in the history of Islam which should be
studied keeping in view its own value and worth. It is more valuable
than that it should be mentioned lightly while studying other matters.

In the second poetic verse recited by the messenger of the Imam he
disgraced the Umayyad dynasty for ever. Standing by the grave of the
Holy Prophet he said: "These faithless people killed the son of their
Prophet, besmeared his body with dust and blood and hoisted his head on
the spear".

Then he informed the people about the arrival of the Holy family and
added that they had at that time dismounted outside the city of Madina.

The people started going out of the city and the roads were blocked.
Madina assumed an unusual appearance. When Imam Sajjad saw himself face
to face with the people of Madina he made a sign to the people to remain
quiet. At this moment he considered it necessary to inform the Muslims
of Madina about the events which had taken place during the journey
covering a number of months. The details of his speech on this occasion
will be given later.

When the Ahlul Bayt left for Madina they were, notwithstanding their
being bereaved and mournful, fully confident about their own victory and
the helplessness of the enemy. While they were still in Syria the signs
of Yazid 's helplessness began to appear. As we have alluded earlier,
the Ahlul Bayt were released from imprisonment soon and were transferred
to the capital as ordered by the caliph. There they were treated by the
people of Damascus with honor and respect. As written by Tabari the
women of the family of Mu'awiya went, without exception, to the ladies
of Bani Hashim to offer condolences.

They mourned the martyrdom of Imam Husayn and a gathering to mourn for
the martyrs of Bani Hashim was held in the palace of the caliph for
three days. Yazid did not spend the morning and the evening except in
the company of Imam Sajjad. It was on one of those days when a child of
Imam Hasan or Imam Husayn had accompanied the fourth Imam and during the
course of conversation Yazid said to him: "Are you prepared to fight
with my son Khalid?" He replied: "No, except that you may give a knife
to me and a knife to him and then we may fight with each other". Yazid
was deeply impressed by the bravery and frankness, especially of a child
who had suffered so many hardships. He embraced him and said words which
mean: "The cub of a lion is also a lion".


