Chapter 44: Tribes of Aws and Khazraj
=====================================

After the destruction of the Ma'arib dam of Yemen a large part of the
lands of Yemen became uncultivable. The opening of the sea route of the
Red Sea and the deterioration of the economic importance of Yemen was
the pretext for their migration, and it is possible that each of these
two things had an effect on the scattering of the Qahtani tribes of
Yemen.

In any case on whatever pretext it might have been, the Almighty Allah
brought these two tribes of Yemen to Yathrib and made them settle there,
and eventually when it became intolerable for the Holy Prophet to
continue to live in Makkah amongst his relations, these two tribes
received him and his immigrant companions, gave them place in their
houses and preferred them even to themselves.

From the day these two tribes called Aws and Khazraj came to Yathrib and
settled there, they were continuously fighting with each other till they
were fed up with this state of affairs and realized that if they
continued to fight they would be annihilated and the Jews of Yathrib
belonging to the tribes of Bani Nazir etc. would prevail over them. Some
of them were, therefore, obliged to go to Makkah to seek assistance from
Quraysh so that they might become exalted and powerful.

However, Quraysh put forward certain conditions which were not
acceptable to them. Then they went to Taif and sought the assistance of
the tribe of Thaqif. However, they also dilly- dallied and the persons
from Yathrib returned home without achieving any result. In the meantime
the Holy Prophet had made his call public in the 4th year of his
mission. For ten years continuously he contacted the people in the
bazaars of Arabia like ukkaz and Zul Hijaz and the pilgrims during Haj
season at Mina, Makkah etc. and invited them to Islam. He asked them to
assist him and support his Divine mission so that they might be rewarded
with Paradise.

He approached various tribes one after the other and said to them: "O
people! Say that there is no deity but Allah so that you may be
delivered, rule over the Arabs and non-Arabs and become the chiefs in
Paradise as a result of your faith. None of the Arab tribes except Aws
and Khazraj of Yathrib agreed to receive the afflicted homeless Muslims.
It was only this sacred city which could embrace the Holy Prophet of
Allah forever. As a consequence of the demise of Abu Talib and Khadijah
in the l0th year of the Holy Prophet's mission it became very difficult
for him to stay on in Makkah.

The city of Taif also did not accept him. In the circumstances he made
greater efforts to contact the various tribes. After having one or two
brief contacts with the people of Yathrib he met a group of persons
belonging to that city in the vicinity of Mina in Haj days in the 11lth
year of his mission and asked them: "Who are you?" They replied: "We
belong to the tribe of Khazraj". The Holy Prophet said: â€œAre you
confederates of the Jews?" They replied: "Yes". The Prophet asked:
"Won't you sit with me so that I may have a talk with you?" They
replied: "Certainly". They then sat down with the Prophet of Allah and
he invited them to Islam and recited verses of the Holy Qur'an for them.
After hearing the Holy Prophet the people belonging to Yathrib said to
one another: "By Allah this is that very Prophet about whose prophethood
the Jews used to warn us.

These persons who were six in number and belonged to the tribe of
Khazraj accepted the invitation of the Holy Prophet. All of them
embraced Islam on the spot and said: "We have courted our people's
enmity and are at the juncture of warfare. We hope that the Almighty
Allah will create mutual love in them through you. We are now returning
to Yathrib and shall invite them by means of this religion.

In that event you will become very honored and powerful among us. At
this time the Qahtanis of Yemen i.e. the tribes of Aws and Khazraj were
accepting the Holy Prophet's invitation to Islam, providing
preliminaries for his migration to their city and discerning in him
ability to unite their two tribes, which had been fighting with each
other for many years.

Meanwhile the relatives of the Holy Prophet and the distinguished
persons amongst Quraysh were planning to kill him and did not consider
any thing more necessary to achieve their prosperity and good luck than
to put an end to his life.

These six persons belonging to the Khazraj tribe returned to Madina,
informed the people about their meeting and conversation with the Holy
Prophet as an important news. It was an important matter and a harbinger
of honor and prosperity for them. They invited the people to embrace
Islam. Islam began to spread soon in the favorable atmosphere of Madina
and there was not a single house of Aws and Khazraj where the Prophet of
Allah was not talked about. The number of the Ansari Muslims who were
the first to embrace Islam has been reported by some writers to be two
and by others to be eight.

In the following year i.e. in the 12th year of the Holy Prophet's
mission twelve persons belonging to Madina took the oath of allegiance
to him in Aqabah (Mina) during Haj season. These persons consisted of
five out of the six persons who had taken the oath in the previous year
and seven others. They swore that they would not associate anyone else
with Allah, would not commit theft and adultery, would not kill their
children, would not beget illegitimate children and would not disobey
the Prophet of Allah and would perform good deeds.

The Holy Prophet also promised them that if they remained faithful they
would be sent to Paradise. He also told them that if they committed any
of these evil acts and were punished for it, the punishment would
constitute atonement for it. In case, however, the crime remained
undetected till the Day of Judgment the decision would rest with Allah.
He might punish them for it, or might forgive them".

The twelve persons returned to Yathrib and the Prophet of Allah sent
Mus'ab bin Umayr Abdari along with them so that he might teach the
Qur'an and invite everyone to embrace Islam. Mus'ab invited the people
to Islam with so much zeal that this religion spread very rapidly and
Muslim men and women could be found in every quarter of the city
inhabited by Aws and Khazraj. In the 13th year of the prophetic mission
seventy five persons consisting of men and women met the Holy Prophet
near Mina and took the oath of allegiance to him in the presence of his
uncle Abbas.

This oath was taken at midnight after the Haj ceremonies. Abbas had not
embraced Islam till then but was present at that time because he was
interested in the safety of his nephew. He took a promise from them that
they would abide by their words and would not make the Prophet of Allah
leave his home unnecessarily.

Ya'qubi writes: "They requested the Prophet of Allah to accompany them
to Madina and undertook to defend him against his own people as well as
against the strangers and the black- skinned as well as the redskined
people. Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib then said: "May my parents be your
ransom! Let me obtain a promise from them."

The Prophet of Allah entrusted this task to his uncle and Abbas obtained
a promise from them that they would support the Prophet of Allah and his
people just as they supported their own people and children, would fight
against, the black-skinned and the red-skinned people for his sake and
would assist him against his relatives as well as against the strangers.
The Holy Prophet also promised that he would honor this pact and added
that their place would be in Paradise".


