Chapter 46: Explanation of the Sermon of Imam Sajjad in Damascus
================================================================

In the foregoing pages we have reproduced the sermon delivered by Imam
Sajjad in Damascus. Every word of that, sermon confirms the frankness,
bravery and spiritual greatness I of the Imam and incidentally the value
and necessity of such sermons and speeches delivered in the
circumstances then prevailing become clear. It has also become evident
that these sermons and addresses were not such that they should have
been delivered as a consequence of sentiments, spiritual uneasiness and
pressure of hardships.

Whatever the men and women of Ahlul Bayt said during the journey, which
culminated in their martyrdom and captivity, and has been recorded in
history, consists of speeches which were delivered, as and when it was
appropriate and necessary, in accordance with a minute and properly
chalked out plan.

Just as Imam Husayn knew well as to what he was doing and where he was
going and what the result of his activities would be, other members of
the Holy Prophet's family also possessed perfect insight, and whenever
they felt it necessary to speak they ignored all their mental sufferings
and depressions, and revealed the realities in such away that it was no
longer possible to tamper with them.

It is, however, certain that at that time most of the people were not
aware of the importance of their speeches and the depth of their object.
Very often they thought about this very sermon of the fourth Imam that a
bereaved person was crying and lamenting as his sentiments had been
aroused and with the passage of time he would become calm and forget all
that he was saying.

However, history not only recorded the sermon delivered by the fourth
Imam but also recorded the words and poetic verses of Yazid and handed
them over to the posterity, and placed them side by side with each other
so that on one page of history the people should read that Imam Sajjad
said in the city of Damascus with great dignity: "I am the son of Makkah
and Mina. I am the son of Zamzam and Safa. I am the son of the Prophet
of Allah ", and on the next page of history they should find that Yazid
said: "There was nothing like revelation or prophet hood. On this
pretext Bani Hashim wished to befool the people and to rule over them".
Indeed, even if Yazid did not fear Allah and did not feel ashamed before
the Holy Prophet why did he not fear the power of history and why was he
not afraid that whatever he was saying would be recorded?

Individuals come in the world and depart and the nations are dislocated.
However, the rise and fall of the nations and the change in governments
does not affect history. It continues to occupy its place and carefully
supervises the good and evil deeds of the individuals and the traffic of
the nations. It does not confuse the account of one person with that of
another and does not make anyone responsible for another's sin.

The Holy Qur'an says:

***Those are a people who have passed away. Theirs is that which they
earned, and yours is that which you earn. You will not be asked of what
they used to do. (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:134)***

History records the behavior of the people to maintain accounts in this
world and the angels write them for accountability in the Hereafter.

In the second part of the speech delivered by lady Zaynab, daughter of
Imam Ali in Damascus, (its first part has already been dealt with in the
foregoing pages), she warned Yazid firstly of the accountability in the
Hereafter and secondly of the accountability before history and the
world. It was in this very part that she said to him: "O Yazid! On the
day when Allah will be the judge and Prophet Muhammad will plead for
justice and your limbs will give evidence against you, your father, who
made you dominate the Muslims, will receive the punishment due to him.
On that day it will become known what reward the oppressors get and
whose place is worse and whose party is humble. (O enemy of Allah and O
enemy of the son of the Prophet of Allah!) I swear by Allah that I
consider you quite mean and incorrigible.

However, what can I do? Our eyes weep and our bosoms burn and our
martyrs cannot come to life by reproaching or reprimanding you. Our
Husayn has been killed and the partisans of Satan take us to the fools
and take from Allah's wealth remuneration for showing disrespect to
Allah. Our blood trickles from their hands and our flesh falls from
their mouths and the pure bodies of our martyrs have been placed at the
disposal of the wolves and the rapacious animals of the jungle. If you
think that you stand to gain today by killing us, you will suffer for it
on the Day of Judgment.

It will be the day on which you will possess nothing except your deeds.
It will be the day on which you will shout at the son of Marjana and he
will shout at you. It will be the day on which you and your followers
will quarrel with one another by the side of the scale of Divine
Justice. It will be the day on which you will learn that the best
provision which your father made for you was that you should kill the
descendants of the Prophet of Allah. I swear by Allah that I do not fear
anyone except Him and do not complain before anyone else".

So far the daughter of Imam Ali warned Yazid of Divine punishment and
accountability on the Day of Judgment. Then she invited his attention to
his being accountable to history and told him that even if he did not
fear Allah and did not believe in the Day of Judgment or had lost his
faith on account of his sins, he should fear history that would disgrace
him.

It was with this object in view that the daughter of Ali said: "O Yazid!
Practice deceit, pursue your vicious plans and do whatever you can. I
swear by Allah that the stain of disgrace which has been stamped on your
name owing to the treatment meted out by you to us cannot be obliterated
and this ignominy can never be converted to goodness".

The daughter of lady Fatima Zahra invited the attention of Yazid to the
might of history and warned him against shame and disgrace. However,
Yazid who, it might be said, had lost intelligence did not benefit from
lady Zaynab's words and could not foresee the future of history. On this
occasion the following tradition of the Holy Prophet quoted by Suyuti in
his book Jami'us Saghir was applicable to Yazid: "When Allah wishes to
execute His Decree He takes away intelligence from the intelligent
people so that He may do with them what He likes. And, when what He
wills is accomplished, He restores their intelligence to them and then
they regret very much what they have done".

If Yazid had not been deprived of his intelligence he should have
realized that after killing the son of the Prophet of Allah and his near
ones, it would not be possible for him to rule the Muslims and to ignore
this great Islamic tragedy. And even if he could not understand this
fact he should have at least so much sense that he should not have
attacked the very basis of Islam in his poetic verses and should not
have announced openly his decision to take revenge upon the children of
the Prophet of Allah and should not have denied the Divine revelation
and the Prophethood of the Holy Prophet Muhammad.

Lady Zaynab, the daughter of Fatima Zahra concluded her speech with
thanks to Allah and said: "Allah be thanked Who ended the task of the
chiefs of the young men of Paradise with benevolence and made Paradise
their resting place. I pray to Allah that He may raise their ranks and
shower His blessings on them, for Allah is Almighty, All-Powerful".

It was this very speech which obliged Yazid to pretend I disgust for Ibn
Ziyad and to curse him. It has been written that while sending the Ahlul
Bayt to Madina Yazid called Imam Sajjad and said to him: "May Allah
curse the son of Marjana. By Allah, if I had met your father I would
have agreed to whatever he had suggested and asked for, and would not
have allowed, as far as possible, that he should have been killed.

However, whatever has happened had been destined. I wish that you may
write to me from Madina for all your requirements". Yazid did not say
this to seek Divine pleasure. He was grateful to Ibn Ziyad that he had
killed Imam Husayn and his companions and in reply to his letter seeking
instructions about the Ahlul Bayt who had been made prisoners he (Yazid)
had himself written that they should be sent to Syria. Yazid's cursing
Ibn Ziyad had only a political tinge, and was the outcome of the
pressure of public thinking.

The sermon delivered by Imam Sajjad in Syria and the Qur'anic verses
recited by him in the bazaar in reply to a Syrian and whatever else the
Ahlul Bayt said produced their result. So much so that the martyrdom of
Imam Husayn was mourned first of all in Damascus, the capital of the
caliphate, and in the caliph's own house.

The Syrian women also came to know the true facts about the tragedy of
Karbala. Perhaps the month of Muharram of the year 61 A.H. had not yet
come to an end when the news of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn reached
various Islamic regions and their inhabitants became aware of most of
the events that had taken place.

When the storm and thunder of the caliphate subsided the people came to
their senses, felt grieved on account of what had happened and
reproached themselves for their unpardonable negligence in helping the
Imam and supporting Truth. Gradually the same correct view was adopted
as had prompted the people of Kufa to invite the Imam before his
martyrdom.

Later, they realized their mistake and decided to make amends for it,
although the loss of an Imam like Husayn bin Ali, the grandson of the
Holy Prophet, was irreparable and wailing and regret could not make
amends for it. Mu'awiya had said: â€œAfter Ali bin Abi Talib the world has
become barren and cannot produce a son like him".

Indeed it is so and another Ali cannot be born. Similarly it is
Impossible to produce an Imam like Husayn, because there must be pure
and sacred parents like his to give birth to a son like him. Every loss
can be made good sooner or later, but how can the loss of such sublime
personalities be compensated?


