Appendix II: Day of Arba'in (40th day of Imam Husayn's Martyrdom - 20th Safar)
==============================================================================

It has been recommended that on the occasion of the *Arba'in* of Imam
Husayn and his devoted companions visit to the graves of the Holy Imam
and the martyrs of the tragedy of Karbala should be paid. The day of
*Arba'in* is one of the most crowded days in the sacred city of Karbala.

The Muslims and the Shi'ah in particular come to that glorious place
from different parts of the world and send greetings to the great and
magnanimous persons who performed the feats of highest, bravery,
devotion and honor. Of course, the ceremonies of homage can be performed
and one's attachment to the sacred mission of the martyrs can be
expressed in any words and language.

However, it will be much better that whatever has come down to us from
the leaders of the religion with regard to the ceremonies of paying the
homage should be performed in the same manner in which it has been
recommended by the Holy Prophet and the Holy Imams, and the
supplications mentioned in the Holy Qur'an itself should be given
preference over others.

How regrettable it is that, for example, people come from far off places
for paying the homage to the sacred grave of the eighth Imam, but during
their stay in Mashhad for a few days they do not recite anything except
the commonplace homage prepared by the sellers and remain deprived of
reading all the homages quoted from the Holy Imams.

Muslims Ought to Understand Islam
---------------------------------

The followers do not recognize Imam Reza except with the title of
*Gharibul Ghuraba*. These people may be religious but they do not really
understand religion. There are people who believe in Allah, His Prophet
and in religion, and make sufficient efforts to perform the religious
rites, but they do not understand religion and their efforts are usually
based on ignorance and vulgarity. These are the people who at times
oppose Allah to seek His proximity, attack religion and the religious
persons for the sake of religion and consider the believers to be
infidels so that they themselves may not become infidels.

Every person, who recognizes Prophet Muhammad to be the Prophet of Allah
and admits to be true what he brought from Allah, is a Muslim. However,
every Muslim does not understand what is the meaning of being a Muslim,
what the purpose of the Holy Prophet's mission was, how supplications
and homage should be performed, and which deeds are the means of
acquiring proximity to Allah.

On the contrary it often happens that notwithstanding the fact that a
person or some persons may be Muslims and religious minded, they may be
having ideas opposed to religion, may practice polytheism in the name of
monotheism and godliness, and may indulge in hypocrisy in the name of
sincerity. Hence, if it is said that such and such person acts against
religion or the Qur'an, it does not mean that that person is not
religious.

During the course of the history of Islam there have been many persons
who have acted against religion while wishing sincerely to seek the
proximity and pleasure of Allah. In fact they wanted to defend their
religion and even to promote it, but notwithstanding this they took
steps against religion. There have been many persons who were interested
in the Holy Qur'an and its publication, but they took steps against the
Qur'an.

There have also been many persons who wrote false narrations and
traditions in the books believing that this action of theirs was a step
towards the advancement of religion and thus became the source of
deviation of many Muslims. There have been still others who wrote things
against the contents of the Qur'an and gave them the name of the
commentary of the Qur'an.

A large number of myths have become a part of the history of Islam and
many vulgar actions have been considered to be a part of the religious
ceremonies. It is for the reason, as we have said, that every religious
person does not understand religion and the religious persons should
more than anything else think about understanding religion so that they
may not disgrace religion, and whatever they do in the name of religion
should become the means of the acquisition of the pleasure of Allah and
His Holy Prophet. The religious ceremonies cannot be left to the
personal taste of the individuals, and the homage of the Holy Prophet
and the Holy Imams cannot be performed with vulgar methods.

One of the dangerous anti-religious ideas is that whichever action
assumes religious bias is good and carries spiritual reward, although it
may be opposed to the spirit of the religion, and the Prophet who
brought it might be opposed to it and might hate it. Similarly the
ceremony on which the sacred name of Imam Husayn is imprinted is
considered to be the source of honor in this world and in the Hereafter
although it may offend the Imam, and whatever is said from the pulpit of
Imam Husayn amounts to worship and entails spiritual reward although it
may consist of a lie whether it is in praise or vilification of certain
persons.

It was in view of these dangers that some distinguished personalities
and scholars of the religion, notwithstanding the fact that they were
capable of educating and training others, considered it necessary to
present their religious belief before the Imam of the time, lest they
should be believing in the name of religion in things opposed to
religion, or do things contrary to religion, considering them to be
apart of religion.

One such great personality was Abdul Azim Hasani who was the great
grandson of Imam Hasan. He was a contemporary of Imam Muhammad Taqi
al-Jawad and Imam Ali Naqi al-Hadi and is himself reckoned to be a
distinguished member of Ahlul Bayt and a great scholar of Islam. Once he
came to Imam Hadi and said: "I wish to mention before you my beliefs so
that I may stick to them if you endorse them". After he had narrated his
beliefs before the Imam the latter said: "I swear by Allah that the
faith which you hold is the same which Allah has chosen for His slaves.
You should, therefore, stick to it. May Allah keep you steadfast in
truth in this world and in the Hereafter".

It is really very surprising that in spite of his being a very great
scholar, Abdul Azim Hasani was not satisfied till he had narrated his
beliefs to the Imam of the time, but usually an ordinary person is
perfectly satisfied that whatever he knows and does is the same which
was brought by the Holy Prophet from Almighty Allah.

Hamran bin Aayun was one of the distinguished companions of Imam Baqir
and Imam Sadiq. Imam Baqir said to him: "You are one of our followers in
this world and in the Hereafter". He has been reckoned to be one of the
reciters of the Qur'an and a scholar of the Qur'an and Arabic grammar.
When he narrated his faith and beliefs to Imam Sadiq the Holy Imam said
to him: "If anyone opposes you in the matter of the beliefs which you
have narrated, he is an unbeliever". Hamran asked: "Even though he may
be an Alawi or a Fatimid?" The Imam replied: "Even though he may be a
Muhammadi, an Alawi, or a Fatimid". The Imam meant to say that
relationship with the Holy Prophet or Imam Ali or lady Fatima has
nothing to do with religion.

Abdullah bin Abi Yafur narrated his beliefs to Imam Sadiq. Amr bin
Hulayth also narrated his beliefs before Imam Sadiq and the Imam said to
him: "O Amr! I swear by Allah that my faith as well as of my ancestors
has been the same as narrated by you and we have remained steadfast in
it. Do not forsake piety in any circumstances and do not utter anything
other than ! a good one. Do not say that you have guided yourself to the
right path for it is Allah who has guided you. Hence thank Allah for the
blessings which He has bestowed on you".

Khalid Bajali, who was one of the companions of Imam Sadiq, narrated his
beliefs in detail before the Holy Imam and the Imam said to him: "What
you have said is sufficient. Be quiet, for whatever you have said is
true".

Another person named Yusuf who was one of the companions of Imam Sadiq
said to him: "Kindly permit me to narrate the beliefs which I hold. In
case they are correct you may tell me about it so that I may stick to
them and in case any belief of mine is opposed to truth you may guide me
to truth ". The Imam said to him: "Speak". Yusuf said: "I testify that
Allah is One and without a partner. I also testify that Muhammad is
Allah's servant and Messenger; Ali has been my Imam; Hasan has been my
Imam; Husayn has been my Imam; Ali bin Husayn has been my Imam; Muhammad
bin Ali has been my Imam; and now you yourself are my Imam". The Imam
said a number of times: "May Allah bless you" and then added: "I swear
by Allah that whatever you have stated and expressed is the Divine faith
and the faith of Allah's angels and my faith and the faith of my
ancestors. It is the faith besides which Allah does not accept any
faith.

Hasan bin Ziyad Attar also narrated his beliefs before the sixth Imam
and the Imam endorsed them.

One of the persons who narrated their beliefs before the Imam of their
time was Safwan bin Mehran Asadi who was a common carrier and who hired
out his camels. He says that while narrating his beliefs before Imam
Sadiq he said: "I testify that Allah is One and with- out a partner". He
added: "Muhammad is Allah's Prophet and so long as he was present he was
the Proof of Allah for the people. After him Imam Ali was the Proof of
Allah".

The Imam said: "May Allah bless you". Safwan added: "After him Hasan bin
Ali was the Proof of Allah for the people". The Imam repeated: "May
Allah bless you". Safwan added: "Then it was Ali bin Husayn who was the
Proof of Allah for the people". The Imam said again: "May Allah bless
you". Then it was Muhammad bin Ali who was the Proof of Allah for the
people. The Imam said:

"May Allah bless you". And now you are the Proof of Allah for the
people. The Imam said: "May Allah bless you".

This magnanimous person who was one of the distinguished companions of
Imam Sadiq and Imam Kazim took Imam Sadiq from Madina to Iraq a number
of times and the Imam used to hire his camel. Safwan himself also used
to accompany the Imam and by means of the blessings of the companionship
of the Imam, he identified the grave of Imam Ali which had not been
identified till then, and remained in attendance upon it for twenty
years.

Safwan is one of the distinguished narrators and has narrated traditions
from the Holy Imams. Amongst them are Ziyarat Waritha, the well-known
homage of Ashura of Imam Husayn, Alqama's supplication, and a homage of
Imam Ali. In his book entitled Misbahul Mutahajjid Shaykh Tusi has
quoted Ziyarat Waritha from Imam Sadiq through Safwan. He (Shaykh Tusi)
has also quoted Ziyarat Ashura through two media -one from Imam Muhammad
Baqir through Alqama bin Muhammad Hazrami, and one from the sixth Imam
through Safwan Jammal.

Safwan said to Sayf bin Umayra: "I was with Imam Sadiq when he performed
homage at this place in this manner and recited this supplication (i.e.
Alqama supplication)". What is surprising is that the supplication which
is known as 'Alqama supplication' and is recited after Ziyarat Ashura
has been quoted by Safwan from Imam Sadiq and not by Alqama from Imam
Baqir. It should, therefore, have been called 'Safwan's Supplication'
and it is not known as to why it has been called 'Alqama's
supplication'. This very Safwan has also quoted one of the two homages
of Arba'in of Imam Husayn from the sixth Imam.

The second homage of Arba'in is the one, which was recited by Jabir bin
Abdullah Ansari while paying the homage to the grave of Imam and which
has been quoted by Atiyya bin Sad bin Junada from the distinguished
companion Jabir. The sentences of the Ziyarat Arba'in of Safwan, as
translated below are well known.

They are the same sentences which, according to Safwan, were uttered by
the sixth Imam while performing the homage to Imam Husayn: "I testify
that you were alight in your noble fathers and the wombs of your pure
mothers. The uncleanliness of ignorance did not contaminate you. The
darkness of polytheism, blasphemy and perversion did not put its clothes
on you. I testify that you are a pillar of the faith, a support for the
Muslims and a refuge for the believers. I testify that you are the
righteous, pious, praiseworthy and pure Imam, you guide and are yourself
guided. I testify that only the Imams who are your descendants are the
paragon of virtue and piety, the signs of guidance, the dependable
medium and reliance for the people of the world".

We hinted before that it is possible that a person may be religious and
may take much interest in religion and the things related to it, but
notwithstanding this he may not understand religion and may believe as a
part of religion in things with which religion has nothing to do, and
may do things in the name of religion which have no sanction. It is for
this reason that according to a tradition quoted by Suyuti in Jami'us
Saghir the Holy Prophet said: "When Allah wishes to do good to one of
his slaves He makes him understand religion. He despises the world and
comes to know his shortcomings".

Apparently what is meant by the first sentence of the tradition is that
when Allah wishes to do good to a person and to make him happy He makes
him understand religion so that his faith and deeds may be based on
wisdom and knowledge, and he may not add anything to it on account of
personal desires, nor subtract anything from it owing to ignorance and
lack of insight.

According to this sacred tradition understanding religion is the
foundation of the happiness and prosperity of a slave of Allah. In fact
the reason for the mischiefs and divergences which took place in the
history of Islam and the irreparable losses suffered by the Muslims, has
been that most of the Muslims did not understand religion.

Notwithstanding the fact, therefore, that, according to their own
thinking, they served religion, they actually did harm to Islam and the
Muslims. Possibly the main reason for this was that during the time of
the caliphs the Islamic conquests took place rapidly and every day the
inhabitants of a new city or region embraced Islam. In the circumstances
it was quite impossible that the persons newly converted to Islam should
become aware of its reality and its real teachings, understand this
religion and become acquainted with the Qur'an and the commands and
morality of Islam through intelligence and knowledge.

Making conquests and persuading people to accept the laws of the Islamic
Government is one thing and their education and training and acquainting
them with the spirit of Islam and the value of its teachings is another.
In none of the sacred verses of the Holy Qur'an revealed about the
personality of the Holy Prophet it has been said that Muhammad is a
Prophet who is a conqueror, and in none of the religious documents
conquest has been reckoned to be one of the virtues of the Holy Prophet.
The Qur'an describes the Holy Prophet and his duty and message thus:

***O Prophet! We have sent you as a witness, a bearer of good tidings, a
warner, a summoner to Allah by His permission, and as a shining torch.
{Surah al-Ahzab, 33: 45- 46)***

Allah does not say: "We have sent you to conquer lands by Allah's
permission and to add them to the Islamic state". On the other hand He
says: We have sent you as a summoner to Allah by His permission.

***We have sent you with the Truth, a bearer of glad tidings and a
warner. {Surah al-Baqarah, 2:119)***

***We have sent you only as a bearer of good tidings and a warner.
{Surah al-Furqan, 25:56)***

***We have not sent you save as a bearer of good tidings and a warner to
all mankind. {Surah Saba, 34: 28)***

***We have sent you with the Truth, a bearer of glad tidings and a
Warner. (Surah al-Fatir, 35: 24)***

***We have sent you as a witness and a bearer of good tidings and a
warner. (Surah al-Fath, 48: 8)***

***He it is Who has sent among the unlettered ones a messenger of their
own, to recite to them His revelations and to make I them pure, and to
teach them the Book and wisdom. (Surah al-Jumuah, 62: 2)***

In these verses as well as in others revealed in connection with the
duties of the Holy Prophet nothing has been said about conquests. On the
other hand in all of them a mention has been made of education and
training, encouraging the people to do good and warning them against the
troubles and adversities from which the evil-doers suffer.

In 8 A.H. Makkah was conquered and idol-worship came to an end in that
city. Thereafter the Muslims gained victory over the tribe of Hawazan,
who had gathered in the valley of Hunayn to attack them. Then the Holy
Prophet proceeded to Ta'if to put an end to idol-worship in that city
also, and to destroy the temple of Lat that was reckoned to be the
center of Ta'if. However, after having kept that city under siege for
some time, he went to Makkah and then returned to Madina, and the city
of Ta'if remained unconquered. However, in 9 A.H. the chiefs of Ta'if
and the representatives of the inhabitants of that city themselves came
to Madina, met the Holy Prophet and offered to embrace Islam on the
following two conditions:

(i) They might be excused from offering prayers.

(ii) The Prophet of Allah might postpone the demolition of the temple of
Lat, even though for a very short period.

If the Holy Prophet's object had been to conquer the city of Ta'if he
would have immediately accepted their offer, considered the surrender of
those people a windfall and added the city to the Islamic State. He
would then have realized zakat and other taxes from the newly converted
Muslims of Ta'if, invited their people to take part in the Islamic
battles and thus increased the number of the Islamic forces.

Embracement of Islam by the people of Ta'if and their surrender on the
above-mentioned conditions was undoubtedly in the interest of the
Muslims from the viewpoint of organization, conquests and other
advantages, but the Holy Prophet was not at all agreeable, and so long
as the people of Ta'if insisted on the acceptance of their conditions,
he declined to accept their embracement of Islam. The last reply which
he gave them was: "As regards breaking the idols with your own hands, I
excuse you from undertaking this task, and shall send other persons to
do it. As regards prayers (al-Salat} it is a must, for without it
religion has no value".

It was usual with the Holy Prophet that whenever he conquered a place he
asked its chiefs to pull down their idol temples with their own hands.
The favor which he did to the people of Ta'if was that he excused them
from breaking their idols with their own hands, but as regards prayers
he told them that the religion of which prayers did not form a part is
worthless i.e. even if not only Ta'if but a country is conquered and its
inhabitants do not offer prayers that conquest is of no use. In other
words it is no good if the people are religious but do not understand
religion.


