Appendix III: Dr Iqbal on Imam Husayn
=====================================

Dr Muhammad Iqbal (1877- 1938) known to the world as the
Poet-Philosopher of the East, devoted his life to awaken the Muslim
Ummah and to make it pursue the path of spirituality, knowledge, jihad,
sacrifice and martyrdom.

Dr Iqbal had an abiding faith in Ahlul Bayt (the Chosen Descendants of
the Holy Prophet). He was intensely moved by the tragic events of
Karbala so much so that in many of his couplets he carried a universal
message to the mankind for emulating Imam Husayn who sacrificed his life
at the altar of Truth. His elegies on the martyrdom of Imam Husayn stand
unmatched and are an eye-opener to all those who are giving a mere
lip-service to Islam.

In the following couplets Dr Iqbal gives vent to his sentiments and
feelings on Imam Husayn:

*Jis tarah mujhko shahid-e-Karbala say piyar hay*

*Haq ta'ala ko yatimon ki dua say piyar hay*

Dr Iqbal expresses his extreme love for Imam Husayn. Just as Almighty
Allah loves to listen to the invocation of the orphans, he also has the
same kind of love for the martyr of Karbala.

*Roney wala hoon shahid-e-Karbala kay gham may mayn*

*Kya durrey maqsÅ«d na daingay Saqi-e-Kauthar mujhey*

Dr Iqbal has a sincere and genuine faith in Imam Husayn. The hero of
this episode Imam Husayn, the brave son of the bravest of the brave Ali
and grandson of the Holy Prophet, took up a firm stand not to
acknowledge Yazid as the Caliph of Islam. It is a fight for the
preservation of the principles and tenets of Islam.

Imam Husayn arrived in Karbala on the 2nd of Muharram 61 A.H. along with
his small children, women, and some comrades numbering 72 only. On the
l0th of Muharram he was brutally killed. This was the tragedy over which
Iqbal sheds tears. He believes that mourning and wailing over him would
lead to his (Iqbal's) salvation. He also believes that Suqi-e-Kauthar
Lord of Kauthar (Cistern in Paradise) Le. Imam Ali loves those, who weep
for Imam Husayn. He hopes and prays that since he sheds tears out of
grief for Husayn, Imam Ali would give him all the help he needs.

*Gharib-o-sada-o-rangi'n hay dastan-e-Haram*

*Nihayat iski Husayn ibtida hay Ismail*

Dr Iqbal says that the event of the construction of Ka'ba is very simple
and interesting. Prophet Ismail suffered great pains in its
construction. The Holy Prophet purged it from the idols that were in it,
and so raised its glory. The first stone was laid by Ismail indeed. He
offered for sacrifice his own life but the sacrifice was not completed
as he was replaced by a ram and according to the Holy Qur'an the great
sacrifice or Zibh-e 'Azim was to come later and completed by one of his
descendants, Husayn. So in fact culmination of the spirit of love for
Allah was manifest when Imam Husayn sacrificed his life and preserved
the dignity of the Holy Kaba.

*Haqiqat-e-abadi hay maqam-e-Shabbiri*

*Badaltay rahay hain andaze Kufio-Shami*

Dr Iqbal here compares two things Shabbiri or Husayniyat, i.e.
principles enunciated and adhered to by Imam Husayn, and Yazidiyat, i.e.
worldly power and authority. Husayn was the symbol of devotion to and
love for Allah, i.e. submission to none except Allah.

The spirit as shown by the rulers of Kufa and Syria is always changing
since it tries to gain strength through fraud, dishonesty, and political
expediency and maneuvering as against this truth never changes. So .the
place Imam Husayn has achieved is a reality which shall be hailed and
acknowledged for all times to come.

*Qafilay Hijaz may ek Husayn bhi nahin*

*Garche hai tabdar abhi wadi ey Dajlao Furat*

Dr Iqbal was distressed to note that Iraq was under the yoke of the
British. He was disappointed that the Muslims had lost courage and were
suffering humiliation. The land of Tigres and Eupharates called some
staunch devotee of Islam who could relieve them of their serfdom. Iqbal
only wished a man, a follower of Imam Husayn might come up to help the
Muslims of Iraq!

*Sidq-e-Khalil Bhi hay ishqe sabr-e-Husayn bhi hay ishq*

*Marika-e-wujud maiyn Badr-o-Hunayn bhi hay ishq*

Dr Iqbal says that love of Allah manifests itself in many ways. Prophet
Ibrahim had to suffer many difficulties in the cause of Allah. He
accepted being thrown into the fire, and the fire was turned into a
blooming garden.

It showed his intense love for Allah. Our Holy Prophet conquered the
Battles of Badr and Hunayn through his ardent love for Allah. Similarly
Imam Husayn showed his patience in the battlefield of Karbala where he,
with his family and comrades, not only suffered the pangs of three days'
thirst, but willingly sacrificed his life for the cause of Truth and
love for Allah. Love for Allah is a quality, a force, an impetus, which
creates in us extraordinary patience and forbearance.

*Ek faqr hay Shabbiri es faqr mayn hay meri*

*Miras- e-Musalmani, samaya-i-Shabbiri*

Dr Iqbal says that the life of a dervish is a very noble way of living
but it is different from the life of a mendicant or friar who lives on
begging or in seclusion. We should learn from Imam Husayn who while
passing the life of a dervish had no other consideration except love of
Allah and submission to His will.

Our treading the path practised by Imam Husayn will bestow on us the
title of Chief among the people. A Muslim has inherited this wealth from
Imam Husayn, and we should make the best use of it. Imam Husayn has
given us the lesson of self-sacrifice, patience, and forebearance and
submission to none except Allah.

*An Imam-e-ashiqan pooray Batool*

*Sarvay azadi ze bustan-e-Rasul*

Now Dr Iqbal opens his praises for the son of Lady Fatima. He was the
chief of the lovers of Allah, and an evergreen tree from the garden of
the Prophet. Imam Husayn who stood against the forces of evil, refused
to acknowledge Yazid as theCaliph of Islam, and upholding the dignity of
Islamic principles sacrificed his life along with a small band of 72 of
his followers, at the battlefield of Karbala.

*Allah Allah Baey Bismillah pidar*

*Ma'niye zibh-e-azim amad pisar*

In a state of supreme bliss Dr Iqbal says, "O' Allah, what an exalted
position Imam Husayn possessed, as his illustrious father (Imam Ali) was
the first letter of the Qur'an! A tradition says that Imam Ali said,
"What is in the Holy Qur'an is in the first chapter (Surah Fatiha); what
is in this surah (chapter) is in the first verse (Bismillah); what is in
Bismillah is in its first letter (Ba) and I am the dot below ba.
Doubtless Imam Ali was acknowledged to be the best expounder of the Holy
Qur'an.

The Holy Prophet had himself declared: "Ali is with Qur'an, and Qur'an
is with Ali". Imam Husayn was the son of such an eminent personality. It
is Imam Husayn's Martyrdom which is referred to as Zibhe Azim the
greatest sacrifice in the Holy Qur'an. Imam Husayn was the direct
descendant of Prophet Ismail and had offered himself for sacrifice at
Karbala to save Islamic principles from annihilation.

The Holy Qur'an says that Zibhe Azim, the great sacrifice of Prophet
Ismail was left over for the coming generation. Dr Iqbal alludes to this
and says that Zibhe Azim in the Holy Qur'an means the sacrifice of Imam
Husayn.

*Bahray an shahzadaey Khayrul milal*

*Dosh-e-Khatmul mursalin ne'mul Jamal*

Dr Iqbal here alludes to an event stated by Tirmizi and others. Once
Imam Husayn mounted the shoulders of his grandfather, the Holy Prophet,
and somebody said, "What a good carriage it is!" The Prophet said, "And
what a good rider it is!" Dr Iqbal mentions this event to show what
affectionate feelings the Holy Prophet had towards his grandson.

*Surkh roo ishq-e-ghayoor az Khoon-e-oo*

*Surkhiye in misra az mazmoon-e-oo*

Dr Iqbal says that it is because of Imam Husayn's blood that the modest
love has gained honor and dignity. This couplet can well serve a title
for the episode of the Tragedy of Karbala which shows how piously and
valiantly Imam Husayn defended the tenets of Islam, sacrificed his own
life along with his kith and kin, sincere followers, and comrades, and
raised the honor of love to its acme.

*Darmiyan-e-Ummat an Keywan janab,*

*Hamchu harf-e-Qul Huwallah dar Kitab*

Dr Iqbal shows here the position of Imam Husayn. He says that among the
followers of the Holy Prophet Imam Husayn is like the Divine phrase Qul
huwallah (Say He is Allah) meaning that Allah is One, in the Holy
Qur'an. Since the entire Holy Qur'an turns to this verse -QuI Huwallaho
Ahad (Say that He is One) similarly the whole Islamic world turns
towards Imam Husayn who is the source of our guidance. Dr Iqbal knows
the tradition of our Prophet: "Husayn is from me and I am from Husayn"
i.e. Husayn is his grandson and that he (the Prophet) would be made
known by him, and his mission would be fulfilled by Imam Husayn who
sacrificed his life to immortalize Islam and its tenets.

*Musa o Firaun-o-Shabbir or Yazid*

*In do quwwat az Hayat amad padid.*

Ever since the creation of life two opposing forces have been at war
with each other- virtue and vice, Right and wrong. Musa (Moses) rose
against Firaun (Pharoah) and Shabbir (Imam Husayn) rose against Yazid.
These struggles were between the Right and the wrong. Consequently the
Right prevailed upon the wrong and it was proved that Right is might.

Zindah haq az quwwat-e-Shabbiri ast

Batil akhir dagh-e-hasrat miri ast

Dr Iqbal says that Truth or Islam exists today because of the strength
shown and the spiritual power exercised by Imam Husayn. In other words
Imam Husayn made Islam immortal. The wrong was crushed to annihilation
in spite of its apparent success. Yazidism or the principle enunciated
by Yazid is looked down upon by all, but Husayn's blood spilled at
Karbala still enlivens our hearts and makes us feel that his sacrifice
to support the Right against the wrong was unparalleled in the history
of mankind.

*Choon Khitlafat rishtah az Qur'an gusikht*

*Hurriyat ra Zahr under Kam rikht*

*Khast an sar Jatwaey Khairut Umam*

*Choon Sahabe Qibtah Baran dar qadam*

*Bar zamin-e-Karbala Barid o raft*

*Lalah dar wiranaha Karid o raft*

*Ta qayamat qat'ay istibdad kard*

*Mauje Khoone oo chaman ijad kard*

Dr Iqbal says that when the Islamic Government severed its relation with
the injunctions of the Holy Qur'an the Muslims suffered moral
degradation. It marred their freedom. When the rulers indulged in all
sorts of vicious habits and satisfied their carnal desires against the
clear-cut injunctions of the Holy Qur'an the whole social structure was
impaired. Nobody could utter a word against the tyrant ruler and his
associates.

Then rose the chief of the Muslims (Husayn), blessed cloud with rain of
mercy under his foot. It rained blessings on the sands of Karbala and
turned that desert into a garden. It is the place where Imam Husayn with
his kith and kin, children and comrades, numbering 72 only, faced a huge
army and courted martyrdom after three days starvation and thirst on the
l0th of Muharram 61 A.H. Husayn was undoubtedly the savior of freedom
and Karbala has become the symbol of struggle against tyranny.

Husayn's role at Karbala was So magnificent that it eradicated for ever
the savage idea of cruelty and cold-bloodedness. The wave of his blood
has created a garden which is symbolic of his sacrifice for the
preservation of freedom and Truth.

*Bahre haq dar Khak-o-khoon ghaltida ast*

*Pas bina ey la illah gardida ast*

Dr Iqbal says that Imam Husayn voluntarily gave his life at Karbala for
the sake of Allah or Truth. So it goes without saying that Husayn laid
the foundation of the cardinal Principle of Islam -the belief that there
is no god except Allah. Since Islamic principles were being twisted,
distorted and exterminated it was Husayn's blood which gave it a new
life.

*Mudda a yash saltanat boody agar*

*Khud na hardy ba chunin sammane safar*

That Imam Husayn's only aim in refusing to accept Yazid as Caliph of
Islam was to preserve Islam, can be borne out from the fact that while
he left Madina for his journey towards Kufa he had a small band of his
relations and followers, including women, and children. Had he the
intention of fighting a political battle he would not have gone there
with such people as he took with him.

Those Who accompanied Imam Husayn included his sisters, wives, children
(even a six month old child was with him) and some followers, some of
whom were more than eighty years of age.

*Dushmanan chun rig-e-sahra la tu'ad*

*Dostan-e-oo ba yazdan ham 'adad*

In the Battle of Karbala the number of the enemy was as countless as the
particles of sand, but the number of Imam Husayn's friends was only 72.

*Tigh-e-la choon az miyan buroon kashid*

*Az rag-e-arbabe batil khoon kashid*

*Naqsh-e-Illallah bar Sahra nawisht*

*Satre-unwan-e-najat-e ma nawisht*

*Ramz-e-Qur'an az Husayn amokhteem*

*Za Atishe-oo Shoalaha andokhteem*

Imam Husayn took up his sword of 'La' or 'No' that is, there is no deity
(except Allah) and crushed infidelity. He imprinted the mark of Illallah
(Tawhid), or monotheism in the wilderness of Karbala. It was a title for
our salvation. In fact we have learnt the lesson of Tawhid or monotheism
from Imam Husayn, who taught us in a practical way the secret of Qur'an
by sacrificing his life for the sake of Allah and for completing the
mission of his grandfather, the Prophet.

We have gathered warmth from the fire of love for Allah that Imam Husayn
possessed. Dr Iqbal means that the love for Allah shown and the
sacrifice made by Imam Husayn at Karbala should serve as the best lesson
for all the people of the world.

*Shawkat-e-Sham-o farray Baghdad raft,*

*Satwat-e-Ghamata ham az yad raft*

*Tar-e-ma az zakhma ash larzan hanooz,*

*Tazah az takbir-e-oo Iman hanooz*

Dr Iqbal says that kingly grandeur gained through political battles
never survives. The pomp and vanity of the thrones of Syria and Baghdad
which were once seats of great kings is no more present. Nobody
remembers the splendor of Gharnata i which was the seat of Spanish
Kings. But the reverential call of Husayn at Karbala -his call of La
Illaha Illallah is still echoing in our ears and thrilling our hearts.

*Ay saba ay payk-e-dÅ«r uftadagan,*

*Ashk-e-ma bar khak-e-pak-e-oo rasan*

Iqbal's intense love for and faith in Imam Husayn is apparent from this
couplet. Fondly addressing himself to the breeze, which proverbially
carries the message of the lover to the beloved, who is at a remote
place. Iqbal asks her to carry his tears to the sacred tomb of Imam
Husayn. Dr Iqbal weeps in sad and blessed memory of Imam Husayn and
wishes to place his tears over his Imam's grave.


