Chapter 6: Muhammad bin Hanafiya
================================

When Imam Husayn left Madina for Makkah along with the members of his
family, his brother Muhammad bin Hanafiya remained in Madina. The mother
of Muhammad, the son of Ali, belonged to a tribe named Bani Hanafiya and
on this account he was called Muhammad bin Hanafiya. He was a
magnanimous, brave and pious person.

Although Kaisaniya sect considered him to be an Imam he himself believed
in the imamate of his brother Imam Hasan after his father Imam Ali, and
thereafter in the imamate of his second brother Imam Husayn and then in
the imamate of his nephew Ali bin Husayn. He was a distinguished person
among the Ahlul Bayt and showed great valor in the battles fought by
Imam Ali the Commander of the Faithful.[^1]

When Imam Husayn left Madina for Makkah he wrote a testament for his
brother Muhammad bin Hanafiya. It has been narrated by Ibn Tawus. In
this testament the Imam mentioned the motive for his rising and
clarified the policy which he intended to pursue in all circumstances.
He also referred to the false motives which instigate a man and make him
fight to satisfy his carnal desires and stated that the godly persons
are free from such motives. The testament reads as follows:

***In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.***

"This is the testament of Husayn bin Ali bin Abi Talib written by him
for his brother Muhammad, known as Ibn Hanafiya. Indeed Husayn testifies
that there is no god except Allah and no being other than Him is fit to
be worshipped and He has no partner. He also testifies that Muhammad is
Allah's servant and messenger, who has brought truth from Him, and that
Paradise and Hell do exist and the Day of Judgment is bound to come and
there is no doubt about it, and on that day, Allah will bring the dead
to life".

What the Imam said consists of the very doctrines which it is necessary
for every Muslim to hold, and one who does not hold them cannot be a
Muslim. Apparently the Imam meant to say that these very principles were
in danger and, if the matters were allowed to continue in that manner,
it was possible that the regime of the time might not refrain even from
attacking these Principles of Faith. In fact the real motive for the
Imam's rising was the protection of these very principles on which other
religious and social tenets of Islam are based.

The Imam continued: "This movement of mine is not on account of
stubbornness, rebellion, worldly passions or instigation by Satan. It is
also not my object to create trouble or to oppress anyone. The only
thing which invites me to this great movement is that I should reform
the affairs of the followers of my grandfather, eradicate corruption,
undertake enjoining to do good and restraining from evil and follow the
tradition of my grandfather, the Prophet of Allah and my father, Ali".

This testament does not mention the formalities that usually form part
of the last will made nowadays. On the other hand the Imam wished to
clarify his motive. He wanted to tell the people that his movement was
not an ordinary one based on human passions and worldly desires. He,
therefore, says: I am not going out for merry-making and amusement or to
create mischief. I am also not perusing the path of oppression". He
adds: "I have come out to reform the followers of my grandfather".

These words show that in the year 60 A.H. the Muslim ummah was faced
with a dreadful social and religious crisis, which could not be overcome
with a severe and bloody revolution. It was a danger that could be faced
only by a leader like Husayn bin Ali, whose infallibility has been
testified by the Holy Qur'an in the verse of Purification of Surah
al-Ahzab (33:33). It was a peril that could not be dealt with by means
of speeches and religious sermons.

He added: "If the people respond to my call, and accept truth from me,
well and good; and if they do not accept it, I shall observe patience
and am not afraid of unpleasant events, hardships, and sufferings". By
saying that he would observe patience, the Imam did not mean to say that
he would sit with folded hands so that Yazid might do whatever he liked.
On the contrary he used this word in its correct sense, which is suited
to the position of an Imam, and is the basis of faith and godliness. In
other words he said: "Even if I am alone I shall pursue this path till
Allah decides justly between me and these people, and He is the most
Wise and the most Powerful of the judges".

Thereafter he wrote: "O my brother! This is my testament for you. I do
not seek assistance from anyone except Allah. I depend on Him alone and
have to return to him".

[^1]: It is said that the Roman Emperor sent two herculean athletes to
Muawiya to measure their strength with the Muslim athletes. One of them
was tall and corpulent and the other was powerful with a strong grip.
Muawiya said to Amr bin As: "We have got a match for the tall man in the
person of Qays bin sad bin Ubada, but as regards the other man you
should think over it as to who can measure his strength with him and
defeat him". Amr said: "I have two persons in view but you are inimical
towards both of them. One of them is Muhammad bin Hanafiya and the other
is Abdullah bin Zubayr". Muawiya said: "You should summon him who is
nearer to us at present. Amr asked Muhammad bin Hanafiya to meet the
challenge. Muawiya took his place in the general assembly and the
dignitaries of the State also attended. The powerful person was the
first to enter the field and came face to face with Muhammad. Muhammad
said to him: "Either you should sit down and let me hold your hand so
that I may pull you off from your seat, or I may sit down and you may
lift me from my place. Now let me know whether you are going to sit down
or I should do so?" The Roman said: "You may sit down. Muhammad sat down
and let the Roman hold his hand. In spite of his best efforts, however,
the Roman could not move Muhammad from his place, and acknowledged his
weakness. Then Muhammad stood up and the Roman sat down and let Muhammad
hold his hand. Muhammad immediately lifted him from his place with one
jerk, held him in the air, and then threw him on the ground. Those
present applauded him for his strength and Muawiya too was very happy.
Now the second Roman champion who was tall statured entered the field to
compete. Qays bin SƒÅd who was present went in a corner, took off his
underwear and gave it to the Roman to wear. When the Roman put it on it
reached his breast and also trailed along behind his feet. Thereupon, he
felt ashamed and sat down. The elder amongst the Ansar were very much
annoyed on Qays having taken off his underwear in such a formal meeting
and rebuked him. He, however, composed some verses in which he
apologized for his conduct.


