Chapter 7: Causes of the rise of Imam Husayn
============================================

Truly speaking if we wish to find out the causes of the rising of the
Imam we shall have to make a search for its preliminaries during a
period of at least thirty years preceding that time, because about
thirty years after the migration of the Holy Prophet, there had taken
place such developments as had made necessary a movement like this in
the Islamic society.

Uthman bin Affan Umavi ruled over the Muslims for about twelve years as
the Caliph of Islam. It is clearly recorded in the history of Islam that
the shape of the Islamic Government underwent a change during the six
years covering the second half of the Caliphate of Uthman. In fact the
Islamic rule should strictly enforce law otherwise the people should be
free in all matters and no limits should be laid down for them except
those prescribed by law. This Islamic method underwent a change and it
assumed another posture that made the Muslim free in all matters, except
that it was necessary for them to have regard for the interests of the
ruler.

Taking advantage of this state of afairs the people began to amass
wealth and property from the Baytul Mal (public treasury) of the
Muslims. It was the same Baytul Mal that was guarded so carefully by
Imam Ali during the period of his caliphate. The same policy was adopted
by the caliphs preceding Uthman and even Uthman exercised necessary care
in spending from it during the earlier part of his caliphate.

However, later this wealth, instead of being spent on the general
welfare of the Muslims, fell into the hands of a few persons. These were
the malpractices, started thirty years earlier, which Imam Husayn
decided to restrain in 60 A.H. by means of a sweeping and bloody
revolution, which resulted in his own martyrdom and his everlasting
honor.

Mas'udi writes in Murujuz Zahab that at the time of his death the Third
Caliph left behind in cash 150,000 gold dinars and one million dirhams.
However, according to the same Mas'udi, when Imam Ali was martyred Imam
Hasan mounted the pulpit and announced: "My father has not left behind
any gold or silver except 700 dirhams. This money, too, had been saved
by him from his salary to procure a servant for his house".

Thereafter Mas'udi writes: "The value of the property owned by the Third
Caliph in Wcidiul Qura and at other places reached 100,000 gold dinars.
Besides it he also left behind a large number of horses and camels".

About Zubayr he writes: "Besides the well-known palace at Basra he built
a large number of houses in Basra, Kufa and Alexandria and at the time
of his death he owned 50,000 gold dinars, one thousand horses, one
thousand slaves and slave-girls and numerous estates in different
cities.

Talha bin Ubaydullah was a well-known companion of the Holy Prophet. His
daily income from the property owned by him in Iraq alone reached 1000
gold dinars and according to another version it exceeded this amount. In
Syria he owned even larger property.

Abd ur Rahman bin Awf Zuhari was one of the distinguished companions. He
had 100 horses, 1000 camels and 10,000 sheep. At the time of his death
he had four wives and as he had children also his wives inherited,
according to the Islamic law of inheritance, 1/8 of the property left by
him. This was decided between the four wives and every wife got 1/32 of
the property. This 1/32 amounted to 84,000 gold dinars.

When Zayd bin Thftbit died he left behind such a large amount of gold
and silver that it was broken with a hatchet and distributed among the
heirs and the value of his other property was 100,000 gold dinars.

Yala bin Umayya, whose mother's name was Munayya, is also called Yala
bin Munayya. The Battle of the Camel was started against Ali with his
financial assistance and most of its expenses were borne by him. At the
time of his death he left behind 500,000 gold dinars and the people also
owed him large sums of money. Besides this the value of property etc.
left by him was 300,000 dinars".

Thereafter Mas'udi himself writes: "During the Caliphate of Umar there
was no such financial disorder and he did not permit these persons to
grab all this wealth from the property of the Muslims. On the other hand
everything was done in a straightforward manner and according to a
clear-cut policy. In the light of the system of government and
collection of wealth and its distribution among the Muslims none of the
Muslims could acquire so much wealth.

After Caliph Uthman Imam Ali attained to the caliphate. The difficult
task for Ali, on account of which battles were also fought, was to
control these influential persons and not to permit any person any
longer to take even one dinar from the Baytul Mal of the Muslims without
proper accounting. He wanted to restrain the people from all sorts of
covetousness, greed, and bad habits.

For about four and a half years covering the period of his caliphate he
had to struggle against these very persons who had been prevented by him
from amassing wealth. He used to say: "It is no longer possible that I
should be at the helm of affairs and this plundering should be renewed.
On the contrary I shall recover whatever has been given or taken
unlawfully and shall deposit it in the Baytul Mal". On this very account
Ali was eventually martyred.


