Chapter 8: Peace Treaty of Imam Hasan
=====================================

After Imam Ali, Imam Hasan attained to the caliphate. At this time the
Muslim society had assumed a peculiar form. Their strength had been
divided almost evenly, and if Imam Hasan had continued fighting against
Mu'awiya neither of the two parties could expect victory without severe
bloodshed. The result of such a fighting would have been disastrous for
the Muslims. Hence, Imam Hasan was faced with a situation in which he
had no alternative but to come to terms with Mu'awiya and prevent
senseless bloodshed. If he had persisted in fighting it would have
resulted in gain to the Eastern Roman Empire on the external front and
to the Khawarij within the Islamic territories.

If those 400,000 or 500,000 Muslims had attacked one another on that day
and fighting with Mu'awiya had been continued only Allah knows what
calamity would have fallen on the Muslims from the side of the Eastern
Roman Empire and what dimensions the danger from Khawarij would have
assumed, and what the history of Islam would have been!

Hence, Imam Hasan retired from the caliphate and thus safeguarded the
blood of the Muslims and the strength of Islam, and prevented the
external and internal enemies from taking undue advantage of the
situation. This does not, however, mean that he surrendered to Mu'awiya
and recognized him as the caliph and the Commander of the Faithful.

One of the conditions of the Peace Treaty between Imam Hasan and
Mu'awiya reads thus: "Hasan bin Ali makes Peace on the condition that he
will not be under an obligation to call Mu'awiya, the Commander of the
Faithful". It meant that he did not recognize Mu'awiya to be the caliph
and the Commander of the Faithful. Those, who think that by retiring,
Imam Hasan bin Ali surrendered to Mu'awiya and Mu'awiya became the
caliph of the Muslims and Hasan bin Ali also became one of his obedient
subjects, should keep in mind this valuable narration by Ibn Athir which
refutes this false belief:

"After Hasan bin Ali retired and Mu'awiya became the caliph, Farwa bin
Nawfal Ashjaie Kharij, who had deserted the Khawarij earlier along with
five hundred men and gone to the city of Zur said: "Now there is no
doubt about the fact that we should fight against Mu'awiya's
administration. As Mu'awiya has come at the helm of affairs and become
the caliph we must wage war against him".

They, therefore, marched towards Iraq and reached the palm-grove of
Kufa. In the meantime Imam Hasan had left Kufa and was on his way to
Madina. When Mu'awiya came to know that the said Khariji had revolted
along with his five hundred men, he wrote a letter to Imam Hasan,
possibly with a view to strengthening the Peace Treaty with the Imam.

He wrote thus: "I understand that Farwa bin Nawfal Khariji is proceeding
to Kufa along with five hundred men. I, therefore, direct you to go and
fight against him and ward him off, and after you have vanquished him
there will be no objection to your proceeding to Madina".

Imam Hasan received Mu'awiya's letter when he had arrived at Qadisiya.
He sent him the following reply: "O Mu'awiya! You have appointed Hasan
bin Ali to go like one of your officers and to ward off a rebellious
Khariji. I, Hasan bin Ali, have retired, in the interest of the Muslims,
from the caliphate, which is my right. If I had wished to fight against
one of the people of the Qibla i.e. with a Muslim, whoever he might be,
and to which ever sect he might belong, I would have fought against you
in the first instance".

The Imam meant to say that he desisted from fighting against Mu'awiya in
spite of the latter's being deviated from Islam as compared with all
others. It will be observed that the Imam did not say: "I have
recognized you as the caliph".

On the other hand he wrote: "I let you go and did not fight against
you". And possibly a better interpretation of the words "I let you go"
may be this: 'I have set you at liberty in the field of politics and
have myself retired only in the interest of Islam and to avoid the
bloodshed of the Muslim i.e. I considered it futile that these two
forces of Islam which are evenly balanced should fight and kill and
weaken each other and be annihilated, and the external and internal
enemies should take undue advantage of this situation '.

After the martyrdom of Imam Hasan, Imam Husayn did not also rise up in
arms against Mu'awiya during the last ten years of his rule (49 -60 AH)
and did not undertake that campaign against him -the campaign, which he
considered necessary during the regime of Yazid. However, he
continuously criticized and reprimanded Mu'awiya and denied his
rightfulness to the caliphate in the same manner in which his brother
Imam Hasan had done.

After the martyrdom of his brother Imam Hasan, Imam Husayn wrote the
following letter to Mu'awiya that has been reproduced by Ibn Qutayba
Denuri:

"O Mu'awiya! Are you not the same person who killed Hujr bin Ady and his
pious friends unlawfully? They were the persons, who condemned heresy
and ordered the people to do good and restrained them from evil. You
killed them cruelly after granting them security and making firm
promises and covenants with them. By doing so you defied Allah and
considered the Divine covenants to be frivolous. Did you not kill Amr
bin Humuq Khuzaie, who was one of the distinguished companions of the
Holy Prophet? He was the man whose face had worn out and whose body had
grown thin on account of excessive worship. You killed him after
granting him security and holding out promises of safety to him. If such
promises had been held out to the desert deer, they would have come down
to you from the hills with perfect confidence."

Are you not the man who associated Ziyad, the son of an unknown father,
with your father Abu Sufyan and called him your brother, as Ziyad bin
Abu Sufyan, and supposed that he is the son of Abu Sufyan although the
Holy Prophet has said: "The child belongs to the man on whose bed (i.e.
in whose house) he is born and the woman giving birth to the child is
married to him and the adulterer is to be stoned to death as commanded
by Allah. And then you have appointed Ziyad to rule over the Muslims so
that he may kill them and amputate their hands and feet and hang them on
date-palm trees. Allah be praised!

"O Mu'awiya! It appears that you are not a member of the Muslim
community and the Muslims have no connections with you. Fear Allah and
beware of the Day of Judgment, because Allah has a document from which
nothing, whether small or big or good or bad, is omitted and everything
is taken into account. You must remember that Allah does not forget
these acts of yours, that is, you kill people on mere suspicions and
false accusations and have made a boy, the ruler of the Muslims, who
drinks wine and plays with dogs.

"O Mu'awiya! I see that you have destroyed yourself, spoiled your faith
and made the Muslim ummah helpless".

This was the manner in which Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn, the two sons of
the Holy Prophet addressed and wrote letters to Mu'awiya bin Abu Sufyan
and called him to account.


