Preface
=======

The modern scientific thought has undergone metamorphic changes over
ages. Its spirit, however, has constantly remained to justify the
existing fact on rational grounds. Eventually, the twentieth century has
witnessed an unimaginable scientific advancement that has assigned a
vital role to man on the globe in the conquest of the universe.

In the quest of knowledge, the modern man has also discovered that the
centuries old concepts about religion are contrary to the scientific
thought and, therefore, need to be either discarded or made compatible
with the scientific method. This is the challenge that the religious
scholars and theologians have failed to face. Instead of analyzing the
problem on scientific basis, they have adhered to their timeworn
ideologies with a practical surrender to the materialistic values in
vogue. Even the torchbearers, the so-called intellectuals and modern
scholars of Islam who pretend to be abreast with the modern scientific
thought have given in to the onslaught of modern sciences and in secret
depths of their hearts feel nervous how to defend their position. They
are doing more harms than good by defending their post with archaic
weapons.

However, towards the dawn of new millennium, there has risen one guiding
star on the intellectual horizon that has showered rays of his effulgent
wisdom on the modern mind fallen prey to stray ideologies. Equipped
adequately with the scientific and religious knowledge, he has given the
call to modern man that Islam is the religion that, ever since its
revelation, has the scientific bases which the modern scientific thought
is now claiming to discover and further needs to explore in its
totality. What Descartes and his successors (Locke, Barkeley, Hume, Kant
and Hobbes, Montesquieu, Mill and Benthem and others) did to promote
scientific method and rational thought in Europe, has been accomplished
in the world of theology, single-handedly by Prof. Dr Muhammad
Tahir-ul-Qadri. The world has already recognized him as*‘outstanding man
of the century’ and ‘leading intellectual of the world.’*

This is not in our purview here to reckon the contributions made by
Prof. Dr Muhammad Tahir-ul-Qadri to the modern Islamic thought and its
reconstruction. Nor can we measure his achievements in clearing and
purifying Islamic ideology from muddling of various ‘isms’ wrought over
centuries. But the aspect of his intellectual ventures focussed here
relates to a sensitive issue that has disintegrated the intellectual
unity of Muslim thinkers and their followers.

Who is ‘Wali’ and what role he plays in spreading light of divine
guidance among the believers is a question that has been answered
divergently under the reflective influences alien to Islam. A huge
reservoir of literature exists on Mysticism, Islamic Mysticism,
Pantheism and Transcendentalism, nature of Mystic Experience, its
variety, allied philosophies and schools of thought. The antagonists too
have generated colossal works proving it contrary to the ‘true Islam’
and labeling it as an impious innovation in the approved Islamic code of
life. This controversy has inflicted serious damage to the modern Muslim
mind leading the young educated Muslims all over the world to
desperation and abhorrence from

Islam. They are confused and blatantly question the intellectual
validity and logical wellbeing of Islamic thought. The Muslim scholars
engaged in this unfortunate controversy, however, ill afford any attempt
to recover from the ‘spin’. They drastically lack in advanced knowledge
and are unaware of the ‘phenomena’ of modern scientific mind. Being the
odd ones, they now stay out of this war of wits, which has spread over
East and West. How to satisfy the modern scientific mind on the question
of Islamic Spiritualism, its nature and significance; the ‘Friends of
Allah’- Auliya, their role and task, status and dignity and the
phenomenology of spiritual experience is an uphill task which Prof. Dr
Tahir-ul-Qadri, however, has performed with tantamount facility,
authority and command.

Without entangling himself in sterile controversy on mysticism and its
various ‘schools’ and types, he has taken the Holy Qur’an as the basic
and exclusive source of his logic. He triumphantly convinces the reader
that a Wali Allah (a friend of Allah), whether a mystic or a saint
(whatever term one may use to describe him), is a spiritually privileged
Muslim. He acquires heavenly acquaintance and proximity to Allah through
absolute obedience to and an overpowering love and adoration for the
Holy Prophet (SAW). He then himself becomes a source of spiritual bliss
and inspiration for those who stand fast in his company.

Simultaneously, endowed with a vividly historic insight, he educates the
modern Muslim mind how, centuries ago, the Muslim scholars defeated
their rival thinkers employing the then contemporary logic against them.
He emphatically exhorts all educated Muslims of the world to acquire
perfect knowledge of modern logic and defeat the antagonists of Islam
who have joined hands against the ‘Ummah’ with an intention to shake the
solid spiritual realities which are the bases of Islamic thought and
ideology. Prof. Dr Muhammad Tahir-ul-Qadri, the intellectual spirit of
our age, the divine genius of the new millennium and a ‘Friend of Allah’
has a sagacious eye on rise and fall of the Muslim and non-Muslim
empires. He possesses a vision that penetrates into future and clearly
discerns the impending dangers and their remedies.

While handling this most difficult and controversial subject of Islamic
spiritual philosophy, disseminating it to the modern inquisitive mind,
he has adopted an easy and logical style to communicate the ideas with
the help of similitudes and parables and enviably sublime and inspiring
expression. This is exactly the style of exposition and elucidation
manifest in the Holy Quran where the divine principles and the spiritual
realities of life are made home to man loud and clear through parables
and similitudes. While explaining the nature of friendship with Almighty
Allah he has based his arguments on the verses of the Holy Qur’an and
has taken similitude from modern scientific subjects specially
‘Magnetism’ and ‘Electric Charge’. The concept of ‘Spiritual Magnetism’
and ‘Spiritual Charge’ enabling Auliya Allah to get into the ‘spiritual
channel’ which originates from the Holy Messenger (SAW) is a dazzlingly
unique and exceptional addition to the existing literature on Islamic
Spiritualism. It attracts and convinces the modern educated reader and
deletes his disbelief in spiritual values. It irrefutably proves that
the phenomenology of Islamic Spiritualism is

compatible with the modern scientific method. This dissertation in this
way is, by any standard, a classic piece of literature produced on the
subject.

This work, besides spiritualism, also enlightens the reader on ventures
of modern science especially in the field of parapsychology. An account
of scientific research into finding the underlying reality of psychic
experiences and supplying empirical interpretations to extra-sensory
perception (ESP) and out-of-body-experience (OBE) has added substantial
value to intellectual status of this exposition. The glimpses from
spiritual life of Auliya, of their divine experiences in comparison to
ESPs, OBEs and the concept of an infinite power within man, highlighting
the real significance of Islamic Spiritualism, invite the scientific
mind to struggle if it can and belie the spiritual reality. When they
decline to disbelieve in psychic reality and its wonders on
electromagnetic ground, how can they decline to believe in spirituality
of real self of man, its special link with Allah and its acquired
infinite spiritual competence towards conquering the universe,
demonstrated by Auliya Allah. Studying spiritualism in the perspective
of most modern scientific investigation in the field of parapsychology
is an amazingly emphatic maiden attempt in the field. It has indeed
opened the doors, to embrace Islamic Faith, on those who have been
enabled by this study to develop their belief in Islamic Spiritualism on
rational scientific grounds. We the believers, welcome this courage to
convert to Islam on this rational basis.

While closing this prologue, I convey my sincere thanks to Dr. M. Z.
Awan who provided me with his enlightening guidance towards finalizing
compilation of this work. In this regard I owe to him a great deal. And
Hakeem Muhammad Younas Mujaddady! I must say he is an angel who came and
in a single discourse changed the course of my life. While talking about
his ‘Quaid’ he glows with love and devotion. His motivation kept me in
while accomplishing the assignment. He brought me spiritual proximity to
the ‘Friend of Allah’ who is also a friend of all of us - Prof. Dr
Muhammad Tahir-ul-Qadri, our great ‘Quaid’.

ABDUL AZIZ


