Statement of Case
=================

Our Dissociation with the Past
------------------------------

The Muslim Ummah remained at the pinnacle of glory for over a
millennium. It had stamped its existence on the surface of the earth.
But it eclipsed to such a stalemate that even the urge to remain in the
race got consigned to oblivion. Devoid of a zeal for worldly advancement
and spiritually hollow, we have entangled ourselves in superficial and
absurd paradoxes and contradictions. Indifferent to our immense
ancestral heritage, we have lagged far behind, serving other nations
with a welcome opportunity to feed on our forefathers’ highly nourishing
and delicious inputs in the field of scientific research and
intellectual advancement. We know we are starving but we do not
comprehend how and why! We have failed to perceive what assets we have
ruined. We are bereaved of both vision and the insight. This predicament
has consequenced to humiliation, disesteem and debasement.

One major reason of our fall to dishonor and disdain, is our
indifference towards scientific disciplines. It has put us among the
tail-enders in the world. An in-depth inquiry of human history reveals
that our ancestors disseminated thought and philosophy to the whole
world and founded numerous scientific disciplines. Had our forefathers
not accomplished their pioneer work in the field of empirical sciences,
the contemporary scientific disciplines could never have developed into
their present status. They dawned with their wisdom on the Western
Nations drowned in murk and darkness of ignorance. The Western World
amply fed on our illuminating heredity. And we spared everything for
them witlessly.

### Our Forebears’ Ingenuity and ourClumsiness

###

Our forebears vehemently defended the tenets and doctrines of Islam
against the infidels’ onslaughts. They planned their strategy well and
executed it intelligently. They paid them back in the same coins. The
unbelievers used all their weapons to invalidate Islamic ideology.
However, the Muslim scholars and thinkers put to use the same weapons
effectively against the adversaries and frustrated their game plan.
These weapons were the disciplines of learning in vogue. The strategy
adopted by the Muslim intellectuals bore fruit. They employed logic and
reasoning to thrash Greek perplexities and silenced the enemy through
rational argumentation and thoughtful interpretations. Thus they guarded
the verity and veracity of Islam.

The table, however, was turned on us. For last two centuries the
stronghold of knowledge and learning held by the Muslim scholars and
scientists has passed into non-Muslim hands. This has reduced our
existence to mere dependents of the West in all spheres of life. For
last one hundred years in general and half a century in particular, the
West has launched a high power offensive against the teachings and
ideology of Islam. Our ancestors were not exposed to such malice.

These offensive measures employed against our dominion - Islam, are
multifaceted and multidimensional. The bottom line is lamentable and
heartbreaking. The complexity gets manifold when our so-called religious

scholars pursue the Western thought and endorse the materialistic and
sacrilegious mentality that denies spirituality root and branch. What a
paradox and what an irony of fate! Our superficial and pseudo
intellectuals share the ideas of Western thinkers, regurgitate their
thought and negate the very spiritualism that forms the basis of
Muhammad’s (A) ‘Channel’ to Allah. A critical analysis of this situation
reveals that the axis of reason and intellect has shifted from the
Islamic World to the Western confines of wisdom. Whatever they mould
carries heretic features. A majority of our contemporary thinkers and
scholars have been swayed by Western thought. Is it not grievous and
distressing?

The tragic consequence of this deplorable situation is that the
distracted rather deluded Muslim scholars fail to defend against the
contemporary attacks of Western scientific thought. They either become
apologetic for their paucity of learning and inferiority complex or
attempt to encounter the blasphemous attack equipped with timeworn Greek
thought and philosophy. The output is obvious. What can they achieve
with obsolete weapons? What an awareness and what a modernism! Centuries
after the demise of Greeks, we teach their philosophy as part of our
curriculum even today. Sequel to this intellectual inertia, the sources
of our creativity have gone parched and unproductive. What
counter-offensive against the Western scientific method is then possible
in this scenario?

### Weak Defence of a Strong Case

###

This is deplorable that in our era the Islamic world seems to lose its
case despite having strong grounds. We have failed to plead a strong
case. On the contrary, the anti-Islamic forces appear to win a very weak
case due to their strong presentation and vigilant and shrewd attorneys.
This situation warrants us to concentrate maximum on acquisition of
modern education in the current disciplines, in addition to
dissemination of Islamic thought. The modern learning merits priority
also because, unlike Greek philosophy, it is consistent with the Islamic
thought. The more you get grounded in it, the clearer you become on its
perfection. The modern scientific evolution has verified and validated
the Holy Quran and Hadith as its origin. This is an irrefutable fact
that expansion of scientific research and advancement will keep
validating the absoluteness and rationality of Islamic concepts and
teachings. In this regard, probabilities of breakthroughs and
progression are infinite and the prospects of the victory of Islamic
thought are encouragingly bright.

We have to inquire into the factors responsible for the present
predicament of the Islamic world. Why have we failed to triumphantly
advocate our case and standpoint before the world? Why the world
persistently rejects and repulses our viewpoint based on solid
scientific facts?

An objective analysis of the dilemma would unfold that we, as a
community, are unaware of the requisites of modern age. Majority of our
Ummah is not well versed with the language that we have to employ to
convince the non-Muslim world of our beliefs. We are not equipped with
the weaponry that the enemies of Islam have put to use for destroying
our strongholds. The enemy is engaged in adulterating the text of the
Holy

Qur'an and in counterassault, we are complacent with the use of merely
the print media to curb the heinous attack launched through electronic
media. The enemy forces have opened gunfire and we are combating with
slings and arrows. They bomb us to shatter our unity and positions and
we feel contented with throwing stones. Is it not heartrending? Should
we close our eyes to the dazzling firepower of the enemy and hide into
the caves of evasion and escape? OR shouldn’t we equip ourselves
overnight with the weapons superior to those of adversaries to overpower
and frustrate their malicious designs?

### How to Counter the Conspiracy?

###

We must understand the conspiracy against the Islamic World. The science
is advancing by leaps and bounds. The Westerns are rightly proud of
their superior evolutionary status among the comity of nations. As they
keep the poor and the deprived dependent and subdued, they also intend
to see the Muslim world under their subjugating authority.

The modern scientific civilization is eating up geographical distances
and the world spread over millions of miles has been reduced to Global
Village. Owing to scientific progress, deserts are being transformed
into meadows and fertile fields. The mineral wealth is drawn to our
feet. Scientific knowledge has enabled us to bring all the natural
sources under human control and consumption. This is, however, tragic to
note that the Western nations are adamantly bent upon keeping the
backward nations dependent and subdued. In this regard, the Muslims of
the world are their well-defined target. They are striving hard to keep
the Muslims deprived of the fruits of scientific progress.

On the contrary, we are not ready to realize the need of the hour.
Instead of acquiring modern scientific knowledge, we still justify and
take pride in learning classical knowledge. Even today the outdated
Greek philosophy forms part of curricula of our higher seats of
learning. What all facts science has deducted from its research work are
compatible with Islamic thought and validate and verify the facts dealt
with in the Holy Qur’an and Hadith literature. Under the circumstances,
all intellectuals, scholars and scientists of the Muslim world are
required to jointly develop some workable plan to get rid of
sluggishness and adynamism; introduce remedial measures to overcome the
odds and perpetuate our existence in the modern scientific age. Keeping
this objective in view, they are to contrive a strategy how to remedy
the present deteriorated situation.

Need for Learning Modern Logic (Ilm-e-Kalam Jadeed)

In early days of Islam when sciences had not yet taken roots, the Greek
philosophy was considered to be the measure of wisdom and rationality
the world over. Our forerunners, the traditionalists and the religious
vanguards befittingly encountered the philosophical attacks against
postulates and tenets of Islam, in terms of Greek philosophy. For that,
they contrived the discipline of ‘logic’ known as ‘Ilm-e-Kalam.’

The present generation has opened eyes in the scientific age. A person
even with insignificant learning, knowing little about science is at
least aware of scientific method. The hard disk of his mind has been
formatted in a manner that he won’t accept anything incompatible with
scientific

thinking. He knows that all scientific procedures produce logically
correct results. In the same way, we need modern logic (Ilm-e-Kalam
Jadeed) to triumphantly communicate the Islamic teachings and concepts
to the scientifically formatted mind. The old method to work out a
‘mean’ term of two extremes to infer corollary has gone archaic. Today,
we need to observe and undergo successive experiments to deduce
inference and formulate concepts. This scientific method is believed to
be the rational method to arrive at the truth.

In early centuries of Islam, in counterstrike to Greek offensive attack
against Islamic ideology, our Islamic vanguards, (the Aa’immah-e-Keram),
approved and promoted ‘logic’ (Ilm-e-kalam) as the offensive-defensive
strategy. They frustrated this way the atheist attacks and proved that
Islam was verily the true DEEN.

Today, our sincerity of purpose in spreading and defending Islam binds
us to follow the footsteps of our ancestors. To consolidate their
position and ensure victory against the adversaries, they used the most
effective weaponry of the day, the Greek philosophy itself. We too are
required to follow the same strategy i.e. using the contemporary methods
of offensive- defensive operations against the adversary. We need to
administer the scientific method, which our forerunners were not even
exposed to, as it was a nonentity at that time. It is considered to be
the touchstone of wisdom and reason. This is the ‘modern logic’, the
Ilm-e-Kalam Jadeed. This device put to use would generate the desired
results against the Western intellectual forces deployed to oust us from
the civilized world. This is the only strategy that would guarantee our
success and stability and ensure effective communication of the message
of Islam to all scientific cultures in the world. This may also confirm
our emancipation ultimately with our heads bowed down, souls prostrated
and tears quivering in our eyes, in the foremost and loftiest court of
our most beloved ‘Prophet’(A). We will receive from him alms,
benevolence, compassion, mercy, intercession and deliverance from acts
of trespassing, slip and oversight. He will shower upon us his bliss and
bounties and we shall drink to our fill from his ever-spurting spring of
love, care and kindness.

The need of the hour is to equip our coming generations with scientific
knowledge and methodology. This would not only provide a solid
foundation to Islam but also groom us to put the enemy on defensive
through our counter offensive measures. Without that even the defense of
our modest teachings of Islam is impracticable. Our scholars absorbed
the Greek philosophy to frustrate the Greek faith and concepts and their
onslaught against the Muslim thought. We also have to follow the same
path: acquire modern scientific learning; reject the adversaries’
concepts on scientific grounds; stun their wits and mute their
antagonism. This is the secret of our survival as a dauntless and
triumphant Muslim Ummah.

The awful fact, however, is that we are far from our destination.
Science is making rapid advancement and we are too slow to keep abreast
with the modern developments. The situation is grievous and dreary. It
warrants expeditious but wise and cautious planning to take most
effective measures to equip our youth with the modern thought and defeat
the foes on their

ground. Otherwise a perpetual backwardness will bring us to a total
subjugation leading to annihilation as an independent entity.

### Our Pseudo Scholars and their Escape from Spiritualism of Islam

###

This is quite unfortunate that in such a critical moment, when
antagonistic forces surround Islam, a few fanatics are busy sermonizing
empirical ideals. They have shunned spiritualism and ignored the
spiritual values. They reject and deny love and attachment for ‘Sunnah’
(the holy practices of the Prophet(A), refute miracles (mo’ojizat)
performed by him as Signs of his Prophethood and reject his knowledge of
the unseen. They totally reject love for the ‘Auliya Allah’. Nor do they
accept their teachings. Instead, they promulgate a self-made concept of
Islam, which may be in keeping with their materialistic reasoning but
cannot be compatible with the true spirit and real teachings of Islam.

On occasions, these pseudo scholars and their Western thinkers seem to
be the same class. Both have the same objectives. The non-Muslim
intellectuals strive to keep the ‘Ummah’ from nourishing on the
spiritual source. The Muslim pseudo intellectuals and thinkers too deny
spirituality of Islam and have joined the hostile camp. Our Western
rivals emphatically denounce the spiritual benevolence, and bliss of our
beloved ‘Messenger’ of Islam(A). They also deny his life, now, fourteen
centuries after his physical demise. Our awkwardly educated,
ill-informed and strayed scholars do also disbelieve the living status
of the Prophet(A). They claim to have faith in the Holy Qur’an but,
paradoxically, reject the unimaginable eminence, spiritual glory and
effulgence of the Holy Prophet(A) - who is the embodiment, divine
recipient and awardee of the Holy Qur’an.

This is an undeniable fact that the religious scholars assigned to teach
Islam in religious institutions have lost their communication with the
majority of the people. They are an isolated entity. The communities and
the milieu that need exhortation and merit goading and teaching are out
of their reach and intellectual influence. These pseudo scholars are
unfit for the war of wits that is on in the East and West and in the
Arab and non-Arab Muslim world. Those who somehow, reach the front soon
learn that they are far feeble and low in face of modern learning and
scientific interpretation of the Holy Qur’an and Sunnah. They have
limited knowledge and are ill-equipped for any sort of logical reasoning
and intellectual combat. Owing to lack of scientific knowledge, they
fail to come up to the mark. Their superficial bookish knowledge
containing narratives, debates, religious sanctions against their rivals
and versified fables cannot satisfy a scientific mind. Consequently,
they fail to differentiate right from wrong. What they try to prove
through Qur’anic reasons as perverse innovations and infidelity, come
out to be righteous, pure and virtuous. Through religious declaration,
Fatwa, they label whom they wish and whenever they want, as unbeliever
and atheist. This would not be inappropriate to say that all they do to
promote the cause of Holy Qur’an is in fact, detrimental to the Holy
Qur’an and Sunnah. They are miserably handicapped. Nor can one keep them
from this pseudo service of Islam, snatch their pens and mute their
eloquence. Our great thinker poet, Iqbal has masterly potrayed their
true picture in his splendid poetic work Javed Nama:

“The religion of God is more shameful than unbelief,

Because the Mullah is a believer trading in unfaith;

In our eyes this dew-drop of ours is an ocean,

To his eyes our ocean is a dew-drop.

At the elegant graces of that Qur’an-vendor

I have seen the Trusty Spirit himself cry out!

His heart is a stranger to what lies beyond the sky,

For him the Archetype of the Book is but a fable;

Having no share of the wisdom of the Prophet’s religion

His heaven is dark, being without any star.

Short of vision, blind of taste, an idle gossip

His hairsplitting arguments have fragmented the Community.

Seminary and Mullah, before the secrets of the Book

Are as one blind before the light of the sun.

The infidel’s religion is the plotting and planning of Holy War;

The mullah’s religion is corruption in the way of God.”

### Convincing New Generation to see the Real Light

###

The need of the hour is to impede Mullah and convince the new generation
to see the real light and save them from hell fire through learning
Islamic teachings in scientific and rational way. With scientific
knowledge and logical conviction they will practice the tenets of Islam
persistently, consistently and productively. It is, however, regrettable
that our hypocritical scholars, owing to their defective reasoning on
the Holy Qur'an and Hadith, are causing our youth deviate from Islamic
teachings.

Consequent to their failure in defending the cause of Islam, our
religious scholars generally start condemning and reproaching time and
age. They need to review their inconsistent thought, irreconcilable
concepts and awkward behaviour. Instead, they find it far convenient to
find fault with and blame time and age and get relieved of their
fundamental duties and liabilities. For this very reason, supreme leader
of the universe, the Holy Prophet(A) exhorted:

Do not reproach time for Allah is (manifest through) time.

*(Ahmad bin Hambal, Musnad, 5:299, 311.)*

This pearl of wisdom of the Holy Prophet(A) contains invaluable
connotations and denotations. Rebuking age is worthless and futile; it
rather worsens the situation. Whether you are dynamic or inactive,
gaining or losing, time is indifferent to that. This is a permanent
value subject to no change that time sanctions victory for those who do
not depart from reality; they present and fight their case more
effectively and scientifically and reject any compromise on principles
and rules of the game.

This is a heartrending paradox that a majority of our so-called learned
lot presents the Qur’anic message so awkwardly that instead of drawing
closer to the postulates of Islam, our younger generation feels fed up
with and strides away from Islamic concept of life. Such religious
scholars (Ulama or Maulvees) are utterly counter productive. The wrong,
self-willed and unauthentic interpretations of the Holy Qur’an, which is
the divine source of guidance, corrupt their vision and put them on the
erroneous track. The Holy Qur’an verifies:

***By means of the Holy Qur’an He (Allah) causes many to stray and many
He leads to the right path.***

*(Qur’an (al-Baqarah) 2:26.)*

The Muslim youth all over the world in general and the Pakistanis in
particular have set out to get equipped with scientific knowledge. They
regard those Qur’anic concepts and deeds which have descended to them
from their forefathers, not more than whims. The young Muslims
graduating from the Western universities feel frustrated and
dissatisfied with the unnatural concepts about Islamic code of life.
They question their elders about the spiritual “channels” like Qadri,
Sohrwardi, Chishti and others: Why should there be such channels? What
is their value in terms of utility in practical life? Why should we take
the mystic traditionalists, the saints -Auliya Allah, as our guides and
leaders? Why shouldn’t we implore Allah’s assistance directly? And why
an intermediary link or a ‘channel’ for mediation is all that necessary?

These interrogations crowd their minds and find vent in form of defiant
utterances. We consider these eloquent inquiries as rudeness and
arrogance. We do not attempt to convince them with logic and reason. We
blame them to be trespassers and deserters of their faith. Such
reprimands do restrain them for a short while, but eventually frustrate
them and make them astray. Such a rebellious approach emanates from our
failure to present Islamic postulates in the language of science.

An Exhorting Episode
--------------------

This would not be out of place to mention an episode that occurred
during one of my visits to London. One of my elderly friends called on
me. He looked gloomy and deeply worried. Sympathizing, I offered my
fervent cooperation and investigated the problem. He burst out and
lamented: “I sent my son to a mosque for religious education. There the
commentary lectures on the Holy Qur’an were delivered according to a
regular program. He attended these lectures for a few days and then
discontinued. On inquiry, he retorted, “I listened to the lectures on
the Holy Qur’an. But to my disappointment, what all I learned was
contrary to science and reason. I do not accept such mythological and
unrealistic tales.” Narrating the grieving tragedy my friend mourned, “
I sent my son to Mosque to learn Islam. But contrary to what I aspired,
he denied his belief, creed and even the dignity and divine status of
the Holy Prophet(A)”.

I consoled my friend and invited him and his son to dinner. I intended
to clear the young man on the essence of Islam and make him learn the
reality. My friend however, declined saying, “But my son considers you
an innovator and a polytheist”. On this, I approached his son myself,
hugged him and said, “Sonny, We are your guests; courtesy demands that
you accompany us for a while.” I called his father as well and enquired
about all the complexities that had perverted his son’s mind. He put the
questions one by one and I replied in the same order. The son felt half
relieved in an hour’s time. On my departure he sought information about
my stay their. “Another two three days” I replied. “Could you spare one
more hour please?” he requested. I replied in affirmative saying, “Not
for you alone. Bring your friends too. There will be an open session for
every body.”

When we ended the second session, the son embraced me, saying, “May
Allah bless you, you have saved me from complete divergence”. The son is
now a staunch Muslim, strictly complying with the teachings of Islam.

Most wards of immigrants in Europe, owing to their brought-up in the
most modern educated societies, are exposed to similar problems. They
are diverting from the righteous Islamic teachings and guidance for the
sole reason that we are indifferent to and avoid modern scientific
education and fail to perceive the reality. We ourselves are responsible
for this situation. We can keep the young generation from this disaster,
provided we appreciate the requisites of scientific age and present
Islam to the young but more knowledgeable and mature mind in a manner
compatible with the prerequisites of our age. We require arranging
religious education for our children on scientific grounds along with
formal modern education. This would bear us positive and fruitful
results and our children would stick to the postulates of Islam
tenaciously and perseveringly.

A Dire Need of the Hour
-----------------------

We are in a dismal state. It is indeed Islamic spiritualism that can
rescue us from the earthly impasse we have gone into. This has become a
dire need of the hour that men of vision and wisdom from amongst the
‘channels of mysticism, saints and Holy Shrines’ should come forward and
make comprehensible the spiritual teachings of Islam to the scientific
mind of our youth. They have to take keen interest in the education of
their children, their training and brought-up on right footing. Only by
producing competent heirs can they save the spiritual heritage of Islam
from deterioration and disaster.

In the modern era of impiety and wickedness, only a few mystic and
spiritual dynasties have been able to survive the invasion of
materialistic forces. Very few of them are those who still have the
stimulant value in re-animating spiritual pursuits among their
followers. What is generally observed is that, to a great extent, the
spiritual foundation of shrines has been demolished and superficiality
and pseudo spiritualism surround the spiritual centers established by
the eminent forerunners. Our great national poet Allama Iqbal perceived
this bitter fact and versed this passion: ‘the shrines are devoid of
mystic savour; and schools are depleted of innovation of ideas.’


