Scientific Bases of Spiritual Phenomena
=======================================

Historical Aspect
-----------------

While making statement of case in the first chapter, we have pointed to
the Western thinkers’ averse rather hostile stance towards spiritualism
and our pseudo scholars’ blind submission to the Western scheme of
thought. We also need to look at the historical aspect of the problem to
acquire and facilitate a better comprehension of the scientific bases of
spiritual experience. This is an undeniable historical fact that since
the time of ancient Greeks, Eastern thought has played a vital role in
the development of Western philosophies and psychologies. This
intellectual influence on Western mind reached its zenith during
Renaissance period. With the advent of natural sciences, however, the
positivistic approach dominated Western science and philosophies and the
intellectual West drifted away from the Eastern psychologies and study
of transcendence.

A quotable instance is that of Plotlines who felt influenced by Persian
and Indian philosophies. He, in his reflex action, left a deep impact on
Christian mystics, which continued for centuries. He profiled a world of
experience beyond the bonds of sense-reality. He offered the doctrine of
divorcing the sensuous experience to transcend self-awareness, time and
place and achieve the state of ecstatic union with God. This doctrine
formed an essential ingredient of Christian psychology. Later,
engendering a controversy between science and religion, the progressive
thinkers of science-age regarded the mystic aspects of religion as
outdated, unscientific and based on ignorance and lack of education. The
custodians of religion also took an aggressive stance of which Galileo
became an exemplary figure. The gulf then could never be abridged. The
empirical intellectual culture in the West rejected the Eastern
philosophies and psychologies, disregarding them of any import in the
new materialistic scheme of things.

After this fall, however, there was a revived inclination towards
Eastern thought in nineteenth century. There are numerous factors
responsible for this shift in the Western stance. One of these factors
is the fact that the Western psychologies ignored a large range of
experience that happens to be an inevitable and dynamic part of our
life. This tilt towards spiritual experience is revealed through
writings of some leading psychologists of that age.

A Canadian psychiatrist R.M. Bucke narrated an experience how he and two
of his friends spent the evening reading Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats,
Browning, and especially Whitman. When they parted at midnight, he had a
long drive. His mind, deeply under the influence of the ideas, images
and emotions called up by the reading and the talk of the evening, was
calm and peaceful. He was in a state of quiet enjoyment. Suddenly,
without early warning of any kind, he found himself wrapped around, as
it were, by a flame-colored cloud. For an instant he thought of
fire—some sudden conflagration in the great city. The next (instant) he
knew that the light was within himself. Then there came upon him a sense
of exultation, of immense joyousness, accompanied or immediately
followed by an intellectual illumination quite impossible to describe.

Later they called it as a glimpse of cosmic consciousness.[^1]

Many Western psychologists, likewise, became keen in studying
transcendent experiences and in this way laid the foundation of
‘Transpersonal Psychology’. C.G. Jung, Medard Boss, Gardener, Lois
Murphy, Alan Watts, Maslow, Charles Tart and Robert Ornstein are the
leading psychologist who promoted the study of transcendence of self,
spirit, unitive consciousness, peak experiences, ecstasy and mystic
experiences. They realized that the Western scientific scholars
blundered by neglecting this very significant area of human life.

Charles Tart, a major investigator of transcendent experiences observed:

*‘Western Psychology has dealt very poorly with the spiritual side of
man’s nature, choosing either to ignore its existence or to label it
pathological. Yet much of the agony of our time stems from a spiritual
vacuum. Our culture, our psychology, has ruled out man’s spiritual
nature, but the cost of this attempted suppression is enormous. If we
want to find ourselves, our spiritual side, it is imperative for us to
look at the psychologies that have dealt with it.’* [^2]

Even after acquiring this insight into the significance of spiritualism,
the Western philosophers and psychologists have failed in appreciating
the true knowledge and information the Holy Qur'an has furnished on
human psychology. Out of a bias against the Qur'anic thought they deny
themselves the enlightenment on the secrets of individual as well as
collective personality of a people that lead to the real success. All
their interests in Eastern religions’ psychologies revolve mostly around
‘Abhidhamma’, Buddha’s teachings and ancient scriptures of India, China
and Japan. They turn away from the Qur'an which describes their actual
state of mind:

*Most of the people of the Book wish to turn you to disbelief after you
have embraced faith, owing to the jealousy they have in their hearts,
despite the truth having become manifest to them.* [^3]

We are making here an attempt to present to our readers, irrefutable
spiritual reality to reawaken the human intellect to the ‘Light of
Allah’ for prosperity and success here and hereafter. This will remove
the spiritual vacuum Charles Tart has pointed to in his transpersonal
psychology.

The analysis of the problem in the preceding chapter reveals belief as
one of the fundamentals of our life. How it works in self-exploration
and self-actualization amounting to incredible manifestations of real
human self, falls beyond the scope of reason. However, it functions
within the confines of scientific method but in its own peculiar way.
The believer who attains a close link with Allah through firm faith in
Deen, its perfect implementation and deep love for the Holy Prophet
(SAW), experiences his own spiritual observations and undergoes the
rigors of experimentation dictated by the discipline. But this has never
so far been studied and comprehended in a scientific way.

Studies in parapsychology, however, have attempted to find the facts
that have remained hidden from rational scanning. The research has
brought forth certain experiences that a psychic undergoes. This has
opened doors of investigation to new realities of life difficult for the
scientific studies to absorb. Nevertheless, its significance towards
understanding spiritualism

and the reinforcement it provides to stabilize faith in the spiritual
truths can never be underestimated. It is because our spiritual life too
operates through the same apparatus of human psyche that engenders
psychic experiences. This takes us into an interesting phase of our
present inquiry.

The purview of Reason and Science
---------------------------------

*“There are more things in heaven and earth,*

*Horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy.”[ 4 ]*

Reason is a unique faculty bestowed upon man by Almighty Allah. It is a
distinctive attribute of man. It is intangible itself but has an access
to empirical (existential) reality and can perform brilliantly under the
illumining guidance of transcendent (essential) reality. Science is its
great achievement and it does apprehend the contents of Revelation.
However, the Spiritual or the Transcendent Reality and the real self of
man (termed as Khudee by Iqbal) are beyond its ken.

*Pass beyond Reason,*

*It’s a lamppost on the way,*

*Not the destination itself.[^5]*

Reason is at its best when it conducts scientific investigation. It
guides us to solutions and decisions on the bases of data it has
collected. If the data are inadequate, the guidance provided to us by
reason is ineffective. Then we choose hit and trial because reason falls
helpless in the absence of the required knowledge about facts.

Our knowledge is adequate and sufficient so far as the physical world
and the empirical self of man are concerned. Here, the guidance of
reason is reliable and perfect. But knowledge processed by reason about
man’s real self and the Ultimate Reality and the relationship between
the two, leaves us blind. This is not the domain of reason. With regard
to the physical world we ill-afford any negligence in acting on the
advice of reason. But as regards our self and spiritual wellbeing, we
are ill-advised to place any reliance on reason.

Here, we require Divine Guidance where reason fails. Reason functions
but in its own sphere; the moment it oversteps, it falls. Understanding
the limitations of reason and scientific investigation is, therefore,
inevitable.

The Scientists on Science
-------------------------

Science employs perfectly valid methods which yield true knowledge but
in its own domain. If some skeptics underestimate its efficacy and rate
it unreliable, that poses the system a threat to survive. However, the
other extreme too is irrational at the same time. Some scholars and
scientists dazzled by the soaring success of modern science claim that
science would ultimately solve the riddle of the universe and answer any
query pertaining to man and the universe. This is an unjustifiable
approach and also harmful because it becomes a barrier to the progress
of human faculties lying out of its purview. Great scientists, however,
do accept it that reason can never fathom reality.

**Einstein remarks:**

*Representatives of science have often made an attempt to arrive at
fundamental judgements with respect to values and ends on the basis of*

*scientific method and in this way have set themselves in opposition to
religion. These conflicts have all sprung from fatal errors …. Science
cannot create ends and, even less, install them in human beings; science
can at the most, supply the means by which to attain certain ends. But
the ends themselves are conceived by personalities with lofty ethical
ideals.* [ 5 ]

**Jode opines:**

*(Intuition) is its own authority and carries with it the guarantee of
its own authenticity. For those truths which we know intuitively no
reasons can be adduced, simply because they are not reached by a process
of reasoning. Reason no doubt may be enlisted later to produce arguments
in their favour.”* [ 6 ]

**Dr Crowther aptly remarks:**

*The last word of science on any topic may perhaps be left for the last
man to utter.* [^8]

Science, therefore, is a perfect guide so far as the physical self of
man or his earth-bound life is concerned. But the real self of man
transcends human reason. Its nature is unknown to us. It may even be
impossible to know it. All that we know about it is confined only to
this awareness that it is free; that it has unlimited capacity to
develop; that it has an in-built urge to grow; that it is a spiritual
substance capable to acquire attributes of the Ultimate Reality - Allah
Almighty. These are but the glimpses of the real self that we have to be
contented with. ‘Allah is the Light of Heavens and the Earth’; and the
real self of man gets illumined by this ‘Light’. Here reason gets
extinguished and science only gropes in the dark.

Science and Psychic Experience
------------------------------

Of all the clarity we have so far achieved on limitations of reason and
delineation of confines of scientific method, this is but amazing that
the scientists of human mind have not given up their probe into psychic
experiences and spiritual flights of human soul. They are excluded from
their sphere. Terms such as extra-sensory perception, out-of-body
experience, or psychic experience describe all episodes or events to
which they fail to provide any interpretation.

*There are many records of people, who see themselves, or seem to see
themselves, from outside themselves. These are the varieties of
out-of-body experiences that seem to me to be more common than many
people suppose. How common, no one knows;” common because man has been
endowed with such capabilities that assist him to develop into his real
being.* [^9]

Robert Rivlin, and Karen Gravelle, in their joint venture Deciphering
the Senses have examined the spectrum of human perception and revealed
that there may be as many as seventeen senses. Drawing on the most
recent scientific research, they have described certain psychic
experiences and attempt to find some scientific interpretation to these
events.

To perceive the real nature of man’s spiritual life, this is inevitable
to comprehend, as far as possible, the dynamics of psychic experiences.
The ESPs and OBEs produced here with their scientific analyses intend to
equip us with an insight to peruse what actually spiritualism means in
Islam. Episodes from spiritual life of Auliya Allah shall further enrich
our information. That will enable us to process in our mind what
actually the

concept of spiritualism is and how one can acquire it through spiritual
magnetic experience - the query this work is striving to answer.

These efforts of the scientists (empiricists) although have their own
significance in comprehending dynamics of human mind yet they are
incomparable with the manifestations of man’s real self (spiritual self)
particularly when the real self is closely linked with the Divine
Reality - Allah Almighty. Whether the scientists deny or accept the
correspondence of real self of man with the Divine Reality is
immaterial.

This is very simple to understand. Science deals only with matter and
not the spiritual realities. They have their respective scopes and
domains. Science is based on reason whereas spiritual existence of man
is based on faith in the unseen and revival of life beyond grave.
Science believes in trial and error and persistent probe into material
reality; spiritual life is based on revelations. The sensory apparatus
of man can perceive the spiritual realities in form of observations that
can only bewilder human intellect.

A common man experiences something extra-sensory and the magnetic
sensitivity or electromagnetic energy is found to be the answer. In the
presence of such findings can one refute the verity of spiritual
realities parallel to psychic ones - parallel in form though not in
substance? The conclusion already drawn in the preceding pages remains
that science only gropes in dark so far as man’s real self and its life
and growth in relation to its proximity with God is concerned.

Extra-Sensory Perception (ESP) [ 10]
------------------------------------

The Concept
-----------

The episode pertaining to Hadrat Suleman (AS) and the little ant
adequately highlights the ESP concept.

A tiny insignificant creature, an ant, heard the troops of Suleman (AS)
marching on. Fearing that all the ants would be crushed under their
feet, the ant forewarned its whole family:

*O ye ants, get into your dwellings, lest Suleman and his troops crush
you without even noticing it.* [^11]

How did a humble creature like an ant perceive Suleman’s(AS) troops
approaching? What scientific phenomena are involved in all that? How
could the ant know it were none other but Suleman’s troops?

Hadrat Suleman (AS) too heard the little ant’s warning to its folk; he
smiled and offered his prayer to Almighty Allah!

This episode referred to in the Qur'anic verse is of special
significance here in the context of perceiving the imperceptible. How
could an ant know the unknown and hear the inaudible? Or what phenomenon
was involved that made Suleman(AS) hear the ant and understand the
message? Or did all that happen beyond the confines of time and place?
Was there something beyond sensory apparatus? A perception,
extra-sensory?

**Paradise Lost:** When in paradise, both Adam and Eve were in perfect
harmony with each other and with the entire nature. They had learnt the
inner essence of all things. They sang with the birds and communicated
with other species in their own languages. They had acquired this art.
Then the unfortunate occurrence put them apart. The man and nature were

disassociated. Man failed to communicate with the vegetable and the
animal worlds. Innocence expired and the paradise ended with the end of
harmony with nature. The communication between the individual and the
cosmos terminated. We got confined to our senses - the empirical
reality. That was how we had to live on earth!

**Paradise Regained:** But there still was a way back to harmony with
nature, a chance to restore communication between the individual and the
cosmos. Once it happens, you can talk to the spirits of the dead and
know what is going to be said before it is uttered. Through precise and
accurate intuition you become aware if somebody is going to harm you. We
have seen how a tiny little creature, ant sensed the impending danger
posed by Suleman’s troops.You rise above or beyond time and become
timeless which enables you to feel future as present. That is getting
out of the frontiers of senses. That is something extra-sensory, the
perception of infinite, and the restoration of complete tuning in with
nature, the revival of paradise.

Such experiences of harmony and communication with cosmos are those that
fall within the realm of parapsychology, extra-sensory perception and
psychic phenomena. The one who manages to get into such a state of
harmony can then see, know and feel all things on a more expanded level
than normal. It is timelessness Adam and Eve enjoyed before the fall
when the senses encompassed an all-dimensional communication with
nature.

The Case of W T Wolfe [^12]
---------------------------

Psychic is a person who can have ESP. William Thomas Wolfe was a
psychic. He discovered one day that he could perceive things on a very
extraordinary level. He began to meditate more and more. He found that
he could often perceive what someone was going to say shortly before
making the utterance. He realized that he could do more than just listen
to someone talk and evaluate what they were saying. It was like an
in-depth experience of what was going on.

He started feeling heat at various spots in his head and other
pleasurable sensations. He would get involved in activities like
biofeedback as an extension of his meditation. He wanted to know what
was actually happening to him. So he began reading books to figure out
exactly the phenomenon that had taken over his system.

*One night when I had just gone to bed and was lying there perfectly
awake I, suddenly exploded into another state of being, some sort of an
electrical effect in that I was no longer experiencing or sensing things
like an ordinary physical person. I had become a completely different
being, no longer a two-legged, two-armed human, but part of a complex of
silvery balls just hanging in space. I experienced only blackness, only
the existence of the silver balls, which were part of me, extending out
into somewhere. You might say it was like the view of someone sitting on
an atom. Somehow my consciousness got totally wrapped up in something
completely different.*

He also had similar perceptions some time afterwards. He took them as
‘sort of an electrical effect’; he would experience something
internally, which actually occurred later. It would not just be a
reflection of the

occurrence but actually the experience of the event although in a
slightly different mode than it would happen later.

*It’s as though there were two valid points of reality for a given
incident. In experiencing something on the front end and then
experiencing it again at the second point, it becomes very difficult to
distinguish which is the true reality, which came first. After going
through something like this it throws you into a different mind set.*

Do we perceive what happens or do we make it happen to correspond to
what we perceive? This bothered him much. “I believe that perception is
a little bit of both, that perception itself can actually go outward
rather than just flowing in as most people believe. I think that
perceptions themselves can be constructive acts in the ongoing creation
of everything around us¾that’s one way I have to explain some of the
things that happened to me.” Wolfe’s answer!

We, however, have to see what answer science finds to this inquiry.

Winston Churchill’s ESP [^13]
-----------------------------

Winston Churchill, during World War II, used to make frequent trips out
to the line to boost the morale of his troops. Every day his driver
would come, open the car door for him, and Churchill would get seated.
One morning, however, the driver opened the door as usual but Churchill
refused the open door. He went around to the other side of the car,
opened the opposite door and got in. Then they set off. As his car sped
up to the destination, on the way, a bomb exploded immediately alongside
the car and threw it onto two wheels. Miraculously, it righted itself.
Had Churchill followed his normal routine, the car would have gone on
the wrong side because of his weight. So he escaped the disaster. Later,
he revealed that he had heard a voice saying, “Stop. Go around to the
other side and get in there,” when it had been time to get into the car.

What was this voice? What sense was involved in the perception? Was it a
communication with the cosmos or what? Wait for the research to come to
fore, take up the investigation and answer the inquiry.

Obsession of Son’s Death
------------------------

A mother feared her elder son Herbert would die in the bathtub. She
always remained obsessed with the awful idea. She spent sleepless
nights. She made a special point of listening that nothing went wrong.
However, she had not disclosed it to Herbert though she had unfolded it
to Peter, her younger son.

Years later, Herbert had gone away. On a holiday, however, when he came
home the obsession haunted her. She still remembered it. In the evening
she heard him whistling and singing in the bathtub. Although she was
ready to go out somewhere, she changed her mind and decided to stay back
home. Anxiety and fear had taken over her. She kept restlessly listening
to his voice, fearing that his singing would subside owing to the
dreadful mishap. Then she heard the water running out but no singing.
Immediately she ran and opened the door and there he lay, exactly as she
had seen him years before in her frightful imagination. There was gas
heat and the window was closed and he had apparently been overcome by
fumes.

She immediately opened the door and windows and called the doctor;
Herbert was revived. Had she not been there he doubtlessly would have
passed away.

What magic is it that kept the mother on her toes? She perceived it
before its actual occurrence. How could it all happen?

An Out-of-Body Experience (OBE)
-------------------------------

(Consciousness A & Consciousness B)
-----------------------------------

A person senses that his soul or consciousness has somehow become
separated from his physical body, an experience identical to death, R.
Crookwall records in his*More Astral Projections* ,

Late at night he felt unwell; by two o’clock it developed into acute
gastroenteritis. He vomited and purged until about eight o’clock in the
morning and by ten o’clock he had symptoms of acute poisoning. So
incapacitated he grew that he could not even call for any assistance. A
strong feeling of illness caught him. He quickly reviewed his financial
position. Thereafter at no time did his consciousness appear to be in
any way dimmed, but he had a sudden feeling that his consciousness was
separating from another consciousness existing in his very system. There
was a consciousness A and a consciousness B; his ego remained attached
to the consciousness A.

The B personality belonged to his body. His physical condition
deteriorated and heart fibrillated. He had a sensation of a built-up of
individual consciousness in each organ: the head, the heart and the
viscera. These components became more individual and the B consciousness
began to disintegrate, while the A consciousness seemed to be altogether
outside the body, which it could see.

He felt his consciousness gradually expanding and he could see not only
his body and the bed in which it was, but everything in the whole house
and garden, and then realized that he was seeing not only things at
home, but in London and Scotland. He was free in a time dimension of
space wherein “now” was in some way equivalent to “here.” He failed to
know wherefrom he was being directed, and what was the source of his
explanations.

Seeing oneself from without and feeling lifted out of oneself with the
bodily consciousness alive is what they call OBE. Does science offer any
explanation to that? Let us see.

Some Scientific Explanations of ESP[^14]
----------------------------------------

As a rule, what cannot be explained in the light of current set of
scientific laws is either rejected or denied. Later, when scientific
method overcomes its bafflement, it makes for the denied facts some
room. For instance homeopathy was once treated as illegal practice; its
founder Dr. Hahnemanna was banished from his native land. Later it
became popular all over the world. Similarly, acupuncture was once
totally rejected by the medical scientists. But it is now considered a
standard practice in hospitals. Likewise, science has developed some
degree of acceptance for psychic phenomena. In some cases, it offers at
least partial explanations while for others, such as reincarnation, they
are watchful and look for some more

developments and evidence. For ESPs and OBEs they now talk of
categories. Precognition or telepathy is one category in which a person
experiences something without immediate physical reference.
Psychokinesis is another type where objects are moved by mental powers.
They also regard ESP as a human experience and find its dynamics in
magnetism and electromagnetism, which permeate human organism as well as
the universe.

**It is a Human Experience:** ESP is something extra-sensory. It may be
sixth or a sixteenth sense. They now talk about seventeen instead of
conventional five senses that man is blessed with. The scientists do not
consider ESPs as results of some unknown or hidden forces. Nor do they
regard them as an offshoot of mystical thinking or some magic or
witchcraft. It is a very human experience in which sensory signals are
transmitted and received by the body. Nevertheless, there are two
considerations: first, they are signals below the normal threshold of a
known sensory system; second, they are a form of energy that is being
detected by a sense, which we are so far unaware of. But although
various forms of ESP lie beyond scientific investigation, yet we expect
that one day they will be known as a rational phenomenon.

Magnetic Sensitivity: The question is: are humans insensitive to the
earth’s gravitation? It relates to existence of magnetic sensitivity in
humans; it has already been demonstrated that other animal species do
possess it. Robin Baker experimented to prove it in humans. He has
recorded in his book Human Navigation and the Sixth Sense, an experiment
in which groups of blindfolded people were set free at some distance
from their homes. They were then asked to walk toward where they assumed
their homes to be. Baker concluded that humans could use magnetic fields
as an aid to navigation in the absence of visual cues.

**EEG & SQUID:** The evidence to the existence of magnetic sensitivity
is supported by a finding which may help explain the perception of
projected images that one can perceive around the heads of others and
which form the basis of ESP and telepathy. EEG (electroencephalograph)
measures the overall electrical activity of the brain. A newly developed
device known as SQUID (superconducting quantum interference device)
measures extremely fine electrical activity in the brain from just above
the scalp as proved by Lloyd Kaufman and his colleagues at New York
University. It also maps and records shifts in brain activity emanating
from different types of thought. The instrument can also detect how
brain processes information and what different parts are involved in
pattern recognition and problem solving beside other functions. The
research also substantiated the idea that activity of the brain may
project out beyond scalp. The brain itself transmits signals of its
thinking to the outside world in addition to what already our body and
face do in this regard.

This leads us to telepathy or ESP. An ESP, therefore, may be an image of
a person’s inner mental state reflected in an electromagnetic energy
field projected from his head in the form of an aura. These are the
extra-sensory powers that someone can consciously or unconsciously read
a person’s mental state from such radiation.

**The Mystics’ Third Eye - Pineal Gland:** Pineal Gland is the only
structure in the brain, which is not bilaterally symmetrical. It is a
lonely individual organ surrounded by a greater mass of other brain
structures. The scientists consider it a relatively primitive part of
the brain. Science has, however, attempted to prove it as an origin of
mystic thinking. That is why it has also attracted the attention of
mystics and philosophers.

Descartes considered pineal gland as the seat of human soul. He
propounded that it was in the pineal that spinal fluid was formed: the
supposed medium of exchange between body and soul. Various religions
particularly in the east regard it as a “third eye”. They hold that
through it can be visioned the light of the world and divine guidance.

Those who practice yoga advise to close the eyes and hold the index
finger about half an inch away from the middle of forehead. This
stimulates the pineal gland. A bright aura of light becomes visible as a
symbol of divine inspiration. In modern theory of mysticism pineal gland
is named as ‘inner eye’ to see the mystical light within the soul. Some
believe that if a small flashlight is shone at the middle of the
forehead the pineal will get stimulated to function better. So we can
safely conclude that Pineal Gland serves as a clue to biological
functioning of human organism facilitating its spiritual dynamism.

Electromagnetic Energy and ESP
------------------------------

One thinks of a friend or relative not heard or seen for months, even
years. Then the same moment, telephone rings and the person is on the
line. You may also get a flash that something is about to happen or has
just happened hundreds of miles away. Then the occurrence is confirmed
at the same time, in the same manner. While talking business or
discussing informally things concerning different chores of life, one
suddenly knows exactly what is going to be said before it is uttered, or
exactly what something will look like before it is seen. These and many
others are the experiences, sensory or extra-sensory, for which science
has yet to supply empirical substantiation. Extra-sensory implies
outside the range of normal senses. But do we know all our senses and
their individual actual scope of function? These experiences may,
therefore, be truly sensory, i. e. they may be completely internal,
within the person who perceives them, and not manifestations of any
external power or source. The receiving sensory system may be muffled or
enveloped in mystery, incapable to comprehend the proceedings.

Karen Gravella’s account of electromagnetic energy in pertaining to ESP
is a valuable study of the phenomena.

*If psychic perception does occur through some sensory system that
allows a person to literally snatch thoughts and images out of the air,
what can be the means through which the images are received? The most
likely explanation is that some kind of sensing of electromagnetic
radiation is involved, but through a mechanism which is still totally
hidden. In this way, the electromagnetic vibratory frequencies of colors
themselves could be perceived directly. And this could also correspond,
of course, with the sources of electromagnetic energy emanating from the
body. The kinds of brain signals detected by the SQUID are extremely
weak, however, and*

*would only account for the kind of psi experiences that occur at close
range.* [^15]

A study accomplished by James Beal of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight
Center points to the microwave energy in the “X-band” (around 9 giga
hertz) involved in the subject puzzle of human psychic functioning. This
frequency falls within the bands used in commercial broadcast
applications (when a news crew goes live, it sends back signals to the
station on either 2, 7 or 13 GHz), He holds that this is the frequency
at which many living organisms also seem to emit radiation. This
suggests an analogy between life processes in the human body and the
process how radio and television signals are created, transmitted and
received through various modifications.

Static Electricity and Brain
----------------------------

The origination of psychic phenomena may also be engendered due to human
body’s peculiar responses to forces like electricity in nature. Static
electricity particularly, can affect the body directly, in the same way
the microwaves are absorbed. It makes the nerves of the brain and the
rest of the nervous system ignite more easily and sharpens the reflexes.
Generally, it makes a person more alert. In the presence of static
electricity discrimination of levels of a light’s brightness is
increased. It happens in the same way, as brain perceives the difference
between a solid glow and a rapidly flickering light.

Effects of -ive and +ive ions on Human Mind
-------------------------------------------

There are various phenomena associated with positively charged
electrical fields and the negative flow of free ions. If negative ion
flow is well maintained in the air it adds peacefulness, tranquility,
improved healing and what not to human life. Changes, on the other hand,
in the negative ion supply in the atmosphere generate adverse reactions
like depression, lethargy, despondency etc. An approaching storm causes
a build-up of positive ions in the air. Sequel to that the flow of
electricity in the nervous system slows down. Hence the consequences.

These various forms of energy are the forces to which the body responds.
Whether or not some specific sensory system detects them is not yet
ascertained. However, there is a likelihood that such a sensory
mechanism does exist which has not so far been known. For the finding is
that the transmission is either aided or hindered by large amounts of
electricity present in the environment.

Man in Electromagnetic Environment
----------------------------------

The animals forewarn an earthquake; they bark, cry out, or try to break
free and give other peculiar specific reactions. We see dogs sometimes
reporting what happened to their master even at a long distance. This
must not be simply knowing by them about the imminent danger.

Then what does all that mean?

Helmut Tributsch of the Free University of Berlin has found that human
skin is quite damp, due to secretions of sweat glands. On the contrary,
animals mostly have relatively dry skin. Some electromagnetic
disturbances precede an earthquake and large amounts of static
electricity build up in the

air. Owing to having damp skin human organism does not react. However,
animal’s fur gets electrified, literally bristling with the static
charge. This effect is intensified when the animal is in an enclosed
place space like a house. This makes the animal extremely uncomfortable.
Then horses try to break free, dogs bark violently, and cats move their
kittens out of doors.

Communication might occur on a much lower frequency. The earth itself
vibrates constantly between. 1 and 100 times a second, with an average
frequency around 10 hertz., falling in a range between 8 and 13 hertz.
The brain wave pattern associated with sleep and dreaming also operates
at the same frequency. This is also the frequency of light flashes or
rapid-fire sounds that can bring on an epileptic seizure. In view of all
that the scientists suggest that minute changes in this natural
vibratory frequency might account for profound psychic changes and
perceptions.

We also do not thoroughly know the functions of all the various parts of
brain. If one of them is supposedly involved in sensing electromagnetic
spectrum, a link between the body’s hormone/enzyme processes and some
as-yet-unknown environmental factor can be pointed to. At present, the
only thing known about the science of psychic phenomena is that they
seem to be matched fairly closely with alpha waves¾electrical signals
produced by brain when it is engaged in activities such as dreaming and
creative thought.

Hadrat Suleman (AS) and the Ant
-------------------------------

This would be worthwhile to close the argument with a special note on
the episode pertaining to Hadrat Suleman(AS) and the ant referred to at
the outset.

Was there involved some electromagnetic field or the Earth’s vibration
frequency? What type of perception that was which the little ant and
Hadrat Suleman(AS) experienced? The ant not only perceived their
movement, it also knew about Suleman (AS)!

**Conclusion:** This is one of the miracles of the Qur'an that ages ago,
it pointed to the realities which now man is so anxiously probing into.
The electromagnetic causality of such experiences to which science has
yet to provide substantial meaning bears special import. The ant knew
the unknown and heard the inaudible. Suleman (AS) heard the ant and
understood the message. It is compatible with those laws of science that
science has yet to discover but which do exist in nature. The scientific
method confirms that its findings are never final because it is an
ever-growing process. On the contrary, the divine realities are eternal;
they are unchangeable; man has to apply all his faculties to explore,
find, learn and believe in all such realities. So far as they remain
unknown and unseen, man must place his faith in the unseen reality,
submit himself to the Creator of the universe and obey his commands to
triumph in his quest for the most coveted scientific knowledge. The more
he delays his belief in the unseen, the more distant he drifts from the
truth. And the distance involved is measurable in millennia!

The Almighty within Us[^16]
---------------------------

Scientific probe is one way of looking at the psychic phenomena. There
is yet another approach on that. You may find the century’s best sellers
and

reward classics on the subjects like the ‘giant inside you’, ‘the cosmic
power within you’ or ‘habits of most effective people in the world’ and
so on. They claim that you are the ‘artificer’ of your own future. As
you change your thought-life, you change your destiny. They also
pronounce that methods they teach in their books have already helped
thousands of people to experience guidance, health, prosperity,
happiness, and peace of mind; that over hundred thousand people have
already used these secrets to obtain a happier and more fruitful life.

The literature thus produced spells out secrets of a life-changing art
to discover the latent power you are endowed with to realize your
objectives. Then it suggests certain exercises as well based on
religious faith and some psychic phenomena to conquer difficulties with
the divine help of the ‘cosmic power’ or the ‘Almighty Within Us’ that
permeates our existence.

Let us put aside the intellectual value of both theory and practice it
contains. Also disregard for a while its evaluation on the spiritual
scale from purely mystic point of view. What enhances its interest value
is the study how today, in the modern scientific era, people put to use,
though haphazardly, the power of faith in God even outside the world of
Islamic faith. This is heartening to see that through spiritual prayers
and practices, modern man feels keen to get out of his difficulties
caused by materialism and that people from other religions also are
inclining towards the spiritual practices which were peculiar to Islam.

They cannot, however, fully succeed without Islam as there is no
religion on earth but Islam that offers a sound system of spiritual
uplift ensuring real success in worldly life. Those who search peace
through spiritual means have to adopt this spiritual system having
irrefutable scientific bases. However, we regard and welcome their
interest in spiritual practices even outside Islamic faith as a step
ahead in this direction. Islam will provide them perfection as described
in the subsequent pages. Here, we need to peruse what this literature
presents.

Tuning in
---------

Dr Murphy holds that there is a power in you that has never been fully
released and that moves the whole world. ‘It is within you.’ Those who
mastered tuning in with this amazing power rose to heights in a short
time. You possess countless potentials to develop and the power within
you, discovers them and lifts you out of failure, misery, and
despondency. It guides and directs you and opens up new vistas for you,
“dries your tears, dissolves your problems and sets you on the high road
to happiness, freedom and peace of mind.” This power enables you ‘to
move onward, upward and Godward along all lines.’

It Heals
--------

Mrs. Helen Hanford LA California, succeeded to contact this wonderful
Power and got rid of her trouble:

*I began to think that the power of the Godhead was within my own mind
and that I could use it. I began to think that this power was greater
than hydrogen bombs, atomic energy or electricity and that all these
were nothing as compared to the All-Powerful God within me. For ten days
I had*

*been unable to lift my arm upward without unbearable pain, which caused
me to scream at times. On the way to my family doctor, I tuned in on the
Cosmic Power and affirmed: Through the Power of the Al-mighty within me,
I am now moving my arm freely. I lifted my arm to a horizontal position
with no pain whatsoever, and I moved it more freely than had been
possible for some weeks. The doctor tested my arm, and all goes well.
Truly, the kingdom of God is within each one of us!*

It Brightens
------------

Dr. Lothar Von Blenk-Schmidt is an air space scientist. Whenever he
faces some problem in the engineering department related to space
projects, he stills the wheels of his mind. He then affirms quietly:
Infinite Intelligence within me casts light on this project. On this his
mind suddenly gets illuminated with the answer. Infinite Intelligence
within him responds to his requests.

It Delivers
-----------

A financial wreck developed ulcers and hypertension and was “in a mess.”
He was obsessed by the idea of a Jinx as if God was punishing him for
his past sins.

He was advised that as long as he would believe in a Jinx following him
he would suffer because a man’s beliefs change into experiences and
events. The bankrupt followed a prayer advised to him and got rid of the
trouble.

He prayed loudly five or six times a day, and convalesced in a month’s
time. The new idea enthroned in his mind brought him riches of life.

Demonstrate Your Beliefs
------------------------

A woman had developed a wonderful philosophy of life. She wrote a thesis
on A Way of Life which sounded scientific as well as spiritual. However,
her personal life was chaotic having been divorced four times.

She was exhorted that her postulates and philosophical niceties must
also be put to practice. Her “head-knowledge” had to become
“heart-knowledge”; i.e. a living part of her personality.

Simultaneously she filled her mind and heart with the following prayer.
With that, she became completely transformed:

*God is love, and His love fills my soul. God is peace, and His peace
fills my mind and body. God is perfect health, and His health is my
health. God is joy, and His joy is my joy, and I feel wonderful!*

They say that thought must be made flesh, i.e. it must be embodied in
your experience. You must demonstrate your religious beliefs in all
areas of your life.

Some Dreams Rescue Life
-----------------------

*A few months ago I was scheduled to travel by plane. The night prior to
my departure I had a dream. I saw that I was reading headline of a
newspaper about a plane disaster, killing all the passengers. I woke up,
flabbergasted, perturbed and charged with feeling of dread. I found that
my wife was awake. Staring at me she said, “Did you have the same dream
that I had?” Behold! She told me exactly the same dream that I had seen,
in all its details! I cancelled the trip. Next morning the same flight
had a fatal*

*crash; all lives were lost, exactly as I had seen in the dream. The
dream saved my life.*

We do not dream with our conscious mind awake. In sleep the conscious
mind is put out; the subconscious and the unconscious mind find free
play. The subconscious mind dramatizes its contents during sleep; It
presents many symbolic pictures and illogical situations.

But they say the cosmic power protects life through dreams as in the
dream quoted here. ‘Dreams are the television series of your Deeper
Mind. There are all kinds of dreams, including dreams of pre-vision,
where you see an event before it happens objectively and which may apply
to yourself or to others. The dream may reveal the fulfillment of your
desire or it may be a warning to avoid a tragedy.’

The Faith Pays
--------------

From North Carolina, a man decided to take God as his partner. He
developed the feeling that God is the Living Spirit within him. He
talked to this Invisible Presence in him and affirmed:*“You are my
Partner, and I am going to ask you to guide, direct, and prompt me in
all ways. We are now a team, and we can’t fail.”*

This young man terribly lacked the courage to go into business for
himself. For long he remained shy. But after praying in the above manner
and affirming his union with the Divine Presence he felt in him a new
wave of strength and confidence. He went into a deal for a restaurant,
and with magic qualities of faith and courage paid off for the deal in a
year’s time. He did not care for the relatives who would always
discourage him that he didn’t have a chance and that he would ultimately
fail. But he realized deep within himself that nothing could defeat him,
as he possessed the priceless quality of faith in the Cosmic Power
within him to watch over him in all his ways.

His secret was that he held on tenaciously to the idea that his Senior
Partner would advise him and prosper him until his subconscious mind had
absorbed the idea and had brought it to pass.


