Qur'an, Science and Phenomenology of Spiritual System
=====================================================

The Holy Qur’an on Divine Status of Auliya Allah
------------------------------------------------

The style and expression of the Holy Qur’an is charged with wisdom,
guidance and exhortation. In the same exhorting style it addresses, on
occasions, our dearest and the most adorable Holy Prophet (SAW), and
these exhortations contain implied instructions for the whole Ummah. In
the following verse of the Holy Qur’an Allah goads his most kind and
beloved Messenger:

*(O’my servant), stand fast in the companionship of those who call on
their Lord morning and evening, seeking His pleasure and satisfaction
(by accomplishing His plans) and let not your eyes (your affectionate
and kind care) pass beyond them. Do you pursue adornments of worldly
life (turning away from the indigent)? Nor follow any whose heart We
have made heedless of Our remembrance (neglectful of Allah’s commands),
the one who follows his own lusts and who has gone beyond all bounds
(whose ways are unbridled).* [^19]

Allah Almighty has enjoined the whole Muslim Ummah, through His divine
“bond” with the beloved Messenger (SAW), to continue tenaciously and
with utter involvement the companionship of those who enjoy the ecstasy
of calling on Allah the Sustainer. Morning and evening they spend every
moment conscious of their spiritual contact with Allah and accomplish
His plans in the world. Doing all chores of life, they need nothing
except pleasure and satisfaction Allah Seeking His proximity, they long
only for ‘union’ with Him and pass away in the same state. They are the
Auliya Allah, His companions. ‘Allah is pleased with them and they are
pleased with Allah They call on Allah and Allah calls on them’. Their
dignity lies in the fact that those Muslims, who seek spiritual contact
with Allah, are required to join the pious and pure company of Allah’s
companions. This is the spiritual world. They are spiritually so
intimate to the Creator that we are exhorted to establish a contact with
them. Maulana Room has also emphasized:

*The desirous of Allah’s company must sit with Allah’s friends.*

The glimpses from spiritual life of Auliya Allah have already depicted
this spiritual contact with Allah. The Islamic history is replete with
anecdotes of Allah’s friends and their disciples. These episodes are
authentic and irrefutable records of the wonders of Islamic spiritualism
manifested through routine activities of the saints and their dedicated
followers.

Ghous-e-Azam Syedana Abdul Qader Jilani Hadrat Khwaja Moeen-ud-Din
Chishti Ajmairi, Hadrat Baha-ud-Din Zakria Multani, Hadrat Shah
Rukn-e-Alam and Hadrat Data Ganj Bakhsh (RTA), were those few who
attained Allah’s proximity and achieved His bliss. The above-quoted
verse of the Holy Qur’an commands us to join the company of such
spiritually elevated Auliya Allah and feed on their spiritual charity
and benevolence. Their companionship would ‘systematically’ lead us to
Allah’s companionship and win us His favours. They are not ambitious of
paradise,

position or fame. Nor do they long for ‘noble spouses matching in age,
specially created for Allah’s friends in reward of their noble deeds.’
The sole incentive that keeps them awake is the chance for a glimpse of
Allah’s face. The Qur’an enjoins those who seek Allah’s sight to
perpetually glance at the face of ‘His Friends’. Allah has also
commanded to stay away from those who have neglected Allah’s
remembrance:

*Do not follow him whose heart We have made heedless to Our
remembrance.* [^20]

And in Chapter An‘am:

*So, do not (ever) continue to sit with the trespassers after you
recollect.* [^21]

These verses adequately elaborate the main thought that we have to keep
away from the company of those who can drag us away from Allah This is
obligatory to persist with the companionship of those who are in contact
with Allah in order to acquire Allah’s love and affection. For that,
absolute abandonment of worldly ambitions is a pre-requisite. Pious
company makes you while the evil one breaks you.

Why Companionship of Allah’s Friends?
-------------------------------------

Instead of detaching oneself from reality around, drunken with private
meditation and calling “Allah, Allah” in isolation, why shouldn’t we
join the company of Allah’s Friends complying with the divine
instructions? According to Islamic Shariah code, what is the
significance of getting into the spiritual “channel” swearing fealty and
allegiance placing hand on hand, and establishing affiliation with the
“Auliya Allah ”? Why shouldn’t we establish a direct bond with Allah and
why to have a go-between? Why to have the link of His ‘devotee’ in
between whereas eventually we aspire only for closeness to Allah
Almighty ?

These inquiries bear significance for two reasons. Firstly, the
spiritual thought and spiritualism is tapering off gradually. ‘The
supremacy of mind over matter’ is a phrase people do use more often than
not. But, ‘the supremacy of the spiritual over the material’ is not
commonly appreciated. Materialism and materialistic thinking with
empirical education is predominating religious education and even the
highly educated and learned people examine and scrutinize Islam against
materialistic criteria. Instead of tailoring their worldly affairs
according to the Islamic concept of life, they attempt to fit Islamic
teachings into the frame of their material interests. Such a worldly
wisdom suspends the belief that the spiritual values of life are the
greatest factor in the estimate of ‘reality’. It replaces generosity
with selfishness and munificence with pride in possession. The
materialist becomes myopic to the fact that the material is ephemeral
and relative and the spiritual is eternal and absolute. He fails to
comprehend how through all the fire of persecution Ibrahim (D) remained
unhurt, how the inanimate world gets under spiritual command and how
stones turn into emeralds when touched by Dhun-Noon. The miracles of
spiritual might (mo’ojizat) are beyond his dimensioned wisdom.

Secondly, in our age, inactivity is coupled with corrupted creeds. In
religious circles, the pseudo monotheists deny the spiritual greatness
and dignity of the Auliya and regard their teachings as ‘perverse
innovations and

atheistic pile of sayings’. These so-called religious intellectuals do
not award any status to spiritual systems in Shariah. Nor do they regard
it of any historical and religious significance. The damage they have
done is beyond estimate. People have lost the right path; they are
deprived of the only chance, before death, of self-purification during
their stay on earth. They are inert and inactive towards their life
hereafter. Who will reconstruct them into pious souls that Allah so
earnestly desires them to become? Only the Auliya Allah bring about the
spiritual arrangement for such a rebuilt and reformation of our
personalities. Unfortunately, however, people are being pulled and
dragged away from teachings of Allah’s Companions, their divine
affiliation and ‘spiritual channels’. The number of people is increasing
who question the legitimacy of considering spiritual personalities and
mystics as linking channel between Allah and His ‘devotees’. This
controversy is confusing the mind of the common man.

However, when we turn to the Holy Qur’an for guidance on this issue, we
are enlightened that Allah has declared His “Friends” (Aulia) as a
go-between arrangement to lead his servants to purification, fruition of
their virtues and ultimate emancipation. This is the basic principle
even of all professional training as well as general education that the
experienced and the experts impart on the job training (OJT) to the
novice who gradually and with dedicated efforts acquire skills and learn
and one day become experts themselves.

The spiritual bond with Allah is not a man-made ‘channel’. It is beyond
man’s capacity to bring about such arrangements. This is Allah’s divine
Will that His Friends are inevitable for spiritual uplift of common man.
This is what the Qur’anic verse denotes:

*Stand fast in the companionship of those (friends of Allah).* [^22]

Affiliation and intimacy with them is mandatory to ensure access to
Allah. Once the bond of companionship is established they win us Allah’s
nearness.

A Divine Rule since the Creation of Universe
--------------------------------------------

Allah Almighty appointed His Messengers to convey the massage of His
Oneness to humanity. These Apostles accomplished this divine task from
Adam (D) to Allah’s last Messenger (SAW). This has been the divine
practice since the creation of the universe that Allah communicates His
message to His creatures through the ‘divine medium’ of his Messengers.
During their worldly term, He made them an intermediary between Him and
His creatures. After the cessation of Prophets’ channel, the divine duty
of keeping His servants from evil has been assigned to His Friends - the
Companions of Allah’s Messenger (SAW). This practice will last to the
Day of Judgment.

This is Almighty Allah’s ‘divine strategy’ that He sends out message of
His Oneness to humanity through the Holy Prophet. He enjoins:

*Proclaim, He is Allah, the Single.* [^23]

If someone asks Allah to pronounce His Unity (Oneness) Himself directly
without any channel, He would rejoin: This is below My Dignity to
address My creatures directly. Nor any human is permitted to talk to me
without any ‘medium’. Allah has revealed in the Holy Qur’an:

*And no one can dare speak to Allah (directly); however, (there are
three ways: ) either through revelation or from behind a veil or Allah
should send some angel to reveal by His command that which He pleases.
Surely He is High, Wise.* [^24]

This verse of the Holy Qur’an amply elucidates that Allah gets this task
accomplished by His chosen ones -His Messengers, the Prophets. Allah
declares that He talks to His Messengers whom He appoints His Prophets
(Rasool), shares His secrets with them and bestows upon them His glad
tidings. Hence His revelation: “My beloved Rasool (Messenger), I
appointed you My Prophet; Approach your folk and proclaim My Oneness and
covey to them what I have told you.”

The Qur’anic verse: “Proclaim, He is Allah, the One, The Only,” connotes
both monotheism (Tauheed) and Prophethood (Rasalat). The word “
Proclaim” signifies the Messenger’s Prophethood and rest of the verse
implies monotheism. This verse of the Holy Qur’an explicates that
monotheism begins with the Messenger (SAW) of Allah as it commands the
Prophet to declare (for the consumption of the people) that “ Allah is
the One, the Only.”

The crux of the matter is that Allah does not speak to any one directly.
He conveys His message through the channel of His Messenger, and vice
versa. No body can establish any direct communication with Allah. As
validated in the Holy verse on Oneness of Allah, He delivers His tidings
to His creatures not directly but through His Prophet (SAW) We,
therefore, in no capacity can develop a bond with Him without the
go-between link of the Holy Messenger (SAW). This is Allah’s sovereign
Will. We are instruction-bound and therefore, cannot trespass.

By My Lord, this is Allah’s Threshold
-------------------------------------

Allah has manifested this permanent (unchangeable) value through His
revelation: to submit your obedience to me, surrender to My Messenger.”

*Whosoever obeys the Messenger, has obeyed Allah indeed.* [^25]

This is a categorical imperative: “ O’ My servants! Never forget that
your obedience to my Messenger is complementary to your obedience to Me.
Beware! You must not even think of obeying Me without your total
submission to My Messenger.”

This point is further elaborated in the Holy Qur’an:

*(O’ my beloved Messenger), Proclaim, if you love Allah then obey me.
(In return) Allah will award you His love and affection.”* [^26]

Allah has clearly pronounced, “O my dearest Messenger, inform all if
they love Allah and claim to be His believers, they are required to love
you and obey your exhortations. The one who implements this command,
will be awarded Allah’s affection and fondness.” Another significant
aspect to this proclamation is that obedience to Allah without
obedience, love and devotion for the Messenger is abhorred and rejected.

*O ye who believe, do not raise your voices above the voice of my
Messenger, nor speak aloud to him in discourse, as you may speak aloud
to one another, lest your virtuous deeds are rendered vain while you
perceive not.* [^27]

Allah has made His Messenger a communication link between Him and His
servants and wants to confirm that His servants have thoroughly
comprehended His Will. It is, therefore, settled once for all that
without linking up with the intermediary connection, no claim of
humility, love and obedience for Allah would be accorded any approval.

All believers must submit totally to the instructions and guidance of
Allah’s Messenger (SAW). It is further consolidated:

*When My servants inquire from you, O’ My Prophet , tell them I am
close.’* [^28]

It implies that when the believers seek Him and inquire from His
Messenger (SAW), they should be clearly informed that Allah is close by
them. Allah is very close to His servants. But how can we identify those
fortunate souls who are being given the happy tidings of Allah’s
closeness? Reading in between the lines, we learn that they are those
who seek the favours and bounties of Allah’s Messenger (SAW). Allah
loves those who love and obey His ‘Rasool’ (SAW). Love for Allah and his
‘Rasool’ is essential for faith.

*If your fathers, your sons, your brothers, your spouses and your family
ties as well as the wealth you have acquired and the business you dread
will fall off, plus the dwellings you are so fond of are dearer to you
than Allah and His Messenger (SAW) or striving for His sake then wait
around till Allah brings His command to pass. Allah does not guide such
immoral folk.* [^29]

The one who turns away from Muhammad-ur-Rasool-Allah (SAW), invites
Allah’s displeasure and goes to rack and ruin. He falls from the status
of Allah’s servant and is demeaned. In this context, Imam Ahamd Raza
composed a charged poetic verse:

*By my Lord, this is Allah’s door, inescapable;*

*Wherefrom we get Allah’s favors;*

*Turning away from here (Muhammad) implies*

*Turning away from there (Allah).*

Inevitability of Messenger’s Channel for Allah’s Servants
---------------------------------------------------------

The Holy Messenger (SAW) is an indispensable link between Allah and his
believers. When the hypocrites, out of their rivalry and prejudice
refused to obey the Messenger, Allah revealed to the Holy Prophet (SAW)
how to recognize such double dealers:

*When they are exhorted to turn to Allah’s revelation and His Messenger,
you will see the hypocrites will turn away from you.* [^30]

This is a pertinent point to ponder over. The hypocrites do not hesitate
in turning to Allah They evade when they are enjoined to grovel
themselves in front of the Messenger (SAW). They do not recognize his
inevitable link with Allah. They turn away from him instead. Allah has
categorically declared them as hypocrites who suffer from this malady
and deny the link of Holy Prophet (SAW) between Allah and the believers.

The aforesaid Qur’anic verse has established the fact that obedience to
the Holy Messenger (SAW) is the only way which leads to Allah We cannot
reach our destination without abiding by his commands. The trespasser,
despite his devotion diligence and obedience, would never be

accepted as a true servant. The great Persian mystic poet and scholar
Sa‘ady holds: “Whosoever turns away from the Messenger, cannot reach his
destination.”

Allah is the Creator, the All-Powerful. He wills and executes. Nothing
is beyond His Might. He could arrange direct revelation to all His
servants. Instead, He communicated His message to them through His
Messenger. He could assign the angels to place a chapter of revelation
daily by everybody’s pillow and task to learn it by heart every morning.
Allah could also adopt for every believer the way He spoke to His
selected and the chosen Messenger (SAW). This way, there could be a
direct link of every creature, man and woman with Allah But, Allah’s
wisdom and sagacity cannot be questioned. It is all prevailing. He
decided that the Holy Messenger (SAW) is the inevitable link for
dissemination of Allah’s message. Cognizance about Allah entails
awareness about the Holy Prophet (SAW). To know Allah we have to know
the Holy prophet (SAW).

The Order Of Names in stamp of the Holy Prophet (SAW)
-----------------------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (SAW) possessed a ring with the words “Muhammad,
Rasool, Allah” inscribed in it. He used this ring as his stamp.[3 1 ]

He used to stamp the letters addressed to contemporary rulers with the
ring. These letters have been printed and are easily available. The
transcript of Arabic Language runs from right to left. In the holy ring
of our Prophet (SAW) this arrangement is changed to vertically ascending
order: ‘Muhammad’ in the bottom, ‘Rasool’ in the middle and ‘Allah’ on
the top. This arrangement of words in vertical direction is not a
co-incidence. It symbolizes Muhammad’s link with Allah Those desirous of
closeness to Allah are required first to obey and humble their souls in
front of Allah’s Messenger (SAW). This ascending vertical order is
actually the required order of our access to Allah We have only to reach
the exalted court of our most dignified and adorable Prophet (SAW). He
takes care of our access to Allah Allah has himself comprehensively
outlined the role of our dearest Prophet (SAW) in this regard:

*Surely, a Messenger has come to you from among yourselves; grievously
heavy is it on him that you should fall into trouble, ardently desirous
is he of your welfare: compassionate and merciful towards the
believers.* [^32]

We believers are warned by Allah to keep our voices low to the voice of
our beloved Holy Prophet (SAW) lest our righteous works go waste and
fruitless.(Al-Qur’an 49:2).

His door is, in fact, Allah’s threshold. Allah gives and bestows and His
Messenger (SAW) distributes. We get everything from our charitable
Prophet (SAW) who is compassionate and merciful. Overwhelmed by his love
and devotion, we prostrate our souls in front of him to ensure our
obedience to him and our faith in the Oneness of Allah We bow down in
front of Him to strengthen Allah’s love in our souls. The holy dust of
his sacred shoes illumines our soul - our real self inside us. We place
our foreheads at his radiant footsteps and our access to his holy feet
and footsteps means for us our ascension to divine heights.

Your elevation is Ascension to Allah’s divine Solitude;

Our elevation is our access to your feet.

Distribution of Allah’s Blessing by the Holy Prophet (SAW)
----------------------------------------------------------

This is settled now that without our total submission to the Holy
Prophet’s (SAW) authority, we cannot avail Allah’s bliss and compassion.
We must never forget of the fact that the Messenger’s bliss and
bountiful dividends are a harbinger of Allah’s delight and satisfaction
with His obedient devotees. The Messenger’s (SAW) ‘link’ is the means to
set up a contact with Allah Any effort to renounce this ‘Channel’ will
be a satanic attempt to abort Allah’s arrangement. This fact is verified
by the Holy Messenger’s declaration:

*I distribute and Allah the Sustainer, bestows.* [^33]

This hadîth first treats ‘distribution’ of bounties and then mentions
‘provision’. This order underlines the significance of the Distributor
of bounties (SAW) who, feeling heavy at heart for those who are prone to
go astray, gives them a passionate call, “Do not lose the right path; I
am the ‘Distributor’. If you are seeking charity of My love and
affection, bliss and bounties, you will find in abundance. For that you
have to approach me. Abandoning me would be disastrous for you and will
put you in humiliation and disgrace. Allah’s bounties are distributed
only at this doorstep. Incline to Allah’s message; I welcome you.”

The ‘Channel’ of Aulia Allah
----------------------------

Allah has ordained:

*(O’my Messenger), stand fast in the companionship of those who call on
their Lord morning and evening seeking His Pleasure and Satisfaction (by
accomplishing His plans) and let not your eyes (your affectionate and
kind care) pass beyond them. Do you pursue adornments of worldly life
(turning away from the indigent)? Nor follow any whose heart We have
made heedless of Our remembrance (neglectful of Allah’s commands), the
one who follows his own lusts and who has gone beyond all bounds (whose
ways are unbridled).* [^34]

Through this verse of the Holy Qur’an Allah has provided us with a
go-between link or the ‘channel’ of His companions who call on Allah
morning and evening and are His Friends. They receive bounties from the
doorsteps of Allah’s Messenger (SAW) and give away to the common
believers. They put them on the right path and make them stick to
Allah’s ‘rope’ - His Deen.

Allah exhorts us how to approach Him: O’ My servants, establish your
link with those who spend their morning and evening, lifted out of
themselves in My remembrance, and drink excessively the extract of My
presence and their nights and days pass in My remembrance.

Those who seek access to Allah must stand fast in the companionship of
His friends—Auliâ; join their social circle, attend their sessions of
ecstasy and taste what extract they derive from Allah’s remembrance day
and night. If you fail to get a sip, even the smell would suffice to
transport you out of your ‘self’ and link you up with Allah.

*Drunk without wine, drunk with Vision;
A glimpse divine snatches my reason.*

Allah warns the believers not to turn their eyes away from the face of
His friends nor ever must they look down upon them, lest He turns His
eyes away from them, resulting into their devastation.

Furthering the exhortation, Allah says: “Do you want to remain fettered
in this temporal world and remain indifferent to the rewards in the life
hereafter? If you have a concern for the hereafter, attend to ‘My
Friends’. If you abandon materialistic pursuits put aside the worldly
gains and glitter and prefer their company; they will transform you into
Allah’s pursuers and altruists. If you desert them and turn aside, your
worldly ambitions and lusts urges will take you to total devastation.
The worldly craze will keep you away from the remembrance of Allah and
hereafter and will ruin you.” Allah warns:

*Don’t obey the one whose heart We have made heedless to Our
remembrance.* [^35]

Beware! Do not obey the one whose heart We have made heedless to Our
remembrance. If you comply with their instructions and follow them, you
will get away from Us and would be liable to a big deprivation here and
hereafter.

The instruction contained in this verse refers to ‘awareness of,
proximity to and union with Allah attainable through an attachment and
companionship with those who are the inevitable means to acquire the
Messenger’s bounties. The inference is that as the Messenger is the
‘Channel’ to obtain Allah’s bounties so are Allah’s Friends to attain
the Messenger’s bounties.

Co-relation between Science and the Channel of Spiritualism
-----------------------------------------------------------

As mentioned in the beginning, there is no contradiction between
Deen-Al-Islam and Science. The days are not very far off when the
scientific investigations and findings will validate the fundamental
Islamic realities. However, in this respect, the Muslim scholars and
intellectuals and the expert scientists have yet to accomplish
substantial work. In modern days, corroborating the verity and veracity
of Islam through contemporary scientific disciplines is the need of the
hour. It cannot be neglected any more.

Today the cautious mind, devoid of Islamic insight and living in doubt
and distrust, questions the possibility of continuous contact with the
Messenger of Allah for spiritual prosperity. For him this is also beyond
comprehension as to how Auliya Allah receive bounties from the Holy
Messenger (SAW) and pass them on to us. How can we reason it out? What
is the phenomenology of the spiritual ‘Channels’ and the descent of
spiritual contents from generation to generation? These and many other
similar questions keep crowding the modern mind.

The scientific method is such a standard and certified means to perceive
and ascertain reality that, putting it to use, the modern man infers and
formulates concepts on the basis of observation and rational thinking.
These concepts are subjected to series of tests and experiments for
verification and validation. Scientific study is conducted on the basis
of objective facts. Here we have to compare it with religion. Science
and religion work in separate, unrelated and independent jurisdictions.
Science encompasses only the

empirical realities and their causality. Things beyond causal framework
are not included in its purview. The religion, on the other hand deals
with metaphysical realities and the matters related to the life
hereafter. Their jurisdictions being absolutely unrelated, their mutual
contradiction and conflict is illogical and irrational. Simultaneously,
all scientific advancement proves one thing with authenticity that the
basis of the universe is spiritual rather than material. The dependence
of the phenomenal world on the Divine Will (spiritual) is unconditional
and absolute. All material things are held in the firm grip of
inexorable natural laws (spiritual). These laws flow from the Divine
Will of Allah That is why in several verses of the Holy Qur’an, we are
exhorted to ponder over the regularity of natural phenomena which is the
reflection of the Divine Will, the very source of its material
existence. Those who study this process day and night are called Ulamâ
(scholars) by the Holy Qur’an. In modern times they are known as the
‘scientists’.

Modern science, after discovering the nuclear energy, has revealed that
every particle of this universe is fully charged with an infinite
energy, which can be employed for some marvelous accomplishments in the
universe. After sorting out the complexities of Einstein’s equation of
relativity i.e. E=mc2, science has discovered this secret of nature that
the matter can be converted into energy. Science and Islam (generally
called religion) therefore, do not clash or conflict. They are two sides
of the same coin. Nor is it logical to believe that they cannot cope up
with one another. This is irrational rather absurd. Obviously, science
deals with material life and its manifestations; it is not clear about
spiritual life. Islam, on the other side, deals exclusively with the
sphere of spiritual life and reforms and ameliorates the life here and
hereafter through its application on material life.

Science: The Greatest Contemporary Standard of Knowledge
--------------------------------------------------------

The material advancement is at its apex in our age. Science is the
greatest criterion of knowledge in this corporeal world. Everything is
evaluated and assessed against this standard. All that comes up to this,
is considered reality. Falling short of it would be liable to rejection
as a whim, fancy or a suspicion. With this overwhelming empiricism, the
modern scientific inquiries are validating and verifying Islamic
teachings.[^36]

Unfortunately, the Muslim Ummah has fallen prey to ‘materialism’; it is
diverging from spiritual life. Islam too is being obscured as
materialistic. The modern educated youth is the victim of materialistic
tendencies, intellectual paucity, confusion and doubt. In his view, the
reality must conform to scientific method. Owing to lack of knowledge
and awareness of fundamental teachings of Islam, he regards religious
beliefs as inane and absurd. The modern educated people hold that
following ‘Auliya Allah’, linking up with their ‘Spiritual Channels’ and
joining their annual celebrations is nothing but timeworn traditions
based on ignorance. From scientific point of view they are considered of
least significance. These people, however, are absolutely ignorant of
contemporary knowledge. They regard science and ‘Deen’ as two
conflicting disciplines. Nevertheless, what we observe is that science
is gradually proving true the miracles of the

Messenger (SAW) and incredible accomplishments of Allah’s Friends.
Science, through its explorations is getting closer to spiritual
reality. There is a dire need of educating the people on this extremely
important aspect of the issue in question.

To make easy the comprehension of Islamic philosophy and teachings from
this standpoint, we elucidate some aspects of science to prove that
scientific discoveries are in fact the interpretations of the Holy
Qur’an. This will also make the mature young mind realize that the
religious people do not have merely parables of the old to narrate.
Islam is a scientific reality. In the perspective of teachings of the
Holy Qur’an, without getting into details and remaining in the purview
of this dissertation, the essential and relevant information on science
is served to the reader to create a rapport on scientific interpretation
of Islamic Spiritualism.

Analogy of Geo-magnetism of the Earth
-------------------------------------

Strenuous work has been accomplished on magnet especially on Super
Electro Magnetism. Magnetism is a force that attracts everything located
in its area of influence called ‘magnetic field.’ It has its own range.
The power of each magnet determines its range. The Earth is also a very
big magnet. Its range is spread over 80,000 kilometers. Like other
planets in the universe, its magnetic field is proportional to its mass.
Its magnetic force is generated from its poles known as North and South
poles. The properties of gravitation can be well explained with the help
of a compass. The moment we place it on the surface of the Earth, its
needles whirl North-South. The common needles, however, remain static
when placed on the ground; they are ‘unaware’ of any north or south.
What force then turns the compass needles North-South? The magnetic
needle corresponding to the Earth pole is not the common needle; it is
compass needle. It is the correspondence of poles that has turned the
needle pole-wards.

Magnetic System of Spiritual Universe
-------------------------------------

The materialists who are blind to the spiritual reality, often enquire
as to how a friend of Allah - ‘Walî Allah’, can attend to his disciple -
‘Murîd’ thousands of miles distant from him. How their interaction is
possible with such a great geographical distance in between? The answer,
however, to such dubious probes is very simple. Allah is All-Powerful
and All-Knowing. He has provided the Earth and other planets like
Mercury, with such a magnetic force which attracts to their respective
centers, meteorites floating in space millions of miles away. These
meteorites fall on these planets due to the latter’s gravitational pull.

Doesn’t the All-Powerful Creator of the Universe have the capability to
convert the material realities into spiritual ones? The All-Powerful
does that, but only the one who is endowed with spiritual insight and
divine vision, can discern this fact.

The Chief Pole of the Spiritual Universe: The Holy Prophet (SAW)
----------------------------------------------------------------

The victims of materialism need to know that their hearts resemble a
common needle. For having no magnetic correspondence with any spiritual

pole they fail to perceive that divine light which is spread beyond east
and west.

There is only one eminent force of spiritual universe, the Holy Prophet
Muhammad (SAW), reposing in Madînah. The Earth has two poles: North and
South. Correspondingly, the compass needle turns North-South. The
Spiritual Universe spanning from the Earth beyond the skies up to the
Divine Solitude, has its chief pole in Madînah. The needles
characterized by the Earth’s poles no more remain common ones; they
change into magnetic needles for their dedicated link with the poles and
automatically turn North-South without any visible link. Analogously,
the heart of a believer remains in constant contact with the Holy
Prophet (SAW) every moment for the bountiful and generous heed of his.
The hearts that get involved with the Holy ‘Rasool’, the Messenger of
Allah remain no more ordinary; they become extraordinary hearts due to
the spiritual charge they receive. They get attached to the ‘source of
sustenance for all the worlds’. Even without a tangible link, their
direction gets fixed: be it Baghdad, Ajmair, Lahore or Multan, they
remain inclined to ‘Muhammad Mustafa’ (SAW). The disconnection from this
bountiful ‘Channel’ would imply malfunction of the ‘heart needle’ and
disengagement with the spiritual pole; the provision of bounties though
persists endlessly.

All planets and heavenly bodies floating in this vast universe in their
respective orbits always have two poles emitting magnetic waves and
attracting other bodies towards them. The spiritual universe, on the
other hand, spanning from the depths of the Earth beyond the Skies has
only one pole located on Earth in our ‘devotion-land’ i.e. Madînah
Munawwarah. This is an outcome of the spiritual magnetic system that the
heart once involved with the spiritual pole in Madînah would get its
direction fixed forever. The magnetic attention of the most amiable and
the kindest Messenger of Allah (SAW), is even today channeling all the
believers’ psychic direction towards the pole, analogous to the Earth’s
magnetic pull that controls the direction of magnetic needles of the
compass North-Southward.

Making of Magnets? Difference between the Leader (Sheikh) and the Disciple (Murid)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are two methods of magnet making or magnetization of iron. The
first and the endurable method of making a magnet is called electric
charge magnet. By this method, electric current is passed through a
piece of iron. The resultant magnet is known as electric charged magnet.

According to the Holy Qur'an, these magnets symbolize those Auliya
Allah:

*Who remember Allah morning and evening and seek His consent.* [^37]

Allah described them as His Friends who remain absorbed in the
remembrance of Allah morning and evening. This process of persistent
remembrance, continual worship, self-purification and self-strife brings
them a permanent spiritual charge. Then they work like electric charged
magnets. The spiritual magnets so produced are placed to spread bounties
of Muhammad Mustafa (SAW) in the person of Data Ganj Bakhsh in Lahore,

Ghawth-e-A‘zam in Baghdad, Khawaja Moeen-ud-Din Chishtî in Ajmair and
Baha-ud-Din Zakaria in Multan.

The second method of making magnets is based on the principal of staying
in persistent contact with a magnet. A piece of iron is rubbed against a
magnet and this way the magnetic force is transferred into it. Through
contact (and steadfast companionship) the piece of iron becomes a magnet
and starts attracting common iron items towards itself.

In the world of spiritual magnets, this category comprises such people
who are infirm in the struggle with ‘self’, diligent worship and
purification. They cannot perform hard labour but do have a flame in
them to purify their ‘inner self’ of all evils, indecencies,
immoralities and sinful urges to attain Allah’s pleasure and consent.
They live and prosper like mini-magnets of spiritualism.

*Stand fast in the companionship of those (friends of Allah)* [^38]

In this Qur’anic verse are mentioned those truth seekers who join
companionship of Allah’s Friends and inculcate in themselves the essence
of divine pursuit and dedication to Allah’s consent. They are the
contact-method spiritual magnets corresponding to the Qur’anic verse.
The Leader or ‘Sheikh’ becomes the spiritual magnet through Electric
Charge Method while the Follower or ‘Murid’ becomes a magnet through
persistent companionship with his spiritual leader.

Heat Conduction Process and the Conduction of Spiritualism
----------------------------------------------------------

The conduction of magnetism through contact Method resembles heat
conduction process. A conductor put into fire gets heated up and
transfers heat backward up to the grip. An iron bar is a good heat
conductor and passes heat on very well. A wooden bar, on the other hand,
is not a conductor; it gets burnt to ashes but is totally deprived of
conducting capability.

As a piece of iron conducts heat till it receives heat, the Auliya Allah
or ‘Auliâ’-e-Karâm’ deliver spiritual bounties of ‘Muhammad Mustafâ’
(SAW) to the common believer (in the manner of heat conduction), because
they are continually blessed with the bounties from Madînah. Those who
transfer or pass on the Messenger’s bounties call this method in terms
of spiritual discipline as ‘Channel’ (Silsila). This ‘Silsila’ or
‘Channel’ starts from those ‘Auliâ’ who are blessed with spiritual
magnetic force from Muhammad (SAW) in Madinah and keep delivering it
onward. This ever-gushing, ever-flowing spring of bounties never dries
up; it is an ever-running continual process.

An Illustration from Modern Scientific Discoveries and Electric System
----------------------------------------------------------------------

In the contemporary world of science, many inventions work under Super
Electro Method System. With reference to electricity, according to
modern scientific advancement, the coil is cooled to an extent that its
temperature falls to -269 degree centigrade. The electric resistance of
the coil is reduced to nil. The electro magnet so produced can contain
maximum electric current. This is worth mentioning here that average
temperature of

earth is 15 degree centigrade whereas the temperature of the whole
universe is -270 degree centigrade.

Tazkia: Cessation of Sinful Resistance!
---------------------------------------

In terms of electricity, Tazkia is ‘cessation of all resistance against
electric charge’. In terms of Islamic mysticism ‘Tazkia’ implies
elimination of all resistance from sinful urges, lusts and evil impulses
which come in our way to Allah’s proximity. The mystics term this
experience in spiritualism as ‘Tazkia’ or purification. The Holy Qur’an
signifies Tazkia as:

*Triumphant indeed is he who purifies himself (of afflictions of self
and sins’ pollution) .* [^39]

Corresponding to this allegory of Super Electro Magnetic System, Auliâ
through self-strife, and self-control get rid of all lusts and low
impulses like anger, jealousy, vanity, revenge etc.’ which impede our
way to Allah They cool their ‘self’ down and look like an embodiment of
this Qur’anic verse:

*They control anger, tolerate others faults and follies (working for
their betterment) and Allah love those who strive to make up others’
deficiencies.* [^40]

As the Super Electro Magnet gets charged through cessation of resistance
and works wonders in the physical world Allah’s Friends likewise, get
purified from wrong impulses and worldly urges and absorb the bounties
of Allah and His Messenger (SAW). So charged with spiritual energy, they
perform wonders in the worldly life. Through this metamorphosis, their
hearts work like conducting magnets. The Electro Magnet is passed
through a particular process to make Super Conducting Magnet, which is
then processed through Nuclear Magnetic Resonant. When a patient is
placed before it, all his internal organs invisible to naked eye become
discernable. The scanner with magnetic capability distinctly perceives
all that is hidden and concealed inside the physical body. The ‘Auliya
Allah’ through purification process acquire a vision which penetrates
like a scanner and discern, through their internal (magnetic) awareness,
things which are hidden may be thousand miles distant, and know the
unseen. They can perceive that which the naked eye cannot see. They can
look into and ahead of time.

Wonders of Spiritual Magnetism
------------------------------

Well-grounded and groomed in the purifying and illumining, holy and
divine companionship of the Spiritual Sovereign of the Universe, the
close associates and comrades of our dearest Prophet (SAW) were the
Spiritual Super Conducting Magnets refined through process of ‘Tazkia’.
The Holy Messenger (SAW) himself spiritually charged them. Without
physical means, they could spiritually scan and monitor even the combats
against the unbelievers and issue commands to their war commanders
engaged in far-off battlefields. In a war against the adversaries of
Islam, the commander of the Muslim army Saria bin Jabal had deployed his
troops against the adversaries. In the event of war, the enemy changed
its strategy and encircled the Muslim troops, catching them unaware. The
Second Caliph of the Muslims, Hadrat Umar Farooq (RTA) was, at that
moment, delivering

his Juma’a address in Madînah. Owing to his spiritual concentration, he
scanned the battlefield, saw the positions of both the warring armies
and addressed the commander of his forces:

*O Saria, take cover of the hill.’* [^41]

After issuing this command, he continued his address. He was neither
equipped with any radar nor had he any direct TV Channel to monitor such
a distant activity. Delivering his address in ‘Nabvi Mosque’ in Madînah,
he issued instructions to his army commander engaged in the strategy of
war. This was his Spiritual Magnetic Force and his inner vision that
watched everything. The commander Hadrat Saria-bin-Jabal received the
message of the Caliph, implemented his orders, took shelter of the hill
as advised and in consequence thereof won the war. The enemy was
defeated and the Muslim forces gained victory.

This episode needs to be studied in the perspective of ESP we have
already discussed in the preceding chapters. How Hadrat Suleman (D) and
the little ant interacted serves an analogy to the underlying spiritual
reality that engenders such events.

The Auliya Allah inculcate in themselves the spiritual magnetic force.
They achieve it through strenuous worship aimed at winning Allah’s
pleasure. They employ methods including philanthropic and Allah fearing
deeds. They implement the Holy Prophet’s instructions, follow his foot-
steps and strictly comply with shariah, his code of conduct. Conforming
to spiritual commands, and obeying Allah’s commandments, they purify
their inner self through enveloping themselves in love and obedience of
the beloved Muhammad (SAW) and thus receive favours from the Holy
Messenger (SAW) and his worthy Companions.

The materialistic progress of the scientific age has almost turned the
world into global village. The computer has reduced the distance and the
Internet facility has reduced the world to a rye grain. A common man can
observe the whole world like a rye grain placed on his palm through
scientific devices. It is the scientific advancement that has elevated
our vision to this level. Nonetheless, the servants of the Holy
Messenger (SAW) have obtained this capability through their spiritual
vehemence and well-being. They have infinite capability to bring the
forces of nature into their control and service. Hadrat Ghawth-e-A‘zam
Sheikh Abdul Qadar Jilani (AR) pronounced:

*I discern all countries of Allah like seeing a rye grain on my palm.*
[^42]

From Self-Purification and Perseverance to Resurrection
-------------------------------------------------------

The magnets are also enabled through a process to generate electricity,
which produces heat and light. With the conversion of electric energy
into mechanical energy, the things get transformed and the dead bodies
start moving. A plastic doll, for example, charged with battery gets
into motion and produces many recorded sounds. It keeps moving as long
as it gets charge from the battery cell. This is how in the physical
world the battery-cell system enlivens the non-living objects and sets
them into motion. Correspondingly, the Auliya Allah in spiritual world,
animate the lifeless hearts and restore them to action and activity.
Those who blessed with the companionship of Allah’s friends, get back to
life again are reborn with

their hearts and souls filled with the bounties of Allah’s friends. This
is validated in the Holy Quran where meeting between the Prophet Moses
(D) and Hadrat Khizar (D) is described. At Majma-ul-Bahrain, the
residence of Hadrat Khizar, the cooked fish in Hadrat Musa’s breakfast
box, got animated and jumped into the water. This episode manifests that
the residential place of Hadrat Khizar (D) had a favorable climate for
resurrection of the dead. The Holy Quran describes:

*When both of them reached the confluence of two rivers, they forgot
their fish (there);so the (fried) fish (got animated and) escaped
through water as if it was a tunnel.[^43]*

This is how Auliya Allah resuscitate the lifeless people. They are
assigned to charge them with new vitality. Khawaja Moeen-ud-Din Chishti
Ajmari said about Hadrat Data Gunj Bakhsh: “He awards treasures to the
world and reflects Allah’s radiance; a perfect Leader for the
incompetent and a Guide to the perfect leaders.”

The System of Electric Supply and the Contact with Auliya Allah
---------------------------------------------------------------

The current system of electric power supply allegorically well-explains
the channels of Aulia or Mystics in the world. Acquisition of bounties
from them is relative to one’s own caliber. It would be ridiculous on
one’s part to look for an electric connection directly from a Dam. How
can you get a direct connection from a Dam? There is a system of
electric power supply; it has its own lines that are to be strictly
followed. The electricity travels from Tarbella Dam to powerhouses,
further to power stations, then to transformers up to our houses
according to a particular measure. After getting a connection from a
transformer we use stabilizers and fuses for the safety of electric
appliances. We take these safety measures because the electric points in
our houses are never so strong to accept high voltage. Such a system is
called Silsila, Channel.

In similitude of this electric power supply system we can better
comprehend the spiritual channels and their utility and activation.
Allah has blessed the universe with a spiritual reservoir (Dam) spread
from the depths of the Earth beyond the skies to the divine privacy and
solitude. From this Dam, the transfer and distribution of kindness,
special attention, amiable attachment, favours and bounties the world
over, is accomplished in the universe through different well-organized
channels. This reservoir of spiritual bounties, kindness, compassion,
love and affection is the most eminent holy personality of the most
revered and adored Messenger of Allah, Muhammad (SAW). To pass his bliss
to all the believers, there are enormous ‘Channels’ of Allah’s friends
that work like ‘power distribution system’ i.e. the distribution system
of spiritual power, force or energy. These Friends distribute this
supply according to the recipient’s caliber. The system is destined to
last till the Day of Judgement.

The Auliya Allah have vitalized and strengthened the link of their
Channels with our beloved and most adorable Prophet (SAW). Through
extreme hard work, extraordinary spiritual labour and self-strife, they
take bounties directly from the source. Everyone cannot afford a direct

connection from the Dam. The common believers are, therefore, strictly
advised to persist with the companionship of Aulia and through this
persistent association with them acquire the spiritual charity they are
destined to obtain.

Allah has established this system of Spiritual Channels. It is a
continued flow of light, furnishing the humanity with Allah’s bounties.
Denying this system of Spiritual Channels means denial of reason,
awareness and the system of sustenance provision by the Sustainer.

Conquest of the Moon and the Apollo Mission
-------------------------------------------

The necessity of a spiritual connection can also be evaluated by
examining an incident that took place in National Aeronautic Space
Agency (NASA). The ten year Apollo mission of NASA probe Apolo-10 was
heading towards the Moon. The scientists working in Kennedy Space Center
Florida, were busy guiding the mission. During the proceedings, the
mission’s link with the Control Room on Earth got disconnected
accidentally. The mission not only failed to reach its destination but
also was doomed in space. After this accident, the Apollo Mission’s next
probe Apolo-11 was sent to the Moon. Its contact with the Ground Control
Center remained intact; it reached the moon and returned to the Earth
safely as per program after achieving the objectives of the mission. The
Apollo that lost contact with the Space Research Center was ruined; the
one that stayed in contact with the center conquered its mission.

Analogously, Allah has devised a system of goading and guidance to take
the believers to the goal of emancipation. The central control of this
emancipation mission rests with the Holy Prophet (SAW). Those who
succeed in keeping the contact with the center intact receive the alms
of his love and the charity of his care and compassion. The one who
loses contact is doomed, just like Apolo-10.

Cardiac Screen and Spiritual TV Channel
---------------------------------------

In the modern satanic era, our hearts are veiled in default and
negligence. We decline to receive favours of Allah and the Holy Prophet
(SAW). Owing to visionlessness of our hearts, we even deny the very
existence of favours and spiritual bounties. In fact, Allah has designed
our hearts like TV screens. We think that the TV transmissions have
stopped. Nay! they have not. The Channel’s transmissions are continually
on; but our receiving sets i.e. the TV sets or the receivers are out of
order. We have to detect fault and get it repaired to receive the
transmissions. The reception of sound and vision is subject to
persistence of connection with the transmission centre. Extending this
example to receiving spiritual transmissions, it must be clear that the
distribution of spiritual alms never stops. It is malfunctioning of our
set that it fails to catch the frequency and receive the spiritual
transmission which remains on day and night. You restore the contact
today and there you receive the favours without any hindrance.

The link of Auliya with the Sovereign Authority of our Spiritual
Universe, our most revered, esteemed and beloved Holy Prophet (SAW)
never disrupts. Their cardiac screen is always furnished with the

transmissions from Gunbed-e-Khazra Madînah. One of the great Auliya
Allah Hadrat Abdul Abbas Marsi said:

*If the holy face of Muhammad (SAW) gets out of my sigh even for a
moment, I consider myself an unbeliever that moment.[ 44 ]*

The cardiac needle of Aulia remains fixed at the transmission from the
Channel of the ‘Green Dome’ Madînah. Their contact with the Holy Prophet
(SAW) remains round the clock intact and the process of distribution of
spiritual blessings continues.

The Special Kindness of Allah to ‘Ashab-e-Kahf’
-----------------------------------------------

Thorough and effective comprehension of the Holy Quran attaches special
significance to semantic inter-relationship of the Qur’anic verses.
While studying the chapter of ‘Al-Kahf’ we should investigate the
semantic relations of the verse under study.

With the episode of Ashab-e-Kahf, (the companions of Kahf) this study
will bring to fore the message contained in the verse and the episode.
They were Auliya Allah from the former Ummah who, under security threat
of the cruel ruler and the adversaries of Islam, migrated from their
abodes for safety and hid themselves in a cave for shelter. They prayed
to Allah:

*O’ our Lord, bestow on us your special kindness and provide us with
(means of) guidance in our affair.* [^45]

Allah Almighty accepted their imploration and gave them the happy tiding
that He would provide them with His kindness. What was that special
kindness conferred on the companions of Kahf needs to be comprehended.
An in-depth study of the context of the Holy Qur’an will reveal that the
Companions of Kahf reposed in the cave for 309 years. Independent of
their physical needs and provisions of life, in a grave like
circumstances, they were kept from decomposition and degeneration, which
should have inflicted their physical bodies due to atmospheric changes
over long 309 years. It was a special shower of Allah’s kindness that
the sun changed its course to keep their bodies intact, safe and secure
from climatic effects and temperature variations. The 309 Lunar years
equal 300 Solar years. They remained there fresh and retrievable for
three centuries. For the companions of Kahf, however, such a long span
of time took flight in hours. The Holy Qur’an describes:

*And you behold, when the sun rises it moves away from their cave on
their right and when it sets it shifts away from them on their left and
they are lying in the spacious hollow (in the cave).* [^46]

This is a special sign of Allah that for His Friends, he changed the
rules of rising and setting of the Sun, which change was incorporated in
the overall system of the universe for long 309 years. He amended a
fixed and predetermined heavenly system for 300 rotations of the Earth
round the Sun with the sole purpose to keep His Friends safe from any
possible damage. He changed the course of nature for His Friends This
was the ‘decision’ of the All-Powerful, All-Knowing.

After describing the whole episode, Allah Almighty exhorted, “Those who
seek My nearness, must persist with the companionship of my Friends.”

The Holy Quran further specifies:

*He whom Allah guides is on the right path but whom He makes stray you
will find them friendless with no help or guide.* [^47]

Allah the most benevolent, the most merciful, lulled the Companions of
Kahf to an undisturbed and profound sleep and exalted them to a heavenly
status; then he thoroughly engaged and involved them in an ecstatic
state of visioning ‘the ultimate reality’. The time got wings to fly and
centuries passed like moments. The Doomsday lasting for 50,000 yours
would not be more than an Asar Prayer time (late afternoon prayer time)
for His Friends. For Allah’s adversaries, however, this would stretch as
long as 50 millennia of indescribable agony and pain. The inference is
that the time reduces in the heavenly experience of visioning reality;
the measure of time changes: centuries pass as moments.

On that day, Allah will direct his angels to arrange for a glimpse of
Allah’s sight for those who pursued and sought Him all along their
worldly and earthly term of life. Instead of luxuriating in their
comfortable and overstuffed beds and couches, they kneeled and bowed
their heads down in front of Allah at night ‘for half of night or less
or a little more’ to seek His favour, consent and delight. On the day of
judgement all veils will be removed and ‘His Friends’ will be positioned
on enlightened mounds. For them the day will not be longer than their
‘Asar Prayer’ i.e. a few hours, while for others it will span 50,000
years.

Auliya’s Life after Death
-------------------------

The Holy Quran confirms that “Ashab-e-Kahf” spent three centuries like a
few hours. When they inquired after waking up as to how long they had
slept, one of them retorted, “a day or a little more”. The time they had
actually spent according to the Holy Quran was three centuries, hence
undeniable. Nonetheless, their clothes had not worn and the physical
well being was intact, as if they had a nap, which restored their
strength and vitality.

Then, one of them was assigned to take coins they possessed and go to
bazaar to make some purchases. When he paid the coins the shopkeeper
felt bewildered and gazed at his customer in astonishment as to
wherefrom he had brought centuries-old coins. He refused to accept the
payment in the out-dated and antiquated coins. The customer, one of the
Ashab-e-Kahf, said, “We took these coins with us a day before.” The
shopkeeper replied, “how is it possible? I don’t understand wherefrom
have you brought these centuries-old coins.” On that the customer looked
curiously at every thing around and felt puzzled to find them changed
altogether. Such ‘Auliya Allah blessed with vision’ stay in caves for
centuries but their physical conditions remain unchanged, natural and
normal. Similarly, such people with vision, in-transit, spend thousands
of years in graves and this period passes like a few hours. It is not a
contrived parable. The Holy Qur’an has revealed it. Auliya Allah even
after their physical transfer from this world, live with an intuition of
Allah. What to talk of the Holy Messenger (SAW) who came to distribute
the boon of life among the lifeless! And this holy distribution is
continuously on even today!

The Pet Dog of Allah’s Friends Remained Alive
---------------------------------------------

There was also a pet dog in the ‘companionship’ of the Kahf Companions.
It remained sprawling on the cave entrance for 309 years to guard The
Ashab. The Holy Qur’an also mentions this dog:

*And their dog is sprawling on (their) threshold.* [^48]

The dog was blessed with that status owing to its companionship of
Allah’s Friends. The commentators on the Holy Qur’an observe that the
dog too used to take sides when the Ashab turned their sides while
asleep. This resulted out of the perpetual company and association which
is emphasized in the Holy Qur’an, “perpetuate their companionship”.
Another account of the episode holds that the Ashab made efforts to send
the dog away as it could bark and thus alarm and rouse the cruel king’s
men to reach them in the cave. They endeavored to drive it away
forcefully but the fortunate dog remained tenaciously stuck, received
bounties for 309 years and became a significant part of the story.

‘Rasool Allah’ (SAW) the Fountain Head of Allah’s Bounties:
-----------------------------------------------------------

The impeccable emblem of adoration and sincerity, our Holy Prophet (SAW)
is the immaculate symbol of benevolence and the embodiment of bliss and
kindness for all the worlds and also the Super Magnet of the Spiritual
Universe, who received the spiritual charge through both Electric Charge
and Contact Methods.

He opted isolation in the solitude of Hira,

And created Ummah, Constitution, and the State.

(Iqbal)

The solitude of Hira cave unveiled the Spiritual Sovereign of the
universe as a paragon of wisdom and sagacity and the unparalleled
precedent of love, kindness and mercy for the whole humanity; it
fostered him into the peerless and the perfect leader. Owing to his
compassion and kind attention, the East and the West became one Ummah
with one state with one Qur’an as its supreme law.

Allah Almighty awarded our beloved Prophet the spiritual bliss for the
whole universe through blessing him with His radiant sight on earth as
well as in the divine solitude beyond the skies during the ascension
night. Mentioning bounties of Allah, he (SAW) proclaimed, “Allah blessed
me one night with His sight corresponding with His dignity and put His
powerful hand in between my shoulders. Due to that I felt a chill in my
chest. This lifted all veils from my vision and everything in the earth
and the skies became discernible.”

This was one episode of the Holy Messenger’s vision of Allah on earth.
His Ascension to the Divine Solitude beyond the skies during the Night
of Ascension is both unimaginable and indescribable. He ascended as
close to Allah as two ends of a bow or even less than that after which
the distances of time and space were diminished to nil and the distance
between the lover and the beloved was reduced to nothingness. Here we
are required to keep our belief in oneness of Allah firm, accurate and
pure. Allah is the Creator and the Only, ‘worth all worship’. The
Messenger (SAW) though so close and so dear, is His servant. This
difference has to be maintained as part of our faith.

Blessed in this way with all the extents of bliss and bounties the Holy
Messenger (SAW) proclaimed:

*The one who saw me, saw Allah .* [^49]

The Prophet Mosses (D) implored Allah for a glimpse of His sight. The
request was accorded approval and when the ‘divine glimpse of Allah’ was
awarded, Musa(D) could not bear it and fainted. He requested for Allah’s
sight number of time even during the Night of Ascension (Shab-e-Mia’raj)
but it was put off till the Muslim Ummah was assigned during the
Ascension Night fifty prayers a day. Musa(D) on the sixth sky,
repeatedly requested the Holy Prophet (SAW) to get the number of prayers
decreased till they were reduced from 50 to 5.

When the Holy Prophet Muhammad (SAW) frequently returned from Allah to
Musa (D) after having rich views of the beloved Allah , the Prophet
Mosses (D) every time gazed at the Holy face of Muhammad (SAW). This way
he derived divine pleasure from viewing his face radiant with Allah’s
divine reflection. This is how divine riches of Allah’s sight were
awarded to the Holy Prophet Muhammad (SAW). As regards Allah’s bounties
awarded to our beloved Prophet (SAW) in terms of tangible physical
world, they are beyond comprehension and imagination. The Holy Prophet
(SAW) was awarded all the treasures of the Universe. He became the
distributor of these treasures among the believers in the world till the
Day of Judgement.

He is assigned to distribute Allah’s bliss. Similarly, Allah’s Friends
are tasked to distribute the bounties of the Holy Prophet (SAW) among
his followers. The Holy Quran confirms;

*He, the one who was dead (i.e. deprived of faith) to whom We gave life
(guided) and a light (of faith and awareness) whereby he can (now) walk
among (rest of) men (to spread the same light of guidance).* [ 50 ]

The object is that there were people whose hearts were lifeless. We
enlivened them with the enlightenment of the Holy Prophet (SAW). Getting
so revitalized and illumined they now distribute the same light among
rest of the people. With this assignment to distribute light (noor) one
was placed in Baghdad in the form of Ghaus-e-A‘zam, the other was
positioned in Lahore as Data Gunj Bakhsh; some was Khawaja Ghareeb Nawaz
in Ajmair and the other was Baha-ud-Din Zakaria in Multan to distribute
light, guidance (NOOR). One was assigned the same distribution in
Sarhand. This ‘noor’ (light) revitalized all dead hearts and now even
death cannot conquer them; for them ‘death is mere a change of taste’:

Death is the renewal of lifestyle;

Awakening in the garb of sleep.

(Iqbal)


