Epilogue
========

A strong bias exists against the Holy Messenger’s link with Allah and
his link between Allah and the believers, among the infidels
blasphemers, polytheists and hypocrites. This bias has traveled down
through ages in all societies other than Muslim. The Holy Qur'an
presents irrefutable realities and firm dogmas and beliefs for a
peaceful earthly life and a triumphant return to the paradise. The
anti-Islamic forces, out of their sheer prejudice, have always been
dynamic to harm, one way or the other, the believers all over the globe.

Owing to their material advancement over last few centuries, they are
engaged in gratifying their hostile instinct against Islam. They
conspire against the source springs of our human resources i.e. our
belief in spiritual realities of life, our infinite love for the Holy
Messenger and our unity on the divine principles. Having acquired a
superiority in scientific advancement, they challenge our dogmas and
beliefs as unscientific whims worth immediate abandonment.

Unfortunately, the Muslim scholars, the custodians of Islam’s spiritual
system of life, remained incompetent to defend their position due to
their ignorance in modern scientific disciplines — a factor,
contributory to the predicament. The situation has worsened because the
Muslim as well as the non-Muslim youth all over the world are brought up
in scientific environment. It is modern learning that formats their
minds. They, therefore, reject all they find incompatible with their
acquired knowledge about man and his life on the earth.

This was a ripe opportunity for the antagonists, which they exploited
well against the Islamic faith and belief in spiritual values.

At this juncture, we are required to fulfill our responsibility to our
beloved Prophet (A) and thwart, on scientific grounds, the conspiracies
against Islamic spiritualism.

The Western philosophies and psychologies have almost confirmed the
authenticity of spiritual realities of life. They are now incapable to
gainsay psychic experiences and their underlying truth. The scientific
bases of these experiences refer to magnetic sensitivity in humans,
electromagnetic energies that permeate our atmosphere, the flow of -ive
and +ive ions in the atmosphere affecting our brain functions, the
functions of pineal gland and many other empirical grounds of
transcendent experience that are yet to be explored.

This magnetic base of spiritual experience which the hostile camp has
unveiled for their own reasons, has proved to be a welcome discovery of
modern science for Islamic spiritualism. The Holy Qur'an has revealed
magnetism as a vital force of spiritual communication between the
believers, the Auliya and the Holy Prophet (A) and Allah. A chained link
among all spiritual beings exists which operates through magnetic brain
waves. They function like spiritual magnets as do the physical magnets
according to the laws of Physics. The Holy Qur'an, Ahadith, Sunnah and
the lives of Auliya are replete with episodes that amply prove the
magnetic truth of their spiritual network and their effectiveness
towards emancipation of man and his prosperous return to the Paradise
lost.

The infidels, blasphemers, hypocrites and the people of the Book need to
accept this reality for their own benefit. The source of human
deliverance from earthly miseries lies in Islam’s spiritual system of
life. The believers need to get their belief reassured and the
unbelievers should feel prepared to submit to the truth with an open
mind. They should embrace Islam for their emancipation and success in
the life here and hereafter. In their heart of hearts they are convinced
of Islamic spiritualism as a scientific reality.


