Publisher's Word
================

"Hussein is from me and I am from Hussein. Allah loves whoever loves
Hussein. Hussein is a disciple of the disciples." Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.w.)

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds. There is no god but
Allah, the One. Peace and blessings be with Muhammad, the Messenger of
Allah and his pure and sinless Ahlul-Bait.

In the twentieth century, and particularly in the last quarter of it,
we have witnessed many revolutions resulting in drastic changes in the
geographical, political and sociological faces of the world. Most of
these changes, if not all, have affected large groups of Muslims in one
way or the other.

World events move quickly and man forgets the lessons of the past. But
history is connected by a series of circumstances and continues to
repeat itself. Thus, the past affects the present and the present, no
less, affects the future. The human conflicts we are witnessing in the
world today are merely a reflection of the conflicts of the past. The
essence of these conflicts are based on right and wrong, good and evil,
truth and falsehood.
We often find the unjust ideologies, regimes and methods of ideology
threatening the security of the people and destroying man with the
pressure of their interests and enmity. We often find this to be in
effect in this land, in Europe, Asia, America and Africa. When we search
history we find that what we are suffering today is a continuation of
the stories of injustice of long ago and that the oppressors of the
world today are the successors of the oppressors of yesterday.

If we contemplate these and the many other events that are affecting
the Muslim world today, we will find that there is a strong parallelism
to the subject of our book.

This is a brief account of the life of Imam Hussein bin Ali bin Abi
Talib (a.s.), the second grandson of the Holy Prophet and the third
divinely chosen caliph from the Ahlul-Bait (a.s.).

He was the leader of a movement that was very unlike his illustrious
predecessors. Although the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) engaged in war for the
sake of Allah, it was at a time when Islam was struggling to establish
itself as a divine religion. Later, during the Imamate of Ali bin Abi
Tal ib (a.s.), again he was driven to war to protect Islam from the
deviators. At the time of the Imamate of Hassan bin Ali bin Abi Talib
(a.s.) his followers had lost much of their power and force and because
the bloodshed of war would cause further division in the ummah, Imam
Hassan (a.s.) opted for a peace treaty with the enemy in order to
protect the religion.

Imam Hussein's (a.s.) approach to Imamate was unique and extraordinary
in that he took a position of opposition to the so-called caliph of the
ummah. At first his opposition resembled that of his father, quiet
seclusion and disassociation during the caliphate of Mu'awiyah who had
not only assassinated Imam Hassan (a.s.) in order to override the terms
of the treaty, but further broke all its limits in assigning the
caliphate to his son Yazid as an inheritance. Later, when Yazid became
caliph the pressure on Imam Hussein (a.s.) to give his pledge to this
wayward and deviated ruler brought about the open opposition and refusal
of Imam Hussein (a.s.) to comply.

The repercussions of his position brought about the horrendous event of
the massacre at Karbala' in central Iraq. Unlike his grandfather and
father (a.s.), Imam Hussein (a.s.) was not confronting non-Muslims. The
killers of Imam Hussein (a.s.), his cousins, his sons, his brothers, his
friends and followers, were the same ones who would join him for prayer
and stand behind him as he led it! Yet, we see that even this did not
deter these same people from carrying out the most atrocious orders to
cut off his head and trample his body, leaving it unburied on the desert
sands.

Many books have been written about the revolution of Imam Hussein
(a.s.) any many misunderstand his position. It was not one of war. He
was not marching to Kufa to organise an army to turn upon the ruler of
the time. He was invited to come to lead them in their matters and to do
his sacred duty. But he was not al lowed to do so. The political
implications of his refusal to give his pledge to Yazid would have
weakened the illegitimate leader's position and that was something that
Yazid was not prepared to accept. He wanted all power and authority and
he accepted no opposition. Thus, the tragedy of Karbala' was not about
war, it was about greed and oppression. It was about truth and
falsehood, right and wrong, belief and disbelief. The condition of the
Muslim world today is so parallel with that time of fourteen centuries
ago that one is confirmed to believe that history does repeat itself.

Imam Hussein (a.s.) a revolutionary, a leader, a saint, a pure and
bright soul, a human being concerned about his fellow man. The Muslim
world has been taken over by kings and presidents and prime ministers
with no legitimate right and who desecrate Islamic law every day. Islam
had become a source of wealth and power and is in a state of constant
turmoil and confusion so that Muslims are being killed by Kuffar and
Muslims alike! This was the condition of the ummah during the time of
Imam Hussein (a.s.).

He saw the religion established by his grandfather, the Holy Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.), defended by his father and brother (a.s.), and now
his personal responsibility, being abused and practically discarded for
power, wealth and glory. He saw the rule of Muslims in the hands of
unbelievers. He saw hypocrisy and oppression and he rebelled. Not unlike
what is happening in the Muslim world where the rulers, some in the name
of Allah, and some not, have sold out their people and their religion
for some of the same reasons. The Muslims of these countries, now and in
the past, have made stands against these illegitimate rulers. Why have
they not succeeded to take their right to rule as Allah had ordained?

Superficially we can answer this question by saying the now patent
phrase, "Muslims are disunited." At a closer look we will find it is
because those rulers, of the past and present, have succeeded to
innovate Islam to the point that Muslims have no identity or
self-esteem. A sad reminder of the warnings of our Prophet and his
Ahlul-Bait (a.s.), when they repeatedly commanded us to adhere to
them.

Imam Hussein (a.s.) was one of those reminders. He rose up against an
illegitimate ruler who was innovating the faith and misguiding the
Muslims. This ruler played on the dissentigration of unity that began at
the moment of the death of Muhammad (s.a.w.). Imam Hussein (a.s.) took
his stand so that we could understand our position. It was a stand or
fall situation. He could not win the battle, but he won the revolution.
On the fields of Karbala', a bleak desert plain in central Iraq, he
stood and fought and was martyred for the sake of re-establishing what
had been forgotten.

This book is about a revolutionary. A righteous man. A religious
authority. An Imam of the Muslim ummah. He was killed! By whom? By
others Muslims in a struggle for power and rule of the Islamic state.
Who was there to help him? Precious few. Why did he take a stand that
meant certain death for him and his family and followers? For Allah and
Islam. What was he trying to do? Teach us that fighting unto death is
more honorable than submitting to injustice. Why have we not grasped the
true essence of his message? This final question remains unanswered.

Around the world on the 9th and 10th of Moharram, you will find Muslims
of all creeds crying their eyes out for Imam Hussein (a.s.), and then
going home to their comfortable beds to have a restful night's sleep
while their brothers and sisters starve to death and suffer oppression
and aggression in various countries. What a bunch of rubbish! Is that
what Imam Hussein (a.s.) sacrificed his pure and blessed blood for? A
few tears once a year? Allah perserves us from the ignorant!

We pray to Allah, with all our soul, that upon reading this brief
account of the life of Imam Hussein (a.s.), the third rightful caliph of
the Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) that the reader will be encouraged to research
more deeply into his life and message. Scores of books are available in
many languages. A study of his stand may help us to take a more
righteous position in our own lives.

An understanding of what Imam Hussein (a.s.) was trying to instill in
the soul of the ummah may wake us up before it is too late, if it's not
too late already. We suppose the best way to capsulize his message is in
his own words:

"It is better to die fighting for truth, than to live under an
oppressive ruler."

"Of the believers are the men who are true to what they covenanted with
Allah; of them is he who has fulfilled his vow and of them is he who
awaits (its fulfilment); and they have not changed in the least," Holy
Qur'an (33:23)

If we can honestly include ourselves among any of those mentioned in
the above verse, our tears for Imam Hussein (a.s.) may have real
content. With Allah comes success.


**INTRODUCTION**

Praise be to Allah, and blessings and peace be upon our master and
leader, Muhammad, and his pure household and the righteous among his
companions. As centuries pass by, the uprising of Imam Hussein (a.s.),
the grandson of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.), shines more powerfully, as a
medal on the brow of history. It becomes firmly fixed in the conscience
of the Muslim ummah, and is more understandable in the view of the
historians and researchers.

Similarly, the free faithful get more determined to follow in it's
footsteps, and hold firmly to it's noble goals so as to destroy the
oppression of the tyrants, and root up the governments of the agents of
the east and west all over our great Muslim world.

As in the far past, all efforts made by the sympathizers, and the
spiteful alike, to thwart Imam Hussein's determination to begin his
blessed and tremendous uprising, which awakened the ummah and pulled
down the thrones of the Ummayyad, had failed. Now all the hectic and
poisonous plots being made to deflect the revolution from its right
path, or obliterate its landmarks, or extinguish its blazing flame, will
also certainly fail. There is no way these efforts could succeed,
whether they center on distorting the image of the uprising, inventing
stories and myths around it, or emptying it of its Islamic meaning and
depicting Imam Hussein (a.s.) as a 'rejecting leftist', or an 'ambitious
adventurer', or an 'avenger', or a 'mutinist', or employing any other
means of diversion, cover-up and distortion.

Imam Hussein (a.s.) rose up. He continued his uprising and stuck to it
until its last stages. He sacrificed all that he had, and offered the
most dear men and pure souls to Allah for one goal. It was to defuse a
'bomb' which Mu'awiyah expertly timed and planted. That was Mu'awiyah,
the son of Hind, the 'Eater of Kidneys'. The 'bomb' was planted to blast
off the principle of 'Islamic legitimacy' at the bands of his son Yazid,
to root out that principle after being gradually pushed off the stage.
This being achieved, it would be an easy task to violate all Allah's
bounds and laws, the first of which are the qualifications the Muslim
leader should possess to answer the office of leadership, and the last
of which is the cancelling of Islamic ritual s and ethics.

It is no wonder, then, that the orientalists, including the Jews and
Christians, praise the Ummayyad rule, particularly Yazid, as the
strongest leader in the history of Islam!

Al-Balagh Foundation hopes, as it presents to its dear readers 'Rays of
Light from the Life of Imam Hussein (a.s.)', the third Imam of the
household of the Prophet (s.a.w.), and his second grandson, who, along
with his brother, Imam Hasan (a.s.), are the masters of the youths of
paradise, that it can spread sweet wafts of the fragrance of the family
of the Prophet (s.a.w.), and reach the masses of our Muslim ummah with
the momentum of a principled uprising, the match of which history never
witnessed.

We beseech Allah, the Most High, to aid and grant success to all the
culturally aware vanguards, who reject their corrupt status quo, and
believe in their promising Islamic future. He is the best of helpers.


Al-Balagh Foundation


