How Islam Immortalized Imam Hussein (a.s.)
==========================================

**THE BLESSED INFANT**

On the third of the blessed month of Sha'ban, the fourth year after
Hijrah and a year after the birth of Imam Hassan (a.s.), the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.) was given news of the birth of Imam Hussein (a.s.). He
hurried to the house of Imam Ali and Fatimah al-Zahra' (a.s.). "O
Asma'," he ordered Asma', the daughter of Umays, "bring me my son." She
took the newborn to him. The infant was wrapped in a piece of cloth. The
face of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) lit up upon seeing his grandson.
He took him in his arms. He recited the call to prayer (adan) into his
right ear, and read the shorter version (iqamah) in his left ear. He,
then, placed the baby in his lap and wept.

"May my father and mother be your sacrifice," Asma' asked him, "why are
you crying?" "Because of my son," he replied.

"He is a newborn baby," she said.

"O Asma'," he said," After me, the transgressing party will kill him.
May Allah never grant them my intercession." Then he said: "Asma', don't
tell Fatimah about this, for she has just given birth to him."(1) Then
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) turned to Imam Ali (a.s.) and asked him:
"What name have you chosen for him?" "I would never precede you in
naming him, O Messenger of Allah," he replied.

At that moment, the revelation descended on the beloved Messenger,
Muhammad (s.a.w.), with the name of the infant. Having received the
divine order, the Messenger (s.a.w.) looked at Imam Ali (a.s.) and said:
"name him Hussein."

Seven days later, the Prophet (s.a.w.) hastened to the house of
al-Zahra' (a.s.). He slaughtered a lamb as an offering to Allah and
ordered the infant's head shaved, its weight in silver to be given to
the poor.

Thus, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) applied the very same Islamic rites he
had earlier performed for his brother, Imam Hassan (a.s.).(2)

**THE STATUS OF IMAM HUSSEIN (A.S.)**

The status of Imam Hussein (Abu-Abdullah) (a.s.) is unparalleled,
except by that of his father, mother, brother, and the Imams of his
offspring, on all of them be the peace and blessings of Allah. Should a
historian make a good research, collecting the stories and traditions
concerning Imam Hussein (a.s.), he would certainly end up with the Imam
(a.s.) as the top example among the Muslims. He would write a
voluminous, great work covering this Imam.

As much as we can, we will delve into the key points which portray the
great position of Imam Hussein (a.s.) according to Islamic criteria. The
Glorious Qur'an, the supreme divine document, which falsehood can never
reach from before or behind it, expresses in many verses the lofty
position Imam Hussein (a.s.) achieved in the sight of Allah, the
Exalted. Following are some of these verses: 1. Verse of Purification
(Tathir):

"Allah only wishes to keep away uncleanness from you (Household of the
Prophet) and purify you thoroughly." Holy Qur'an (33:33)

Traditionists say, regarding the reason this verse was revealed, that
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) called for a shawl. With it he covered Ali,
Fatimah, Hassan and Hussein (a.s.). "O my Lord," he said, "these are the
members of my family. Remove uncleanness from them and purely purify
them."(3) and so this noble verse was revealed on this occasion. It is a
testimony by Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, on the purity of the
Prophetic house (Ahlul Bait (a.s.)) and their great stature.

2. Verse of Malediction (Mubahala):

"If anyone disputes with you about it (your prophethood) after the
knowledge has come to you, say, 'Come, let us bring our sons and your
sons and our women and your women and ourselves and yourselves and pray
to Allah to curse the lying party." Holy Qur'an (3:61)

The Qur'anic exegesists and scholars say that this noble verse was
revealed when the Christians of the city of Najran agreed with the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) to pray to Allah to destroy the party which
stuck to falsehood. As agreed, and on time, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.)
went out to the place chosen for the contest. He carried Imam Hussein
(a.s.) and took Imam Hassan (a.s.) by the hand. Fatimah followed behind
while Imam Ali walked in their wake. "Say 'Amen' at the end of my
prayer," the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) told them. But, upon seeing those
brilliant faces filled with piety and grandeur, the Christians stopped
short of entering the contest. They recognized the Prophet's authority,
and paid the tribute. (4)

The noble verse called Hassan and Hussein "our sons," mentioned the
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.), and referred to Ali as "ourselves" and
Fatimah as "our women." She symbolizes the whole of womankind in this
verse. Had there been other people who had higher status than these
people, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) certainly would have brought them
along with him.

3. Verse of Affection (Mawada):

"...say: 'I do not ask you f or any payment f or my preaching to you,
except the love f or my relatives...'" Holy Qur'an (42:23)

The Qur'anic exegesists state that this verse was revealed concerning
Ali, Fatimah, Hassan and Hussein (a.s.).

Jabir bin Abdullah is reported to have said: "A bedouin came to the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and said, 'O Muhammad! introduce me to Islam.'
"'You should bear witness,' replied the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.)
'that there is no god but Allah, Who is the only God, Who has no partner
whatsoever, and that Muhammad is His Servant and Messenger.'

"'Do you ask for recompense in return?' asked the bedouin.

"'No,' said the Prophet (s.a.w.), 'except that you should love the
relatives.'

"'Mine or yours?' inquired the man.

"'Mine,' said the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.).

"'Hold out your hand,' said the bedouin. 'I give you my pledge of
allegiance. My Allah curse whoever doesn't love you or your kindred.'
"'Amen,' said the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.)."(5)

It is reported in the Musnad (Book of traditions) of Ahmad bin Hanbal,
the two Sahihs (Authentic books of traditions), and the exegesis of
al-Tha'alibi and al- Tabarsi, that Ibn Abbas, may Allah be pleased with
him, was quoted as saying, "when the verse (say: I do not ask you for
any payment for my preaching to you except the love for my relatives)
was revealed, Muslims asked the Prophet (s.a.w.), 'O Messenger of Allah!
Who are your kinsfolk whom we should love?! 'Ali, Fatimah and their two
sons,' answered the Prophet (a.s.)."

Next to the verses of the Glorious Qur'an, we quote certain statements,
from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) as additional evidence expressing
the lofty position occupied by Imam Hussein (a.s.) in the world of Islam
and the Muslim ummah.

1. In the Sahih of al-Tirmidhi, Ya'la bin Murrah is quoted to have
said, "The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) said, 'Hussein is from me and I
am from Hussein. Allah loves whoever loves Hussein. Hussein is a
disciple of the disciples."(6)

2. Salman al-Farsi is reported to have said, "I heard the Prophet of
Allah (s.a.w.) saying, 'Hassan and Hussein are my two sons. Whoever
loves them then he loves me. And whoever dislikes them then he dislikes
me. And whoever dislikes me then Allah dislikes him. And whomever Allah
dislikes, He will throw him into hell f ace downward."'(7)

3. Al-Bara' bin Azib is quoted to have said, "I saw the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.) carrying Hussein bin Ali (a.s.) on his shoulder. He was
saying, 'O Lord! I do love him so love him.'"(8)

4. Abdullah bin Mas'ood is reported to have said, "The Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.) said, concerning Hassan and Hussein, 'These are my two
sons, whoever loves them then he loves me. And whoever dislikes them he
dislikes me,"'

5. Ali bin Hussein (a.s.) said, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of his grandfather (a.s.), 'The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.)
took the arms of Hassan and Hussein and said, 'Whoever loves me and
loves these two and their father, he will certainly be with me on the
Day of Judgement.'"(9)


**Aspects Of His Character**

In our latest booklet (10) we referred to the fact that the characters
of both Imams Hassan and Hussein (a.s.) have many traits in common. Both
of them received their initial stage of training before shouldering the
heavy task of propagating and defending the da'wah. Both of them had one
and the same education, indoctrination, and spiritual and ideological
teachings, under the supervision of their grandfather (s.a.w.), their
father and their mother (a.s.). As a result, the aspects of their
characters fused together personifying the message of Allah, the Blessed
and Exalted, in thought, action and conduct.

In our booklet on Imam Hassan (a.s.), we cited some examples which put
his character into perspective. Here, we do the same regarding Imam
Hussein (a.s.).

**1. His Relationship With Allah**

We can better understand the depth of Imam Hussein's (a.s.)
relationship with Allah, the Most High, if we don't lose sight of the
fact that the Prophet (s.a.w.) himself taught him the ideology of Islam
and brought him up spiritually as he had done with his father, Imam Ali,
his mother, al-Zahra', and his brother, Imam Hassan (a.s.). By so doing,
his path was defined and his character was formed.

One day he was asked, "How great is your fear of your Lord?" "No one
would be secure on the Day of Judgement except those who feared Allah in
this life," he replied.(11) His face would turn pale, and he would
tremble at the time of doing his ablution. He was asked about this and
answered, "Whoever stands in the presence of the Almighty Allah is not
to blame if his color turns pale and his limbs shake."

On the night before the tenth of the month of Muharram, Imam Hussein
(a.s.) asked the Ummayyad army to delay the battle till the following
morning. He said, "This night we want to offer our prayers to our Lord,
and we want to ask His forgiveness. He knows that I love to offer my
prayer to Him, recite His Book, and pray much asking f or His
forgiveness."

During the most critical and horrifying hours of the last day of his
earthly life, he realized that it was midday and he had to perform his
prayer. The battle of Karbala' was in full swing. He asked the enemies
to stop fighting so as to let him and his followers offer their prayer.
No better testimony than this can reflect the depth and strength of his
relationship with Allah and his love for Him.

He used to recite this supplication, "O Lord! Grant me the desire for
the other world, till I realize that it is a real thing in my heart,
through my apathy to this world. O Lord! Grant me perception with regard
to the other world so much that I will seek the divine reward with acute
longing, and flee from the bad deeds out of fearing You, O
Lord...".(12)

We Will address this plea more elaborately when we cover the uprising
of Imam Hussein (a.s.) and his heroic, and matchless sacrifice for the
sake of Allah, the Most High.

**2. His Relationship With People**

A look at the ethical side of Imam Hussein's (a.s.) character would be
enough to shed light on the vividness of his relations with the ummah,
for he was the most perfect and exemplary leader during his time. We
don't mean that Imam Hussein (a.s.) was different from the other Imams
in this respect. The nature of the relationship between the Imam and the
ummah is actually outlined by the Divine Message. Imams represent it, as
personified in their daily life. Following are some examples of that
great, high and brilliant relationship.

A. His Humbleness

Once Imam Hussein (a.s.) passed by poor men eating crumbs of bread on a
mat. He greeted them and they invited him to their meal. He sat among
them and said: "If your food were not alms, I would have eaten with you.
Come home with me," he asked them. There, he fed them, clothed them and
provided them with money.(13)

One could easily detect the depth of his humbleness through examination
of this vivid testimony, particularly when we take into consideration
that Imam Hussein (a.s.) was the political and ideological figure who
was appointed as the legitimate leader of the Muslims by Allah, through
His Messenger (s.a.w.).

As for his social position, he was so matchless and unique, that Ibn
Abbas, the revered companion of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), used to hold
the stirrup of his horse when he would mount it. Ibn Abbas was older
than Imam Hussein (a.s.), but he did this out of his respect for
him.(14)

It is because of his glorious social status that the people would
dismount from their horses and camels, on the way to Mecca to perform
their pilgrimage, as long as he would travel on foot.

Another example reflecting his humble nature is that of his acceptance
of an invitation to having food with the poor. He encountered a number
of poor men. Having had their food they hastened to ask him to share
with them. He dismounted from, his horse saying, "Surely, Allah doesn't
like the haughty." He partook of their food and said: "I have accepted
your invitation. Won't you accept mine?"

"Certainly, we Will," said they. He took them to his house and said to
al-Rabab, his wife, "Bring us what you have been storing."(15)

He did care for the people. He would always help them, even though, for
the most part, they wouldn't recognize his legitimate right. Shu'aib bin
Abdul-Rahman is reported to have said: "On the way of al-Taf (battle of
Karbala', wherein he was martyred) a mark was seen on the back of
Hussein bin Ali (a.s.). Imam Zain al- Abideen (a.s.) (his eldest son,
and the son who survived the battle) was asked about it. 'It is the
trace,' he replied, 'of the bag, which he puts on his back (carrying
food) to the house of the widows, orphans and the poor."(16)

This fact attests to his remarkable humbleness, his care for the ummah,
his awareness and deep feeling of his responsibility toward the
people.

**B. His Forgiveness of the Wrongdoers**

This is another one of his key attributes. Once a young servant of his
did something which deserved punishment. When Imam Hussein (a.s.) wanted
to punish him, the servant said:

"Who curb their anger." "Let him go", said the Imam.

"And those who forgive their fellow-man," added the servant.

"I forgive you," said the Imam.

"And Allah loves the charitable, sir," said the servant.

"I set you free, for the sake of Allah," said the Imam. "Henceforth I
am going to give you the double of what I have been giving you."(17)
These are only brief instances of the ethical side of the character of
Imam Hussein (a.s.).

**3. Aspects of His Thought**

We deem it suitable to mention some of his activities in the field of
Islamic thought. These texts testify to his great intellectual capacity,
polished by the divine message and set on the right track by Allah, the
Almighty.

Nafi' bin al-Azraq, the head of the Azraqis who were among the Khawarij
(those who mutinied against Imam Ali (a.s.) after the Battle of
Siffeen), once asked him to describe his Lord Whom he worshipped.

"O Nafi'!," Imam Hussein (a.s.) started, "Whoever uses symbolism in
religious matters will always remain in confusion, deviated as he
stumbles off the right path, sticking to deviation wherever he goes,
straying off the right course, and saying bad, and worthless things. O
son of al-Azraq! I can describe my Lord with the very words He used to
describe Himself: Never recognized by the five senses. Never compared to
man. Very close but not to the point of being touched. Very far but not
so far that He can't be detected. He is One and can't be partitioned.
Known by His signs. Described by His attributes. There is no god but He,
the Great, the Exalted."

At that point Ibn al-Azraq wept and said: "What beautiful words are
yours."(18)

On his way to Karbala', he assessed the general situation, pointing to
the great deviation the ummah had been drawn into, and talked about his
determination to win martyrdom, in the following words:

"Life has certainly changed disguises and its good has gone forever.
This has continued till the remaining good in it amounts to the thin
sediment at the bottom of a drinking untensil. Life is a mean food, a
pasture covered with bad grass. Do you not see that the truth is not
followed and falsehood not discouraged? The faithful must certainly
desire to meet his Lord righteously. I do not deem death other than
felicity and life among the unjust other than suffering and boredom.
People are certainly enthralled with life. Faith is only something
licked by them. They take good care of it as long as it secures their
living. But once put to the tests of tribulation, religious men should
be rarely found amongst them."(19)

With his sharp awareness, he defines the different levels of the
relationship with Allah. He says:

"Some people serve Allah desiring (His rewards). It is the worship of
merchants. Some people serve Allah out of fear. It is the worship of
slaves. And some people serve Allah out of gratitude. This is the
worship of the free. It is the best kind of worship."(20)

He addressed the people, prior to the battle of Karbala', defining the
characteristics of the Ummayyad rule, and analyzing the political and
administrative situation from an Islamic point of view He said:

"...O people! the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) had said: 'Whoever
witnesses an unjust ruler considering the prohibitions of Allah as
permissible, breaking the covenant of Allah, opposing the practices of
the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.), treating His servant sinfully and
cruelly, and had seen all these misdeeds but did not oppose him bywords
or actions, Allah surely will punish him as He wills.'

"Certainly these people have come to staunchly obey Satan, and given up
obeying the Compassionate. They showed mischief, stopped acting in
accordance with Islamic laws, took Muslims' property to themselves, made
the haram designated by Allah, halal, and turned His halal to haram. I
am more entitled than anyone else (to make the change). Your letters
arrived, and your envoys came to me carrying your pledge of allegiance
that you will not hand me over to my enemy, nor will you f ail me.

Should you stick to your pledge of allegiance, you have surely made the
right decision. I am Hussein bin Ali, and the son of Fatimah, the
daughter of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.). I am, myself, with you, and
my family is with yours. You find a good example in me. But, however, if
you will not hold onto your pledge of allegiance, break your convenant,
and throw off my pledge of allegiance, then, by Allah, it is not the
first time you do it. You did it with my father, and you have done it
with my brother, and my cousin Muslim bin Aqeel. He is certainly
gullible who is deceived by you. You are missing your luck and losing
your lot. He who breaks his oath, breaks it at his own peril. Allah will
certainly compensate me if you leave me."(21)

These are only scattered small examples of his great thought which
occupies the center of original, serene Islam. Should the dear reader
tend to know more about Imam Hussein (a.s.), he can refer to the books
which dealt with his life. He will find out himself how deep and great
were Imam Hussein's (a.s.) thought and faith.(22)


