Imam Hussein's Role in Reviving Islam
=====================================

**PROLOGUE**

Imam Hussein's role in Islamic life started very early. While still a
young man, he contributed effectively to the rising movement of Islam.
Eminent was his role during the Imamate of his father, the Commander of
the Faithful (a.s.). Side by side with his father, brother, and the
loyal men around his father, he took part in the major battles of his
father: al-Jamal, Siffin and al-Nahrawan.

During the Imamate of his brother, Hassan (a.s.), he lived as his
loyal, obedient soldier. They shared the same views and acted in unison.
He experienced, with his brother, the events, including the signing of
the peace document with Mu'awiyah. Afterwards, he went to Medina along
with his brother and the members of the house of the Prophet (s.a.w.).
There, they did their best to carry out their mission of keeping the
Divine Message away from the current of mounting deviation. As we have
explained in our study of the life of Imam Hassan (a.s.), their
religious task centered around ethical and ideological teachings,
straightening up people's conduct, and pointing out their religious
responsibility to them.

In the wake of Imam Hassan' s (a.s.) departure to his Exalted Lord,
Imam Hussein's (a.s.) role entered a new phase due to the complications
which sprung up in the midst of the ummah. Since the role of any Imam
from the house of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) is defined by the nature of
the social, ideological and political developments in his time, Imam
Hussein (a.s.) blazed a new trail in defining the progress of the
Islamic movement which he led after taking the office of the legitimate
Imam, in harmony with the Divine Will which was expressed in the
statements and words of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) in this
respect.

Jabir bin Sumrah is reported to have said: "I went with my father to
see the Prophet (s.a.w.). I heard him saying: 'Life will not come to an
end before twelve caliphs have appeared.' Jabir went on to say: "I could
not figure out what he said afterwards, and so I asked my father: "What
has he said?"

"He (s.a.w.) said," my father replied, 'All of them are from the
Quraish.'"(23)

Ababah bin Rab'i bin Jabir is reported to have said: "The Prophet of
Allah (s.a.w.) said: 'I am the master of the prophets, who will come
after me are twelve, the first one of whom is Ali and the last one is
al-Mahdi, who will revolt against injustice.'"(24)

Salman (may Allah be pleased with him) said: "I went to see the Prophet
(s.a.w.). I saw Hussein on his lap. The Prophet was kissing him on the
cheeks and mouth. I heard him saying: 'You are a master, the son of a
master, and the brother of a master. You are an Imam, the son of an Imam
and the brother of an Imam. You are the Proof of Allah, the son of a
Proof of Allah, and the brother of a Proof of Allah, and the father of
nine Proof s of Allah, the ninth one of them is al-Mahdi, the one who
will revolt against injustice.'"(25)

There are a plethora of statements and traditions reported from the
Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) in which he states, implicitly and explicitly,
that his successors are twelve caliphs.(26)

Imamate took a new turn during Imam Hussein's (a.s.) term. That is what
we Will explain, Insha'llah, in the following pages.

**POST-PEACE TREATY EVENTS**

Mu'awiyah entered the city of Kufa after signing the peace treaty with
Imam Hassan (a.s.). His army encircled it. He addressed the Kufans in
these words: "O people of Kufa! Do you think that I have fought you for
the sake of prayer, poor- rate and hajj (pilgrimage), whilst I know you
offer your prayers, give the poor-rate and perform hajj? Nay, I fought
you so as to be your ruler and seize control of your lives. Allah
granted any property plundered or any blood shed in this sedition is
irretrievable. Any promise I have given is trampled under these two feet
of mine..."(27)

This address of Mu'awiyah amounted to a public revocation of the treaty
which was conducted with Imam Hassan (a.s.) as expressed in these words:
"Any promise I have given is trampled under these two feet of mine." Not
a few days had passed after the signing of the peace document, when
Mu'awiyah began implementing a new plan, totally in contrast to the
terms of the peace document. The following goals figure in his notorious
plan:

1. Unleashing a wave of terror, and embarking on elimination of all
opposition forces, particularly the followers of Imam Ali (a.s.). They
were bunted down, and every means of oppression and terror was employed
to silence every free voice. No better testimony to the danger of this
savage and horrifying policy than the following text, which carries the
orders of Mu'awiyah to one of his military officers:

" ...And kill any one you come across who does not hold the same views
you hold, and attack every town you pass by. And plunder property as
plundering property is tantamount to killing, and it is more hurting to
the heart..."(28)

If the deviant Ummayyad plot, expressed clearly in this text, is
devilish, it was first implemented during the life of Imam Ali (a.s.);
it took on more dangerous proportions after the signing of the peace
document with Imam Hassan (a.s.). More innocent blood was shed, and
opponents, who came from different schools of thought, at the head of
which were the followers of Imam Ali (a.s.) and the Ahlul Bait (a.s.),
were put to the sword.

Mu'awiyah wrote to his governors in all provinces: "See to it that
whoever is proven, by irrefutable evidence, to love Ali and his
household, his name is erased from the public register and his pay and
food allotment are dropped."(29)

In another letter, he wrote: "Whomever you accuse of being loyal to
these people, severely punish him and tear down his house."(30)

In short and expressive words Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) depicts
this bloody tragedy. He says: "...Our followers were killed in every
city. Hands and legs were cut off at the slightest suspicion. Whoever
was reported to love us or had any contact with us would either be
imprisoned or robbed of his property or his house destroyed. Oppression
increased in volume and became unduly harsh, till the time of Ubaidullah
bin Ziyad, the murderer of Hussein (a.s.)."(31)

At the head of the victims of that horrible carnage was a group of
pious companions of the Prophet (s.a.w.) including Hijr bin Uday and his
followers, Rasheed al-Hajari, Amru bin al-Humq al-Khuza'i, Awfa bin Hisn
and many others. Books such as al-Tabari, al-Kamil and Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah collected countless stories about Mu'awiyah's hatred for the
followers of Ahlul Bait (a.s.).

2. Dispersing money for the sake of buying-out men, and weakening their
Islamic character, and helping the deviant policy of Mu'awiyah to
fulfill its devilish objectives. In reality, two kinds of men were
bought out:

A. A number of preachers and traditionists whose role was outrageous in
working in favor of Mu'awiyah. They forged traditions and narratives and
falsely attributed them to the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) in order to
depricate Imam Ali (a.s.) and all the members of his family.

B. Leading social men who might act against the Ummayyad rule. It was a
policy practised by Mu'awiyah and the other rulers of the Ummayyad
dynasty. This policy became an adopted line of action throughout the
Ummayyad rule. No better testimony to this policy than Mu'awiyah's
sending 1,000 Dirhams to Malik bin Hubairah al-Sakoon. The latter was
enraged to hear of the murder of the great companions of the Prophet
(s.a.w.), Hijr bin Uday, and his followers (may Allah be pleased with
them). Mu'awiyah sent him the money. Al-Sakooni, upon receiving it, gave
up any intention of rising against oppression and corruption.

3. War of starvation. It was the most effective weapon used by the
Ummayyads. The Muslim ummah felt humiliated and unable to challenge the
rulers.

As this policy was based on fighting the opposition forces with their
daily bread and depriving them of the means to earn their living,
Mu'awiyah employed the most horrendous way to besiege the followers of
Ahlul Bait (a.s.) in particular. His recorded directive, which he sent
to his governors in this respect said: "...See to it that whoever is
proven, by irrefutable evidence, to love Ali and his household, his name
is erased from the public register, and his pay and food allotment are
dropped."

One can see for himself the repercussions of this inhuman policy,
adopted by the Ummayyad house to corrupt people and numb their
conscience. It was not a temporary line of action. Mu'awiyah made it a
consistent policy throughout the twenty years of his rule (41-60
A.H.).

4. Breaking the bonds holding the Muslim ummah as one entity by
stirring up the nationalist, tribal and regional spirit among the
different groups. Thus, plunging the Muslims into infighting at the
expense of their real opposition to the oppressive rule of the
Ummayyads. Mutual spite and hatred between the Arab tribes were awakened
and soon differences and violence began to surface. The tribes of Qays
and Mudhar fought each other. The people of Yemen and those of Medina
jumped at each other's throats. And so was the case among the tribes of
Iraq! In the same way sectarianism was revived between the Arabs and
non-Arab Muslims who came to be historically known as al-Mawali. This
policy of ignorance was expressively reflected in the poetry of many
poets like Miskeen al-Darimi, al- Farazdaq, Jareer, al-Akktal and
others.(32)

5. Assassination of Imam Hassan bin Ali (a.s.) as he was the legitimate
symbol of original Islam.

6. Crowning Yazid as the new king after his father, Mu'awiyah. Such a
move was taken in a severe atmosphere of oppression, and in line with
the stick-and-carrot policy, which ran counter to the peace treaty which
appointed Imam Hassan (a.s.) as the next caliph after the death of
Mu'awiyah. If Imam Hassan (a.s.) himself was already dead at the time of
Mu'awiyah's death, the document said that Imam Hussein (a.s.) would be
the next caliph.

And so Mu'awiyah completed his plot of revoking every term of the
treaty he concluded with Imam Hassan (a.s.). Mu'awiyah, thus, went
another step in tresspassing the Islamic concept of rule, by adopting
the hereditary rule, which implies dictatorship, as a system of
rulership in the Muslim world. Islamic principles and the Muslim ummah
were exposed to the most violent tragedy in their history. The ummah's
movement swerved off the right track it was supposed to tread.

Deviation took a clear shape shortly after the death of Mu'awiyah and
the ascension of Yazid to the office of caliphate. Such was the desire
of Mu'awiyah who nurtured and kept it alive till it was completely
realized.

The mandate given to Yazid to lead the Muslim ummah, plan its future,
and define its course of action meant, in reality, the liquidation of
the Islamic existence. It was an actual regression from it shrouded in
another attire.

Yazid, as history testifies, was overwhelmed by deviation in his
thought, practices and feelings. Unbiased researchers would admit that
Yazid could not find the chance to consciously open to Islam and its
high objectives which models man as an individual and a member in a
society in a way that keeps him totally away from the pillars of
ignorance. It is the best model of man any ideology can produce.

When Yazid got rid of the atmosphere of good education furnished by
Islam for its followers, it is no wonder that our history brims over
with stories about Yazid's daily practices which were immersed in
deviation, under the noses of the majority of the Muslims in Syria. He
plunged himself into debauchery, loose entertainment, alcohol-drinking,
womanizing and singing...He was so careless and morally loose that he
used to put gold bangles on his dogs!(33)

And so the ummah stood at the threshold of a new stage of its history.
Ahead of it, there were two choices: Either to develop a strong
rejection of the type of life being imposed on it, whatever the price;
or accept the de facto life, wherein it had to give up its Message, the
source of its greatness and symbol of its pride among other nations.

Then, which choice did the ummah prefer?

**The Uprising : Why?

** If we study the life of Imam Hussein (a.s.), the events he witnessed,
and the circumstances which beset him, we will easily detect the fact
that he had no chance whatsoever of scoring, materialistically speaking,
a victory over the oppressive authorities of the Ummayyads. Even those
Kufans who wrote to him, were not trusted by him. He declared his
opposition to the rule of Yazid before the arrival of the Kufans' envoys
and messages.

He announced his first communiqué in the city of his grandfather,
Muhammad (s.a.w.), whereas he heard of the Kufans' committment to his
cause while in Mecca, i.e. after his declaration of opposition to the
Ummayyads.

On the other hand, the province of Hijazfailed to assist him, if we
leave out the sentimental lip service the people there paid him. He soon
realized the inability of Mecca to protect him from the Ummayyad
authorities which were intent on getting rid of him. So that no drop of
blood of the family of the Prophet (s.a.w.) might be shed in the sacred
town, he moved towards Iraq.

Though he was quite sure that he would be killed, he was insisting on
starting his uprising, and standing his ground till the tragically
inevitable end. Why did he insist so? Rather, why was the uprising? In
answering this big question, let's take into consideration the following
facts; First, Yazid took the office of caliphate, while being a young
deviant and inexperienced man. Yazid was obstinate and rash. He was a
real threat to the ummah. He had no sound, good Islamic education, as he
lived in a house never lightened by the sun of Islamic guidance. So it
comes as no surprise that historical annals attest to the fact that
Yazid took to alcohol, gambling and every kind of unacceptable
anti-Islamic behavior.(34)

Yazid, with all his deviations and the bad life he had led, not to
mention his lack of adequate experience in discharging the affairs of
the Islamic state, was coronated as the new Muslim caliph..!!

His ascension to the high office of caliphate opened the doors wide to
all kinds of corruption, and made it easy to break from the Islamic
shari'ah. But the committed Islamic forces, at the head of which was
Imam Hussein (a.s.), took advantage of the weak points and the manifest
immorality in Yazid's character. Lots of people came to realize, to the
point of certainty, the make-up and goals of this un-Islamic character.
Rejectors of deviation found in that a good chance to melt the stupor
which engulfed the mentality of the Muslims. They moved to awaken and
enlighten the ummah towards the Muslims' high interests. Violence was a
choice that could not be ruled out.

And so Imam Hussein (a.s.), the immortal hero of Islam, stood before
the Ummayyad army, under the leadership of al-Hurr bin Yazid al-Riyahi,
(35) addressing them, pointing to the worst aspects of the Ummayyad
rule's deviation. The two parties came across each other in Iraq. Imam
Hussein (a.s.) said:

"...O people! the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) had said, 'Whoever
witnesses an unjust ruler considering the prohibitions of Allah as
permissible, breaking the covenant of Allah, opposing the practices of
the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.), treating His servants sinfully and
cruelly, and had seen all these misdeeds but did not oppose him by words
or actions, Allah will surely punish him as He wills. Certainly, these
people have come to staunchly obey Satan, and given up obeying the
Compassionate. They showed mischief, stopped acting in accordance with
the Islamic laws, took Muslims' property to themselves, made the
forbidden by Allah lawful, and turned His lawful things to unlawful
ones..."

By such addresses and speeches Imam Hussein (a.s.) shed light on the
nature of the Ummayyad rule. He awakened peoples' sentiments and steeled
their wills to shed off the layer of dust descended on their awareness
and totally rejected the unconditional surrender to the illegitimate
rule of the Ummayyads.

Secondly, the ultimate level of awareness of the ummah was below the
needed one to head off the overwhelming wave of deviation. This is a
morabid phenomenon which painfully took shape in the nature of leaning,
on the part of the average Muslim, to comfort and ease and coveting
private interests. The spirit of jihad had vanished from the social
conscience. This dangerous phenomenon had surprisingly crystalised in
the form of amassing wealth on the part of the high echelons of the
Islamic leadership.(36)

If power-wielding people among the ummah had exploited their influence
to win and double their profits, nearly all walks of life in the Islamic
society developed this mundane tendency in an outrageous way. It
manifested itself in leaning to comfort and luxuries as a substitute to
the spirit of jihad which is expressed in the ability to brave
hardships. It was a condition arrived at after at least 25 years of life
not so much connected with heaven as with the earth.

As a result, it is no wonder that many eminent men among the Muslims
advised Imam Hussein (a.s.), shortly after his announcement that he
would challenge the Ummayyad authorities, to change his mind and cancel
his plans in this respect. They knew full well that the Ummayyad rule
was corrupt, and they were aware that Imam Hussein (a.s.) was the one
who was most entitled to defy the Ummayyads. But it was the fear that
Imam Hussein (a.s.) might attain martyrdom that prompted them to offer
their advice. Umar al-Atraf said to him: "Abu Muhammad al-Hassan told me
that he had heard his father, the Commander of the Faithful, saying that
you would be killed. So it would be better for you, if you gave your
pledge of allegiance (to Yazid)."

Abdullah bin Umar bin al-Khattab and Abdullah bin al-Zubair, and a
number of his own family urged him not to stand up against the
Ummayyads.(37)

The masses, on the other hand, tended to deal passively with politics
and in the most horrible way. The people of Kufa, for example, gave
their pledge of allegiance to Imam Hussein (a.s.) and made a covenant
with him that they would jump to his help when he came to their city.
They declared their readiness to support him in the countless letters
they sent him. But once the local ruling tyrant, Ubaidullah bin Ziyad,
unleashed a wave of terror in the city, and scattered money- bags among
the Kufans promising them alluringly the best of rewards, they forgot
all their promises and covenants with Imam Hussein (a.s.). What
expressive words are those of al-Farazdaq (an illustrious poet) to Imam
Hussein (a.s.) when he asked him about the prevailing situation in Iraq.
"Their hearts are with you," al- Farazdaq replied, "and their swords are
with the Ummayyads."

The pitiful phenomena of lack of responsibility before Allah and the
faith on the part of the majority of the people amounted to hypocricy,
and was the driving force behind the declaration of the uprising. Imam
Hussein (a.s.) wanted to awaken the dead conscience which clung to the
earth, and shake the dust of ambivalence from it.

He knew full well that conditions of extreme humility among the ummah
at the time could never promote this awakening from the religious point
of view. Shari'ah itself presents concepts and laws which make it
obligatory on its followers to reject a life never warmed by the sun of
justice and freedom, the life wherein sticking mundane comfort, and
competing for sensuous pleasures and lusts were the ultimate goal. These
are shining facts reflected in more than one place in the Glorious
Qur'an.

Shari'ah condemns materialistic lifestyle if it runs counter to the
spirit of sacrifice for the sake of the faith:

"O you who believe! What if the matter with you that when it is said to
you, "Go you forther (to fight) in the way of Allah," you incline
heavily to earth; What! Are you content with the life of this world
instead of the hereafter? But the provision of the life of this world
compared to the hereafter, is but little. Unless you go forth, He will
chatise you with a painful chastisement and He will replace you with a
people other than you, and no harm will you do to Him; and verily Allah
has power over all things."

Holy Qur'an (9:38-39)

Trusting the unjust rulers is prohibited by Islam:

"And (believers) incline not to those who act unjustly lest you touch
the fire of Hell..." Holy Qur'an (11:113)

Elsewhere in the Qur'an there is the fact that the faithful have to be
at the beck and call of the faith. They should always be ready to
safeguard its interests and spare no effort to defend it:

"Surely Allah has purchased from the faithful their selves and their
properties in exchange for paradise. They fight for the cause of Allah,
so they slay and are slain; (this is) a true promise binding on Him in
the Torah and the Evangel and the Qur'an..." Holy Qur'an (9:111)

Relying on his deep understanding of the Message of Allah, the Exalted,
Imam Hussein (a.s.), the pure, and real image of the faith, proclaimed
his total rejection of the status quo heedless of the fears and
reservations expressed by his fellow men.

It was Imam Hussein's (a.s.) awareness of his responsibilities and the
soundness of his attitude of rejection that made him call the advisors
and those who were anxious about his life to stand on his side and adopt
his position which was defined by Allah for his faithful servants. He
did this with Abdullah bin Umar who asked him to abandon his decision to
rise against the Ummayyad deviation. Imam Hussein (a.s.) said to him, "O
Abdul-Rahman! Be on your guard against Allah and do not shy away from
aiding me."

Thirdly, awakening the ummah to the Islamic concept of legitimate
caliphate and its dimensions and goals was a necessity. The threat which
encircled Islamic concepts did not come from the common people, but from
the high ranks of state officials who monopolized the means of social
orientation. It is a point worth examining and studying.

As Imam Hussein (a.s.) was aware of this, he began alerting the ummah
to the potential threat of the Ummayyad rule, as it was a rule
completely contrary to Islam's concept of caliphate, both in its men and
institutions. The system of hereditary dictatorship, introduced by
Mu'awiyah when he took the pledge of allegiance from the Muslims for his
son Yazid, was alien to Islam. Mu'awiyah, by doing this, had placed the
corner stone of the most dangerous structure in the history of Islam.
Its harmful consequences are still present. These illegitimate rulers
serve the foes of Islam beyond their imagination.

In line with Islam's instructions, and the qualifications the Muslim
ruler should possess, Imam Hussein (a.s.) set on explaining this point
to the Muslim masses by means of the speeches and statements he made
whenever the chance offered itself.

He delivered a speech, in Karbala', to the followers of al-Hurr
al-Riyah, in which he said: "O people! Should you be on your guard
against Allah and recognize the truth, it will be more pleasing to you.
We, the household of Muhammad (s.a.w.), are certainly more entitled to
this question (caliphate) than these people who claim what is not
theirs, and who rule with injustice and aggression."

In a letter he sent to the people of Basra, he wrote:

"Allah, certainly, chose Muhammad (s.a.w.) from among His creatures,
honored him with His prophethood, and chose him for His Message. Then He
took his life, raising him to His nearness, after he had advised His
servants and preached what he was entrusted. We were his family, his
pious men, his trustees, his inheritors and the most entitled among
people to inherit his status. The people monopolized that to themselves
and we assented, disagreeing to discussion, and chose patience. We know
that we are more entitled to that legitimate right than those who seized
it. I am sending my messenger to you with this letter. I am calling you
to the Book of Allah and the sunnah of His Prophet. For certainly the
sunnah was weakened and innovation was revived. Should you listen to
what I tell you, you will be guided to the righteous path."

By these resounding words, and by similar speeches, Imam Hussein (a.s.)
made it plain to the ummah that the Ummayyads were not fit to rule, due
to their acting contrary to the defined Islamic law. Likewise, he
explained to them the source to which the Muslim ruler should stick and
the Islamic qualifications, which he possessed, because of being the
sapling of prophethood, the disciple of sacred revelation and the one
who lived the faith from birth.

Fourthly, from the Islamic point of view, man is by no means excusible
to abandon his duty of preaching the faith. In the spacious field of
Islam, he is not an independent individual. Rather, he is a member fused
with others, in the faith. He should yield to its demands, do his
obligations towards it, and sacrifice for the sake of it. The duty of
enjoining the good and forbidding the evil, jihad in the way of Allah,
and similar obligations are not but a real translation of this spirit
shed on Muslims by their faith. But man's progress in this field goes in
parellel with his advancement in gaining spirituality.

Imam Hussein (a.s.), the second son of Imam Ali (a.s.), and the
grandson of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.), was a pure page of the
book of Islam, and a vivid translation of all its goals and concepts.
That is why he was the first one who responded to the call of faith in
his time. In order to honor his committments to the Shari' ah, he had no
other way before him other than that of uprising. Without it there would
be no reforms. The first communiqué of his uprising incarnated this fact
with all its positive implications:

"...And I am not taking up arms in order to make merry, or be ecstatic
over what I possess. I am not making mischief, nor exercising
oppression. But I am ready to fight for the sole goal of seeking reform
of the ummah of my grandfather, the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.). I want to
enjoin good and forbid evil and guide the affairs of the people as my
grandfather, and my father, Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.), were doing..."

These are the basic justifications which gave Imam Hussein (a.s.) and
his followers the right to start their uprising. An uprising which still
echoes in the minds of the people today. It is the revolution that
immortalized Islam and inspired the revolutionaries throughout the ages,
to defend Islam and fight recklessly in the battle of sacred jihad.


