Wind of the Uprising
====================

Shortly after the death of Mu'awiyah, his son, Yazid, took over. He
ordered his governors to take the pledge of allegiance to him from the
people. He focused on Imam Hussein (a.s.), in particular, due to the
Ummayyad conviction that he was the unshakable resisting force among the
opposition. Once they subjugated him, all dams before them would
collapse. The opposition, minus Imam Hussein (a.s.), would be easily
subdued.

Instantly Yazid wrote to the governor of the city of Medina, al-Walid
bin Utbah, to take the pledge of allegiance from the people, in general,
and from Imam Hussein (a.s.), in particular. The governor wasted no time
in carrying out the orders of his superior. He sent one of his retainers
for Imam Hussein (a.s.) late in the night. Imam Hussein (a.s.) realized
what the governor was up to. He got himself ready. Escorted by thirty
men from his family and followers, he went to the house of the governor.
He told them that if he called them they had to break into the house.

As soon as they were seated, the governor asked Imam Hussein (a.s.), to
give his pledge of allegiance. Imam Hussein (a.s.) suggested the matter
be delayed to a more suitable time. It would better if it was with the
people of Medina. He said: "...The likes of me do not give their pledge
of allegiance secretly. When you call the people to give their pledge,
call us with them. So it will be one call."(38)

Imam Hussein (a.s.) wanted the delay to prepare himself for the
inevitable conflict. He would not like to raise the anger of the local
authorities prematurely. But Marwan bin al-Hakam, who was also present,
urged the governor to forcibly take the pledge of allegiance from Imam
Hussein (a.s.). Should he refuse to yield, Marwan went on, the governor
had to kill him. Otherwise, the matter would get out of al-Walid and his
master's hands. But Imam Hussein (a.s.) acted decisively and
determinedly. He was tough with Marwan and warned him. A violent
skirmish between the two parties ensued. The companions of Imam Hussein
(a.s.) broke into the house and returned him to his house.(39)

That was the starting point of the rejection of the policy of treachery
and oppression. Imam Hussein (a.s.) made up him mind to shoulder his
responsibility, to challenge the oppressors, as he was the legitimate
Imam of the ummah, and the righteous leader entrusted with the faith.

He went to the tomb of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), his grandfather
and offered prayer beside it. Then he raised his hands in prayer:

"O Allah! This is the grave of your Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.), and I am
the son of the daughter of your Prophet. You know what I am going
through. O Allah! I love good and detest evil. I beseech You, O! The
Lord of glory and honor, and adjure You by this grave and its contents,
to choose for me whatever pleases You and Your."(40)

And so Imam Hussein (a.s.) made a covenant with Allah that he would
defend the faith no matter how high the price was, as long as that would
please Allah.

In the prayer he said beside the tomb of the Prophet (s.a.w.), Imam
Hussein (a.s.) presents himself as a soldier, whose self was totally
molted at the threshold of the faith. He could not separate his self
from the faith. His life would only express itself through the faith.
Imam Hussein (a.s.) hastened to gather the members of his family and the
loyal among his companions. He told them about his decision to move to
Mecca, the sanctuary of Allah.

The objectors increased in number. They pressed him to change his
course for fear of being killed. Still others called him to yield. They
were helpless and thought he would kill himself in vain.

Imam Hussein (a.s.) was too determined to back down. He announced the
first communique of his uprising in the form of a will he wrote to his
brother, Muhammad bin al-Hanafiyyah:

"...and I am not taking up arms in order to make merry, or be ecstatic
over what I possess. I am ready to fight for the sole goal of seeking
reform of the ummah of my grandfather, the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.). I
want to enjoin good and forbid evil and guide the affairs of the people
as my grandfather, and my father, Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.), were doing.
Whoever justly accepts my call, Allah is the Source and Sustainer of
justice, but whoever turns my offer down, I will opt for patience, till
Allah judges between me and these people, and He is the best of
judges."(41)

His first official communique of his uprising pointed to the scope of
deviation which had set in, when en joining good vanished and forbidding
evil ceased. In the same manner, the statement covered the key goals and
motives of the uprising in so few words.

The caravan of Imam Hussein (a.s.) marched towards Mecca. The name of
Allah was on his tongue, and his heart was filled with love of Allah.
Upon entering Mecca, he recited the glorious verse:

"And when he turned his face towards Madyan, he said: Maybe my Lord
will guide me in the right path." Holy Qur'an (28:22)

He stayed at the house of al-Abdul-Muttalib. Throngs of the faithful
gathered to welcome him.(42)

Imam Hussein (a.s.) monitored the reactions of the Muslims throughout
the Islamic provinces towards the ascension of Yazid to the office of
caliphate. Kufa, the capital of Iraq, was witnessing a revolutionary
movement and a remarkable political shake-up. After long periods of
terror and suppression the opposition forces stirred seeing it the
golden chance to free themselves from the yoke of the tyrants. At the
head of these revolutionaries were the followers of the Ahlul-Bait
(a.s.).

They held an emergency meeting to discuss the mounting tension in Kufa
and the responsibility they should take vis-a-vis the change in the
government, after Yazid bin Mu'awiyah had taken the affairs of the ummah
into his own hands. Sulaiman bin Sird al-Khuza'i, at whose house the
meeting was held, delivered a speech.

He informed the gathering of Imam Hussein' s (a.s.) announcement of his
opposition to Yazid and that he rejected him as a legitimate caliph. He
told them that Imam Hussein (a.s.) was in Mecca, and since they were his
followers and helpers they had to do something. If they were able to
support and back him, sparing no effort in doing that, they had to
inform him of their position. But were they unable to live up to their
principles, it would be most incorrect to write to him and then fail him
when the best comes to the worst.

The Shi'ites who were present at the meeting declared their full
support to the Imam. They would defend him by any means available. "We
fight his enemy, and kill ourselves defending him,"(43) they vowed.

After reaching a consensus on this point, the leading men of Kufa wrote
a letter in which they declared their total and final rejection of the
Ummayyad rule and that they knew no substitute for Imam Hussein (a.s.).
Then letters poured in from Kufa carrying the urgent call of the Kufans
for Imam Hussein (a.s.) to join them, to take office as the caliphate
and Imam of the Muslims. The wave of support for Imam Hussein (a.s.) was
so massive that a list of the tribes waiting for his arrival, totalling
100,000 fighters, was prepared.(44)

After studying these letters, Imam Hussein (a.s.) concluded that it was
necessary to send an envoy to Kufa authorized to take the pledge of
allegiance from the people of Iraq, on his behalf, and campaign for the
sake of rallying the people around Ahlul-Bait (a.s.), represented at the
time by Imam Hussein (a.s.).

Imam Hussein chose his cousin, Muslim bin Aqeel, for this mission. The
man was known for his piety, courage, and high qualifications in thought
and leadership. He would be able to steer the wave of enthusiasm for the
interest of the faith.

With him, Imam Hussein (a.s.) dispatched a special letter to the people
there, and particularly their chiefs. He explained the qualifications of
his envoy, and the nature of his mission. He was to closely examine the
situation and describe precisely what was going on there.

Following is the full text of the letter:

"In the Name of Allah, the Beneficient, the Merciful...

From Hussein bin Ali,

To the leaders of the believers and the Muslims.

Hani and Sa'id have brought me your letters; they are the last two of
your messengers who have come to me. I have understood everything which
you have described and mentioned.

The essential statement of the majority of you is: 'We have no Imam.
Therefore come; through you, may Allah unite us under truth and
guidance'. I am sending you my brother, Muslim bin Aqeel, who is my
cousin and trustworthy representative from my house. I ordered him to
write to me about your conditions, affairs and views. If he writes to me
that the opinion of your leaders and of the men of wisdom and merit
among you is united in the same way as the messengers who have come to
me have described, and as I have read in your letters, I will come to
you at once, Allah willing. By my life, what is the Imam except one who
professes the religion of truth, and one who dedicates himself to the
essence of Allah, and Salam."(45)

Kufa welcomed Muslim as any loyal and dutiful following would. The
pledge of allegiance was taken for Imam Hussein (a.s.). Ibn Aqeel, by
now, was convinced that the change was on behalf of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.)
and the Message of Allah, the Exalted. It was by no means something
common and could not be ignored. It was a truth, tangible and
subjective. They should quickly deal with the situation before something
happens and spoils the situation.

And so Muslim, may Allah be pleased with him, saw it fit to dispatch an
account to Imam Hussein (a.s.) about the direction of the de facto
situation. In his account he called him to come to Kufa. He wrote:

"Certainly, the man sent by a caravan in a desert to explore the way
ahead of it will never lie to those who had sent him. All the people of
Kufa are with you. Eighteen thousand of them have given their pledge of
allegiance to me. So make haste and come to us as soon as you read this
letter of mine. And peace and the blessings of Allah be on you."(46)

In the meantime, Imam Hussein (a.s.) thought it would be wise to
contact the chiefs of Basra and discuss with them his decision to oppose
deviation and in justice. He wrote to them. Yazid bin Mas'ood sent a
letter in which people spoke volumes for the loyalty of the tribes of
Tamim and Bani-Sa'd to AhlulBait (a.s.). Quite painfully and
regrettably, his letter arrived too late.

Al-Nahshali's troops were late to arrive. The man was so shocked at the
news of the martyrdom of Imam Hussein (a.s.) that he died. He had missed
the opportunity to help the grandson of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.).


**Kufans' Regression**

At first, the authorities of the Ummayyad party were panic stricken at
the great success achieved by the faith and its real representative,
Imam Hussein bin Ali (a.s.). They were paralysed in front of the massive
wave of loyalty and obedience to the Imam (a.s.). The local Ummayyad
administration, headed by al-Nu'man bin Basheer, felt inept and helpless
vis-a-vis the changing and unstable situation. The odds, they sensed,
were against them.

Al-Nu'man, as if what was going on in Kufa did not concern him,
proclaimed a policy of non-interference. He said: "Certainly, I will not
fight except the one who fights me. I will not attack anyone except the
one who attacks me. Nor will I arrest anyone for the slightest
suspicion..."(47)

The top leaders of the Ummayyad party held a meeting, and discussed
what would be their next step. They decided to provide Yazid bin
Mu'awiyah with the latest news, and the actual situation in the city of
Mecca.

Umar bin S'ad, Umarah bin Aqabah al-Umawi, and Abdullah bin Muslim
wrote a letter to their master in Syria telling him of all the
successive developments in Kufa. Yazid was flustered at the news. His
special advisor suggested that Ubaidullah bin Ziyad replace al-Nu'man
bin al-Basheer as the governor of Kufa. Ibn Ziyad was murderous, the
emptiness of his heart of such human emotions as mercy or compassion and
his black hatred of the household of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.)
made him a prime candidate for the job.

Ibn Ziyad received the decree issued by Yazid appointing him the new
governor of Kufa. Installing his brother in his place in Basra, he
hurriedly headed for Kufa leading a 500-strong division from the
Ummayyad army.

Accompanying him were also certain eminent chiefs of Basra who had
influence over the Kufans due to their blood relations. Ibn Ziyad
resorted to both military tactics and diplomatic tricks and schemes.
Disguised, he preceeded his soldiers in entering Kufa. He went into the
governor's palace and informed al-Nu'man bin Basheer that he was
relieved of his post.

Then he gathered the people, and addressed them. He promised those who
sided with the Ummayyads handsome rewards. He threatened the opponents
of the Ummayyad dynasty with harsh punishments, i.e. death. He said:

"Certainly, Yazid the commander of the faithful has appointed me as the
governor of your city, (the protector of) your borders, and put me in
charge of the treasury. He ordered me to restore the rights of the
wronged among you, give out money to the deprived among you, and to be
kind to the listening obedient among you, like a doting father. I will
use the whip and the sword against those who abandon my commands and
oppose my appointment. So, let one guard oneself..."(48)

Under coercion, he ordered the tribal chiefs to present lists of the
names of those who overstepped the Ummayyad redline. Otherwise, they
would be crucified at the doors of their houses.

An atmosphere of heavy gloom set in on the city. The scales of power
tipped in favor of Yazid. The Shi'ite leaders and the loyalists to Imam
Hussein (a.s.) were rounded up.

Fear spread its wings, and despair descended on the hearts of the
people. Events took so vicious a turn that the tribes began to prevent
their chiefs from opposing the Ummayyads in any form. Mothers locked up
their children lest they help Muslim bin Aqeel. Those who were after
wealth hastened to the governor's mansion, happy with the abundant money
Ibn Ziyad lavsished on them. Practically, the society of Kufa was torn
into small shreds.

The loyalists to the call of Islam, who were still free, adopted
secrecy in their contacts with Muslim. He ordered them so, under the
pressure of the new conditions.

Call to pure Islam went underground. From his first headquarters, the
house of al- Mukhtar bin Abi-Ubaidah, where he had received the pledge
of allegience from the people, Muslim moved to the house of Hani' bin
Urwah, as the fittest place, given the changing situation. Hani was
faithful to Islam, and he had a long-standing reputation for being loyal
to the Ahlul Bait (a.s.) since the time of the Commander of the
Faithful, Imam Ali (a.s.). In Kufa, he was an illustrious man, enjoying
a high social status, and leading a large tribe with many allies and
subtribes.

Ibn Ziyad was obsessed with one thought. He wanted to know the secret
place where Muslim hid himself. Fingers of suspicion pointed to Hani's
house because of being an established local leader, and due to the fact
that he was the invincible fort sheltering the Husseini call in Kufa.
Yazid and his agents were aware of this.

The spies of the Ummayyad's local terrorist authorities lost no time in
spreading throughout the city. One of them, who went by the name of
"Ma'qal" stole into the house of Hani. He pretended to be loyal to Imam
Hussein (a.s.) and frequented the house. Being cunningly treacherous, he
realized that Muslim was in that very house.

So as to challenge Hani face to face, Ibn Ziyad worked feverishly to
discourage the followers of Hani. He left no stone unturned to shatter
the great force Hani was relying on. He lavished promises of good jobs
on the people along with threats, tricks and lies. The plan paid off.
Some eminent men were won over. Finally an attempt was made to arrest
Hani through a devilish plan.

The arrest of Hani meant a total paralysis of the Husseini movement,
and his killing would lead to the putting down of the revolution in the
city of Kufa.

Muslim was well aware of the critical situation. He had to act quickly
to save what he could, or he might have the same destiny Hani, the fort
and solid basis of the revolution in Kufa, had. He had to create a
massive political and social turmoil, whose repercussions would echo
throughout history.

Shortly after the news of the arrest of Hani bin Urwah by the local
authorities, Muslim began his military preparations. He laid siege to
the government building. Ibn Ziyad and his supporters closed the gates
of the mansion, finding a good refuge inside it. Battalions took their
positions. The Ummayyad rule came to the verge of collapse.

The army led by Muslim, may Allah be pleased with him, historians say,
was great both in equipment and number. It was divided into divisions,
battalions and detachments.(49) But, Ibn Ziyad had made use of every
possible means of trickery to get out of the crisis. He floated rumors,
through his spies and followers, that a tremendous Ummayyad army was at
the threshold of Kufa. Rumors were soon on every lip. Gossip increased
and terror ruled. Women prevented their sons from joining Muslim, and
those who already were with him were forced to quit. Men discouraged
their sons and brothers from taking part in the military actions.(50)

The situation further deteriorated. Many people left Muslim's army, and
panic prevailed. Inducement and discouragement of the opponents
succeeded. Muslim, eventually, was left with a few loyalists who engaged
the Ummayyads in street fighting. They made the neigborhood of "Kinda"
their base. Muslim fought in a rarely seen reckless and courageous way.
After all bad deserted him or been killed he fought the Ummayyad police
alone. Finally he was overcome and promised safety. When he was brought
before Ziyad he refused to honor the promise of safety given by the
police and ordered Muslim to be executed. After dictating his last will,
Muslim was taken to the torrents of the palace and thrown down. Later he
was beheaded. His head, along with the head of Hani were sent to Yazid
in Syria.

The two pillars of the Husseini movement in Kufa were torn down. The
movement was lost by the martyrdom of Muslim and Hani, two of its
greatest field leaders in Iraq. Kufa was humiliated with defeat and the
darkness of terror descended on it. The tyrants seized control of the
lives of the people.


