Fasting - Education and Social Reform
=====================================

All obligatory acts ordained by Allah, the Exalted such as Fasting,
Prayer, Hajj (pilgrimage) Zakat (poor-tax) etc., are not mere rituals as
some are bound to misinterpret, but are an elaborate form of spiritual,
psychological, physical and social education. Besides being a form of
worship and a means by which the Muslim displays his submission to his
Creator, they play a vital role in reforming and developing the soul and
personality of an individual which in turn positively affects the
society as an integrated whole.

The purpose behind fasting was not just to prevent eating, drinking and
sexual intercourse during the prescribed hours but to i~frain from all
acts injurious to one's self and fellow humans so as to help build a
virtuous and progressive society. A narration from the Prophet says:
"The easiest duty enjoined by Allah on a fasting person is to forego
food and drink. " \* Thus, fasting has two evolutionary aims. The first
is to protect a person from all forbidden acts such as backbiting,
calumny, envy, lying, vain discourses and the like. And the second is to
encourage and enhance the

------------------------------------------------------------
\* ibid
\* AI-Hur aI-Amili. Wasa El ash-S h:'a, vol. 4. ,4bwab ,4dab as-Sawm.

moral and spiritual level by such recommended deeds as reciting the
Holy Qur'an, giving alms, meditating on one's past life and a more
righteous future course, remembering Allah's favours and greatness,
helping fellow-humans and the doing of various other good that benefits
the self and the society.

Fasting, therefore is an institution designed for educating the soul
and casting it in an Islamic evolutionary mould. There are numerous
Hadiths which guide a fasting Muslim towards divine bliss. Imam Ali ibn
Abi-Talib (a.s.), quoting his cousin the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), says:

"Whoever fasts during the month of Ramadhan out of faith and seeking
Allah's pleasure and guards his ears, eyes and tongue from harming
people, Allah will accept his fasting, forgive his past sins...,,\*

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) relates the Prophet's advice to Jabir ibn
Abdullah:

"o Jabir, whoever, fasts the days of Ratnadh an, stands for prayers in
parts of its nights, guards his/her sexual desires, reins in his/her
tongue, lowers his/her gaze and injures, not the feelings of others,
will become free of sins as on the day he/she was born." \*

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.), on the authority of his illustrious
forefathers, quotes his noble ancestor Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) as
follows: "If a fasting person when abused, replies peace be upon you I
will not abuse as you do, the Lord, the Exalted and Most High, says, By
fasting, My servant has saved himself from the evil of My (other)
servant, I grant him refuge against the fire." \*

--------------------------------------
\* Ahmad i bn Han bal and the compilers of Sunan have narrated the
above with slight difference.
\* Sheikh Saduq. Thawab aL-AmaL p. 88.
\* aI-Kafi. a1-Kulayni.

".. Once the Prophet heard a fasting woman abusing her maidservant. He
ordered some food and told her to eat'. lam fasting', she said. He
replied Can you be considered fasting when you have just abused your
maid. (Beware) Fasting does not mean only to abstain from(mere)eating
and drinking'." \* What follows is an advice from Imam Jafar as-Sadiq
(a.s.) to a fasting Muslim:

"When you fast, guard your hearing and sight against the forbidden, and
your limbs and all other organs from the vile. Do not rm'e at or injure
a sen'ant. Be dignified as a fasting person should, and keep silent and
calm, except when remembering Allah. Do not regard your fasting day as
an ordinary day and refrain from intercourse, kissing and loud laughter,
because Allah dislikes that." \* The Prophet says:

"Whoever backbites his Muslim brothers, his fasting will be invalid\*
and his ablution null. Should he die it, such a state, he will die like
the one who decreed lawful what Allah has forbidden." \*

Such, therefore, are the lofty ethics, fasting persons are exhorted to
observe, as Ramadhan is a month for worship and for reforming one's
self. As is clear the objectives of the great reformative duty called
fasting cannot be fulfilled except by adhering to these lofty morals and
ethics. If not, the act will turn out to be an exercise in futility with
the fasting person gaining nothing except the pangs of hunger and
thirst.

------------------------------------------------------
\* ibid.
\* Wasa'il ash-Shia. al-Hur al-AmiIi.
\* Backbiting does not make the fast void but since it is a sin it
negates the re)Iard a fasting person deserves.
\* Waco ii asjz-Shi'a al-Hur al-,4mili. vol. 4, ,4bwab ,ldab cs-Sawm.

Islam strives to reform both the individual and the society, and the
starting point for this healthy transformation is the human soul. If the
human soul reaches perfection and moulds itself according to the dynamic
principles of Islam, then society will be reformed accordingly. How
wonderfully the Glorious Qur'an confirms this fact:

"â€¦Surely Allah does not change the condition of a people until they
change their own condition;..." Holy Qur'an (13 :11)

Ramadhan, the month of Allah affords us this chance for meditation and
social reform. It is for us to seize this wonderful opportunity to
repent, reflect over our past deeds, seek the Almighty's forgiveness and
strive towards perfection, in morals and behaviour. Fasting has
remarkable benefits. It not only refines an individual's conduct by
instilling virtue, but also has similar impacts on the interest of the
Islamic society as a whole. Because once a group of individuals acquires
honesty, integrity, intellect and other lofty morals, their desire for
reform and to refrain from all things perverse positively affects the
march of the society.

Islam looks at the human being from two angles; as an independent
individual, and as a part of a society affecting society and being
influenced by it in turn. Consequently, all the rules, laws,
regulations, morals and ethics conveyed through the message of Islam
deal with the human being both as an independent entity and as part of
an integrated whole.

Such being the case, these moral, social, economic and devotional
aspects will certainly have political consequences as well because an
individual's daily activities are interrelated and effect each other.

Thus, fasting could without doubt be considered as a great educational
experience, because faith in Allah and the Day of Judgement has a
profound influence not only on devotional and moral aspects but also in
the economic and political spheres. So great is the reciprocal dynamism
of these factors that if sincerely observed they hold the key to the
perfection, bliss and harmony of both the individual and the society.

Narratives reaching us from Prophet Muhammad's (s.a.w.) Ahl-ul-Bait,
wonderfully explain these facts.

How beautifully the eighth Imam of the Prophet's pro.geny All ibn Musa
ar-Ridha (a.s.) expounds the philosophy of fasting,as a blessing from
the Almighty, so that one becomes aware of the hardships of the poor and
the needy and quite naturally feels obliged to pay out of what Allah has
granted us. Moreover, he says. that by realizing the pangs of hunger and
thirst one becomes aware of the Day of Resurrection when people will
have to stand for timeless hours waiting their turn to be judged. In
short, concludes the Imam, fasting builds up personality because the
restraint over desires helps us acquire the virtues of modesty, self-
control, humbleness of character, hope, kindness, generosity,
forbearance etc.. Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) has been quoted as
saying:

"Allah made fasting incumbent to make equity between the rich and the
poor. A rich man does not feel the pains of hunger to have mercy for the
poor, since he is able to obtain whatever he likes. (By enjoining
fasting) Allah wanted to put His creatures on an equal footing by making
the rich taste the pain of hunger, so that he may pity the weak and have
mercy on the hungry..." \*

Therefore, fasting is an all-ecompassing education whose social,
spiritual, hygienic, economic and various other dimensiom which if
properly observed guarantee blissful harmony for the human race.


**Fasting - Key To a Good Health**

Fasting also has its advantages from the point of view of health and
hygiene. Islam wants a Muslim to be healthy, clean, alert, agile and
energetic.

"Fast to be heaIthyy" had said the Prophet. And physicians today
acknowledge the many benefits of fasting that ensure health and the
----------------------------------------------
\* TVasa'iI aS/i-Shju. aI-Hur aI-Amili.

soundness of one's body and mind. Some of these positive points have a
direct influence on psychology and physique of the fasting individual.
Fasting has been found to be an effective treatment for psychological
and emotional disorders. It helps a person to firm up his will,
cultivate and refine his taste and manners, strengthen his conviction of
doing good, avoid controversy, petulance and rashness, which all
contribute towards a sane and healthy personality. Besides nurturing
resistance and ability to face hardships and endurance, fasting reflects
on outward physical appearance by cutting out gluttony and getting rid
of excess fat.

The benefits of fasting on health do not stop there but are
instrumental in alleviating a number of physical diseases, including
those of the digestive systems, such as chronic stomach ache,
inflammation of the colon, liver diseases, indigestion, and conditions
such as obesity, arteriosclerosis, high blood pressure, asthma,
diphtheria and many other maladies.

A Swiss physician Dr. Barsilus noted that: The advantages of hunger as
a remedy exceed those ingesting medicine several times. As readers are
well aware, several physicians advise patients to skip meals, sometimes
for a few days, before prescribing them a controlled diet.

Generally speaking, fasting hastens the destruction of the decaying
tissues of the body by means of hunger, and then builds new tissues
through nutrition. This is why some scientists suggest that fasting
should be regarded as an effective means of restoring youthfulness and
longevity. However, Islam exempts from fasting sick and old people whose
health is bound to deter.

But fasting should have its regulations too, and not simply the
unorderly skipping of meals, that is bound to harm health and stamina,
rather than improving them. Here again Islam provides the answer, and in
order to realize the benefits of fasting it recommends the late midnight
meals called Sohour (before the formal start of a fast) and the breaking
of the fast at the time prescribed. Of course to ensure good health one
should abstain

from gluttony after breaking fast. \*


**REPENTANCE**

How kind is Allah the Exalted Whose mercy to His creatures knows no
limits. The All-forgiving has opened to us the gates of repentance,
granting us the chance to return to His Grace, but it is we who stand to
blame for our failure to avail forgiveness, because of our blind
obstinacy. "Say: 0 my servants! who haie acted extravagantly against
their own souls, do not despair of the mercy of Allah; surely Allah
forgives the faults altogether; surely He is AU-forgiving,
All-merciful." Holy Qur'an (39: 53)

Allah the Exalted knows that the human beings, due to their earthly
constitution, are likely to sin and err. They, therefore, are in need of
an opportunity enabling them to repent and reform themselves, and hence
the chance of repentance in the month of Ramadhan. Divine forgiveness is
an opportunity for reform. Repentance is a process of transformation in
the manner of life and nature of behaviourl and intellectual changes. It
is also the outcome of a new resolution undertaken by the repentant for
a fresh way of life to which he decides to adhere. The repentant of his
sins as such is as if he had committed no sins at all.

Part of the divine favours to mankind is to keep the doors of
forgiveness and mercy always open. Ramad/zan is the month of pardon and
forgiveness, the season for praying and remembering the Almighty's
favours. It is for us to avail this wonderful opportunity of repentance
and ask forgiveness for all faults in sincerity, with an intention not
to repeat them again. We should allow it to be a time of self-criticism
and self-reproach, so that one may begin a new course, ushering in a
true change in soul and thought, through one's deeds of faith during
this period. This month-long opportunity to lead an Islamic way of life
will enable one to observe Allah's commandments and adhere to the
straight path of righteousness and bliss.

The month of Ramadhan creates an atmosphere of congregational
-------------------------------------------------
\* Medicine in the Glorious Qur'an. Dr. .lbdul-l-Iatnid Diyab and Dr.

worship, in which all Muslims feel they are living a new life and
following a new direction. This stimulates a psychological state which
helps them to repent, seek forgiveness and gain the blessings of the
Almighty. In the process they witness a popular advancing towards Allah,
while disdaining those who turn away from His straight path and His
pleasure.

The opposite of these are those whose hearts are closed against the
light of mercy, and their souls are irresponsive to the call of
repentance. They do not even realize their own mistake when they see
that collective procession moving towards Allah, the Exalted. They
disregard all those reminders during the month of Ramadhan such as the
obligation of fasting, the recommended reciting of the Qur'an, the
gathering for invocation and preaching, and other rituals observing the
sanctity of this montb. The Prophet described people who are unaffected
by all this and have hearts full of cruelty, obstinacy and misery as:

"... indeed, miserable is the one who is deprived of Allah s
forgiveness during this great month..." \*


