The Psychological Motives For Worship
=====================================

The concept of servitude and submission to Allah the Exalted in man's
soul is founded on a psychological bases, which enlivens the idea of
servitude and grants it vitality and a spiritual and conscious force
that urges man to cling to Allah and be connected to Him.

These psychological roots and the resultant deep inner feelings, are:

**1.LOVE AND EAGERNESS**

When love of Allah occupies man's mind and heart, and when it interacts
with his feelings and emotions, filling his soul and conscience, it
becomes devotion, a way of life, which affects the entirety of his
behaviour. Its spirit is reflected in all his activities and emotions.
Thus,

[ 17 ]

his servitude to Allah is ingrained in his soul on the basis of love
and pure eagerness for his God, in Whom he discerns every Â· loveable
attribute; nay, more; he sees in Him the infinite perfection and the
ultimate goal.

Consequently, this love and eagerness towards Allah continually urges
him - in the direction of his Lord, and restlessly pushes him to do
whatever may bring him nearer to Him, and to try whatever may attract
His approval.

By enjoying such a love, and living in this state of eagerness, man
feels as if he were imbibing the most delicious pleasures of life, at
the highest stages of bliss, which takes him still nearer to the
proximity of his Creator, with utmost love and longing. The ways of
expressing worship practiced by man through praying, fasting, fighting
for the sake of Allah, invocation, etc. cannot have their full meaning
penetrate in the human soul, without its first feeling a pure love and
longing for Allah.

This is why the believer carries in his soul and mind the message of
servitude to Allah (religion), speaks about it, is proud of it, and
sacrifices for it all his wealth, comfort, himself and his kinsmen;
because all these cannot be compared with the love for his Lord.

This is very expressively, though briefly, described in the Qur'an:

"0 you who believe! Should any among you turns back from his religion,
Allah will soon raise a people whom He loves and who love Him..." Holy
Qur'an (5:54)

"And those who believe, their love of Allah be more intensely..." Holy
Qur'an (2:165)

In the invocation of the great Prophet (s.a.w.), we find a genuine
expression of the fountains of divine love and longing. He says: "0 God,
grant me to love You, to love who loves You, and love the one who brings
me nearer to loving You. Let Your love be more dear to me than a drink
of cold water. 2

Here is Hussain bin Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.), the grandson of Prophet
(s.a.w.) who dips from the fountain of divine love, and illustrating its
sweet taste, proclaims the drinker would not like to turn to any other
than it: "It was You Who wiped away the others from the hearts of Your
lovers, so as to love no one save You and to take refuge with no one but
You .3 Imam Ja'far Al-Sadiq (a.s.) referred to the relation between the
lover and Allah, and its impression on his conduct

[ 18 ]

and feelings, saying: "The lover is the most sincere, the truest
speaker and the strictest keeper of his promise, to Allah. 4 But when
this glowing flame dies away in man's soul, and when this flowing
fountain dries up, man feels the dessication of life, the accumulation
of darkness in his being, the misery of his living. He wanders at random
in his worship, ambling aimlessly in the world of the astray, far from
Allah. If he, in this case, practices religious rites, such as saying
his prayers, fasting and other good deeds, they will be void of real
meaning and they spiritual contents that raise man to high degrees of
human progress and perfection.

**2. FEAR AND HOPE**

The other psychological drive which strengthens the feelings of
submission in man, is the attitude of being small and trivial before
Allah's greatness. He sees that he has no right to rebel and disobey.
This inner feeling; the notion of nothingness before Allah's greatness,
merges with emotions of fear and awe in the soul of the believer,
causing him to submit, surrender, and adhere to his Lord, lest his love
might be lost, and wrath and torment be sent down upon him.

Fear of losing the love and severing connection with Allah has its
positive effects on the soul of the believer, his hope, his continual
expectation, and despairing not of Allah's mercy. It also has tangible
results in enhansing the role of fear in controlling the balance of the
human soul and directing its movement towards Allah.

Thus, in this way, the feelings of the believer grow continually under
the shadow of hope and expectation of divine kindness, free from the
despair which closes in the face of man the doors of hope, preventing
him from reforming himself and changing his attitudes.

The dual drives fear and hope have strong psychological effects and are
a powerful moving force which stamps their mark on man's behaviour,
pushing him towards good, or dragging him towards evil.

----------------------------------------
2-JamiAl-Sa'adat, Vol.3, P.150.
3-ibid. P.152.
4- bid, p. 154.

[ 19 ]

This is because fear and hope form in the depths of the human soul, the
two expressions of a balanced equation which dictate the sum total of
human motives and conduct.

Imam Muhammed Al-Baqir (a.s.) explained the effect of these two drives
on the believer's soul, and the psychological relation between them. He
said:

"There is no believing servant without having in his heart two lights:
the light of fear and the light of hope; if he weighed the one, it would
not seem to be heavier than the other. Allah had joined them when He
described those whom He praised, saying: (They)cry to their Lord in fear
and hope.." 5

Imam Al-Sadiq (a.s.) elaborated on this concept and illuminated it by
saying:

"Fear is the watcher over the heart, and hope is the intercessor for
the soul. Whoever knows Allah, fears Him, and to Him he places his hope,
as these are the two wings of faith by which the righteous servant
ascends to Allah."6

From this brief presentation of the psychological motivation inherently
compelling man to true servitude, we understand that love, longing, fear
and hope are the psychic drives interacting in the depths of the soul
and urging man to be connected with Allah, and to try through all
available means including conduct, thought, emotions and activity, to
obtain Allah's pleasure, and win His reward for purely and sincerely
worshipping Him.


