Familiarity With The Life of The Founder of Wahhabism
=====================================================

Wahhabism is ascribed unto Shaykh Muhammad*,* the son of ’Abd al-Wahhab
of Najd. This ascription has been derived from the name of his father
’Abd al-Wahhab. And as some scholars put it, the reason why this creed
has not been attributed to Shaykh Muhammad himself and has not been
called Muhammadiyyah is for fear lest the followers of this creed would
find a kind of association with the name of the Holy Prophet (s)[^1] and
would misuse this ascription. Shaykh Muhammad was born in 1115 A.H. in
the city of ‘Uyayna which was located in Najd. His father was a judge in
this city.

Ever since his childhood, Shaykh Muhammad had a great liking for the
study of books on *tafsir* (***Qur’anic interpretation***), *hadith*
(***tradition***), and *aqa’id* (principles of beliefs). He learned the
Hanbali jurisprudence from his father who was one of the Hanbali
scholars. From the bloom of youth, he regarded as indecent many of the
religious doings of the people of Najd. After going on a pilgrimage to
the house of Allah and performing its rites, he headed for Medina where
he rejected the resorting of the people to the Holy Prophet (s) near his
shrine. He then returned to Najd, and from there he went to Basrah with
the aim of later leaving Basrah for Damascus. He spent some time in
Basrah and embarked on opposing many doings of the people.

The people of Basrah, however, cast him out of their city. While on his
way from Basrah to the city of al-Zubayr, he was about to perish due to
the intensity of the heat, thirst, and toll of walking in the desert.
But a man from al-Zubayr, seeing the Shaykh clad like the clergy,
endeavoured to save him. He gave the Shaykh a gulp of water, set him on
a mount, and took him to the city of al-Zubayr. The Shaykh wanted to
travel from al-Zubayr to Damascus, but as he did not have sufficient
provisions and could not afford the expenses of the journey, he changed
his destination and headed for the city of al-‘Ahsa. From there, he
decided to go to Huraymala*,* one of the cities of Najd.

At this time which was the year 1139 AH, his father ’Abd al-Wahhab had
been transferred from ‘Uyayna to Huraymala. Shaykh Muhammad accompanied
his father and learned (the material in) some books from his father. He
set out on rejecting the beliefs of the people of Najd. For this reason,
altercation and debates ensued between him and his father. In like
manner, serious and violent disputes erupted between him and the people
of Najd. This matter lasted several years until his father Shaykh ‘Abd
al-Wahhab passed away in the year 1153.[^2]

After the demise of his father, Shaykh Muhammad embarked on expressing
his own beliefs and rejecting part of the religious acts of the people.
A group of the people of Huraymala followed him and his work won fame.
He departed from Huraymala for the city of ‘Uyayna. At that time,
‘Uthman ibn Hamd was the head of ‘Uyayna. ‘Uthman received the Shaykh,
honoured him and made the decision to assist him. In return, Shaykh
Muhammad also expressed hope that all the people of Najd would obey
‘Uthman ibn Hamd. The news of Shaykh Muhammad's call and doings reached
the ruler of al-‘Ahsa*.* He wrote a letter to ‘Uthman. The consequence
of this letter was that ‘Uthman summoned the Shaykh and dismissed him.
Shaykh Muhammad replied that if you help me, you will become the leader
of the entire Najd. ‘Uthman, however, avoided him and cast him out of
the city of ‘Uyayna.

In the year 1160, after being expelled from ‘Uyayna, Shaykh Muhammad
headed for al-Dar’iyya, one of the renowned cities of Najd. At that
time, Muhammad ibn Sa’ud *(*the ancestor of Aal Sa’ud*)* was the emir of
al-Dar’iyya; He went to see the Shaykh and gave him tidings of glory and
goodness. The Shaykh too gave him tidings of power and domination over
all the cities of Najd. And in this way, the relationship between Shaykh
Muhammad and al-Sa’ud commenced.[^3]

At the time when Shaykh Muhammad went to al-Dar’iyya and made an
agreement with Muhammad ibn Sa’ud, the people of al-Dar’iyya lived in
utmost destitution and need.

Relating from (‘Uthman) Ibn Bishr al-Najdi*,* al-Alusi notes that:

“I (Ibn Bishr) initially witnessed the poverty of the people of
al-Dar’iyya. I had seen that city at the time of Sa’ud*,* when its
people had enjoyed enormous wealth, their weapons were decorated with
gold and silver and they mounted thoroughbred horses. They wore
sumptuous clothes and were well provided with all the means of
prosperity, so much so that it is beyond the scope of expression.

One day in a bazaar in al-Dar’iyya, I saw men on one side and women on
the other. In the bazaar, there was a huge amount of gold, silver, and
weapons and a large number of camels, sheep, horses, expensive clothes,
and much meat, wheat, and other edibles, so much so that they could not
be recounted. The bazaar extended as far as the eye could see. And I
could hear the call of the sellers and buyers, a sound which hummed like
the buzz of the bee. One (of them) would say, “I sold (my goods)”, and
the other (one) would say, ‘I bought (something)’.”[^4]

Of course, Ibn Bishr had not given an account as to how and from where
such an enormous wealth had been amassed. But the trend of history
indicates that it had been accumulated by attacking the Muslims of other
tribes and cities (on the charge of not accepting his beliefs) and by
plundering and taking as booty their properties. With regard to the war
booties which Shaykh Muhammad took (from the Muslims of that region),
his policy was to spend it in any way he desired. At times, he granted
unto only two or three people all the war booties which amounted to a
very large amount. No matter what the booties were, they were in the
possession of the Shaykh, and the Emir of Najd could have a share of the
booties on permission of the Shaykh.

One of the biggest flaws during the Shaykh's life was the fact that he
treated Muslims who did not follow his notorious beliefs as infidels
deserving to be fought against. He maintained no esteem for their life
or property.

In short, Muhammad ibn ’Abd al-Wahhab called (the people) to *tawhid*
(***monotheism***) but an erroneous *tawhid* which he created himself,
not the real *tawhid* promulgated by the Qur’an. Whoever adhered to it
would have immunity as far as his life and property were concerned, else
(the dissolution of) his life and property would, like that of the
infidels, be religiously lawful and permissible.

The wars which the Wahhabis waged in Najd and outside Najd such as in
Yemen, Hijaz, the vicinity of Syria and Iraq were on this basis. Any
city which they conquered by war and domination was religiously lawful
for them. If they could, they would establish it as their own
possession, otherwise they would be content with the booty they had
taken.[^5]

Those who adhered to his beliefs and hearkened to his call had to pledge
allegiance to him. If anyone rose up in rebellion, he was killed and his
property divided. On the basis of this policy, for instance, they killed
three hundred men from a village called al-Fusul, located in the city of
al-‘Ahsa and pillaged their property.[^6]

Shaykh Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab died in the year 1206.[^7] After the
demise of Shaykh Muhammad, his followers also pursued this policy and
kept alive his innovation and misguidance. For instance, in the year
1216, the Wahhabi emir Sa’ud mobilized an army of twenty thousand
warriors and made an inroad on the city of Karbala. At this time,
Karbala enjoyed utmost fame and grandeur. Iranian, Turkish, Arab, and
other pilgrims turned to it. After laying siege to the city, Sa’ud
finally entered it and brutally massacred the defenders and inhabitants
of the city.

The Wahhabi army created such a public disgrace in the city of Karbala
that it cannot be put to words. They killed over five thousand people.
After emir Sa’ud found leisure from the affairs of the war, he turned to
the treasures in the shrine of Imam Husayn (‘a). These treasures
consisted of various properties and precious objects. He took away and
plundered whatever he found there. After this episode, Karbala was
transformed into a situation that the poets composed elegies for it.[^8]

For over twelve years, the Wahhabis, every now and then, invaded and
looted the city of Karbala and its suburbs, as well as the city of Najaf
.The first of these invasions took place in the year 1216 as already
mentioned. According to the writings of all Shi’i writers, this invasion
took place on *Eid al-Ghadir* (**a festival celebrating the designation
by Prophet Muhammad (s) of Imam Ali's (‘a) as his successor**) the same
year.

The late ’Allama Sayyid Muhammad Jawwad al-‘Amili says:  
 “This part of the book *Miftah al-Kirama* was completed by the writer
after midnight of the ninth of the holy month of Ramadan 1225 AH while
in anxiety and apprehension, for the *‘Unayza* Arabs who are Wahhabi had
laid siege on the Najaf al-‘Ashraf and on the place where Imam Husayn
(‘a) had been martyred. They blocked the roads, plundered the pilgrims
to the shrine of Imam Husayn (‘a) who were returning to their own lands
after pilgrimage in the middle of Sha’ban, and massacred a large number
of them (mostly from among Iranian pilgrims). It is said that the number
of those killed (this time) probably amounted to one hundred and fifty,
some say less...”[^9]

The *tawhid* to which Shaykh Muhammad and his followers invited the
people in which they made permissible the seizure of the life and
property of whoever did not accept it, consisted of proving a location
for Allah the Almighty and regarding Him as having limbs and organs,
going by the apparent meaning of some of the Qur’anic verses and
traditions.

In this regard, Alusi has noted that the Wahhabis, adhering to Ibn
Taymiyya*,* confirm the traditions which express Allah's descent into
the heavens. They say that Allah descends into the heavens from the
empyrean and says:

“Is there a person who seeks forgiveness for his sins?”

In like manner, they also acknowledge that on the Judgment Day, Allah
comes to the place where mankind is gathered because He Himself has
said:

***“And your Lord comes and (also) all the angles in ranks (Fajr
89:22).”***

And Allah can draw near to any of His creations in any way He wants:

***“…and We are nearer to him than his life vein (Qaf 50:16)”***[^10]

As indicated in his book entitled *al-Radd ‘ala al-‘Akhna’i*, Ibn
Taymiyya regarded the traditions related to going on pilgrimage to the
shrine of the Holy Prophet (s) as forged. He has pointed out that it is
a grave mistake if a person thinks that the Holy Prophet's being is the
same as that of his lifetime even after his demise.

Shaykh Muhammad and his followers have expressed similar statements in a
more vehement manner.

The false beliefs and statements of the Wahhabis has prompted some
people, who have studied Islam from their viewpoint, to say that Islam
is a strict and rigid religion and that it is not suitable for all ages
(of human history).

An American scholar, Lothrop Stoddard, says:

“The Wahhabis have gone to extremes as far as prejudice is concerned. In
the meantime, a group of fault-finders have risen and, voicing out the
Wahhabi course of action, have said that the essence and nature of Islam
does not fit in with the demands of different times. Therefore it does
not have conformity with progress and evolution of the society and does
not follow changes brought about by time.”[^11]

From the time that Shaykh Muhammad ibn ’Abd al-Wahhab expressed his
views and called on the people to accept them, a large group of eminent
scholars voiced opposition to his beliefs. The first person to oppose
him severely was his father ‘Abd al-Wahhab and then his brother Sulayman
ibn ’Abd al-Wahhab*,* both of whom are deemed as Hanbali scholars.

Shaykh Sulayman compiled a book entitled *al-Sawa’iq al-ilahiyya fi
al-radd ‘ala al-Wahhabiyya* in which he refuted the views of his
brother.

[Ahmad] Zayni Dihlan says:

“The father of Shaykh Muhammad was a righteous man of learning. His
brother Shaykh Sulayman was also regarded as a scholar. Shaykh ’Abd
al-Wahhab and Shaykh Sulayman both reproached Shaykh Muhammad and warned
the people against him from the very beginning. That is to say, from the
time when Shaykh Muhammad was studying in Medina. It was through Shaykh
Muhammad's words and deeds that they had realized he cherished such a
claim.”[^12]

The Egyptian scholar ‘Abbas Mahmud al-‘Aqqad said:

“The greatest opponent of Shaykh Muhammad was his brother Shaykh
Sulayman, the writer of *al-Sawa’iq al-ilahiyya*, who did not
acknowledge for his brother a position of *ijtihad* and correct
understanding of the Qur’an and *sunnah*.”

Al-‘Aqqad has also noted that Shaykh Sulayman said the following while
severely refuting his brother's statements:

“Matters in which the Wahhabis have regarded as polytheism and unbelief,
and used as pretexts to make permissible the taking of life and property
of the Muslims existed at the time of the *A’imma* (***leaders***) of
Islam. But no one has heard or narrated from the Imams of Islam that
those who commit these acts are infidels or apostates. Neither have the
Imams issued order of Holy war (***jihad***) against them. Nor have they
called the cities of Muslims as the cities of polytheism and unbelief,
as you have.”[^13]

In conclusion, it must be noted that Shaykh Muhammad ibn ’Abd al-Wahhab
was not the originator and innovator of the beliefs of the Wahhabis. But
centuries before him, his ideas had been expressed in different forms by
people such as Ibn Taymiyya al-Harrani and his disciple Ibn al-Qayyim*.*
However it had not been turned into a new creed and had not found many
followers.

Refutations of the True Leader of The Wahhabis
----------------------------------------------

Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad ibn ‘Abd al-Halim, known as Ibn Taymiyya, was a
Hanbali scholar who died in 728 A.H. As he expressed views and beliefs
contrary to the views held by all Islamic sects, he was constantly
opposed by other scholars. Investigators are of the view that the
beliefs of Ibn Taymiyya later formed the principles of beliefs of the
Wahhabis.

When lbn Taymiyya made his views public and wrote books in this regard,
the scholars of Islam, headed by the Sunni scholars*’*, did two things
to preclude the prevalence of corruption:

A) They criticized his views and beliefs. In this regard, we will refer
to some books which have been written as a criticism to his beliefs:

1) *Shifa’ al-saqam fi ziyarat qabr khayr al-anam,:* by Taqi al-Din
al-Subki.

2) *Al-Durrat al-mudi’a fi al-radd ‘ala Ibn Taymiyya*, by Taqi al-Din
al-Subki.

3) *Al-Maqalat al-mardiyya*, compiled by the supreme judge (*qadi
al-qudat*) of the Maliki’s by the name of Taqi al-Din Abi ‘Abdillah
al-‘Akhna’i.

4) *Najm al-muhtadi wa rajm al-muqtadi*, by Fakhr bin Muhammad
al-Qurashi.

5) *Daf’ al-shubha*, by Taqi al-Din al-Hisni.

6) *Al-Tuhfat al-mukhtara fi al-radd ‘ala munkir al-ziyara*, by Taj
al-Din.

These are some of the refutations written on the beliefs of Ibn
Taymiyya. In this way, the baselessness of his views has become evident.

B) The Sunni scholars and *fuqaha* of his time have accused him of
immorality and have even at times excommunicated him and have revealed
his heresy.

When his views about going on pilgrimage to the shrine of the Holy
Prophet (s) were expressed in written form for the Supreme Judge of
Egypt, al-Badr ibn Jama’a, he wrote the following at the bottom of the
page:

“Going on pilgrimage to the (shrine of the) Holy Prophet (s) is a
virtue, the *Sunnah* and all scholars unanimously accept it. He who
regards going on pilgrimage to the shrine of the Holy Prophet (s) as
being religiously unlawful, must be rebuked by the scholars and must be
barred from making such statements. If these measures are not effective,
he must be imprisoned and exposed to the people, so that the latter
would not follow him.”

Not only did the supreme Judge of the Shafi’i school of thought express
such a view about him, but also the Supreme Judges of the Maliki and
Hanbali schools of thought in Egypt also confirmed his views in one way
or the other. You can refer to *Daf’ a-Shubha* written by Taqi al-Din
al-Hisni for more details.

Apart from this, his contemporary al-Dhahabi, who was a great writer of
the eighth century A.H. and who has written valuable works on history
and biography, has, in a letter to him, called him an equal match to
al-Hajjaj al-Thaqafi as far as spreading corruption and deviation are
concerned. (This letter has been disseminated by the writer of *Takmila
al-sayf al-saqil* on page 190 of his book, as recorded by the late
’Allama al-‘Amini in the fifth volume of *Al-Ghadir* on pages 87-89.
Those interested may refer to these books.)

When Ibn Taymiyya died in 728 AH in a prison in Damascus, his movement
underwent a decline. Though his renowned student Ibn al-Qayyim embarked
on propagating the views of his master but did not succeed. No trace of
such beliefs and ideas was left in later periods.

But when the son of ’Abd al-Wahhab came under the influence of the
beliefs of Ibn Taymiyya, and when al-Sa’ud supported him to strengthen
the foundations of their own rule over Najd, once again the hereditary
beliefs of Ibn Taymiyya spread in the minds of some of the people of
Najd like cancer in the body. In the wake of rigid bias, and
unfortunately in the name of *tawhid* (***monotheism***), a blood bath
was evoked under the title of *jihad* against the unbelievers and
polytheists. Tens of thousands of men, women, and children were
victimized by it.

Once again, a new sect sprang up in the Muslim community and regret
arose from that day the *haramayn sharifayn* (***the two holy
sanctuaries of Mecca and Medina***) were put under the possession of
this group as a result of compromise with Britain and the other
superpowers of that time. Also due to the dissolution of the Ottoman
Empire and division of the Arab countries among the superpowers, the
Wahhabis of Najd gained control over Mecca and Medina, as well as other
vestiges of Islam. They exerted utmost effort in annihilating the graves
of the *awliya Allah* and in transgressing in disrespect against the
progeny of the Prophet (s) by destroying their shrines and other
historical remains attributed to them.

In this regard, the Shi’a scholars, alongside the Sunni scholars as we
have mentioned above, made tremendous efforts to criticize the views of
’Abd al-Wahhab. Both groups commenced logical and scholarly *jihad* in
the best possible manner.

The first refutation which the Sunni scholars wrote on the views of
Muhammad ibn ’Abd al-Wahhab was the book entitled *Al-Sawa’iq
al-Ilahiyyah fi al-radd ‘ala al-Wahhabiyya* written by Shaykh Sulayman
ibn ’Abd al-Wahhab, the brother of Muhammad ibn ’Abd al-Wahhab.

The first book written by the Shi’a scholars to refute the views of
Muhammad ibn ’Abd al-Wahhab was *Manhaj al-Rashad,* penned by the
honourable late Shaykh Ja’far Kashif al-Ghita (died 1228 AH). He wrote
this book as a reply to a treatise which one of the Emirs from among
House of Sa’ud by the name of ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ibn Sa’ud had sent to him.
In that treatise, ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ibn Sa’ud had gathered all views of
Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab and tried to prove them from the Qur’an and
*Sunnah*. This book was published in 1343 A.H in Najaf. After the work
of this dignitary, numerous refutations and criticisms were written
against the movement Wahhabism in the region. Most of these books have
been published.

But now, the Wahhabi movements have increased as a result of the massive
wealth that the Sa’udis has amassed by way of selling oil. Every day and
month, the modern Abu Jahls and Abu Lahabs who have taken control of
Ka’ba, attack the Islamic sanctities in one way or the other. Each day,
the vestiges of Islam are ruined. That which has given impetus to their
movement is the secret signs and go-aheads given by their Western
masters who are appalled by the unity of the Muslims.

They fear this unity more than they fear international communism.
Therefore they have no choice, but to expedite the creation of religions
and faiths, so as to spoil a part of the money they pay to the Wahhabi
government for oil and ultimately to severely harm the unity of the
Muslims and engage them in branding one another as immoral and in
excommunicating one another.

In this book, we will try to reveal their beliefs and remove the
obscurities regarding Wahhabism. We will remove the dark veils of doubts
and hope to clarify the facts that the beliefs of all Muslims of the
world, originate from the Qur’an and the blessed *Sunnah* and that the
movements of Wahhabism and its deeds are against the teachings of the
Qur’an and the *Sunnah* of the Messenger of Allah (s).

[^1]: Farid Wajdi, Da’irat al-ma’arif al-qarn al-‘ishrin, vol. 10, p.
871, quoting from the magazine Al-Muqtataf, vol. 27, p. 893.

[^2]: Summarised from the Ta’rikh Najd of al-‘Alusi, pp. 111-113.

[^3]: An Ottoman writer in his book Ta’rikh Baghdad, p. 152, has noted
that the relationship between Shaykh Muhammad and Aal Sa’ud began in
another manner. But what has been stated here seems to be more correct

[^4]: al-‘Alusi, Ta’rikh Najd, pp. 117-118.

[^5]: Jazirat al-‘Arab fi al-qarn al-‘ishrin, p. 341.

[^6]: Ta’rikh al-mamlakat al-‘arabiyya al-Sa’udiyya, vol. 1, p. 51.

[^7]: There are other views concerning the date of birth of Muhammad b.
‘Abd al-Wahhab and that of his death.

[^8]: Dr. ‘Abd al-Jawwad al-Kalidar, Ta’rikh Karbala, pp. 172-174.

[^9]: Sayyid Muhammad Jawwad al-‘Amili, Miftah al-kiramah, vol. 7, p.
653.

[^10]: al-‘Alusi, Ta’rikh Najd, pp. 90-91; Ibn Taymiyya, al-Risala
al-\`aqida al–hamawiyya al-kubra, risalah no. 11 from his Majmu’
al-rasa’il al-kubra, pp. 429-432.

[^11]: Lothrop Stoddard, The New World of Islam, (London, 1922), vol. 1,
p. 264

[^12]: Ahmad Zayni Dihlan, al-Futuhat al-Islamiyya, vol. 2, p. 357

[^13]: Al-‘Islam fi al-qarn al-‘ishrin, (Egypt), pp. 72-73.


