Seeking Help From Awliya Allah During Their Lifetime
====================================================

The request for something from the ‘Awliya Allah’ takes place in various
ways which we shall mention as under:

1. We request a living personality to assist us in building a house or
ask him to quench our thirst by handing over the vessel of water which
lies next to him.

2. We request a living personality to pray for us and seek forgiveness
for us from God.

Both these cases are common, in that, we ask the person to do a work
that is fully within his natural capability to fulfil it. However, the
first request is related to the worldly affair and the second one to
religious and heavenly affair.

3. We request a living personality to perform a task without utilising
any common and natural means. For example, we ask him to cure the sick
without treatment, find our lost one or repay our debt.

In other words, we ask him to fulfil our needs through miracle or wonder
without having recourse to the ordinary and natural tools.

4. The person whom we ask is not alive but since we believe that he is
alive in another abode and is receiving his sustenance, we request from
such a person to pray for us.

5. We request from such a person to cure our sick and find our lost ones
and through utilising the spiritual powers bestowed upon him by Allah.

These two cases, similar to the second and third one are a request to a
living person except that in those cases, the responsible authority is
alive in this physical and material world and in these last two cases
the responsible authority is physically dead but in reality is alive. We
can never request from such a person to help us in the material affairs
through the ordinary channels. This is because it is presumed that he
has left this world and he is cut off from the normal channels of this
world.

In this way, there are five types amongst which, three of them are
related to request from the living ones in the material world and two
are related to the living ones in another world.

We shall discuss in this chapter, request to a living person in the
material world and discuss in the next chapter, request (for help) to
the awliya Allah who are living in another world.

Here is the description of each of the three cases of the first type:

First Case
----------

Requesting for work and help from a living person in the ordinary
affairs of life which have natural and ordinary causes, forms the basis
of human civilization. The life of human beings is established in this
material world on the basis of cooperation. All those in this world, who
possess intellect, seek mutual assistance in their worldly affairs. This
matter is so obvious that nobody has ever found fault with it and
because our discussion is based on Qur’an and traditions, we shall
restrain ourselves at this point by quoting a verse. Zul-Qarnain while
building the dam against the oppression of *Ya'juj* and *Ma’juj* turned
towards the people of that place and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَعِينُونِي بِقُوَّةٍ أَجْعَلْ بَيْنَكُمْ وَبَيْنَهُمْ رَدْمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Thus you only help me with workers; I will make a fortified barrier
between you and them. (Kahf 18:95)”***

Second Case
-----------

Requesting someone to pray for good or seeking forgiveness from living
persons in this material world; the correctness and firmness of such a
request from the living is from the necessities related to the Holy
Qur’an. Anyone having a little acquaintance with the Holy Qur’an is
aware that the ways of the Prophets was to seek forgiveness for their
*ummah* (nation) and or the *ummah* themselves were placing such a
request before the Prophets. Now we shall bring here all the verses
which have come down in this regard.

Of course, the verses concerning this section are of several categories
where, for the sake of simplicity of the matter, we shall number them as
follows:

(1) Sometimes, God orders His Prophet to seek forgiveness for his people
such as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاعْفُ عَنْهُمْ وَاسْتَغْفِرْ لَهُمْ وَشَاوِرْهُمْ فِي الْأَمْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Pardon them therefore and ask pardon for them, and take counsel with
them in the affair. (Aal-e-Imran 3:159)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبَايِعْهُنَّ وَاسْتَغْفِرْ لَهُنَّ اللَّهَ ۖ إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ
رَحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Accept their pledge, and ask forgiveness for them from Allah, surely
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. (Mumtahena 60:12)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُذْ مِنْ أَمْوَالِهِمْ صَدَقَةً تُطَهِّرُهُمْ وَتُزَكِّيهِمْ بِهَا
وَصَلِّ عَلَيْهِمْ ۖ إِنَّ صَلَاتَكَ سَكَنٌ لَهُمْ ۗ وَاللَّهُ سَمِيعٌ
عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Take alms out of their property, you would cleanse them and
purify*** ***them thereby, and pray for them, surely your prayer is a
relief to them, and Allah is Hearing, Knowing. (Tauba 9:103)”***

In this verse, Allah directly commands the Holy Prophet (s) to pray for
them and the effect of his prayers is so quick that one feels comfort in
one's heart after the prayers of the Holy Prophet (s).

(2) Sometimes, the Prophets themselves used to promise the sinners that
they would seek forgiveness for them under special circumstances.

For example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا قَوْلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لِأَبِيهِ لَأَسْتَغْفِرَنَّ لَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But not in what Ibrahim said to his father: I would certainly ask
forgiveness for you,*** ***(Mumtahena 60:4)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَأَسْتَغْفِرُ لَكَ رَبِّي ۖ إِنَّهُ كَانَ بِي حَفِيًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I will pray to my Lord to forgive you, surely He is ever kind to me,
(Maryam 19:47)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ اسْتِغْفَارُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لِأَبِيهِ إِلَّا عَنْ مَوْعِدَةٍ
وَعَدَهَا إِيَّاهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Ibrahim asking forgiveness for his sire was only owing to a
promise which he had made to him. (Tauba*** ***9:114)”***

This verses show that the Prophets used to promise and give glad tidings
to the sinners just as Ibrahim too had given such glad tidings to Azar.
But when he saw him persisting in idol-worshiping, he stopped from
seeking forgiveness for him because, one of the conditions for
acceptance of prayers is that the person for whom the forgiveness is
sought should be a monotheist and not a polytheist.

(3). Allah commands a group of sinful believers to approach the Holy
Prophet (s) for seeking forgiveness from Allah and to request the
Prophet (s) to seek forgiveness on their behalf and if the Prophet (s)
seeks forgiveness for them, then Allah would forgive their sins.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ إِذْ ظَلَمُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ جَاءُوكَ فَاسْتَغْفَرُوا
اللَّهَ وَاسْتَغْفَرَ لَهُمُ الرَّسُولُ لَوَجَدُوا اللَّهَ تَوَّابًا
رَحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And had they, when they were unjust to themselves, come to you and
asked forgiveness of Allah and the Apostle had (also) asked forgiveness
for them, they would have found Allah Oft returning, Merciful.***
***(Nisa 4:64)”***

Which verse can be clearer than this one where Allah orders the sinful
*ummah* to approach the Holy Prophet (s) for acquiring the forgiveness
of Allah and requesting him to pray for them? Going to the Holy Prophet
(s) and asking for forgiveness has two obvious benefits:

(A) Requesting for forgiveness from the Holy Prophet (s) enlivens the
essence of obedience to the Prophet in sinful persons and due to their
feeling of the Holy Prophet's position, they will sincerely follow and
obey the Holy Prophet (s).

Basically, such goings and comings creates a special state of humility
in a person towards the Holy Prophet (s) and prepares him to sincerely
act upon the verse of:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أطيعوا الله وأطيعوا الرسول
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Obey Allah and obey the Apostle. (Nisa 4:59)”***

(B) This action clearly illustrates the position and status of the Holy
Prophet (s) in the minds of the *ummah* and makes them understand that
just as the material bounties are received through special means by the
servants of God, the spiritual bounties which is the same forgiveness of
Allah, is received through fixed channels such as the *du'a* of the Holy
Prophet (s) and His beloved ones.

If the sun is the cause of flow of calories, heat and energy and these
benefits are received by the people through the sun then in the same way
the spiritual bounties and divine grace is received through the sun of
*risala* (messengership) and the universe in both the stages is the
world of cause and causation and the material and spiritual bounties in
both the worlds are received through (some) cause.

(4) Some of the verses indicate that the Muslims were frequently
approaching the Holy Prophet (s) and requesting him to pray for them.
Thus, when the Muslims were advising the hypocrites to do the same, they
were met with refusal and denial. As Qur’an says

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ تَعَالَوْا يَسْتَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ
لَوَّوْا رُءُوسَهُمْ وَرَأَيْتَهُمْ يَصُدُّونَ وَهُمْ مُسْتَكْبِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when it is said to them: Come the Apostle of Allah will ask
forgiveness for you, they turn back their heads and you may see them
turning away while they are big with pride.*** ***(Munafiqun 63:5)”***

(5) Some of the verses bear witness to the fact that the people, by
inspiration from their pure innate nature, were aware that the prayers
of the Holy Prophet (s) for them in the court of God had a special
effect and were surely acceptable. For this reason, they would approach
the Prophet and request him to seek forgiveness from Allah on their
behalf.

The pure nature of man was a sort of inspiration for him that the divine
bounties are received by the people through the Prophets, just as they
receive the divine guidance through the Prophets. Therefore they were
approaching the Prophets and requesting them to pray for their
forgiveness before God.  
 Here is a verse about this matter:

> قَالُوا يَا أَبَانَا اسْتَغْفِرْ لَنَا ذُنُوبَنَا إِنَّا كُنَّا
> خَاطِئِينَ {97}

> قَالَ سَوْفَ أَسْتَغْفِرُ لَكُمْ رَبِّي ۖ إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْغَفُورُ
> الرَّحِيمُ {98}

***“They said: O our father! ask forgiveness of our faults for us,
surely we were sinners. He said: I will ask for you forgiveness from my
Lord, surely He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.*** ***(Yusuf 12:97 &
98)”***

(6) Verses which notify the Prophet (s) that seeking forgiveness for the
hypocrites who still persist in their idol-worshipping will bear no
result. This verse is one kind of exception to the previous verses and
shows that other than this instance, the prayers of a Prophet has a
special effect as mentioned in the following verses

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ تَسْتَغْفِرْ لَهُمْ سَبْعِينَ مَرَّةً فَلَنْ يَغْفِرَ اللَّهُ
لَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Even if you ask forgiveness for them seventy times, Allah will not
forgive them. (Tauba 9:79)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَوَاءٌ عَلَيْهِمْ أَسْتَغْفَرْتَ لَهُمْ أَمْ لَمْ تَسْتَغْفِرْ لَهُمْ
لَنْ يَغْفِرَ اللَّهُ لَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is alike to them whether you beg forgiveness for them or do not
beg forgiveness for them, Allah will never forgive them. (Munafiqun
63:6)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمَّا وَقَعَ عَلَيْهِمُ الرِّجْزُ قَالُوا يَا مُوسَى ادْعُ لَنَا
رَبَّكَ بِمَا عَهِدَ عِنْدَكَ ۖ لَئِنْ كَشَفْتَ عَنَّا الرِّجْزَ
لَنُؤْمِنَنَّ لَكَ وَلَنُرْسِلَنَّ مَعَكَ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when the plague fell upon them, they said: O Musa! pray for us
to your Lord as he has promised with you, if you remove the plague from
us, we will*** ***certainly believe in you and we will certainly send
away with you the children of Israel.*** ***(Araf 7:134)”***

Here the sinners are asking Musa bin 'Imran to pray for them and
according to the sentence **بما بما عهد عندك**they were aware that God
had bestowed such a promise to Musa.

If the sentence **ادع لنا ربك** is a testimony to this point that the
nation wanted Musa (‘a) to avert the punishment and they also traced in
him the power of doing so, then in such a case, this verse will be an
evidence for the third instance (Is it correct or not to ask the
Prophets to perform some extraordinary acts by means of their divine
powers?) But the sentence **ادع لنا ربك** makes this probability weak
because, this sentence apparently shows that the work of Musa was only
‘to pray’ and not to dominate in this world and avert punishments.
Therefore the verse is related to this same instance.

That the prayers of Kalimullah Ibrahim (‘a) with regard to the
polytheists were not accepted has not been specified in this verse but
in some other verses.

(7) Verses which show that a group of believers were always praying for
another group of believers such as,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ جَاءُوا مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا اغْفِرْ لَنَا
وَلِإِخْوَانِنَا الَّذِينَ سَبَقُونَا بِالْإِيمَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those who come after them say: Our Lord! forgive us and those of
our brethren who had precedence of faith.*** ***(Hashr 59:10)”***

(8) It is not only they who pray for the believers but the carriers of
*'arsh* (throne) and those besides them too, seek forgiveness for the
believers. As the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَحْمِلُونَ الْعَرْشَ وَمَنْ حَوْلَهُ يُسَبِّحُونَ بِحَمْدِ
رَبِّهِمْ وَيُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ وَيَسْتَغْفِرُونَ لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
رَبَّنَا وَسِعْتَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَحْمَةً وَعِلْمًا فَاغْفِرْ لِلَّذِينَ تَابُوا وَاتَّبَعُوا سَبِيلَكَ
وَقِهِمْ عَذَابَ الْجَحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who bear the power and those around Him celebrate the praise
of their Lord and believe in Him and ask protection for those who
believe: Our Lord! Thou embracest all things in mercy and knowledge,
therefore grant protection to those who turn (to Thee) and follow Thy
way, and save them from the punishment of the hell. (Ghafer 40:7)”***

Therefore, how good it is that we too, follow this God-loving practise
of this group and always seek forgiveness for the believers.

Till here, the decree of two out of the five cases of seeking help from
someone other than Allah has been clarified from the viewpoint of Qur’an
and out of the three cases pertaining to seeking help from a living
person only one case has remained to which we shall now refer.

Third Case
----------

We seek help from a living person who has power over extraordinary
affairs and ask him to perform an act through extra ordinary ways,
examples include, curing the sick, making a spring flow, and other
things through a miracle.

Some of the Islamic writers reckon this kind of request to be the same
as the second case and say that the aim (of the person making the
request) is only to ask them to request Allah to cure his sickness, to
repay his loan, etc, etc. This is because such works are the works of
Allah and since the channel (of such works) is the *du'a* of the Prophet
and Imams, the work of God is metaphorically attributed to the person
reciting the *du'a*. [^1]

However, the verses of Qur’an clearly testify that asking the prophets
for fulfilment of such actions is absolutely correct and is not
something metaphorical. That is to say, we sincerely want *ma'sum* (the
inerrant) to do us a favour and / or through the door of miracle, cure
our incurable diseases by the divine strength and power.

It is true that Qur’an attributes *shifa’* (cure) to God and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإذا مرِضت فهو يشفين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when I am sick, then He restores me to health.*** ***(Shuara
42:80)”***

But in other verses, Qur’an ascribes *shifa’* (cure) to honey, or even
to Quran itself, such as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَخْرُجُ مِنْ بُطُونِهَا شَرَابٌ مُخْتَلِفٌ أَلْوَانُهُ فِيهِ شِفَاءٌ
لِلنَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There comes forth from within it a beverage of many colours, in
which there is cure for men.*** ***(Nahl 16:69)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ونُنزل من القرءان ما هُو شفاء ورحمة للمؤمنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We reveal of the Qur’an that which is a healing and a mercy to
the believers. (Bani-Israel 7:82)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ جَاءَتْكُمْ مَوْعِظَةٌ مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ وَشِفَاءٌ لِمَا فِي
الصُّدُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There has come to you indeed an admonition from your Lord and a cure
for what is in the breasts. (Yunus 12:57)”***

The way of reconciling these two set of verses (confinement and
earmarking of *shifa’* to Allah and its verification for honey, the
Qur’an and the divine admonitions) is this that Allah is ‘efficient
independently’ and is self-dependent whereas other agents are effective
by the permission of Allah and are dependent upon Him.

In Islamic world view and philosophy, all the factors and elements are
the *causative* act of Allah and the causes are not having the least
independence in themselves. Therefore, from the logical viewpoint and
Qur’anic verses, there cannot be any objection to the fact that the same
God Who has placed the power of cure in honey and has bestowed the power
of cure and recovery in the chemical and herbal medicines gives the same
power and ability to the Prophets and Imams.

If the meditators can acquire great spiritual powers through asceticism
then what is wrong if due to Divine Grace or man's devotion and
servitude, God grants them power and ability so that under special
circumstances, they are able to perform the astounding acts without the
natural means. [^2]

*Shifa'* bestowed by the Prophet and Imams and performing the
extraordinary acts is not inconsistent with this that the actual
‘Shaaf'ee’ (curer), the true finder of the lost one, etc. is Allah Who
has given these agents power and strength so that they can, by His
permission, control the affairs of this world.

Incidentally, the verses of Qur’an bear testimony that the people wanted
and expected such acts from the Prophets and sometimes from others too.
Here we shall mention some of them.

The following mentioned verse reveals that Bani Israel requested water
from their Prophet during the year of famine and that too, not through
natural channels, but through some extraordinary means. They did not
say: ‘you pray so that God sends water for us’ but said: ‘you satiate us
and give us water’. As the verse says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَوْحَيْنَا إِلَىٰ مُوسَىٰ إِذِ اسْتَسْقَاهُ قَوْمُهُ أَنِ اضْرِبْ
بِعَصَاكَ الْحَجَرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We revealed to Musa when his people asked him for water: Strike
the rock with your staff.*** ***(Araf 7:160)”***

A clearer verse to this one is the verse which speaks about Sulayman
('a) asking those present in the gathering to bring the throne of Bilqis
which was hundreds of miles away and un-free from barriers and
obstacles.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُّكُمْ يَأْتِينِي بِعَرْشِهَا قَبْلَ أَنْ يَأْتُونِي مُسْلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Which of you can bring*** ***to me her throne before they come to me
in submission?*** ***(Naml 27:38)”***

The aim was to bring the throne of Bilqis through extraordinary means as
indicated by the replies given by Afrit and ‘Asif Barkhia which have
come down in Sura al-Namal verses 39 and 40.

The most significant point is that people imagine that simple and
ordinary works are not Divine acts and the extraordinary ones which are
not within the scope of ordinary people are the work of Allah.

Actually, the measure of divine and non-divine acts is the matter of
independence and non-independence. The divine act is one in which the
doer performs the act independently without seeking the help of any
power and source. In other words, the divine acts are those in which the
doer is the absolute authority in performing that action and is
dependent on Himself and no one else.

However, the non-divine acts, whether simple and ordinary or difficult
and unusual, are those acts wherein the doer is not independent in
performing that action but does so under the influence and help of an
independent power.

Therefore, there is no objection to this fact that Allah bestows upon
His beloved ones, the power to perform extraordinary acts which are not
within the scope of ordinary people and there is no objection if we too
request them to perform such acts.

The Holy Qur’an addresses 'Isa (‘a) very explicitly and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتُبْرِئُ الْأَكْمَهَ وَالْأَبْرَصَ بِإِذْنِي ۖ وَإِذْ تُخْرِجُ
الْمَوْتَىٰ بِإِذْنِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And you healed the blind and the leprous by My permission, and when
you brought forth the dead by My permission. (Maida 5:110)”***

The total sum of these verses shows that the divine leaders possessed
such powers and that requesting extraordinary works from them was a
common practice and Qur’an too bears testimony to the rightness of such
requests.

Till here, the decree of all the three cases of asking from the living
ones has been clarified from the viewpoint of Qur’an and we saw that
verses of Qur’an have clearly approved their legitimacy.

It is now time to clarify the decree of the remaining two cases (i.e.
asking from the holy spirits) from the viewpoint of Qur’an and
traditions (hadiths). We shall discuss this in the next chapter.

[^1]: Kashf al-'Irtiyaab, page 274.

[^2]: For explanation of this part and acquaintance with the verses of
Qur’an refer to the book of ‘Spiritual powers of Prophets’. In this
book, you will find references from Qur’an about their spiritual powers


