Seeking Help From The Spirits of Awliya Allah
=============================================

The most important issue with regards to seeking help from the awliya
Allah (the friends or beloved of Allah) is when they have died or so to
say, living in another world, whether this act of seeking help is in the
form of *du'a* (invocation) or asking for some extraordinary acts to be
performed. This is because the Muslims of today are not in the presence
of the Holy Prophet (s) or an Imam so that they can approach them and
ask them to do something in their presence. Rather, most often, their
questions and requests are put before the pure spirits of the Prophets
and awliya. For this reason, analysing the Islamic decree with regards
to these two situations is very important.

Investigation on this matter depends on the analytical study of four
topics and by becoming fully aware of them, one can acknowledge the
correctness of such imploration and beseeching. These four topics are:

1. Eternity of soul and spirit of man after death

2. The reality of man is his very soul and spirit

3. Relationship with the world of souls is possible

4. The correct traditions which the Islamic traditionists have narrated
bear witness to the authenticity of such implorations and the practise
of the Muslims has been the same in all the ages. Now we shall describe
each of these four topics.

1. Death is not Annihilation of Man
-----------------------------------

The verses of Qur’an bear a clear witness to the fact that death is not
the end of life but a window for a new life. By passing from this
passage, man steps into a new life, a world completely new to him and
much superior than this material world.

Those who take death to be the end of life and believe that with death,
everything of man is finished and nothing remains of him except one
lifeless body which (even that) after some time is changed to soil and
destroyed, follow the philosophy of materialism.

Such a reflection shows that a person with such a view thinks life to be
nothing but a part of material effects of the organs of body and the
physical and chemical reactions of the brain and nerves and with the
subsiding of the heat of body and stoppage of the cells from activity
and production, the life of man comes to a halt and he turns into an
inanimate object. Soul and spirit in this school of thought is nothing
but reflection of materialism and its properties and with the
nullification of these properties and domination of reciprocal effects
of the organs of body over each other, the soul and spirit become
completely void and there no longer remains anything by the name of
spirit, its eternity and a world related to spirits.

Such a view about the soul and spirit of man is inspired by the
principles of Materialism. In this school of thought, man is nothing
more than a machine where he is formed from different tools and
implements and the reciprocal effects of those components give the power
of thought and perception to the brain, and with the dispersion of these
components the effects of thought, perception and in short, life gets
completely destroyed at death.

The views of materialists about soul and spirit were completely
discarded by the great philosophers of the world and the divine
scholars. The theologians believe that apart from the material system of
body, the nervous system and its reciprocal material reactions there
exists for man, a real substance by the name of soul and spirit which
remains with the body for some period and then cuts off its relation
with the body and lives in a special world with a much more delicate
body. The continuity of soul after the death of a person is not a matter
which can be established and proved in these pages because today the
eternity of soul and spirit has been proven by verses of Qur’an, precise
philosophical reasoning and convincing spiritual experiences. We shall
now narrate the verses of Qur’an that bear testimony to the matter of
eternity of spirit after death.

### Qur’an and Eternity of Spirits

Verses of the Qur’an clearly indicate that the spirit continues to live
after its separation from the body. For the sake of brevity, we bring
here only the text of the verses and postpone its analysis for some
other proper time.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَقُولُوا لِمَنْ يُقْتَلُ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ أَمْوَاتٌ ۚ بَلْ
أَحْيَاءٌ وَلَٰكِنْ لَا تَشْعُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And do not speak of those who are slain in Allah's way as dead, nay,
(they are) alive, but you do not perceive. (Baqarah 2:154)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَحْسَبَنَّ الَّذِينَ قُتِلُوا فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ أَمْوَاتًا ۚ
بَلْ أَحْيَاءٌ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ يُرْزَقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And reckon not those who are killed in Allah's way as dead, nay,
they are alive (and) are provided sustenance from their Lord.***
***(Aal-Imran 3:169)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَرِحِينَ بِمَا آتَاهُمُ اللَّهُ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ وَيَسْتَبْشِرُونَ
بِالَّذِينَ لَمْ يَلْحَقُوا بِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Rejoicing in what Allah has given them out of His grace, and they
rejoice for the sake of those who, (being left) behind them, have not
yet joined them.*** ***(Aal-Imran 3:170)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْتَبْشِرُونَ بِنِعْمَةٍ مِنَ اللَّهِ وَفَضْلٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They*** ***rejoice on account of favour from Allah and (His) grace.
(Aal-Imran 3:171)”***

> إِنِّي آمَنْتُ بِرَبِّكُمْ فَاسْمَعُونِ {25}

> قِيلَ ادْخُلِ الْجَنَّةَ ۖ قَالَ يَا لَيْتَ قَوْمِي يَعْلَمُونَ {26}

> بِمَا غَفَرَ لِي رَبِّي وَجَعَلَنِي مِنَ الْمُكْرَمِينَ {27}

***“Surely I believe in your Lord, there for hear me. It was said: Enter
the garden. He said: O would that my people had known of that on account
of which my Lord has forgiven me and made me of the honoured ones!***
***(Yasin 36:25-27)”***

The Paradise which he is told to enter therein is the Paradise of
*barzakh* and not of the Hereafter because he wishes that his people
knew and were aware that God has forgiven and honoured him. Such a wish
is not compatible with the world of the Hereafter, where the curtains
will be removed from the eyes of the people and their condition will not
be hidden from each other. Rather such unawareness is befitting with
this world where the people of this abode are unaware of the condition
of the people living in another world (*barzakh*) and the verse of
Qur’an bears witness to this fact.

Moreover, the next verse clarifies that after his death, when man is
forgiven and he enters the Paradise, the light of his people's life will
be extinguished by one heavenly cry. As verse says:

> وَمَا أَنْزَلْنَا عَلَىٰ قَوْمِهِ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ مِنْ جُنْدٍ مِنَ
> السَّمَاءِ وَمَا كُنَّا مُنْزِلِينَ {28}

> إِنْ كَانَتْ إِلَّا صَيْحَةً وَاحِدَةً فَإِذَا هُمْ خَامِدُونَ {29}

***“And We did not send down upon his people after him any hosts from
heaven, nor do We ever send down. It was naught but a single cry, and
lo! they were still.*** ***(Yasin 36:28-29)”***

From these two verses we come to know that after entering Paradise, his
people were still living in this world till death suddenly overtook them
and, this Paradise cannot be anything other than Paradise of *barzakh*.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النار يُعرضون عليها عدًواً وعشياً ويوم تقوم الساعة ادخِلوا أل فرعون
أشد العذاب
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The fire, they shall be brought before it (every) morning and
evening and on the day when the hour shall come to pass: Make Firawn's
people enter the severest chastisement.*** ***(Momin 23:46)”***

By paying attention to the contents of the two verses, the matter of
continuity of life in the world of *barzakh* becomes clear and obvious
because, before the approach of *qiyama*, the Fire will be presented to
them morning and evening but after the *qiyama* they will be given the
worst punishment.

If the later part of the verse **ويوم تقوم الساعة** was not there, then
the beginning contents would not have been so clear. But by paying
attention to the verse it becomes obvious that the objective is the same
period of *barzakh*; otherwise the reciprocity of the two sentences
would have been incorrect.

Moreover, the matter of morning and evening too bears witness that it
does not refer to the world of the Hereafter since, mornings and
evenings do not exist in that world.

So far, the first of the four topics has been made clear from the
viewpoint of Qur’an. Now it’s time to refer to the second topic.

2. The Reality of Man is his very Spirit
----------------------------------------

Man in the outset seems to be formed of body and spirit. However, the
reality of man is his same spirit which is accompanied with the body.

We shall not discuss this matter from the view point of philosophy and
at present we are not concerned with the Greek and Islamic philosophy.
Rather we shall discuss this matter only from the viewpoint of Qur’an.  
 By examining the verses that have come down with regards to man, this
fact can easily be seen that the reality of man is his very soul and
spirit. Here, we shall ponder over the contents of this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَتَوَفَّاكُمْ مَلَكُ الْمَوْتِ الَّذِي وُكِّلَ بِكُمْ ثُمَّ
إِلَىٰ رَبِّكُمْ تُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: The angel of death who is given charge of you shall cause you
to die, and then to your Lord you shall be brought back.*** ***(Sajdah
32:11)”***

Contrary to what we believe, the word of **توفىّ** does not mean ‘to
cause to die’. Rather it means ‘to take’ or ‘to seize’. [^1]

Therefore, the purpose of the sentence **يتوفاكمً** is: “He will seize
you all”. When the reality of man is his very soul and spirit, the
interpretation of the verse will be correct.

However, if the soul and spirit forms a portion of man’s personality and
the other half is formed by his external body, then in such a case such
an interpretation will not be permissible because the Angel of Death
never seizes our external body. Rather, the body remains in its same
condition and what the Angel seizes is only our soul.

The verses which clarify the reality of soul and spirit with regards to
man are not confined to this verse and as an example; we content
ourselves with one verse.

This fact that ‘the reality of man and centre of his spiritual
excellences is his very spirit and the body is (only) a covering which
has been put over it’ becomes evidently clear by paying attention to the
matter of eternity of spirit after death which was discussed in the
first topic. Qur’an does not recognise death to be the annihilation of
man and the end of his life.

Rather, it believes that life exists for the martyrs, the pious and the
oppressors before the approach of *qiyama*, a life accompanied with joy
and happiness, (or) accompanied with torment and punishment and if the
reality of man is his fundamental body then, undoubtedly the body gets
destroyed after a few days and changes to different elements and in such
a case the matter of eternity of man or the life of *barzakh* becomes
meaningless.

3. Qur’an and the Possibility of Connection with another World
--------------------------------------------------------------

Proving eternity of spirit is not enough for the purpose of recommending
and proving (beseeching) to be useful. Rather, apart from its eternity,
the possibility of establishing relationship with it should be proved
from the viewpoint of reason and Qur’an.

We have talked about this matter in detail in the book ‘Originality of
the Spirit’.

Here, we shall mention in brief, some of those verses which prove that
the relationship of man continues with his past ones and is not yet
disconnected.

### A) Salih ('a) Speaks with the Souls of His People

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَعَقَرُوا النَّاقَةَ وَعَتَوْا عَنْ أَمْرِ رَبِّهِمْ وَقَالُوا يَا
صَالِحُ ائْتِنَا بِمَا تَعِدُنَا إِنْ كُنْتَ مِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So they slew the she-camel and revolted against their Lord's
commandment, and they said: O Salih! Bring us what you threatened us
with, if you are one of the apostles.*** ***(Araf 7:77)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَخَذَتْهُمُ الرَّجْفَةُ فَأَصْبَحُوا فِي دَارِهِمْ جَاثِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then the earthquake overtook them, so they became motionless bodies
in their abode.*** ***(Araf 7:78)”*** [^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَوَلَّىٰ عَنْهُمْ وَقَالَ يَا قَوْمِ لَقَدْ أَبْلَغْتُكُمْ
رِسَالَةَ رَبِّي وَنَصَحْتُ لَكُمْ وَلَٰكِنْ لَا تُحِبُّونَ
النَّاصِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then he turned away from them and said: O my people, I did certainly
deliver to you the message of my lord, and I gave you advice, but you do
not love those who give advice.*** ***(Araf 7:79)”***

Pay careful attention to the contents of these three verses.

The first verse shows that when they were alive they demanded the
punishment of Allah.  
 The second verse shows that the divine punishment overtook and
destroyed each one of them.  
 The third verse shows that Salih ('a) spoke to them after their death
and destruction and said: “I presented you the divine messages but you
disliked someone giving you advice.”

A clear witness to this fact that he spoke to them after their death are
the following two points:

(1) The order of verses in the aforementioned form.

(2) The alphabet of **فا** in the word of **فتولى** which denotes an
order. i.e. after their destruction, he turned towards them and spoke in
such words.

The sentence of **(ولكن لا تُحبون الناصحين)** shows that they were so
much sunk in obstinacy and wretchedness that even after death, they
possessed wicked mentality so much so that they did not like people who
gave advices and warnings.

The expression of Qur’an is in such manner that, he speaks to his
peoples’ souls with sincerity and considers them as his audience, and
reminds them of their permanent obstinacy which was present in them even
after death and says: “Now too, you do not like an advisor.”

### B) Shu'ayb ('a) Speaks with the Souls of the Deceased Ones

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَخَذَتْهُمُ الرَّجْفَةُ فَأَصْبَحُوا فِي دَارِهِمْ جَاثِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then the earthquake overtook them, so they became motionless bodies
in their abode.*** ***(Araf 7:91)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا شُعَيْبًا كَأَنْ لَمْ يَغْنَوْا فِيهَا ۚ الَّذِينَ
كَذَّبُوا شُعَيْبًا كَانُوا هُمُ الْخَاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who called Shu'ayb a liar were as though they had never dwelt
therein, those who called Shu'ayb a liar, they were the losers.***
***(Araf 7:92)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَوَلَّىٰ عَنْهُمْ وَقَالَ يَا قَوْمِ لَقَدْ أَبْلَغْتُكُمْ
رِسَالَاتِ رَبِّي وَنَصَحْتُ لَكُمْ ۖ فَكَيْفَ آسَىٰ عَلَىٰ قَوْمٍ
كَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So he turned away from them and said: O my people! certainly I
delivered to you the messages of my Lord and I gave you good advice, how
shall I then be sorry for an unbelieving people?*** ***(Araf 7:93)”***

The method of reasoning in this verse is the same as the verses related
to Salih (‘a).

### C) The Holy Prophet (s) of Islam Speaks with the Souls of Prophets

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاسْأَلْ مَنْ أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ مِنْ رُسُلِنَا أَجَعَلْنَا
مِنْ دُونِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ آلِهَةً يُعْبَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And ask those of Our Apostles whom We sent before you: Did We ever
appoint gods to be worshipped besides the Beneficent God?*** ***(Zukhraf
43:45)”***

This verse shows that the Prophet (s) can establish a connection from
this very world with the prophets who live in another world till it
becomes clear that the order of God in all the ages and to all the
Prophets was not to worship anyone other than Allah.

### D) Qur’an Sends Salutations Upon The Prophets

The Holy Qur’an has on occasions sent peace and salutations on Prophets
and these salutations were not meaningless compliments or some kind of
formalities.

Great! it is far from justice if we wish to put down the sublime
meanings of the beloved Qur’an to the level that has taken the tinge of
staleness. It is true that today, the materialists who do not believe in
the validity of spirit, send in their speeches, peace and salutations
upon their leaders and founders of this school of thought as a form of
respect and honour. But is it fair that we put aside the sublime
meanings of Qur’an which reveals facts and realities and bring them down
to low level and say that all these salutations which Qur’an has sent
upon the prophets (and we Muslims too recite them day and night) are
just some dry and meaningless compliments? The Holy Qur’an says:

(1) Peace be upon Nuh, in the Universe.

(2) Peace be upon Ibrahim.

(3) Peace be upon Musa and Harun.

(4) Peace be upon Aal Yasin.

(5) Peace be upon the Messengers. [^3]

### Salutations upon the Holy Prophet (s) in the State of Tashahhud:

All the Muslims of the world irrespective of the differences which they
have in the principles of jurisprudence address the glorious Messenger
of Allah in the *tashahhud* of their *salat* every morning and night and
say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليك أيها النبيّ ورحمة الله وبركاته
  </p>
</blockquote>

The only thing is that the Shafi'ites and some others reckon this to be
obligatory in *tashahhud* whereas other sects think it to be *mustahab*
(recommendable). However all of them are unanimous in their opinion that
the Holy Prophet (s) has taught the Muslims as such and the *sunnah* of
the Prophet (s) remains the same during life and death.

If really our link and connection with the Holy Prophet (s) is cut-off
and disconnected, then such a salutation and that too in the form of
address (to the Prophet) is of what benefit?

The proofs of possibility of such connections and their occurrences are
not confined to what we have said till now. Rather, we have other verses
too in this regard which, for the sake of brevity, have not been
discussed. For a more detailed discussion, interested readers can refer
to the book of ‘Originality of spirit from the viewpoint of Qur’an’. In
this book, a section of verses dealing with the topic are mentioned.

In the end, we remind you that the rationalization of *salam* in
*tashahhud* was discussed due to its decisiveness among the verses. [^4]

### Conclusion of Our Discussion

For the first point, it was proved that death is not the end of life and
the destruction of man. Rather, it is a window for getting transferred
to another world.

On the second point, it was clarified that the reality of man is his
very soul and spirit and his body is a dress covering his spirit. And if
his soul and spirit remain, then naturally his reality, personality and
all the other abilities (not the type of ability which is related to the
material body) too remain. Therefore, if in this world his soul had the
power to pray and eulogize or had the ability to perform some
extraordinary actions by the Will of God, his holy nafs possesses by the
Will of God, the same power and ability in that world and except for
those acts which require the material body, it is capable of performing
all the other actions.

On the third point, it was proved that it is possible for the people of
this world to have relationship with the people of the next world and
that the holy spirits can hear our words and sayings.

By paying attention to these three points, the philosophical possibility
of the matter is proved i.e. it has been proved that the awliya Allah
can listen to our talks and also reply to them by the Will of Allah.
However, whether such a thing is lawful from the viewpoint of Islamic
regulations or not, will be discussed in the fourth point to which we
shall now refer.

4. Muslims and Asking for the Fulfilment of Their Needs from the Holy Spirits
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ibn Taymiyya and his followers with their unusual trait of opinionated
judgements, deny the fact that the companions of the Holy Prophet (s)
and those after them had asked the Prophet (s) for their needs to be
fulfilled. Regarding this matter they say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولم يكن أحد من سلف الأمة في عصر الصحابة ولا التابعين ولا تابعي
التابعين يتخيرون الصلاة والدعاء عند قبور
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأنبياء ويسألونهم ولا يستغيثون بهم لا في مغيبهم ولا عند قبورهم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“No one from* *the past* *ummah* *either at the time of the Companions
nor the period after the* *tabi'in* *(disciples of companions) have
performed* *salat* *and du'a near the graves of prophets. Never has
anyone asked anything from them nor has anyone beseeched them either in
their absence or near their graves.”* [^5]

Perhaps a person unacquainted with the history of the Companions (of the
Holy Prophet) and the *tabi'in* may imagine such an attribution to be
true. However, referring to history will prove contrary to that. As an
example, we narrate some instances:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أصاب الناس قحط في زمان عمر بن الخطاب فجاء رجل إلى قبر النبيّ فقال يا
رسول الله استسق الله لأمتك فإنهم قد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هلكوا فأتاه رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله في المنام فقال: أنت عمر ،
فاقرنه وأخبره إنهم مسقون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“During the Caliphate of ‘Umar, when there was a famine, a person came
near the grave of the Holy Prophet (s) and said: ‘O Prophet, ask water
for your people as they are being destroyed.’ Thereafter the Holy
Prophet (s) appeared in his dream and told him as such: ‘Go to ‘Umar and
send* *salam* *upon him and, inform him that all will soon be satiated
with water.’”* [^6]

(A) Al-Samhudi continues as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومحل الإستشهاد طلب الإستسقاء منه صلى الله عليه وأله وهو في البرزخ
ودعاؤه لربه هذه الحالة غير ممتنع
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعلمه بسؤال من يسأله قد ورد فلا مانع من سؤال الإستسقاء وغيره كما كان
في الدنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“This incident shows that though the Prophet (s) is in* *barzakh, one
can ask him to pray for us.* *This matter is of no objection because he
(i.e. the Prophet) is aware of the requests of the people. Thus there is
no hindrance if one requests him to pray for us just as he was doing in
this life.”* [^7]

(B) al-Samhudi narrates from al-Hafiz Abu 'Abdullah Muhammad bin Musa
bin al-Nu'man with the chain of narrators ending in 'Ali bin Abi Talib
(‘a) that three days had passed after the burial of the Holy Prophet (s)
when an Arab from outside Medina came and sprinkled the soil of the
Prophet's grave over his head and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا رسول الله قلت فسمعنا قولك ووعيت عن الله سبحانه ما وعينا عنك ، وكان
فيما انزل عليك (ولو أنهم إذ ظلموا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنفسهم جاؤك فاستغفروا الله...) وقد ظلمت وجئتك نستغفر لي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Prophet! you spoke and we listened to your sayings. You* *received
from God what we received from you. Among those things which was
revealed upon you is this particular verse.* *'If among them anyone who
has done injustice upon themselves comes to you and seeks forgiveness
from Allah and you too seek forgiveness for them, then they will find
Allah most -Merciful and Forgiving.' I have done injustice upon myself
and I have come to you (so that) you seek forgiveness for me.”* [^8]

The writer of *Wafa' al-wafa'*, at the end of chapter eight, narrates
many incidents which show that pleading and asking for one's need from
the Holy Prophet (s) has been the constant practise of the Muslims. He
even mentions that Imam Muhammad bin Musa bin al-Nu'man has written a
book in this regard under the title of *Misbah al-zalam fi
al-mustaghithin bi khayr al-'inam*.

(3) Muhammad bin Munkadar says:

*“A man gave my father 80 dinars as a trust while he was leaving for
jihad and said: “You may spend this money if you fall in need”.
Incidentally due to high cost of living, my father utilised that money.
Finally its owner came and demanded back his money. My father told him
to come* *the next day and the same night my father went to the mosque
and pointing to the grave and pulpit of the Prophet (s), he implored and
pleaded till the early dawn. At that moment, a man appeared from the
dark and said “O Aba Muhammad take this.” He gave a purse to my father
which contained 80 dinars.”* [^9]

(4) Abu Bakr al-Muqri says:

Hunger overtook al-Tabarani, Abu al-Shaykh and myself and we were close
to the grave of the Holy Prophet (s). When night approached I went near
the grave of the Prophet (s) and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا رسول الله الجوع...
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Moments later, a person from the Alawites entered the mosque with two
young men and each of them was holding a bag full of food…. When* *we
finished eating the 'Alawi man said.... "I saw the Holy Prophet (s) in
my dream and he commanded me to bring food for you.”* [^10]

(5) Ibn al-Jallad says:

*“Poverty-stricken, I entered Medina and went near the grave of the Holy
Prophet (s) and said: O Prophet I am your guest. Suddenly I fell asleep
and saw in my dream that the Holy Prophet (s) gave bread in my hands."*
[^11]

Right now we are not concerned with the verity or inaccuracy of those
incidents. Our point is that these incidents whether true or false prove
that such an affair was a common one and if it was innovation or
forbidden or polytheism and blasphemy than the fabrication and the
enactors of such matters would not have narrated such matters which
would lower them in the eyes of the people.

We have narrated in the book *Asalat al-ruh* (The originality of Spirit)
in the section of ‘Connection (with) Spirits’, traditions that prove the
authenticity of asking the holy spirits to pray.

Here, we are bound to mention a few points:

(1) In as much as these kinds of decrees and incidents are incompatible
with the temperament of a group, they therefore declare all to be
unknown without investigating into their references and narrations. Does
such inadmissible denial bring harm to our reasoning?

Answer: *Such an encounter with the historical events becomes the cause
of interpolation of history because the number of these kinds of
pleadings for fulfilment of needs is so numerous that one cannot
consider all of them to be false and baseless. If someone intends to
collect such narrations or stories he will be able to compile a thick
book.*

Now let us suppose that these stories and narrations are false and
baseless. But these same baseless claims in the entire history inform us
of one fact and it is as follows:

If these implorations and beseeching were unlawful, they would not have
been fabricated and enacted such unlawful action in the form of honour
and glorification as otherwise, their status would be lowered and they
would be subject to the wrath and anger of the people.

The fabrication and enactors of tradition and history strive to
fabricate and enact those things which suit the taste of the common
people. If such an action was against Qur’an and *Sunnah*, then it would
be considered as polytheism and *'ibada* by the Muslims and the
fabricators would never have enacted them and lowered their status in
the eyes of the people.

(2) Seeking help from the holy spirits either in the form of request for
*du'a* or in the form of fulfilling an action (Curing the sick,
returning the lost one, etc.) is without any objection considering the
four principles which we have discussed.

The thing which was in vogue among the Muslims at the time of seeking
*tawassul* of the holy spirits was the very request for *du'a* or so to
say, requesting the holy spirit of the Prophet to seek forgiveness for
them from Allah and pleading for the fulfilment of their worldly and
heavenly affairs. From the viewpoint of logic, request for fulfilment of
actions like curing of the sick, freeing of the captive; solving of
problems in life is the same as request for *du'a*.

(3) By paying attention to the measure which we reminded you about
*'ibada*, such requests and pleadings are never considered as *'ibada*
of the holy spirits. This is because the person making the request
neither believes in their divinity nor in their lordship and neither
considers them as God nor as the one who manages the world or part of
it. He also does not believe that some of the actions of God have been
entrusted to them. Rather, they consider them to be the pure servants of
Allah who have never committed the least offence in their worldly life.

By paying attention to the four basic facts, one cannot doubt their
power and *barzakhi* ability in fulfilling the requests of the pleaders.
They are living creatures and our relation with them is well
established. The only point is that every action and affair either in
the form of *dua’* or other than that it is dependent on the Will of
Allah and they are clear evidence to:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما تشاءون إلا أن يشاء الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

Just as in this world, 'Isa (‘a) could pray to God for goodness for
someone or could cure by the Will of Allah, those who were born blind
and those who suffered from leprosy, in the same manner, considering the
fact that these powers and abilities are related to his soul and spirit
and not his body, he can perform these same two actions (even) after his
transfer to another world. However, in both the stages, the permission
of Allah and His will is a necessary condition for receiving Grace
through this channel.

(4) Even though such humility and humbleness in connection to the
inerrant leaders are apparently for paying attention to them, yet if we
tear open the inner portion of this attentiveness and the *tawassul*, we
will find which really is desired and demanded by God Himself. In
reality, paying attention to the cause is like paying attention to the
‘Causer of the causes’ and those who are having a firm step in the
matter of behaviour and dealing with the people are aware and conscious
of this reality with a conscious and enlightened heart.

Those who seek *tawassul* do not believe in the originality and
independence of these causes and agents. Rather, they are means which
God, the Causer has made them a channel and a route for receiving His
Grace and Mercy and He, Himself, has ordered the believers for attaining
as such. As verse says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَابْتَغُوا إِلَيْهِ
الْوَسِيلَةَ وَجَاهِدُوا فِي سَبِيلِهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who*** ***believe! be careful of (your duty to) Allah and seek
means of nearness to Him and strive hard in His way that you may be
successful.*** ***(Maida 5:35)”***

If *salat*, fasting and all the divine duties are **وسيلة** means, then
in the same manner, the pure *du'a* of Prophets and awliya too, by
decree of the previous verse (verse related to asking for forgiveness),
is **وسيلة**means and paying attention to these means is like paying
attention to the Creator of these means and our action is in accordance
to the command of the afore-mentioned verse.

[^1]: Allama Balaghi has a valuable research about the word of توفىّin
his introduction to Tafsir Aala al-Rahman”, page 34.

[^2]: In some of the verses the cause of their destruction is said to be
a heavenly cry (Sura Hud verse 6) and some other verse mention the cause
as thunderbolt (Fussilat - 17). In these two verses, earthquake is
mentioned and the total of the verses is such that there was a severely
cry along with thunderbolt and earthquake.

[^3]: Sura al-Saffat: verses 79, 109, 120, 130, 181.

[^4]: Refer to the book of Tadhkirat al-fuqaha', vol. 3, page 232 and
the book of al-Khilaf by Shaykh al-Tusi, vol.1 page 47. In this book, he
has narrated tashahhud in various forms from ‘Umar bin al-Khattab and
'Abdullah bin Mas'ud which all of them have such salam and the jurists
of Ahl al-Sunnah like Abu Hanifa, Malik and Shafi'i have each taken one
of these forms of tashahhud and given fatwa (verdict) upon them.

[^5]: Treatise of al-Hadiyyat al-saniyya, page 162 (Egyptian edition).

[^6]: Wafa' al-wafa', vol. 2 page 1371.

[^7]: Wafa' al-wafa', vol. 2 page 1371.

[^8]: Wafa' al-wafa', vol. 2 page 1361

[^9]: Wafa' al-wafa', vol. 2 page 1380 (Egyptian print). He has
described example of these implorations till page 1385.

[^10]: Same as previous reference.

[^11]: Wafa' al-wafa', vol. 2 page 1361.


