Seeking Shafa’a (Intercession) From Awliya Allah
================================================

All of us are well acquainted with the term *shafa’a.* When the
discussion of crime, sin and guilt of a person is brought up and someone
else intercedes and mediates for him in order to save him from death and
execution or imprisonment and detention, we say so and so has done
*shafa'a* for him.

The word of *shafa'a* has been taken from the root word **شفع**which
means ‘even’ as against **وتر**which means ‘odd’. The reason that the
mediation of a person for saving a sinner is known as *shafa'a* is that
the status and position of the one doing *shafa'a* and his effective
powers get attached (and become even) with the factors of salvation
which is present in the person receiving the *shafa'a* (even though it
may be a little). Both these, with the help of one another become the
cause of release of the sinful person.

The *shafa'a* of the beloved ones of Allah for the sinners is apparently
this that because of their proximity and position which they have before
Allah, (of course by the will of Allah and under special norms which
have general and not personal aspects) they can mediate for the
criminals and the sinners and through (invocation), and pleadings ask
God to forgive their crimes and sins. Of course, *shafa'a* and its
acceptance depends on a series of conditions of which some are related
to the sinful person and some to the circumstances of *shafa'a* of sins.

*Shafa'a* in other words is the help of the beloved ones of Allah (by
His will) to the one who in spite of being sinful has not disconnected
his spiritual relation with Allah and the beloved ones of Allah.
Moreover, this standard should always be safeguarded.

According to one of the meanings, *shafa'a* is: One inferior person who
has the aptitude for leaping forward and progressing seeks help from a
superior person in the form of one lawful order. However the person
seeking help should not, from the viewpoint of spiritual perfections,
fall to such extent that he loses the power of advancing and the
possibility of changing into a pious man.

Right from the time of the Holy Prophet (s) till the later periods it
had been the practise of the Muslims to seek *shafa'a* from the true
intercessors. They were always asking in their lifetime or in their
death and such *shafa'a* had never been objected by any of the Islamic
scholars on any ground or Islamic principles.

It was only in the 7th century A.H. that Ibn Taymiyya with his special
way of thinking, opposed this and many other lasting customs and
traditions that were in vogue among the Muslims. Three centuries after
him, Muhammad bin ’Abd al-Wahhab once again raised the flag of
opposition and enlivened Ibn Taymiyya's school of thought with much more
vigor.

One of the point of differences of the Wahhabis with the other Islamic
sects is that although they have accepted *shafa'a* as an Islamic
principle (like the other muslims) and say that on the Day of *qiyama*
the intercessors will intercede for the sinners and in this matter the
Holy Prophet (s) will play a greater role, yet they say that no one has
the right to seek *shafa'a* from them in this world. In this matter they
have gone to such an extreme that narrating the text of their sayings
will be the source of spiritual discomfort. In short, they say:

The Holy Prophet (s), the other Prophets, the angels and the beloved
ones of Allah have the right of doing *shafa'a* on the Day of Judgement
but one should ask for *shafa'a* from the Master of *shafa'a* and the
One who gives permission for that i.e. Allah and say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم شفع نبينا محمد فينا يوم القيامة أو اللهم شفع فينا عبادك الصالحين
أو ملائكتك أو نحو ذلك مما يُطلب من الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا منهم فلا يٌقال يا رسول الله أو يا وليَّ الله أسألك الشفاعة أو غيرها
مما لا يقدر عليه إلا الله فإذا طلبت ذلك في
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أيام البرزخ كان في اقسام الشرك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O God, make the Holy Prophet (s) and your virtuous servants and the
Angels as our intercessors on the Day of Judgement.” However we are not
having the right to say, “O Prophet of Allah” or “O* *wali* *of Allah we
ask you to seek* *shafa'a* *for us. This is because* *shafa'a* *is
something which no one is capable of doing except Allah. Asking such a
thing from the Holy Prophet (s) who is living in* *barzakh* *will be a
kind of polytheism (shirk)."* [^1]

The Wahhabis have, with a series of notions, forbidden the seeking of
*shafa'a* from the true intercessors and have labelled the one who does
so as a polytheist and his action as polytheism.

Before looking into their reasoning, we shall discuss the matter from
the viewpoint of Qur’an, sunnah and the practise of the Muslims in this
regard. After that, we will examine their reasoning.

Our reasoning on the logical firmness of seeking Shafa'a
--------------------------------------------------------

Our reasoning for the permissibility of seeking intercession *(shafa'a)*
is a combination of two matters which by proving them, the matter of
intercession will become clear. These two matters are:

(1) Asking for *shafa'a* is the same as asking for *du'a.*

(2) Requesting for *du'a* from some worthy person is a recommended
(*mustahab*) order.

### 1. Asking for Shafa'a is the same as asking for Du'a

The intercession of the Holy Prophet (s) and other true intercessors is
nothing but *du'a* and eulogy before Allah owing to the proximity and
the position which they have before Allah. It is due to their *du'a*
that Allah bestows His mercy and Grace upon the sinners and forgives
them. Asking for *du'a* from one believer (what if it is asked from the
Holy Prophet) is an approved affair and none amongst the Islamic
scholars whether Wahhabis or Non-Wahhabis have doubt in its
authenticity.

Of course it cannot be said that the reality of *shafa'a* in all the
stations of *mahshar* is this very *du'a* before Allah. But one can say
that one of its clear meanings is *du'a* and the one who says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا وجيهاً عند الله اشفع لنا عند الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O the one who has a position before Allah intercede for us from
Allah.”*** denotes the same meaning.

Nizamuddin al-Naysaburi while interpreting the verse

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من يشفع شفاعة سيّئة يكن له كفل منها
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever joins himself (to another) in an evil cause shall have
the responsibility of it. (Nisa 4:85)”***

It is narrated from Muqatil as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الشفاعة إلى الله إنما هى الدعوة لمُسلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The reality of* *shafa'a* *is performing* *du'a* *for the Muslims*.*”*

It is also narrated from the Holy Prophet (s) that anyone who performs
*du'a* for his Muslim brother will be accepted and an angel will cry
out: “The same shall be for you too.”

Ibn Taymiyya is one of those who believe’s that the request for *du'a*
from a living person is correct. Therefore asking for *shafa'a* is not
confined to the Holy Prophet (s) but one can make such a request from
any believer who possesses value and esteem before Allah.

Al-Fakhruddin al-Razi is one of those who have interpreted *shafa'a* as
*du'a* and eulogy before Allah. In interpreting the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا رَبَّنَا وَسِعْتَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ رَحْمَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And ask protection for those who believe: Our Lord! Thou embracest
all things in mercy.*** ***(Ghafir 40:7)”***

He says: “This verse shows that the *shafa'a* performed by the carriers
of *‘arsh* (Throne) is only in connection with the sinners.” [^2]

Similarly, the *shafa'a* of the Holy Prophet (s) and other Prophets with
regards to the same group (i.e. the sinners) is the same because Allah
commands as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واستغفر لذنبك وللمؤمنين والمؤمنات
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And, ask protection for your fault and for the believing men and the
believing women.*** ***(Muhammad 47:19)”*** [^3]

And Nuh ('a) sought forgiveness for himself, his parents, those who had
faith in him and all the believers who are to come till *qiyama* and in
this way he has fulfilled his mission of *shafa'a*. [^4]

This description from al-Fakhr al-Razi bears witness that he has
presented *shafa'a* to be the same as *du'a* of the intercessor for the
sinner and has reckoned the request for *shafa'a* to be the same as
request for *du'a.*

In the Islamic traditions (hadiths), there are clear indications that
the *‘Dua’* of one Muslim for another Muslims is *‘Shafa'at’.*

Ibn 'Abbas narrates from the Holy Prophet (s) as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما من رجل مسلم يموت فيقول على جنازته اربعون رجلاً لا يُشركون بالله
شيئاً إلا شفعهم الله فيه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“If one Muslim dies and forty men who are not polytheist, recite salat
over his dead body, then Allah will accept their shafa'a which was done
in his favour.”* [^5]

In this tradition, the person reciting the *du'a* is introduced as an
intercessor. Now, if someone in his life-time requests forty of his
loyal friends to be present after his death and perform *salat* and
*du'a* upon his dead body he has in reality sought *shafa'a* from them
and has prepared the premises of *shafa'a* of the servants of Allah.

In *Sahih al-Bukhari* there is a chapter entitled as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذا استشفعوا إلى الإمام ليستسقى لهم لم يرُدهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“When the people would ask their Imam to intercede (do* *shafa'a) and
plead before Allah to descend rain, he (i.e. the Imam) would not reject
their demands.”*

Also, there is a chapter entitled as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذا إستشفع المُشركون بالمسلمين عند القحط
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“**Occasions when the polytheists demanded* *shafa'a* *from Muslims*
*at times of famine.”* [^6]

Narration of these two chapters is evidence that request for *shafa'a*
is the same as request for *du'a* and it should not be interpreted in
another way.

Till here, one pillar of reasoning has been clarified and that is, the
reality of seeking *shafa'a* is nothing but requesting *du'a.* Now we
should engage ourselves in describing the second pillar of reasoning and
that is asking from one brother-in-faith (what if it is asking the
awliya Allah) is a desirable and recommended action.

### 2. Qur’an and Request for du'a from Worthy People

The verses of Qur’an bear witness that when the Prophet's seek
forgiveness for the people it is very effective and beneficial such as
the following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واستغفر لذنبك وللمؤمنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And ask protection for your fault and for the believers.***
***(Muhammad 47:19)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وصلِ عليهم إن صلاتك سكن لهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And pray for them, surely your prayer is a relief to them.***
***(Tauba 9:103)”***

If the *du'a* of Prophet has such benefit for man then what is the harm
if one requests him to pray as such for him? On the other hand, request
for *du'a* is nothing but request for *shafa'a.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ إِذْ ظَلَمُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ جَاءُوكَ فَاسْتَغْفَرُوا
اللَّهَ وَاسْتَغْفَرَ لَهُمُ الرَّسُولُ لَوَجَدُوا اللَّهَ تَوَّابًا
رَحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And had they, when they were unjust to themselves, come to you and
asked forgiveness of Allah and the Apostle had (also) asked forgiveness
for them, they would have found Allah Oft-returning (to mercy),
Merciful.*** ***(Nisa 4:64)”***

By **جاؤك** (they come to you) it means that they would come and ask the
Prophet (s) to pray and seek forgiveness. If it means something else
then their coming will be useless and in vain. Moreover, the honour of
meeting the Prophet (s) and asking him to pray is itself a witness of
the spiritual transformation which prepares the ground for acceptance of
prayers. The Holy Qur’an narrates from the sons of Ya'qub ('a) that they
requested their father to seek forgiveness for them and Ya'qub ('a) too
accepted their request and acted upon his promise.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا يَا أَبَانَا اسْتَغْفِرْ لَنَا ذُنُوبَنَا إِنَّا كُنَّا
خَاطِئِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ سَوْفَ أَسْتَغْفِرُ لَكُمْ رَبِّي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They said: O our father! ask forgiveness of our faults for us,
surely we were sinners. He said: I will ask for you forgiveness from my
Lord.*** ***(Yusuf 12:97)”***

All these verses show that requesting the Prophet (s) and other virtuous
ones to perform *du'a* which is the same as requesting *shafa'a,* is not
having the least objection from the viewpoint of Islamic standards. For
the sake of brevity, we have not narrated the traditions regarding
request of *du'a* from the virtuous ones.

Islamic Traditions (hadiths) and the Path of Companions
-------------------------------------------------------

The famous traditionist, al-Tirmidhi and the writer of one of the
*Sihah* of the Ahl al-Sunnah narrates from Anas as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سألت النبيّ أن يشفع لي يوم القيامة فقال أنا فاعل قلت فأين أطلبك فقال
على الصراط
  </p>
</blockquote>

*(Anas says): “I requested the Holy Prophet (s) to ask* *shafa'a* *for
me on the day of Judgement and he accepted and said, “I shall request
your* *shafa'a.* *I asked: “Where should I find you?* *The Prophet said:
"Find me near* *Sirat* *(bridge over Hell)."* [^7]

With his mild disposition, Anas requests for *shafa'a* from the Holy
Prophet (s) and he too accepts it and gives him glad tidings. Sawad bin
Qarib was one of the Companions of the Holy Prophet (s). In the contents
of one of his poems, he seeks intercession from the Prophet (s) and
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فكن لي شفيعاً يوم لا ذو شفاعة بمُغنٍ قتيلاً عن سواد بن قارب
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"O' the honourable Prophet! you be my intercessor on the Day of
Judgment, the day when the* *shafa'a* *of no one will be useful and
beneficial to Sawad bin Qarib."* [^8]

Before the Holy Prophet's (s) birth, a person by the name of Tubba' from
the tribe of al-Himyar had heard that soon a Prophet was going to be
appointed by God in the Arab territory. Before dying, he wrote one
letter and requested his near ones that if the day came when such a
prophet was sent, then they should hand over his letter to him. In this
letter, he had written as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإن لم أدركك فاشفع لي يوم القيامة ولا تُنسِني
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Though my age was not loyal and I died before seeing you, ask my*
*shafa'a* *on the Day of* *qiyama* *and do not forget me.”*

When the letter was handed to the Holy Prophet (s) he said thrice:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مرحباً بتبع الأخ الصالح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Congratulations to Tubba', my pious brother.”* [^9]

If request for *shafa'a* was polytheism then Holy Prophet (s) would
never have addressed him as his brother and would not have thrice
congratulated him.

Seeking Shafa'a from the Dead
-----------------------------

Last section of traditions indicated that seeking *shafa'a* from the
true intercessors in their lifetime is absolutely correct.

Now, we shall mention two traditions that show that the companions of
the Holy Prophet (s) used to seek *shafa'a* from him even after his
demise.

(1) Ibn 'Abbas says: When Amir al-mu'minin ('a) finished giving *ghusl*
(ablution) and *kafan* (shroud) to the Holy Prophet (s), he uncovered
the face (of the Prophet) and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بأبي أنت وأمي طبت حياً وطبت ميتاً...واذكرنا عند ربك
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“May my mother and father be sacrificed; you are chaste and pure in
life and in death. Remember us near your Lord."* [^10]

(2) When the Holy Prophet (s) passed away, Abu Bakr uncovered his face
and kissed him and said:

“May my father and mother be sacrificed; you are chaste and pure in life
and death. Remember and think of us near your Lord.” [^11]

The aforesaid traditions show that seeking *shafa'a* of the intercessor
makes no difference whether the intercessor is alive or dead. Thus, by
paying attention to these verses, traditions and the continuing custom
of the Muslims in all the ages, the matter of seeking *shafa'a* becomes
self-evident and one should never be in slightest doubt with regards to
its integrity. Moreover, the companions of the Holy Prophet (s) were
requesting the Holy Prophet (s) to pray for them even after his demise
and if request for *du'a* (prayers) after his demise is correct, then
request for *shafa'a* too which is one kind of request for *du'a* is
proper and correct. [^12]

Examining The Reasoning Of Wahhabis About The Prohibition Of Seeking Shafa'a
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the previous chapter, we became acquainted with the permissibility of
seeking *shafa’a* with logical reasons. Now it is time to learn about
the reasoning of the opponents with regards to such request for
*shafa’a.* The group of opposition have prohibited seeking of *shafa’a*
with their particular way of thinking which we shall now discuss in
brief.

### (1) Seeking shafa’a is shirk (Polytheism)

By *shirk* they mean *shirk* in *'ibada* and present seeking of
*shafa’a* to be *'ibada* of the intercessor. In chapter 9 we had
discussed in detail about *'ibada* and have clarified that requesting
and asking someone and or seeking *shafa’a* will be counted as *'ibada*
only when we believe the other person to be **اله**God, **رب**(Lord) and
the one who is managing the world or is the source and master of divine
affairs. If it is not as such then any kind of request and asking any
kind of respect and honour will never be counted as *'ibada*.

The one who seeks *shafa’a* from the true intercessors before Allah
(where Allah has permitted them to do *shafa’a)* consider them as an
intimate and chosen servants of Allah where they are neither God nor the
divine affairs such as forgiveness and *shafa’a* have been transferred
to them so that they are able to wilfully and without the permission of
Allah, do *shafa’a* and forgive whomsoever they wish.

Within the framework of ‘Permission of Allah’, these divine people can
seek forgiveness and mercy for those particular people who still have
spiritual relation with God and their spiritual connection with the
divine intercessors has not yet been discontinued. And such a request
from someone who does not reckon the intercessor to be more than an
intimate servant can never be considered as *'ibada*.

Of course we remind you that if such a request (of intercession) to the
intercessor who is dead amounts to *'ibada* then the same request to a
living intercessor too should be counted as *'ibada*.

However, in the previous discussion we pointed out that Qur’an and
traditions command the Muslims to approach the Holy Prophet (s) and
request him to seek forgiveness for themselves. And such a request is
nothing but seeking *shafa’a* from him in his life-time and it is
impossible that one action which is polytheism in one period turns into
a monotheistic action in another period.

To elaborate further, they say: *Shafa’a* is the act of God and in
better terms, is the right of God and asking others about something
which is related to His action will amount to *'ibada* of that person.
They speak the same about asking for *shifa’* (cure) of the sick and
other similar things from the beloved ones of God and say: Such kinds of
requests are requests for the Acts of God and naturally it will be like
doing his *'ibada*.

By paying attention to the previous discussions, the reply to this
reasoning becomes absolutely clear and it is as such: None amongst the
Muslims have differences in this general rule and universal measure and
all agree that asking others about the actions of Allah will be counted
as *'ibada* and involves the belief in divinity and Lordship. But the
main point of our discussion is: What is meant by ‘action’ of God? The
Wahhabi writers during these three centuries have not explained the
standard for the ‘acts’ or ‘action’ of God without which the reasoning
will be brought to naught.

In the discussion about the definition and limitation of *'ibada* we
reminded you that in many verses of Qur’an, the actions which are
specific to God have also been attributed to other than Him. For
example, giving death which is a specific action of God as mentioned in
Sura al-Mu'minun verse 85.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهو الذي يُحيى ويُميت
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"He is one who gives life and Death"*** is also attributed to
(someone) other than Him as mentioned in another verse as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حتى إذا جاء أحدكم الموت توَّفته رُسلنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Until when death comes to one of you, our messengers cause him to
die.*** ***(An’am 6:61)”***

Until the time death overtakes one of them, our messengers take away
their souls. It is not only this action (i.e. ‘giving death’) that is
specifically the action of God and is attributed to (someone) other than
Him but in fact. a portion of the actions of God and those things which
should be asked only from God have been permitted to be asked from
someone other than Him.

For example: Qur’an commands the Muslims to say day and night (only from
Thee do we seek help) but at the same time in another verse it commands
us to seek help from (something) other than Him like *salat* and
patience, As verse says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاسْتَعِينُوا بِالصَّبْرِ وَالصَّلَاةِ ۚ وَإِنَّهَا لَكَبِيرَةٌ
إِلَّا عَلَى الْخَاشِعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And seek assistance through patience and prayer, and most surely it
is a hard thing except for the humble ones.*** ***(Baqarah 2:45)”***

If we wish to narrate those verses which are specific to Allah, but are
attributed to other than Him, then our discussion will lengthen. [^13]
What is necessary is to solve the controversy through Qur’anic insight
and acquire the actual meaning of Qur’an and it is as such:

Each of these affairs irrespective of our request has two forms:

(1) A ‘doer’ performs an action without relying on a creature, without
acquiring power from any position and without obtaining the will of
anybody, For example, he gives death to a living creature or helps a
creature.

(2) A ‘doer’ performs the same action by relying on a superior being, by
acquiring power from a higher position and obtaining His permission. The
first affair is the affair of God and the second a human or non-divine
affair. This is a general yardstick for distinguishing the divine action
from the non-divine ones.

The divine actions such as giving life, death, cure, sustenance etc, are
invariably those actions for which the doer is needless of anything in
performing them.

On the other hand, a non-divine action is that action which the doer has
to depend on a superior and higher creature than him and without His
Power and Will, is not able to perform that action.

By paying attention to this principle, it becomes clear that the
*shafa’a* which is the special right of Allah is different from that
*shafa’a* which is sought from the virtuous people.

Allah is needless from all angles in these actions whereas the virtuous
one put them into operation only under the light of His wise Will and
Permission.

Whenever *shafa’a* is sought from the awliya Allah in the first sense,
then in such a case, the divine action is asked from someone other than
God and such an asking will be reckoned as *'ibada*.

However if *shafa’a* is sought from them in the second sense i.e. a
limited and permitted *shafa’a* which is in the form of one acquired
right, then in such a case, a non-divine action is asked from them.

By paying attention to this yardstick, the fists of the fallacious
writers of Wahhabis will open up and it becomes clear that such kind of
requests, most common being request for *shafa’a* and others such as
*shifa'* (cure) and the like of it takes place under two forms and no
virtuous monotheist will request such an action in the first form and no
one, no matter how little Islamic knowledge he possesses, will ever
reckon them to be the ones managing this world or the ones in charge of
the system of creation.

Moreover, they do not (even) reckon them to be such creatures to whom
God has entrusted His position and His actions and do not imagine that
in the actions of *shafa’a* and fulfilment of needs they are unlimited
and unconditional.

In short, asking for a limited and authorised *shafa’a* is the action of
a man from man himself and is not asking for the Acts of God from
someone other than Him.

We shall speak about the ‘action of God’ and its special features in the
near future.

### (2) The Shirk (Polytheism) of the Polytheists was due to Their Seeking of Shafa’a from the Idols

The second reasoning which the Wahhabis give for the prohibition of
*shafa’a* is this that God has labelled the idol-worshippers of Hijaz as
polytheists because of their seeking of *shafa’a* from the idols; their
crying and wailing before them and their request (to them) to act as
mediators, The following verse bears testimony to this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ مَا لَا يَضُرُّهُمْ وَلَا
يَنْفَعُهُمْ وَيَقُولُونَ هَٰؤُلَاءِ شُفَعَاؤُنَا عِنْدَ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they serve beside Allah what can neither harm them nor profit
them, and they say: These are our intercessors with Allah.*** ***(Yunus
11:18)”***

Therefore, any kind of *shafa’a* from other than God will be polytheism
and worshipping of the intercessor.

#### Reply

Firstly, this verse is never an indication of what they say and if the
Qur’an calls them as polytheists it is not because they were seeking
*shafa’a* from the idols but because of worshipping them and finally
reaching the stage of seeking *shafa’a* from them.

If seeking *shafa’a* from the idols did really amount to their worship
then, in addition to the sentence **ويعبدون** there was no reason to
bring the sentence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويقولون هؤلاء شفعاؤنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

That these two sentences have come in a parataxis form in this verse
shows that the matter of *'ibada* (worship) of the idols was different
from the matter of seeking *shafa’a* from them, Worshipping of the idols
is the sign of polytheism and dualism and seeking *shafa’a* from the
stones and wood is reckoned to be a foolish act, devoid of any logic or
reason.

This verse never shows that seeking *shafa’a* from the idols amounts to
worshipping them so that we may say that seeking *shafa’a* from the true
beloved ones of Allah is the sign of worshipping them.

Secondly, even if we assume that the reason of their polytheism was due
to their seeking of *shafa’a'* from the idols yet, there exists a vast
difference between their seeking *of shafa’a* and the seeking of
*shafa’a* of the Muslims. They reckoned the idols to be the masters of
*shafa’a* and the absolute authorities in the matters related to
*shafa’a* and ‘forgiveness of sins’. Perhaps God has discharged Himself
from these affairs and has entrusted them to the idols.

Such a *shafa’a* will naturally be (like) worshipping them because they
were seeking *shafa’a* in them by having belief in their divinity,
lordship and their being the source of divine affairs. On the other
hand, a Muslim seeks *shafa’a* and requests for *du'a* from the beloved
ones of Allah as one esteemed and honourable one (of Allah) and as one
authorized servant of Allah in the matter of *shafa’a.* Thus considering
these two forms as one and the same is far from justice and realism.

### (3) Request for Fulfilment of Need from Someone Other than Allah is Forbidden

The third reason which the Wahhabis give for the prohibition of the
matter of seeking *shafa’a* from the divine leaders is this that by
specific decree of Qur’an, we should not, in the position of *du'a*,
call anyone other than Allah. And asking for *shafa’a* from other than
God is one kind of asking (for fulfilment of needs).

The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلا تدعوا مع الله أحداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then do not*** ***call anyone with Allah*** ***(Jinn 72:8)”***

If on the one hand it is said that calling someone other than Allah is
forbidden and on the other hand the matter of *shafa’a* of the awliya
Allah has been established, then the way of concluding is to say that we
should seek *shafa’a* of the divine leaders from God and not from
themselves.

The proof that such callings is *'ibada* and worship is the following
verse of Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ادْعُونِي أَسْتَجِبْ لَكُمْ ۚ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ عَنْ
عِبَادَتِي سَيَدْخُلُونَ جَهَنَّمَ دَاخِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Call upon Me, I will answer you; surely those who are too proud for
My service shall soon enter hell abased.*** ***(Ghafir 40:60)”***

Attention is required in the beginning of the verse; the word and in the
end the word has come which shows that ‘calling’ and worship give one
and the same meaning. In the books of tradition too, we find as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدعاء مُخ العبادة
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Du'a is the brain of* *'ibada* *(worship).”*

#### Reply

Firstly, the verse which has prohibited **دعوت** (calling) of someone
other than God in the sentence **فلا تدعوا** does not refer to absolute
calling and requesting. Instead, this prohibition (of **دعوت**) refers
to the prohibition of worshipping someone other than God; the reason
being the preceding verse which says **وأن المساجد لله**. This sentence
shows that by **دعوت** (in this verse) is meant some specific **دعوت**
which is accompanied by worship and a rising which is mixed with
unlimited humility and lowliness in front of the one whom they consider
as God of the Universe, Lord of the worlds and the absolute authority in
creation. [^14]

And such a bond does not exist in the matter of seeking *shafa’a* from
someone in whom Allah has bestowed such a right to give *shafa’a* by His
will.

Secondly, what has been prohibited in the verse is ‘calling someone
along with Allah’ and ‘considering him at His level’, as the word of
**مع الله** is a clear evidence to this fast. If someone requests the
Holy Prophet (s) to pray for him, that Allah may forgive his sins or
fulfil his needs, than he has not called anyone along with Allah.
Rather, the reality of this calling is nothing but the calling of Allah.

If asking for fulfilment of needs from the idols is introduced as
polytheism in some of verses, it is because they reckoned them to be the
small gods, the authorities in all or some of the divine affairs and the
ones who are powerful enough to fulfil their needs. Therefore the Qur’an
criticizes such ideas and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِهِ لَا يَسْتَطِيعُونَ نَصْرَكُمْ وَلَا
أَنْفُسَهُمْ يَنْصُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those whom you call upon besides Him are not able to help you,
nor can they help themselves.*** ***(Araf 7:197)”***

The Qur’an also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ عِبَادٌ أَمْثَالُكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely those whom you call on besides Allah are in a state of
subjugation like yourselves.*** ***(Araf 7:194)”***

In short, the polytheists imagined the idols to be small gods and
believed them to be absolute possessors of divine actions. However,
asking *‘shafa’a* and *du'a* from someone whom God has granted such a
right and position is devoid of such stipulations.

Thirdly, calling is having a much wider and comprehensive meaning and is
occasionally used metaphorically in *'ibada* (worship) such as the verse
of **أدعوني استجب لكم إن الذين يستكبرون** and the tradition **الدعاء مع
العبادة.** However, such partial usages in metaphorical form is no
reason that we always interpret **دعوت** in the meaning of worship and
condemn the request for fulfilment of need and *du'a* from someone (in a
reasonable manner) as polytheism.

Moreover, the actual meaning of **دعوت** is ‘to call’ which sometimes
takes the shape of Ibadat and mainly gives the meaning of calling others
(and not *'ibada*).

Later, we shall have a chapter on the meaning of **دعوت** in Qur’an and
will prove that every **دعوت** (calling) and pleading is not accompanied
with *'ibada* and worship.

### (4) Shafa’a is the Special Right of Allah

The following verse shows that *shafa’a* is the right of Allah and as
such, what meaning can we derive other than this?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمِ اتَّخَذُوا مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ شُفَعَاءَ ۚ قُلْ أَوَلَوْ كَانُوا
لَا يَمْلِكُونَ شَيْئًا وَلَا يَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لِلَّهِ الشَّفَاعَةُ جَمِيعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Or have they taken intercessors besides Allah? Say: what! even
though they did not ever have control over anything, nor do they
understand. Say: Allah's is the intercession altogether.*** ***(Zumar
39:43)”***

#### Reply

The sentence **لِلَّهِ** **الشَّفَاعَةُ** **جَمِيعًا**does not mean that
only God gives *shafa’a* and that no one else is having the right of
*shafa’a.* This is because undoubtedly, God never asks anyone to do
*shafa’a* for someone else. Rather, it means that God is the original
Owner of *shafa’a* and not the idols; since the one who possesses wisdom
and ownership of all things becomes the owner of *shafa’a* and not the
idols whom they worship which are devoid of both these qualifications.
As Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل أولوا كانوا لا يملكون شيئاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

Therefore, the pivot of discussion of this verse is that God is the
Owner of *shafa’a* and not the idols and in whomsoever He sees worth and
merit, He gives the right of *shafa’a* (and not to the idols).
Therefore, this verse has no relation with the topic of our discussion
because the Muslims consider only God as the Owner of *shafa’a* and not
the beloved ones of God. They believe that only those who are having His
permission can do *shafa’a* and not everybody. They also believe that by
the decree of verses and traditions, God has authorised the Holy Prophet
(s) to do *shafa’a.* Thus, they seek *shafa’a* from him as one
authorized person (and not as the Owner of *shafa’a).* As such, what is
the relation between the discussion and the contents of this verse?

### (5) Seeking Shafa’a from the Dead is Useless

Their last reasoning is that seeking *shafa’a* from the awliya Allah is
(like) seeking fulfilment of needs from the dead who are lacking the
hearing sense. The Holy Qur’an explains the dead to be unworthy. As it
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّكَ لَا تُسْمِعُ الْمَوْتَىٰ وَلَا تُسْمِعُ الصُّمَّ الدُّعَاءَ
إِذَا وَلَّوْا مُدْبِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely you do not make the dead to hear, and you do not make the
deaf to hear the call when they go back retreating.*** ***(Naml
27:80)”***

In this verse, the Holy Qur’an likens the polytheists to the dead and
informs us that just as the dead are not capable of understanding, in
the same manner; it is not possible for you to make this group to
understand. If the dead were capable of speaking and hearing, then it
was not proper to compare the dead-hearted polytheists to the group of
dead people.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُسْمِعُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۖ وَمَا أَنْتَ بِمُسْمِعٍ مَنْ فِي
الْقُبُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah makes whom He pleases hear, and you cannot make those
hear who are in the graves.*** ***(Fatir 35:22)”***

The analysis of this verse is the same as the analysis of the previous
verse. Thus, seeking *shafa’a* from a person is like seeking (something)
from an inanimate object.

#### Reply

This group always finds fault with the other sects of Islam through the
door of *shirk* (polytheism) and as supporters of monotheism, they seek
to label others as *kafir* (unbelievers) But, in this analysis, they
have changed the form of this discussion and have presented the matter
of uselessness of paying attention to the awliya. However, they are
completely unaware that:

The awliya Allah by the blessings of rational [^15] and narrative [^16]
reasoning, are alive and living. The objective of this verse is not to
prove that the bodies which have been laid to rest are not capable of
understanding and anybody from which the soul has been detached, is
unable to perceive and understand and turns into an inanimate object.

However, it should be known that what we address is not the hidden body
inside the grave but the pure and living spirits which are living with
*barzakhi* bodies in the world of *barzakh* and are, as per the Qur’an,
alive. We seek *shafa’a* from these spirits and not the concealed bodies
in the soil.

If the dead and the hidden bodies inside the soil are not capable of
understanding, it does not mean that the spirits (and their good
influence) which according to Qur’an are alive and receiving their
sustenance in another world are incapable of understanding.

If we say salutations or seek *shafa’a* and or speak to them, our
attention is directed to those holy and living spirits and not the
hidden bodies inside the soil. If we go for ziyara (visit) of their
graves, houses or place of living, it is because we wish by this way, to
prepare ourselves for establishing a spiritual relationship with them.
Even if we become aware that their bodies have changed to soil (though
the Islamic traditions prove contrary to that) still we will seek of
reach such instances so that in this way, we prepare for our
relationship with these pure spirits.

[^1]: al-Hadiyyat al-saniyya, 2nd treatise, page 42.

[^2]: Since the end of the verse says. "وقهم عذاب الجحيم" and protect
them from the torment of Hell

[^3]: Surah Muhammad, Ayah 19, as a decisive evidence bears witness to
the inerrancy of the Holy Prophet (s) and other Prophets, naturally the
word sin means something else for them. We have written the description
of this section in Vol. 5 of the exegesis of Manshur Javid which is the
first topicwise exegesis in Persian.

[^4]: Sura Nuh: verse 28.

[^5]: Sahih Muslim, Vol .3 page 54.

[^6]: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol.l.

[^7]: Sunan al-Tirmidhi, Vol. 4 Page 42. Chapter of: "ما جاء في شأن
الصراط"

[^8]: Qamus al-Rijal, under the matter Sawad.

[^9]: Manaqib Ibn Shahr Ashub, vol.1 page 12; Bihar al-Anwar, vol.15
page 314.

[^10]: Nahj al-Balagha, Sermon no.230.

[^11]: Kashf al-'Irtiyab, page 265 narrated from Khulasat al-kalam.

[^12]: For more details refer to the book shafa'a in the realm of
reason, Qur’an and Traditions written by (this) author. In this book,
you will find 100 traditions (45 traditions from Ahl al-Sunnah and 55
traditions from Shi'a books).

[^13]: Refer to the book Manshur Javid, vol. 2 Section of "limitation of
'ibada".

[^14]: In fact the meaning of the verse is فلا تعبدوا مع الله أحداً as
mentioned in another verse والذين لا يدعون مع الله إلهاً أخر (Sura
al-Furqan verse 68).

[^15]: The reasons for abstraction of soul from matter after the
separation of body and its needlessness from material body demands that
the soul of man continues and enjoys perception after death too. By
giving ten reasons, the great Islamic philosophers have proved the
eternity of the soul and its superiority to matter and have not left any
ambiguity for any impartial person.

[^16]: The verses of Qur’an like Sura Aal 'Imran: 169, 170; Sura
al-Nisa: 41, Sura al-Ahzab: 45, Sura al-Mu'minun: 100 and Sura Ghafir:
46 prove that life after death continues and we have discussed this
matter in the past.


