Is Belief In Invisible Power The Basis of Shirk (Polytheism)?
=============================================================

There is no doubt that a sincere request for fulfilment of needs is
possible only when the person making the request reckons the requested
person or entity to be powerful and capable enough to fulfil his need.
Sometimes, this power is an apparent and a physical one such as when we
ask someone for water and he fills the vessel with it and hands it over
to us.

Sometimes too, this power is an invisible power, far from the natural
channels and beyond the domain of physical laws. For example, a person
believes that Imam Ali (‘a) could lift the door of the fort of Khaybar
which was not within the power of an ordinary man and pull it off not by
human power but by an unseen power. Or that 'Isa ('a) could, by his
curative healing, cure the incurable disease without the use of medicine
or any kind of operation.

If belief in this unseen power is such that it is supported by the Power
and Will of Allah, it will be similar to the belief in the physical
power which does not involve *shirk* (polytheism). This is because the
same God who has placed the physical power in that particular person
also gives the unseen power to another person but without assuming the
creature to be the Creator and without taking that person to be
independent of God.

The Views of Wahhabis
---------------------

They say: If someone asks one of the awliya Allah, whether dead or
alive, to cure his sick ones or to find his lost ones or to help him in
repaying his debt, such requests involve the belief in the sovereignty
and power (of the one whom he asks) where he is prevailing over the
natural system and the laws in force in the world of creation. Belief in
such sovereignty and power of someone other than God is the same as the
belief in the divinity (Godliness) of that person and asking something
from him under this bond will be *shirk* (polytheism).

If a thirsty person in the desert asks for water from his servant, he
has observed the order prevailing over the laws of nature and such an
asking will not be *shirk* (polytheism). However, if he asks water from
a Prophet (s) or an Imam who is concealed under the soil or lives in
some other place, then such a request involves the belief in his unseen
sovereignty (of providing him with water without the physical causes and
means) and such a belief is exactly the same as the belief in the
divinity of that person.

Abu al-'A'la al-Mawdudi is the one who has emphasised this matter and
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن التصوٌّر الذي لأجله ندعو الإنسان الاله وتستغيثه ويتصرغ إليه هو لا
حرم تصور كونه مالكاً للسلطة المهيمنة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
على قوانين الطبيعة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The reason that man calls God and beseeches Him is because he thinks
Him as the One possessing sovereignty over the laws of nature and
dominance over such power which is outside the scope of the influence
and limits of physical laws.”* [^1]

Our Viewpoint
-------------

Their basic mistake is that they imagine the belief in the unseen power
of someone to be absolute source of polytheism and dualism. They have
neither wished nor have been able to differentiate between the power
which is dependent on the sovereignty of God and the power which is
independent and separate from God. The *shirk* (polytheism) which they
speak about is related to the second one.

The Holy Qur’an very explicitly mentions the names of some personalities
who all possessed unseen powers and command of their will was dominant
over the laws of nature. We shall mention here, from the viewpoint of
Qur’an, the names of those awliya Allah who possessed such powers.

### (1) Unseen Sovereignty of Yusuf ('a)

Yusuf ('a) tells his brothers as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذْهَبُوا بِقَمِيصِي هَٰذَا فَأَلْقُوهُ عَلَىٰ وَجْهِ أَبِي يَأْتِ
بَصِيرًا فَلَمَّا أَنْ جَاءَ الْبَشِيرُ أَلْقَاهُ عَلَىٰ وَجْهِهِ
فَارْتَدَّ بَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Take this my shirt and cast it on my father's face, he will (again)
be able to see. So when the bearer of good news came he cast it on his
face, so forthwith he regained his sight.*** ***(Yusuf 12:93-96)”***

Apparently, this verse shows that Ya'qub ('a) regained his sight owing
to the will and acquired power of Yusuf and this action was not the
direct act of Allah. Rather, it was the act of Allah through some
channel; otherwise there was no reason for Yusuf to order his brothers
to put his shirt over their father's face. Instead, it was enough for
him to just pray. This action is nothing but the appropriation of the
representative of Allah over a part of the world but by the Will of
Allah and such a representative is the possessor of unseen sovereignty
which Allah gives in special circumstances.

### (2) Unseen Sovereignty of Musa ('a)

Musa ('a) is ordered by Allah to strike his staff upon a mountain so
that twelve fountains i.e. the number of tribes of the sons of Israel,
come out of it. As the Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اضْرِبْ بِعَصَاكَ الْحَجَرَ ۖ فَانْفَجَرَتْ مِنْهُ اثْنَتَا عَشْرَةَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Strike the rock with your staff. So there gushed from it twelve
springs.*** ***(Baqarah 2:60)”***

In another place he is charged with striking his staff over the sea so
that every drop of it becomes the size of mountain for the Bani Isra'el
to pass. As Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَوْحَيْنَا إِلَىٰ مُوسَىٰ أَنِ اضْرِبْ بِعَصَاكَ الْبَحْرَ ۖ
فَانْفَلَقَ فَكَانَ كُلُّ فِرْقٍ كَالطَّوْدِ الْعَظِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then we revealed to Musa: Strike the sea with your staff. So it had
cloven as under, and each part was like a huge mound. (Shu'ara
26:63)”***

Here, one cannot imagine that the will and wish of Musa ('a) and the
striking of his staff played no role in the appearance of the fountains
and mountains.

### (3) Unseen Sovereignty of Sulayman ('a)

Prophet Sulayman ('a) is a great beloved one of Allah who possessed wide
unseen Powers and because of this great divine bounty, he has been
described with the sentence **وأوتينا من كل شئ** Sura al-Naml, verse 16
and the details of these bounties and talents have come down in Sura
al-Naml, verse 17 to 44, Sura Saba, verse 12, Sura al-Anbiya, verse 81
and Sura Sa’ad, verse 36-40. Referring to these verses will acquaint us
with the magnificence of the gifted powers of Sulayman. In order that
the readers become aware of these powers, we shall mention some of the
verses related to this wali Allah so that it becomes clear that belief
in the unseen power of the servant of Allah is a matter which Qur’an
itself has pointed out.

From the viewpoint of Qur’an, Sulayman ('a) had dominancy over the
*Jinns* and birds and was aware of the languages of the birds and
insects; as Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَرِثَ سُلَيْمَانُ دَاوُودَ ۖ وَقَالَ يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ
عُلِّمْنَا مَنْطِقَ الطَّيْرِ وَأُوتِينَا مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ ۖ إِنَّ
هَٰذَا لَهُوَ الْفَضْلُ الْمُبِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحُشِرَ لِسُلَيْمَانَ جُنُودُهُ مِنَ الْجِنِّ وَالْإِنْسِ وَالطَّيْرِ
فَهُمْ يُوزَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتَّىٰ إِذَا أَتَوْا عَلَىٰ وَادِ النَّمْلِ قَالَتْ نَمْلَةٌ يَا
أَيُّهَا النَّمْلُ ادْخُلُوا مَسَاكِنَكُمْ لَا يَحْطِمَنَّكُمْ
سُلَيْمَانُ وَجُنُودُهُ وَهُمْ لَا يَشْعُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَبَسَّمَ ضَاحِكًا مِنْ قَوْلِهَا وَقَالَ رَبِّ أَوْزِعْنِي أَنْ
أَشْكُرَ نِعْمَتَكَ الَّتِي أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَيَّ وَعَلَىٰ وَالِدَيَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Sulayman was Dawud's heir, and he said: O men! we have been
taught the language of birds, and we have been given all things; most
surely this is manifest grace. And his hosts of the jinn and*** ***the
men and the birds were gathered to him, and they were formed into
groups. Until when they came to the valley of the Naml, an ant said: O
Naml! enter your houses, (that) Sulayman and his hosts may not crush you
while they do not Know. So he smiled, wondering at her word, and said:
My Lord! grant me that I should be grateful for Thy favour which Thou
hast bestowed on me and on my parents. (Naml 27:16-19)”***

If you refer to the story of ‘Hud Hud’ in Qur’an which was given charge
by Sulayman to deliver his message to the Queen of Saba, you will be
astonished by the unseen power of Sulayman. Therefore it is requested
that you kindly refer and ponder deeply over Sura al-Naml, verses 20-44.

According to the specification of Qur’an, Sulayman possessed unseen
dominancy and the movement of the wind took place as per his wish and
command. As the verse says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِسُلَيْمَانَ الرِّيحَ عَاصِفَةً تَجْرِي بِأَمْرِهِ إِلَى الْأَرْضِ
الَّتِي بَارَكْنَا فِيهَا ۚ وَكُنَّا بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And (We made subservient) to Sulayman the wind blowing violent,
pursuing its course by his command to the land which We had blessed, and
We are Knower of all things.*** ***(Anbiya 21:81)”***

The point which is worthy of attention is the sentence **تجري
بأمره**which shows that the wind was blowing as per his command.

### (4) 'Isa ('a) and His Unseen Sovereignty

By examining the verses of Qur’an, one can follow the unseen power of
'Isa ('a). For indicating his power and position, we present here some
verses. The Holy Qur’an narrates from 'Isa ('a) as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أني أخلُق لكم من الطين كهيئة الطير فأنفخ فيه فيكون طيراً بإذن الله.
وأبرئ الأكمة والأبرص وأحي الموتى بإذن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الله وأنبئكم بما تأكلون وما تدخرون في بُيوتكم إن في ذلك لأئة لكم إن
كنتم مؤمنين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I create you out of dust like the form of a bird, then I breathe
into it and it becomes a bird with Allah's permission and I heal the
blind and the*** ***leprous, and bring the dead to life with Allah's
permission and I inform you of what you should eat and what you should
store in your houses, most surely there is a sign in this for you, if
you are believers.*** ***(Aal-e 'Imran 3:49)”***

If 'Isa ('a) relates his actions to the Will of God, it is because no
Prophet is the possessor of such authority without the Will of God. As
verse says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وما كان لرسول أن يأتي بأية إلا بإذن الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And it is not in (the power of) an apostle to bring a sign except by
Allah's permission.*** ***(Ra'd 3:38)”***

On the other hand, 'Isa ('a) attributes the unseen actions to himself
and says: I cure, I make alive, I give the news. The words **أبرئ ، أحيي
، أنبئكم**which are all **صيغة مثلكم** (the first person) bear witness
to this fact, it is not only Yusuf, Musa, Sulayman and 'Isa ('a) who
possessed unseen powers and supernatural sovereignty but a group of
prophets [^2] and angels possessed and still possess unseen sovereignty
and Qur’an describes Jibra'il as **شديد القوى** (mighty in power) and
the Angels as **فالمدبرات أمراً** (regulator of affairs).

In Qur’an, the Angels have been introduced as the managers of the
affairs of the world, the takers of the lives of people, the protectors
and guards of the people, the writers of deeds, the destroyers of sinful
nations and tribes, etc, etc. Those who have the basic knowledge of
Qur’an are aware that the Angels possess unseen power and by relying on
the Will and power of Allah, they perform extra ordinary acts.

If belief in unseen sovereignty involves (belief of) divinity in that
person, then, as far as the Qur’an is concerned, all of these prophets
and angels should be introduced as **الهة** gods. [^3]

As mentioned before, the solution to this dilemma lies in this that one
should differentiate between ‘independent power’ and ‘acquired power’.
Belief in independent power (of a creature) is the source of shirk
(polytheism) in all the circumstances whereas belief in acquired power
with regards to any action is monotheism.

So far, it has been clarified that belief in the unseen power of the
awliya Allah along with this belief that they are dependent on the
eternal Power of God and are only the channels appointed by God, is not
only far from shirk (polytheism) but is purely *(tawhid)* monotheism.
The basis of *tawhid* is not this that the actions which are dependent
on the natural powers are related to man and the actions that are
dependent on the unseen powers are related to God. Rather, the reality
of *tawhid* is to believe that all the powers whether dependent on
natural powers or dependent on unseen powers are all related to God and
manifest Him to be the prime source of all types of powers and strength.

Now it's time to discuss the matter of asking extraordinary actions from
the awliya Allah. [^4]

Is it Shirk (Polytheism) to request for Extra-Ordinary Actions?
---------------------------------------------------------------

Any phenomenon, as per the laws of cause and effect, has a cause for
itself and the existence of such a phenomenon is not possible without
that cause. As a result, no phenomenon remains without a cause in this
Universe. Miracles and wonders of the Prophets and other awliya too are
not without a cause. The only thing being that there is no natural and
physical cause for them and this differs from saying that there is no
cause (at all) for them.

If the staff of Musa ('a) is changed into a snake, or the dead are made
alive by 'Isa ('a) or the moon is cut into two halves by the Holy
Prophet (s) of Islam and the pebbles start glorification of God in the
hands of the Holy Prophet (s), etc., are all with some cause. The only
point is that in these cases, the natural causes or the well-known
physical causes are not at work and it is not that they are basically
without a cause.

Sometimes it is thought that asking natural actions from someone is not
polytheism but asking some extraordinary acts from him is polytheism.
Now we shall examine this very view.

### Reply

The Holy Qur’an mentions instances where in the Prophets and others have
been asked to perform a series of extraordinary acts which are outside
the scope of natural and physical laws. The Holy Qur’an narrates these
requests without criticising any of them. For example, the tribe of Musa
('a), as per the stipulation of Qur’an, turned towards Musa ('a) and
asked water and rain from him so that they could be saved from the
severe famine. As the Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأوحينا إلى موسى استسقاه قومه أن اضرب بعصاك الحجر
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“……And we revealed to Musa when his people asked him for water:
strike the rock with your staff….” (Araf 7:16)”*** [^5]

It is possible that it may be said that there is no objection in asking
extraordinary acts from a living person but our point concerns such
request from dead people. However the reply is obvious since, life and
death cannot bring any change in any action which is in accordance with
the principle of monotheism such that we declare one to be polytheism
and the other as monotheism. Life and death can have effect on
usefulness or un-usefulness but not on polytheism and monotheism.

Sulayman ('a) Seeks the Throne of Bilqis
----------------------------------------

In summoning the throne of Bilqis, Sulayman ('a) asked an extraordinary
act from those present in his gathering. He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أيُكم يأتيني بعرشها قبل أن يأتوني مسلمين قال عفريت من الجن أنا أتيك به
قبل أن تقوم من مقامك وإني عليه لقويّ أمين قال الذي عنده علم من الكتاب
أنا أتيك به قبل أن يرتدّ إليك طرفك فلما رأه مستقراً عنده قال هذا من
فضل ربي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Which of you can bring to me her throne before they come to me in
submission?' One audacious among the jinn said: 'I will bring it to you
before you rise up from your place, and most surely I am strong (and)
trusty for it.’ One who had the knowledge of the Book said: 'I will
bring it to you in the twinkling of an eye.' Then when he saw it settled
beside him, he said: 'This is by the grace of my Lord.’”*** ***(Naml
27:38)***

If such views (asking for extraordinary acts is polytheism) are true,
then asking miracles in all ages and times from the claimants of
Prophethood is blasphemy and polytheism. This is because the people
asked for miracles (which required extraordinary acts) from those
claiming to be prophets; not from God who has sent them. They were told
as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ كُنْتَ جِئْتَ بِآيَةٍ فَأْتِ بِهَا إِنْ كُنْتَ مِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If you have come with a sign, then bring it, if you are of the
truthful ones.*** ***(Araf 7:106)”***

All the nations of the world used to employ this method in recognizing
the true prophets from the false ones and the prophets were always
inviting the nations to come and see their miracles. The Qur’an too
narrates, without objection, the people's demand for miracles from the
Prophets which shows its acceptance of this matter.

If people wishing to investigate come to 'Isa ('a) and say: ‘If you are
truthful in your claim, then you cure this blind or that one suffering
from leprosy’. Then, not only has he not become a polytheist but he will
be counted amongst the holy men and will be praised in this action. Now,
if after the (apparent) demise of 'Isa ('a), his people ask his holy
soul to cure another sick one amongst them, then why should he be
regarded as polytheist when the life and death of that person plays no
role in polytheism and monotheism. [^6]

In short, as per the specification of Qur’an, a group of selected
servants of Allah possessed the power of performing extraordinary acts.
They would utilize these powers in certain circumstances and sometimes
too, the people would approach and ask them to put these powers into
action. If the Wahhabis say that no one possesses the power to fulfil
these affairs, then these verses bear witness contrary to their saying.

If they reckon such asking to be polytheism, then why did Sulayman and
the others make such a request? If they say: Asking for fulfilment of
one's need from the awliya through extraordinary means involves the
belief in their unseen sovereignty then our reply is that unseen
sovereignty is of two types; one is pure monotheism and the other the
source of polytheism.

If they say that asking miracles only from the divine living
personalities is proper and not from the dead, then we reply that life
and death are not the basis of polytheism or monotheism.

If they say that asking cure for the sick by unusual means is (like)
asking for the actions of Allah from someone other than Him. We say that
the basis of polytheism is to consider that person as God and that he is
source of divine activities. Asking for some unnatural act is not
similar to asking for the acts of Allah from someone other than Him.
This is because the standard to judge an Act of Allah is not that it
should be above the limits of ordinary laws so that such requests
becomes (the same as) requests for His Acts from someone else. Rather,
the criterion for an Act of Allah is this that the doer should be
independent in performing that act. If a doer performs an act relying on
the divine power, then to ask such an act will not be considered as
asking for the Act of Allah from someone other than Him and it makes no
difference whether that act is ordinary or unusual.

Regarding specific request for cure from the servants of Allah, we say:
Sometimes it is imagined that asking for cure and the like of it from
the awliya is (the same as) asking for the Acts of Allah from someone
other than Him and the Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإذا مرضت فهو يشفين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when I am sick, then He restores me to health.*** ***(Shu'ara
26:80)”***

So, how can we say: “O Prophet of Allah, cure my sickness! The same is
true for all that we ask which are of extraordinary nature."

### Reply

This group has still not been able to differentiate the divine acts from
the human acts. They imagine that any act which is not by natural way
should be called as the divine act and any act which is having natural
aspect and physical cause should be called as human act.

This group do not wish and are unable to compare the scale or measure of
divine act from the human act. The measure for divine and human acts is
never to see whether that act is ordinary or not; otherwise we have to
consider the works of magicians as divine acts and consider themselves
as Gods.

Rather, the measure in the divine acts is this that the doer depends on
Himself in His actions and does not seek help from anyone. Such an act
is a divine act. However, if a doer who performs his acts under the
light of divine power will be a non-divine one, whether that act is
having a physical and ordinary aspect or is something extraordinary.

While performing any act whether ordinary or outside the scope of laws
of nature, man always depends on God and seeks help from His power and
any act which he performs is fulfilled under the light of such power
which is acquired from God. Therefore, possessing such power and
similarly, the ability to fulfil our wishes and requests by them are
never a source of polytheism because in all the stages we say that God
has given them such power and God has authorized them to utilize it.

The great teacher, Imam Khumayni says about divine acts as such:

“The divine act is that act where its performer performs it without
interference from outside and without seeking help from another power.”

In other words, the divine act is that act which is performed
independently and its performer is needless of others. Non-divine act is
exactly opposite to this.

God creates the Universe, gives sustenance and cures the sick without
seeking help from any power. No one interferes in His affairs either
wholly or partially and His Power and Strength is not acquired from
anyone.

However, if someone other than God performs an act, whether ordinary and
simple or extraordinary and difficult, his power is not from himself. He
does not perform that action by his own power. [^7]

In other words, whenever we believe a being to be independent either
from the viewpoint of existence or influence, we will deviate from the
path of monotheism. This is because belief in independence in the
original existence is similar to his being needless of God in existence.
Such a being can be no one except Allah Who is needless of anything in
life and His existence is related only to Himself.

Similarly, if we consider his existence to be created by Allah but
believe that he is independent in his actions whether ordinary and
simple or extraordinary and difficult then in such a case, we have
inclined towards polytheism. This is because independence in action
finally leads to independence in the original life and existence and if
we consider an ignorant Arab to be polytheist it is because they
believed that the charge of running the affairs of the world and or the
affairs of the people have been transferred and entrusted to their gods
and they are independent in them.

Such was the belief of most of the polytheists during the period of
ignorance and at the time of the advent of Islam. They believed that the
angels and or the stars (which are created ones) were managing the
affairs [^8] or that at least some of the divine affairs like *shafa'a*
and ‘forgiveness’ were entrusted to them and they were having complete
freedom in them.

If the group of Mu'tazalites, who reckon man to be the creation of God
(from the viewpoint of existence) but believe him to be independent in
actions and efficacy, ponder deeply over their own sayings, then surely
they will realize that such a belief is one kind of hidden shirk
{polytheism) even though it is not equal to the shirk of the
polytheists. The difference between these two types of shirk is clear.
One claims independence in managing the affairs of the world and the
divine affairs while the other claims independence of man in his own
affairs.

[^1]: Al-Mustalahat al-'arba'a, page 18.

[^2]: The discussion about unseen sovereignty of Prophets and awliya
Allah is sufficient in this treatise and we have discussed them in
detail in the book ‘Spiritual power of the Prophets’ and this book has
been printed several times.

[^3]: Sura al-Najm: verse 5.

[^4]: Sura al-Nazi'at: verse 5.

[^5]: Also refer to Sura al-Baqara verse 60.

[^6]: For more knowledge about the miracles of 'Isa ('a), refer to Sura
Aal 'Imran verse 49 and Sura Ma'ida: verses 100 and 110.

[^7]: Kashf al-'asrar, page 51.

[^8]: When 'Amr bin Lahi asked the Syrians the reason for worshipping
idols they replied: “We ask rain from them and they send rain for us, we
seek help and they help us”. With this belief, he took the idol of Habal
to Mecca. (Refer to Sira Ibn Hisham, vol. 1 page 77).


