Pleading Allah By The Right And Position Of Awliya
==================================================

One of the point of differences between the Wahhabi sect and the other
sects of Islam is this that the former manifest two kinds of pleading as
*haram* (forbidden) and occasionally as *shirk* (polytheism) in
*'ibadat.*

These two kinds of pleading are:

(1) Pleading Allah by the right and position of awliya

(2) Pleading to someone other than Allah.

Now, we shall discuss both of these topics in this chapter.

Pleading Allah by the Position of Awliya
----------------------------------------

The Holy Qur’an praises different groups under such titles as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّابِرِينَ وَالصَّادِقِينَ وَالْقَانِتِينَ وَالْمُنْفِقِينَ
وَالْمُسْتَغْفِرِينَ بِالْأَسْحَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The patient, and the truthful, and the obedient, and those who spend
(benevolently) and those who ask forgiveness in the morning times.***
***(Aal-Imran 3:17)”***

Now, if someone in the middle of the night, after the mid-night prayers,
turns towards his Lord and pleads God by the right and position of this
group and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إني أسئلك بحق المستغفرين بالأسحار اغفر لي ذنوبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“O Allah, I ask Thee by the right of** **those asking forgiveness at
twilight to forgive my sins.”**

How can one call this action as *shirk* in *'ibada* since *shirk* in
*'ibada* is this when we worship someone other than Allah and consider
him as God or the source of divine affairs. But, in this benediction, we
have not paid attention to other than Allah and we have asked only from
Allah and nobody else.

Therefore, if such an action is forbidden, it should have some other
reason than *shirk*. At this stage, we shall remind the Wahhabi writers
of one point and it is the fact that the Holy Qur’an has mentioned a
criterion for differentiating a polytheist (of course *shirk* in
*'ibada*) from a monotheist and with this explanation, has closed any
kind of interpretation of the word of polytheist according to one's
personal opinion. This criterion is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا ذُكِرَ اللَّهُ وَحْدَهُ اشْمَأَزَّتْ قُلُوبُ الَّذِينَ لَا
يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْآخِرَةِ ۖ وَإِذَا ذُكِرَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ دُونِهِ إِذَا
هُمْ يَسْتَبْشِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when Allah alone is mentioned, the hearts of those who do not
believe in the hereafter shrink, and when those besides Him are
mentioned, lo! they are joyful. (Zumar 39:45)”***

In another verse it describes the offenders who are the same polytheist
as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا إِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا اللَّهُ
يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ وَيَقُولُونَ أَئِنَّا لَتَارِكُو آلِهَتِنَا لِشَاعِرٍ
مَجْنُونٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely they used to behave proudly when it was said to them: there
is no god but Allah; And to say: What! shall we indeed give up our gods
for the sake of a mad poet?*** ***(Safaat 37:35-36)”***

According to the contents of these two verses, a polytheist is one whose
heart gets disgusted by remembering the Unique God and becomes happy in
remembering the others (false gods) and or takes pride if asked to
confess in the Oneness of God.

As per this criterion, can we label the one who in the middle of the
night, calls nobody but Allah and takes pleasure from His remembrance to
such extent that he forbids upon himself the sweet and pleasant sleep
and instead, beseeches Him and pleads to Him by the position of the
monotheist servants who are His beloved ones as a polytheist? Has he, in
such a situation, turned away from the remembrance of Allah or has he
acted with haughtiness from confessing His Oneness!?

Why have the Wahhabi writers with unknown and imaginary norms, named all
the monotheists as polytheists and reckoned themselves to be the beloved
ones of Allah?

By paying attention to this criterion, one cannot call ninety-nine
percent of the people of *qibla* as polytheists and reckon only the
group of Najdi's to be monotheists.

The interpretation of *shirk* in *'ibada* has not been left to our
discretion and we have no authority to interpret it in the way we like
and label any group that we assume as polytheists.

Amir al-Mu'minin and His Pleading to God by the Position of the Holy Ones
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the prayers of Amir al-mu'minin we can find such pleadings very
clearly.  
 After finishing the night ‘Nafila’ (Supererogatory) prayers, Imam would
recite this dua:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إني أسئلك بحُرمة من عاذ بك منك ، ولجأ إلى عزك ، واستظل بفيئك
واعتصم بحبلك ، ولم يثق إلا بك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"O Allah, I ask Thee by the honour of the one who seeks refuge in Thy
repentance (he thinks of no shelter other than thee) and who seeks
protection in Thy Honour and who is under the shadow of Thy protection
and who has seized Thy rope and has not attached himself to anyone
except Thee.”*** [^1]

In another invocation too, which Imam 'Ali ('a) taught one of his
followers, he says as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وبحق السائلين عليك ، والراغبين إليك ، والمُتعوذين بك ، والمُتصغرين
إليك ، وبحق كل عبدٍ متعبد لك في كل برٍ أو
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بحرٍ أو سهلٍ أو جبل أدعوك دعاء من اشتدّت فاقته
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah, by the right of the questioners and those who turn their
attention and seek refuge in Thee; and those who are humble before Thee;
and by the right of every worshipper who worships Thee in land and in
sea, in desert and in the mountains, we call Thee; like the calling of
the one whose helplessness has reached the extremes.”* [^2]

Is it not that such soul provoking prayers and expression of such
feelings before Allah brings no result other than strengthening
monotheism! (except for Allah there is no other refuge) and what else
can we derive from expression of affection for the friends of Allah
which itself is one way of paying attention to Allah!?

Therefore, we should overlook the charge of blasphemy and polytheism
which can be found more than any other thing in the ‘kit’ of the
Wahhabis and the matter should be looked from another angle.

On this basis, some of the moderates amongst them have mooted the matter
of ‘pleading Allah by the awliya’ within the limits of prohibition and
aversion. Contrary to the extreme al-San'ani who ruled the matter of
pleading within the circle of blasphemy and polytheism, they do not talk
about it as blasphemy and polytheism.

Now that the main theme of discussion has been made clear and it is
known that the matter should be discussed within the framework of
*haram* (forbidden) and *makruh* (abominable) it is necessary to prove
the authenticity of such *tawassul* (recourse).

Occurrence of such pleadings in Islam
-------------------------------------

In Islamic traditions too, one can find such type of pleadings and with
the presence of such firm traditions that have come down partly from the
Holy Prophet (s) and partly from his Ahl al-Bayt, one cannot consider
such pleadings as *haram* or *makruh*.

The Holy Prophet (s) trained that blind person to say as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إني أسألك وأتوجه إليك بنبيك محمد نبيّ الرحمة
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Oh God, I ask you and seek your attention for the sake of your prophet
Muhammad, the merciful Prophet.”* [^3]

Abu Sa'id al-Khudri has narrated from the Holy Prophet (s) the following
*du'a*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إني أسألك بحق السائلين عليك وأسألك بحق ممشاى هذا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Oh God I ask for the sake of those who ask for and I ask you for the
sake of the* *followers of this matter.”* [^4]

Adam ('a) repented as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أسألك بحق محمد إلا غفرت لي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I ask you by the right of Muhammad to forgive me.”* [^5]

When the Holy Prophet (s) buried the mother of 'Ali ('a), he recited
this invocation for her:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اغفر لأمي فاطمة بنت أسد ووسِّع عليها مدخلها بحق نبيك والأنبياء الذين
من قبلي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Forgive my mother Fatima the daughter of Asad and by the right of your
Prophet and the Prophets before him and make her place vast and wide
(and save her from the torment of grave)."* [^6]

Although in these types of sentences the word of pleading has not been
explicitly mentioned yet, the true purpose of them, by the decree of
refers to pleading to Allah by the rights of the awliya. When they say
“O God, I ask You by the right of the questioners" it means “I plead You
by their rights.”

The supplications that have been narrated from the fourth Imam ('a) in
*Sahifa al-Sajjadiyya* is itself a clear proof upon the authenticity and
soundness of such *tawassul*. The splendid meanings of the supplications
in *al-Sahifa* and the eloquence and meanings of sentences makes us
needless to mention its authenticity and its attribution to Imam.

Imam al-Sajjad ('a) used to secretly converse with Allah on the day of
Arafat as such;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بحق من أنتجبت من خلقك وبمن اصطفيته لنفسك بحق من اخترت ، من بريّتك ،
ومن إجتبيت لشأنك ، بحق من
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وصلت طاعته ومن نُطت معاداته بمعاداتك
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O God, by the right of those whom You have selected from Your other
creatures; by the right of those people whom You have vested authority
and have created* *them for acquainting (the people) of Your position;
by the right of those pure ones whom You have connected their obedience
to Your obedience and their enmity to Your enmity.”* [^7]

When Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) performed *ziyara* of his great grandfather Amir
al-mu'minin ('a), he concluded his prayers as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم استجب دعائي واقبل ثنائي واجمع بيني وبين أوليائي بحق محمد وعليّ
وفاطمة والحسن والحسين
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O God respond to my prayers and accept my glorification (of You) and
by the right of Muhammad, 'Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and al-Husayn (‘a)
unite us with Thy beloved* *ones.”* [^8]

It is not only Imam al-Sajjad ('a) and Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) who in their
invocations pleaded to Allah by the right of His beloved ones but, in
the supplications of other Shi'a Imams too, one can find such
*tawassul*.

The noble leader, Imam Husayn ibn 'Ali ('a) in one of the supplication
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إني أسألك بكلماتك ومعاقد عزك وسُكان سماواتك وأرضك وأنبيائك ورسلك
أن تستجيب لي فقد رهقني من
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أمري عسر فأسألك أن تُصلي على محمد وأل محمد وأن تجعل من أمري يُسرأً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah, I ask You by Your words and the centre of Your honour; and by
the inhabitants of* *the heavens and the land; and by your Prophets and
Messengers that You answer my prayers for my affairs have become
difficult. I ask You to send salutations upon Muhammad and his progeny
and to make my affairs easy.”*

These kinds of supplications are so numerous that narrating all of them
will lengthen our discussion. It is better that we cut short our
discussion here and mention the reasoning and objections of the
opposition.

### First Objection

The scholars of Islam are unanimous in their decision that pleading to
Allah by the way of a creature or by the right of a creature is *haram*
(forbidden). [^9]

#### Reply

The meaning of unanimity or rather consensus is this that the scholars
of Islam in every period of history or in all the eras are unanimous in
their opinion over a decree derived from the commandments.

In such a case, the viewpoint of the scholars of Ahl al Sunnah and their
consensus of opinion is itself one of the divine proofs. The Shi'a
scholars consider this to be a divine proof from this viewpoint that it
is springs from the Infallible Imam's counsel (who lives among the
people) and his approval.

Now we ask whether such type of consensus of opinion exists in this
matter. We keep aside the Shi'a and other Ahl al Sunnah scholars and
consider the opinion of the leaders of the four schools of thought only.
Have the leaders of these four schools of thought given *fatwa*
(verdict) that the matter of pleading is forbidden? If they have given
such verdict, we request them to produce the text of their verdicts
along with the name of the book and the page number.

Basically, such type of *tawassul* has not been propounded in the books
of *fiqh* (jurisprudence) and *hadith* belonging to the scholars of Ahl
al Sunnah so that they can express their opinion about them. In such a
case, how can there be unanimity and consensus as claimed by the author
of *al-Hadiyyat al-saniyya*? The only person whom he says has prohibited
this matter is an unknown figure by the name of al-'Izz bin 'Abd
al-Salam. As if the opinions of all the scholars of Islam is considered
by the author of *al-Hadiyyat al-saniyya* into the single opinion of
al-'Izz bin 'Abd al-Salam.

Thereafter, he has narrated from Abu Hanifa and his student Abu Yusuf
that both of them too have said that it is *makruh* (abominable) to say
‘by the right of so and so’.

In short, there does not exist any proof in the name of consensus in
this matter. What worth can the *fatwa* (verdict) of these two persons
have in comparison to the firm tradition of the Holy Prophet (s) and his
Ahl al-Bayt which according to the consensus of the traditionists of Ahl
al Sunnah are and their sayings a proof.[^10] Moreover, the authenticity
of attributing this *fatwa* to Abu Hanifa is not proved.

### Second Objection

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن المسألة بحق المخلوق لا تجوز لأنه لا حق للمخلوق على الخالق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Asking Allah by the right of a creature is not permissible because the
one who is created has no right before the Creator.”* [^11]

#### Reply

Such reasoning is nothing but *ijtihad* (independent reasoning) compared
to explicit text. If really a creature has no right before the Creator
then why in the previous traditions, Adam ('a) and the Holy Prophet (s)
of Islam (s) pleaded o Allah by such rights and asked Allah by these
same rights?

Besides, how should we justify the verses of the Qur’an? In certain
instances, the Qur’an has explicitly indicated that the servants of
Allah to possess a right upon Allah. The same is mentioned in Islamic
traditions (hadiths).

These are the verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكان حقاً علينا نصرا المؤمنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And helping the believers is ever incumbent on Us.*** ***(Rum
30:47)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعداً عليه حقاً في التوراة والإنجيل
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“A promise which is binding on Him in the Torah and the Injil***
***(Tauba 9:111)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كذلك حقاً علينا نُنج المؤمنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is binding on us (that) We deliver the believers.*** ***(Yunus
11:103)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنما التوبة على الله للذين يعملون السؤء بجهالة
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Repentance with Allah is only for those who do evil in ignorance.***
***(Nisa 4:18)”***

Is it proper to interpret so many of these verses just for the sake of
propagation of groundless dogmatic ideas?

Now some examples from traditions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حقٌ على الله عون من نكح إلتماس العفاف مما حرَّم الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“It is a right upon Allah to help the one who marries because of
protecting his chastity from the forbidden acts.”* [^12]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله : ثلاثة حق على الله عونُهم: الغازي في سبيل الله والمكاتب
الذي يريد الأداء ، والناكح الذي يريد التعنف
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The Holy Prophet (s)* *said: “There are three groups of people to whom
help is an obligation upon Allah. A warrior in the path of Allah, a
servant who agrees to pay a sum to his master for his release and a
youth who wishes to protect his honour by way of marriage.”* [^13]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أتدري ما حق العباد على الله...
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Do you not see the obligation which is upon Allah with regards to His
slaves?”* [^14]

Let it not remain unmentioned here that, essentially, no person is
having any right even though he may worship God and remain humble before
him for ages. This is because whatever a person possesses is from Allah
and he has not used any of his own resources in the way of Allah so that
it can be compensated in the form of reward.

Therefore, the meaning of this right in such cases is the very divine
rewards and positions which Allah, due to His special favours has
bestowed upon them and entrusted (these favours) upon Himself. Such a
right (or obligation) upon Allah is the sign of His Greatness and
Magnificence.

No creature has any right upon Allah except if Allah, due to His Mercy
and Favour, justifies it upon Himself and shows that His creatures as
creditors and Himself as debtor.

This matter that a creature possesses a right upon Him is similar to
seeking of loan by Allah from His poor servants. These commitments and
obligations which He has promised is due to His Grace and Honour.
Moreover, with utmost Grace, He has considered Himself to be indebted to
His virtuous servants and has presented them as owners of rights and
Himself as and an obligor. [^15]

Swearing Upon Other Than Allah
------------------------------

Swearing (someone or something) upon other than Allah is a matter which
is very sensitive for the Wahhabis.

One of their writers by the name of al-San'ani in his book *Tathir
al-'i'tiqad* has reckoned it to be the source of *shirk* (polytheism)
[^16] and the author of *al-Hadiyyat al-saniyya* has called it as minor
shirk. [^17]

However we shall, by the Grace of God, discuss the matter without any
prejudice and will take into account the Qur’an and the true *sunnah* of
the Prophet (s) and inerrant Imams as the radiant of source for our
guidance in this matter.

Our Proofs for Permissibility of Swearing upon Other than Allah
---------------------------------------------------------------

### First Proof

Qur’an is the leader, the *al-Thaql al-'akbar* (Greater Weight) and the
living symbol of every Muslim. In this book, one can find tens of
swearings upon other than Allah which, if we were to gather all of them
in this book, it would lengthen our discussion.

In Sura al Shams alone, Allah Himself swore by nine things from His
creation. They are: Sun, its light, moon, day, night, heavens, land and
the human soul. [^18]

Similarly, in Sura al-Nazi'at, one can find such swearing for three
things [^19] and in Sura al-Mursalat for two things[^20]. In the same
manner, such swearings have been mentioned in Sura al-Buruj, Sura
al-Tariq, Sura al-Qalam, Sura al-'Asr, and Sura al-Balad.

Once more, we remind you of some examples from the Qur’an.

> وَالتِّينِ وَالزَّيْتُونِ {1}

> وَطُورِ سِينِينَ {2}

> وَهَٰذَا الْبَلَدِ الْأَمِينِ {3}

***“I swear by the fig and the olive, and Mount Sinai, and this city
made secure.”*** ***(Teen 95:1-3)***

> وَاللَّيْلِ إِذَا يَغْشَىٰ {1}

> وَالنَّهَارِ إِذَا تَجَلَّىٰ {2}

***“I swear by the night when it draws a veil, and the day when it
shines in brightness.*** ***(Lail 92:1-2)”***

> وَالْفَجْرِ {1}

> وَلَيَالٍ عَشْرٍ {2}

> وَالشَّفْعِ وَالْوَتْرِ {3}

> وَاللَّيْلِ إِذَا يَسْرِ {4}

***“I swear by the daybreak, And the ten nights, And the*** ***even and
the odd, And the night when it departs.*** ***(Fajr 89:1-4)”***

> وَالطُّورِ {1}

> وَكِتَابٍ مَسْطُورٍ {2}

> فِي رَقٍّ مَنْشُورٍ {3}

> وَالْبَيْتِ الْمَعْمُورِ {4}

> وَالسَّقْفِ الْمَرْفُوعِ {5}

> وَالْبَحْرِ الْمَسْجُورِ {6}

***"I swear by the Mountain, And the Book written. In an outstretched
fine parchment. And the House (Ka'ba) that is visited, and the elevated
canopy, and the swollen sea.*** ***(Tur 52:1-6)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لعمرك إنهم لفي سكرتهم يعمهون
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“By your life! they were blindly wandering on in their
intoxication.*** ***(Hijr 15:72)”***

With such successive swearings in Qur’an, can one say that it is
polytheism and (*haram*) forbidden?

Qur’an is the book of guidance and it is an example to follow and a
model to adopt. If such a matter was forbidden for the people it was
necessary for it (i.e. Qur’an) to mention that such swearings are the
specific to Allah only.

Some of the ungifted men who are unaware of the Qur’anic aims, reply in
this manner that it is possible that a thing issued from God's side is
good but the same thing issued from someone other than God may not be
good.

However the reply is obvious. Because truly, if the reality of swearing
upon someone or something other than God is polytheism and same as
likening that person to God, then why such an absolute or a minor
polytheism has been committed by God? Is it right that God practically
considers a partner for Himself but forbids others from considering such
a partner to Him!?

### Second Proof

In certain instances, the Holy Prophet (s) has sweared upon someone
other than Allah.

(1) Tradition from *Sahih Muslim*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جاء رجل إلى النبيّ فقال يا رسول الله أي الصدقة أعظم اجراً؟ فقال أما
وابيك لتنبأنه ، أن تصدق وأنت صحيح شجيح تخشى الفقر وتأمل البقاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“A person approached the Holy Prophet (s) and said: ‘O Prophet of
Allah, which*** ***charity bears the greatest reward?’ The Holy Prophet
(s) replied: ‘I swear by your father that very soon, I will inform you
about it. The charity which bears the greatest reward is the charity
that you give when you are healthy and in need of it and when you fear
from poverty and think of your future life.’*** [^21]

(2) Another Tradition from *Sahih Muslim*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جاء رجل إلى رسول الله مِن نجد يسأل عن الإسلام فقال رسول الله (صلى الله
عليه وأله): خمس صلوات في اليوم والليل فقال: هل عليَّ غيرهم؟ قال: لا
إلا أن تطوَّع وصيام شهر رمضان فقال: هل عليَّ غيره؟ قال لا أن تطوَّع
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وذكر له رسول الله (صلى الله عليه وأله) الزكاة فقال: هل عليًّ غيره قال
لا إلا أن تطوَّع فأدبر الرجل وهو يقول
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والله لا أزيد على هذا ولا أنقص منه فقال رسول الله أفلح وأبيه إن صدق أو
دخل الجنة وأبيه إن صدق.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"A person from Najd approached the Holy Prophet (s) and questioned him
about Islam.* *The Holy Prophet (s) replied: ‘The foundations of Islam
are the following:*

*(A)* *The daily five prayers. The Najdi man said: ‘Is there any other*
*salat* *other than these* *salat?’*  
*The Holy* *Prophet (s) replied: ‘Yes they are* *mustahab*
*(recommendable).’*

*(B) Fasting in the month of Ramadan. The man said: ‘Is there any other
fasting other than these fasting?’ The Holy Prophet (s) replied: ‘Yes
they are* *mustahab.’*

*(C)* *Zakat. The man said: ‘Is there any other* *zakat?’*  
*The Holy Prophet (s) replied? ‘Yes they are* *mustahab.’ The Najdi man
left* *the Holy Prophet (s) while saying: ‘I shall neither add nor
deduct.’*

*The Holy Prophet (s) said: ‘I swear by his father that he will be
successful if he speaks the truth; I swear by his father that he will
enter paradise if he speaks the truth.’* [^22]

(3) Tradition from *al-Musnad* of Ahmad ibn Hanbal:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلعمري لأن تكلم بمعروف وتنهى عن مُنكر خير من أن تسكت
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I swear by my life that ‘enjoining good and forbidding evil’ is better
than silence*.” [^23]

There are many other similar traditions and it will get very lengthy if
we were to narrate all of them. [^24]

Amir al-mu'minin Ali bin Abi Talib ('a) who is an esteemed example of
Islamic training has repeatedly sweared by his life in his sermons,
letters and sayings. [^25] Even the first Caliph swears in his
conversations by the father of the addressee. [^26]

The Four Schools of Thought and the Matter of Swearing upon Other than Allah
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Before examining the reasoning of the Wahhabis, it is necessary to know
the *fatawa* (verdicts) of the leaders of the four schools of thought.
[^27]

The Hanafis believe that swearing such as “I swear by your father and
your life” and the like of it are *makruh* (abominable).

The Shafi'is believe that swearing by someone other than Allah is
abominable but not similar seeking partner for Him and not as a trust.

The Malikis say: “Swearing by the great and holy existences like
Prophet, Ka'aba and the like of them has two interpretations: *makruh*
and *haram* and what is famous is to honor.”

The Hanbali's believe that swearing by someone other than Allah and His
qualities is forbidden even though the swearing may be in the name of
Prophet or wali from one of his His awliya.

Let us overlook this fact that all these *fatawa* (verdicts) are a kind
of *ijtihad* in the face of the clear texts of Qur’an and *sunnah* of
prophet and awliya Allah and due to the closure of the door of *ijtihad*
for the Ahl al Sunnah, the contemporary scholars have no option but to
follow their views.

Let us overlook the fact that al-Qastallani has narrated in (*al-Irshad
al-Sari*, vol. 9 page 358) from Malik ibn Anas about the matter of being
abominable. And let us once more overlook this fact that attributing
prohibition of such a swearing according to the Hanbalis is not certain
because, Ibn Qudama in *al-Mughni’* that was written with the aim of
reviving the Hanbali *fiqh* (jurisprudence) writes: “A group among our
companions have said that swearing by the Holy Prophet (s) is a promise
which if not fulfilled would invite *kaffara* (atonement). It has been
narrated from Ahmad ibn Hanbal that anyone who swears by the right of
Messenger of Allah and then breaks it, has to pay *kaffara* since the
right of the Holy Prophet (s) is one of the pillars of *shahada*
(profession of Islam). Therefore, swearing in his name is (like)
swearing by Allah and both invite *kaffara*. [^28]

From these narrations, it is obvious that it can never be said that any
of the Imam of the four schools of thought have decisively given any
verdict on the prohibition of this matter.

After getting acquainted with the views and opinions of the
jurisprudents of the four schools of thought, we shall now discuss two
traditions which the Wahhabis have used as a pretext for unjustly
shedding innocent blood [^29] and accusing millions of Muslims with
blasphemy.

### First Tradition

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن رسول الله سمع عمر وهو يقول: وابي فقال إن الله ينهاكم أن تحلفوا
بأبائكم ومن كان حالفاً فليحلف بالله أو يسكت
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The Holy Prophet (s) heard ‘Umar swearing by his father. The Holy
Prophet (s) said: ‘God has forbidden you (all) from swearing by your
fathers. Anyone who wishes to swear should swear by God or else should
keep* *silent.’”* [^30]

Firstly, swearing by their fathers was prohibited because of the fact
that they were polytheists and idol-worshippers and such people did not
hold any esteem or honour so that one could swear by them. As it has
come down in some of the traditions that one should not swear either by
the fathers or by the devils (the idols of the Arab) [^31]

Secondly, the prohibition to swear by the father is at times of
judgement and hostilities. This is because as per the consensus of the
Islamic scholars, at times of hostilities, no swearing is allowed except
for the swearing by Allah and His attributes which are a reference to
His Essence.

By paying attention to what has been said, how can one dare to say that
the Holy Prophet (s) has prohibited and restrained us from swearing by
the holy personalities like the Prophets and Awliya. His prohibition was
only under special circumstances and was not having a general
application.

### Second Tradition

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جاء ابن عمر رجل فقال: احلف بالكعبة قال لا ولكن احلف برب الكعبة فإن عمر
كان يحلف بأبيه فقال رسول الله (صلى الله عليه وأله): لا تحلف بأبيك فإن
من حلف بغير الله فقد اشرك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A person approached the son of ‘Umar and said: ‘I swear by the Ka’ba.’
The son of ‘Umar said: ‘You should swear by the Lord of the Ka’ba
because when ‘Umar swore by his father, the Prophet (s) ordered him not
to do so since anyone who swears by someone other than Allah has
considered a partner for Allah.’ [^32]

#### Reply

By paying attention to the previous reasoning that recommends swearing
to someone other than Allah, this tradition should be described in the
following manner.

This tradition consists of three parts:

(1) A person approached Ibn ’Umar and wished to swear by the Ka’ba but
the latter prevented him from doing so.

(2) ‘Umar swears by his father in the presence of the Holy Prophet (s)
and the latter prevents him from doing so as it was the source of shirk.

(3) The *Ijtihad* (independent reasoning) of Ibn ’Umar covered the Holy
Prophet's saying and included swearing by the holy things such as Ka’ba
too in the Prophet's saying.

Under these circumstances, the way of reconciling this tradition and the
previous traditions (where the Holy Prophet (s) and others have sworn by
someone other than God without any apprehension) is this that the saying
of the Prophet, (that anyone who swears by someone other than God has
committed shirk) is confined to instances where that person who is sworn
by, is a polytheist and not a Muslim and holy like the Qur’an, Ka’ba or
the Prophet. Thus the *ijtihad* of Ibn 'Umar who has derived a wider
meaning from the saying of the Prophet is an argument only for himself
and not for others.

The reason that swearing by the ‘polytheist father’ is one kind of shirk
is because such swearing is apparently considered to be an approval of
their ways and means.

This was an explanation of the *ijtihad* of Ibn 'Umar who derived a
wider meaning from the tradition which has come down in the case of
swearing by the polytheists. Moreover, he has also applied this to holy
things too (for example, Ka’ba). So, there's another analysis for this
tradition which is much more clear and evident than the analysis of Ibn
'Umar.

Now, we shall discuss his second analysis.

#### Second Analysis

The saying of the Holy Prophet (s), that **من حلف بغير الله فقد أشرك**
is related to swearing by the devils gods such as Lat and 'Uzza and not
swearing by the polytheist father; leaving aside the matter of swearing
by the holy things like Ka’ba. It is the *ijtihad* of Ibn 'Umar who
adopted this rule (which is exclusively related to the idols) to the two
cases (swearing by the polytheist and swearing by the Ka’ba) or else,
there was no such extension in the Holy Prophet's saying, the proof
being that in another tradition, the Prophet (s) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من حلف فقال في حلفه بالات والعززى فليقل: لا إله إلا الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Anyone who swears and swears by Lat and 'Uzza and then immediately
says “There is no god except Allah………."*[^33]

This tradition shows that the sediment of the period of ignorance was
still prevailing in the minds of the people who were yet following the
ancient habits like the practise of swearing by the idols and it was for
the eradication of this ugly practise that the Holy Prophet (s) uttered
such a general statement. But Ibn 'Umar has applied this to both
swearing by the holy thing, as well as, swearing by a polytheistic
father.

The proof that the saying of the Holy Prophet (s) is neither connected
to swearing by the holy thing nor connected to swearing by a polytheist
father and the evidence that it is Ibn 'Umar who has combined the
Prophet's saying with two cases and even to the swearing of ‘Umar by his
father. The following is the text of another hadith:

Imam Hanbal in his *al-Musnad* vol. 2 page 34 has narrated the second
tradition in such a manner that it shows that such comparison is the
work of Ibn 'Umar. Here is the text of the tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كان يحلف أبي فنهاه النبيّ قال: من حلف بشئ دون الله فقد أشرك
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“‘Umar swore by his father; then the Holy Prophet (s) prohibited him
from doing so and said: ‘The one who swears by someone other than Allah
has adopted polytheism.’”*

Just as you can see, the sentence **من حلف** has come without
**واوعاطفه** (parataxis) or **فاء** and if the second tradition was
below the tradition of ‘swearing by the father’, then it was necessary
for the second tradition to come with the word of **عطف** (parataxis).

Again the writer of *al-Musnad* in vol. 2, page 67 has narrated the
tradition of **من حلف**in an independent form without the incident of
‘Umar swearing. It is as such.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من حلف بغير الله قال فيه قولاً شديداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The one who swears by someone other than God has said an unfair thing
and* *or the Prophet (s) has said something severe about him for example
‘has adopted polytheism.’”*

[^1]: Sahifat al-'Alawiyya, Islamic Publications, page 370.

[^2]: Sahifat al-'Alawiyya, page 51.

[^3]: Sunan Ibn Maja, vol.1 page 441; Musnad Ahmad, vol. 4 page 138;
Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol.1 page 313; and others.

[^4]: Sunan Ibn Maja, vol.1 page 261, 262; Musnad Ahmad, vol. 3
tradition 21.

[^5]: al-Durr al-manthur, vol.1 page 59; Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol. 2 page
615; Ruh al-Ma'ani, vol. 1 page 217. (In the chapter of tawassul, you
had been acquainted with this tradition with greater context).

[^6]: Ibn al-Sabbagh al-Maliki (d. 855 AH), al-Fusul al-muhimma, page
31.

[^7]: Sahifat al-Sajjadiyya, du'a No.47.

[^8]: Ziyara of Aminullah.

[^9]: Kashf al-'irtiyab, page 32 narrated from al-Hadiyyat al-saniyya.

[^10]: Hadith al-thaqalayn is an authentic tradition and none denies its
authenticity except for the obstinate.

[^11]: Kashf al-'irtiyab, narrated from al-Qaduri.

[^12]: al-Suyuti, al-Jami' al-saghir, vol. 2 page 33.

[^13]: Sunan Ibn Maja, vol. 2 page 841.

[^14]: Ibn al-'Athir, al-Nihaya, under "h q q"

[^15]: Sura al-Baqara: 245

[^16]: Kashf al-'irtiyab, page 336 narrated from the book Tathir
al-'i'tiqad, page 14.

[^17]: Above reference, narrated from the book al-Hadiyyat al-saniyya,
page 25.

[^18]: Sura al-Shams surah: 91 verse: 1 to 7.

[^19]: Sura al-Nazi'at surah: 79 verse: 1 to 3.

[^20]: Sura al-Mursalat surah: 77 verse: 1 to 3.

[^21]: Sahih Muslim, Book of zakat part 3; chapter of ‘Best charity’
page 94.

[^22]: Sahih Muslim, part 1 chapter of ‘What is Islam and its qualities’
page 32.

[^23]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, vol. 5 page 225.

[^24]: Refer to Musnad Ahmad, vol.5 page 212; and Sunan Ibn Maja vol. 4
page 995 and vol.1 page 255.

[^25]: Nahj al-Balagha, sermons 23, 25, 56, 85, 161, 168, 182, 187 and
letters no. 6, 9 and 54.

[^26]: Malik bin Anas, al-Muwatta', (along with commentary of
al-Zurqani), vol. 4 page 159.

[^27]: al-Fiqh 'ala al-madhahib al-'arba'a, book of al-Yamin, vol. 1
page 75 (Egyptian print).

[^28]: Al-Mughni, vol. 9 page 517.

[^29]: The Wahhabis once attacked Karbala in the year 1216 AH and again
in the year 1259 AH and, in these attacks, they did not spare the young
and the old. Within three days, they killed 6000 people and, like the
army of Yazid, they plundered the precious things inside the shrine.
Why? Just because they were seeking tawassul by the progeny of the Holy
Prophet (s) and were expressing their love towards them.

[^30]: Sunan Ibn Maja, vol. 1 page 277; Sunan al-Tirmidhi, vol. 4 page
109; Sunan al-Nasa'i, vol. 7 page 485; Sunan al-kubra, vol. 10 page 29.

[^31]: Sunan al-kubra, vol.1 page 29 narrated from Sahih Muslim, Sunan
al-Nasa'i vol.7 page 7 and Sunan Ibn Maja, vol. 1 page 278. In another
tradition it has come as: لا تحلفوا بأبائكم ولا بأمهاتكم ولا بالأنداد
(Sunan al-Nasa'i vol.7 page 6).

[^32]: Sunan al-kubra, vol. 10 page 29. Musnad Ahmad, vol.1 page 47 and
vol. 2 page 34, 67, 78 and 125; Sunan al-Bayhaqi, vol. 10 page 29.

[^33]: Sunan al-Nasa'i, vol. 7 page 8


