Nadhr (Vow) To The People In Grave
==================================

People in difficulties and pain customarily make a *nadhr* (vow) that if
their difficulty is solved and if their so and so work is made easy,
they will donate a certain sum of money for one of the shrines over the
grave and / or will sacrifice a goat for preparing food for the
pilgrims. They say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لله علىَّ كذا إن كان كذا
  </p>
</blockquote>

This matter is prevalent among all the Muslims of the world especially
at those centres where the graves of awliya Allah and virtuous
personalities are present.

The Wahhabis are sensitive to these types of vows and the most abusive
writer amongst them, Abdullah al-Qasimi writes as such:

The Shi'a, because of their belief in the divinity (Godliness) of Ali
and his sons, worship them in their graves and it is for this reason
that they have built their graves and populated near them. From every
nook and corner of the world, they go for their *ziyara* and present
their vows and sacrifices to them and shed tears and blood over their
graves. [^1]

This shameless and foul-mouthed writer whose basic culture and manners
is apparent from the title of his book [^2] has reckoned this matter to
be related to the Shi'a whereas, the founder of Wahhabism Ibn Taymiyya
has discussed the matter in a wider scope and has believed it to be
related to the common Muslims. As he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من نذر شيئاً للنبيّ أو غيره من النبييّن والأولياء من أهل القبول أو ذبح
ذبيحة كان كالمشركين الذين يذبحون
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لأوثانهم و ينذرون لها فهو عابد لغير الله فيكون بذلك كافراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Anyone who has a* *nadhr* *(vow) to make and sacrifice for the Holy
Prophet (s), other Prophets and other awliya is similar to the
polytheists who were doing vows and sacrifices for their idols. Such a
person is same as the one worshipping someone other than God and he will
be called an infidel* *(kafir)."* [^3]

The master and student have both been deceived by apparent
(appearances). By the decree of this apparent similarity, they have
attacked both with one stick, whereas in the case of common actions, the
criterion and basis of judgement is not to be looked in its apparent
form but what is important is the intention by heart.

If apparent similarities suffice in a judgement then we have to say that
many of the obligatory Hajj actions are similar to the actions of the
idol-worshippers who used to circumambulate around the stones and mud
and worship their wooden and metallic idols. The same actions are
performed by us. We circumambulate around the Ka’ba which is made of
stone and mud; we kiss the *hajar* (stone) and shed blood in Mina.

The basis of judgements and arbitrations in apparently similar affairs
are the motives and the intentions and one can never pass a similar
judgement only because the two actions are apparently the same.

Regarding this matter, the author of *Sulh al-'ikhwan* has given a
statement which can clarify this matter. He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن المسألة تدور مدار نيات الناذرين وإنما الأعمال بالنيات فإن كان قصد
الناذر الميت نففسه والتقرب إليه بذلك لم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يجُز قولاً واحداً وإن كان قصد وجه الله تعالى وانتفاع الأحياء بوجه من
الوجوه وثوابه لذلك المنذور له الميت فيجب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الوفاء بالنذر
  </p>
</blockquote>

This Sunni scholar who is himself a critic of the beliefs of Wahhabis
has, in this short statement discussed the matter from the viewpoint of
the intentions and motives. He says:

*“If the intention of* *nadhr* *(vow) is to gain proximity to the dead,
then undoubtedly such an act is not permissible (for* *nadhr* *should be
for Allah and His proximity). If it is for the sake of Allah and His
proximity and consequently a section of people benefit from it and its
reward is presented to the dead, then there is no objection to it and
one should in such a case, fulfil his* *nadhr* *(vow).”* [^4]

The truth is what this scholar has said in these sentences and the
motive of *nadhr* among the Muslims is exactly the same as what has come
in the second phase of his statement. It is here that the difference (in
essence) between the action of the Muslims and the action of the
idol-worshippers becomes obvious. Their intention in presenting gifts
and sacrificing animals was to seek proximity to their idols. They even
slaughtered animals in their names and their aim was only the idols and
seeking their proximity and nothing else. On the other hand, the aim of
the Muslims is to seek the satisfaction of Allah and present its reward
to the dead. Therefore they bring the word of Allah in their vows and
say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لله عليًّ إن قضيت حاجتي ان افعل كذا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The purpose of* *nadhr* *in reality is seeking proximity to Allah and
presenting its reward to the one in grave and the beneficiaries of
these* *nadhr* *are the poor and the indigent.”*

In such a case, how can one consider this action as shirk and place it
on par with the action of the polytheists!?

In short, these kinds of *nadhr* are one type of charity given on behalf
of the Prophets and virtuous people the reward of which goes to them and
none of the Islamic scholars have objected to such a charity given on
behalf of the dead.

For acquainting the respected readers with the fallacious thinking of
the Wahhabis, we shall discuss this matter in greater length.

In Arabic language, the matter of charity is presented with **لام**but
sometimes, this letter is taken in the sense of aim, goal and motive,
like; **لله عليَّ** and sometimes it is meant to describe its usage like
**إنما الصدقات للفقراء**and while carrying out the paradigm of *nadhr*
(vow) they use both kinds of **لام**and say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نذرت لله إن قُضيت حاجتي أن أذبح للنبيَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The first **لام**is the same **لام**of goal and motive and it implies
that the aim of this *nadhr* is seeking the satisfaction of Allah and
gaining His proximity whereas the second **لام**indicates the very
object which derives benefit from this *nadhr* and the reward is
presented to him.

**لام**in **صليت لله** and or **نذرت لله**is for expressing goal and
motive i.e. I recited *salat* and I did *nadhr* because of obeying the
commands of Allah and seeking His satisfaction and proximity.

On the other hand **لام** in اذبح للنبيّ اولوالدىّ او لوالدتيis for
clarifying the beneficiary and showing that this action takes place on
his behalf and it is he who reaps the benefits of its reward.

Such *nadhr* not only is not an *'ibada* (worship) of that person but
rather, it is *'ibada* of Allah for the sake of benefit of the creatures
of Allah.

In Islamic traditions, there are many instances regarding this matter
where we shall hereunder mention a few of them.

(1) One of the companions of the Holy Prophet (s) by the name of Sa’d
told the Prophet: “My mother has died and if she was alive today, she
would be giving charity. Supposing that I give charity on her behalf,
will she derive any benefit from it?” The Holy Prophet (s) replied:
“Yes”. Thereafter, he asked the Prophet (s) that amongst all the
charities which charity was the most useful and the Prophet (s) replied:
“Water”. Sa’d dug a well and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذه لإم سعد
  </p>
</blockquote>

As you must have noticed, the **لام**of this sentence is different from
the **لام** that is present in the sentence **نذرت لله**the first
**لام**is for expression of motive and the second **لام**shows the
object deriving the gain. [^5]

(2) During the time of the Holy Prophet (s), a person made a *nadhr* to
sacrifice a camel at Bavana. For this reason, he approached the Holy
Prophet (s) and informed him of his intentions, the Prophet (s) asked:
“During the era of paganism, was there any idol at that place for the
people to worship?” He replied “No.” The Prophet (s) asked: “Was any
congregation held in any of the ignorant festivals in that place?” He
replied “No.” At that moment, the Prophet (s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اوفِ بنذرك فإنه لا وفاء لنذرٍ في معصية الله ولا فيما لا يملك ابن أدم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Fulfill your vow (nadhr) as* *nadhr* *is not correct in two
instances:*

*(a) In case of sins and disobedience of Allah and,*  
*(b) In things which he is not the owner.”* [^6]

(3) A woman told the Holy Prophet (s) as such: I have made a *nadhr* to
slaughter an animal at one particular place. The Holy Prophet (s) asked:
“Have you made a *nadhr* for an idol? She replied “No.”: The Holy
Prophet (s) said: Fulfil your *nadhr*. [^7]

(4) The father of Maymuna said: I have done *nadhr* to slaughter 50
sheep at Bavana. The Holy Prophet (s) said:

“Is there any idol in that place?” He replied “No.” The Prophet (s)
said: “You may fulfil your *nadhr*.”

The successive questionings by the Prophet (s) about the existence of
idols in the past and present and or about the presence of any
congregations in the form of festivals at those places was due to the
fact that under such situations, the sacrifice took place for those
idols and for gaining their proximity whereas sacrifices should be only
for Allah and not for the idols. In fact, one of the forbidden acts from
the viewpoint of Qur’an is to slaughter in the name of an idol. As the
Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وما ذُبِح على النُصب
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And what is sacrificed on stones set up (for idols). (Maida 5:3)”***

The reason that the questioners were fixing the place of slaughter was
because of the presence of poor and needy people and or the easiness in
performing the deed in those places.  
 Those who are having connection with the pilgrims to the holy graves
are fully aware that *nadhr* is made for the sake of Allah and His
satisfaction and sacrifice is done in His name. However, as far as the
benefits are concerned its rewards go to the awliya Allah and its
material gains to the poor and / or to the holy shrine itself.

[^1]: Al-Sira, vol. l page 54.

[^2]: He has named this book, so to speak, as a rebuff to Kashf
al-'irtiyab written by Allama Sayyid Muhsin Amin and given the title of
“battle between Islam and idol-worshipping" and in this way has called
the Shi'a, who form one-fourth of Muslim population in the world, as
idol-worshippers.

[^3]: Furqan al-Qur’an, page 132 written by al-'Azami narrated from Ibn
Taymiyya.

[^4]: Sulh al-'ikhwan, page 102 and …

[^5]: Furqan al-Qur’an, page 133 narrated from al-Ghadir, vol. 5 page
181.

[^6]: Sunan Abi Dawud, vol. 2 page 80.

[^7]: Sunan Abi Dawud, vol. 2 page 81


