‘Calling’ The Divine Personalities
==================================

One of the matters of disputes between the Wahhabis and other Islamic
sects is the matter of pleading and calling the pious personalities and
awliya Allah in times of hardship and difficulties.

Pleading and asking help from the Prophets and awliya Allah near their
graves or otherwise is completely in vogue among the Islamic sects and
they consider it neither to be *shirk* (polytheism) nor contradicting
the Islamic foundations. On the other hand, the Wahhabis have strongly
rejected such pleadings and for intimidating their opponents, they set
forth some verses of Qur’an which are not having the least connection to
what they claim and always raise the following verse as their slogan.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأن المساجد لله فلا تدعوا مع الله احداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The mosques belong to Allah; do not call anyone with Allah.***
***(Jinn 72:18)”***

For acquainting the respected readers with all such verses which are the
greatest excuse in the hands of the Wahhabis, we shall present them here
and then explain their contents. The Wahhabis prove their point by
producing the afore-mentioned and the following verses.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
له دعوة الحق والذين يدعون من دونه لا يستجيبون لهم بشئ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“To Him is due the true prayer; and those whom they pray to beside
Allah give them no answer.*** ***(Raad 13:14)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِهِ لَا يَسْتَطِيعُونَ نَصْرَكُمْ وَلَا
أَنْفُسَهُمْ يَنْصُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those whom you call upon besides Him are not able to*** ***help
you, nor can they help themselves. (A’raf 7:197)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِهِ مَا يَمْلِكُونَ مِنْ قِطْمِيرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those whom you call upon besides Him do not control a straw.
(Fatir 35:13)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ عِبَادٌ أَمْثَالُكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely those whom you call on besides Allah are in a state of
subjugation like yourselves.*** ***(A’raf 7:194)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قل ادعوا الذين زعمتم من دونه فلا يملكون كشف الضُر عنكم ولا تحويلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Call on those whom you assert besides Him, so they shall not
control the removal of distress from you nor (its) transference.***
***(Bani-Israel 17:56)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أولئك الذين يدعون يبتغون إلى ربهم الوسيلة
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those whom they call upon, themselves seek the means of access to
their Lord.*** ***(Bani-Israel 17:57)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا تدع من دون الله ما لا ينفعك ولا يضُرك
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And do not call besides Allah on that which can neither benefit you
nor harm you.*** ***(Yunus 11:106)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن تدعوهم لا يسمعوا دعاءكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If you call on them they shall not hear your call.*** ***(Fatir
35:14)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن أضل ممن يدعوا من دون الله من لا يستجيب له إلى يوم القيمة
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And who is in greater error than he who calls besides Allah upon
those that will not answer him till the day of resurrection.***
***(Ahqaaf 46:5)”***

The Wahhabis conclude from these verses that calling the awliya and
virtuous people after their death is *'ibada* and worship of them, and
that anyone who says, “O Muhammad” either near his grave or from far
off; this calling itself is *'ibada.*

Al-San'ani narrating from *Kashf al-'irtiyab*, pages 273-274, mentions
in his book *Tanzih al-i'tiqad* as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقد سمَّى الله الدعاء عبادة بقوله: ادعوني استجب لكم إن الذين يستكبرون
عن عبادتي ، ومن هتف باسم نبي أو صالح بشئ أو قال اشفع لي إلى الله في
حاجتي أو استشفع بك إلى الله في حاجتي أو نحو ذلك أو قال إقض دينى أو إشف
مريضى أو نحو ذلك فقد دعا النبي والصالح والدعاء عبادة بل مُخّها فيكون
قد بد غير الله وصار مشركاً إذ لا يُتمّ التوحيد إلا بتوحيده تعالى في
الإلهية بإعتقاد أن لا خالق ولا رازق غيره العبادة بعدم عبادة غيره ولو
ببعض العبادات وعُباد الأصنام إنما اشركوا لعدم توحيد الله في العبادة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The Holy Qur’an has unconditionally declared pleadings and callings
towards someone other than Allah as* *'ibada; the reason being that in
the beginning of verse, it says* أدعوني أستجب لكم *and following that it
says:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يستكبرون عن عبادتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Therefore, anyone who calls the Prophet (s)* *and or a pious person or
asks to intercede for fulfilling his or her needs, or says “You help in
repaying my debt”, or says “You cure my sickness”, then in these cases
this person has, with such sayings, worshipped them because the reality
of worship is nothing but calling someone. As a result of such calling,
he has worshipped (someone) other than Allah and has become a polytheist
since monotheism of divinity* [^1] *(i.e there is no Creator and
Sustainer except Allah) should be accompanied with monotheism of worship
which means not worshipping anyone except Him.”*

### Reply

There is no doubt about this fact that the word of **دُعا** in Arabic
means ‘to call’ and the term **عبادات** means ‘to worship’ and one can
never reckon these two words to be synonymous to each other; and say
that both give the same meaning. In other words, one cannot say that
every call and plead is *'ibada* (worship) because: Firstly, in the Holy
Qur’an, the word of **دعوت** (calling) has been used in instances where
it does not give the meaning of ‘worship’ at all.

Like:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبِّ إِنِّي دَعَوْتُ قَوْمِي لَيْلًا وَنَهَارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He said: ‘O Lord! I called my nation (towards Thee) day and night.
(Nuh 71:5)’”***

Can we say that the intention of Nuh was to say “I worshipped my nation
day and night!”?

The Qur'an quotes Satan as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَانَ لِيَ عَلَيْكُمْ مِنْ سُلْطَانٍ إِلَّا أَنْ دَعَوْتُكُمْ
فَاسْتَجَبْتُمْ لِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I did not have any authority upon you except that I called you
(towards evil deeds) and you obliged.*** ***(Ibrahim 14:22)”***

Is it possible for anyone to interpret Satan's calling to mean that he
has worshipped his followers!? If it was an act of worship it was from
the side of the followers of Satan and not from Satan himself.

In this verse and tens of other un-mentioned verses, the word of
**دعوت** (calling) has not been used in the meaning of **عبادات**
(worship). Therefore, one cannot say that **دعوت**and **عبادات** are
synonymous to each other and based on this, conclude that if anyone
seeks help and calls the Prophets or the virtuous people, he has
worshipped them. [^2]

Secondly, by **دُعا** in these verses is not meant as absolute calling
but refers to some special calling which can be synonymous to the word
of **عبادات** because, all these verses have come down with regard to
the idol-worshippers who believed their idols to be small gods who were
entrusted with some of the divine ranks and who possessed some kind of
independence in their affairs.

Let it not be unsaid that humbleness and humility or any kind of
utterance or behaviour in front of a creature either as a big God or
small god if it is with this intention that he is God, Lord, and the
Owner of affairs like *shafa'a* and forgiveness, then it will be
*'ibada* or worship. There is no doubt that the humility of the
idol-worshippers and their pleading and calling were before those idols
which they depicted as the owners of the right of intercession etc., and
considered them as the independent authority in the affairs of this
world and the Hereafter.

It is apparent that under these circumstances, any kind of pleading and
calling towards these creatures is *'ibada* or worship. The most obvious
witness to the fact that their pleadings and callings were accompanied
with the belief in their divinity is this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَا أَغْنَتْ عَنْهُمْ آلِهَتُهُمُ الَّتِي يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ
اللَّهِ مِنْ شَيْءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So their gods whom they called upon besides Allah did not avail them
ought.*** ***(Hud 11:101)”***

Therefore, the verses under discussion have no relation to the main
point of our discussion.

The topic of our discussion is pleading of one slave to another slave
who neither considers him as God nor Lord nor as the Owner and
independent authority in the worldly and heavenly affairs. Rather, he
reckons him to be a beloved servant of Allah who has appointed him to
the position of Prophethood and Imamate and promised to accept his
prayers with regards to His slaves. As verse says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ إِذْ ظَلَمُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ جَاءُوكَ فَاسْتَغْفَرُوا
اللَّهَ وَاسْتَغْفَرَ لَهُمُ الرَّسُولُ لَوَجَدُوا اللَّهَ تَوَّابًا
رَحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And had they, when they were unjust to themselves, come to you and
asked forgiveness of Allah and the Apostle had (also) asked forgiveness
for them, they would have found Allah Oft-returning (to mercy),
Merciful.*** ***(Nisa 4:64)”***

Thirdly, in the aforementioned verses itself, there is a clear evidence
that by **دعوت**is not meant absolute asking for ones affairs and needs
but refers to asking and calling in the sense of Ibadat and worship. For
this reason, in one of the verses, the word of *'ibada* immediately
follows the word of **دعوت**giving the same meaning. Like:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ رَبُّكُمُ ادْعُونِي أَسْتَجِبْ لَكُمْ ۚ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ
يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ عَنْ عِبَادَتِي سَيَدْخُلُونَ جَهَنَّمَ دَاخِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And your Lord says: Call upon Me, I will answer you, surely those
who are too proud for My service shall soon enter hell abased.***
***(Ghafir 40:60)”***

Just as you must have noticed, in the beginning of the verse the word of
**ادعوني** and following the same verse the word of **عبادتي**has come
and this clearly shows that by this **دعوت**is meant some special
pleading and beseeching before a creature whom they recognized by the
divine qualities.

The master of the prostrators, Imam Zayn al-'Abidin (‘a) says in his
supplication as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فسميت دعاءك عبادة وتركه استكباراً وتوعَّدت على تركه دخول جهَّنهم
داخرين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Thou have named Thy calling as worship and its abandonment as pride
and Thou have promised a miserable entry into the fire for those who
abandon it.”*** [^3]

And sometimes in two verses where the contents are similar, we see in
one place the word of **عبادات** and in another place the word of
**دعوت**Like:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَتَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ مَا لَا يَمْلِكُ لَكُمْ ضَرًّا
وَلَا نَفْعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Do you serve besides Allah that which does not control for you
any harm, or any profit?*** ***(Maida: 76)”***

In another verse it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَنَدْعُو مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ مَا لَا يَنْفَعُنَا وَلَا يَضُرُّنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Shall we call on that besides Allah, which does not benefit us
nor harm us. (An’am: 71)”***

In Sura Fatir, verse 13 it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِهِ مَا يَمْلِكُونَ مِنْ قِطْمِيرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those whom you call upon besides Him do not control a straw.”***

In this verse, the word of **تدعون**is used whereas in another verse
which contains the same contents the word of **تعبدون** is used.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ تَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ لَا يَمْلِكُونَ لَكُمْ
رِزْقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely they whom you serve besides Allah do not control for you any
sustenance.*** ***(Ankabut: 17)”***

Sometimes, in one verse, both the words have appeared and has been used
in the same meaning:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنِّي نُهِيتُ أَنْ أَعْبُدَ الَّذِينَ تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ
اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: I am forbidden to serve those*** ***whom you call upon besides
Allah.*** ***(An’am: 56)”***

***“Say, I am forbidden from worshipping those which you call them (i.e.
worship them)”*** [^4]

Respected readers are requested to refer to *al-Mu'jam al-mufahras*
under the words **عبد** and **دُعا**so that they will witness as to how
in on verse the word of **عبادات** has come and in another verse the
word of **دعوت** has come giving the same meaning. This itself shows
that the meaning of **دعوت** in this verse, is *'ibada* and worship and
not absolute calling.

If you carefully pay attention to the whole set of verses wherein the
word of **دعوت**has been used in the sense of **عبادات** you will
realize that these verses either refer to the Great God of the Universe
whom all the monotheist believe in His Divinity, Lordship and Mastership
or refers to the idols where its worshippers considered them as small
gods and masters of intercession. Under these circumstances, reasoning
out with these verses for discussing about **دعوت** (calling) one of the
awliya and beseeching one of them who doesn’t have any of these
qualities is really astonishing.

[^1]: Contrary to the terminology of the Wahhabis, al-San'ani has used
the word of "الوهى"where as he should have, from their viewpoint, used
the word of "ربوني"

[^2]: From the viewpoint of relationship, calling and worship (general
and special) is in one direction. In case of asking help from someone
other than Allah but as a doer depending on God, it shows calling and
not worship. But in practical glorifications like ruku’ and sajda which
is accompanied with the belief in the divinity of the opposite person it
denotes ‘worship’ and notدُعا . In some instances, such as salat, both
دُعا and عبادات are applicable.

[^3]: Sahifat al-Sajjadiyya, supplication No.45 and what is meant is
Sura Ghafir verse 60.

[^4]: The same is the content of Sura Ghafir, verse 66.


