Political and Social Dimensions of Hajj
=======================================

Like Marxism, the school of Wahhabism too, when coming across the events
and phenomenon which go against the aim of their school of thought, tend
to draw a new line and issue some new commandments for the Muslims in
the course of time.

The victory of Islamic revolution in Iran brought up an extraordinary
fear in hearts of the political leaders of Wahhabi ideology. They became
very anxious from its influence over the neighbouring regions and very
the thought of awakening of their nations brought them pain and agony.

In the Hajj season, when our dear and noble country of Iran would, as a
revolutionary duty, engage in demonstrations and invite the Islamic
nations towards unity and cooperation against the blood-thirsty
Americans and international Communism[^1] and Zionism the politicians of
Sa’udi Arabia stretched their hands towards the clergy for conjuring up
a solution about this matter so that they could finally prohibit such
demonstrations.

'Abd al-'Aziz bin Baz, the *Mufti* of Sa’udi Arabia, prohibited
demonstrations under the pretext that *Hajj* is a devotional deed and
should not be mingled with the other matters. As a result, the police
attacked the pilgrims and the honourable guests to the House of Allah
with whips and arms. They entertained the pilgrims to the House of Allah
with curses, blows and bullets and instigated other people against them
and this incident continues every year.

This part of the book has been written in reply to the *fatwa* (verdict)
of the Mufti of Sa’udi Arabia and the political and social dimensions of
this duty have been explained from the viewpoint of verses, traditions
and the common practise of the muslims.

The aim of performing Hajj duties is to call for humility before God and
this matter is clear and apparent by paying attention to the Hajj
rituals.

*'Ibada* and worship of the Lord and non-worship of other than Him is
evident right from the beginning of the deeds till the last of them and
it is needless to mention them, especially if these actions are
accompanied with recommended prayers. We derive the following
conclusions from all such deeds:

Hajj is *'ibada* and worship of the true Lord in the best possible
circumstances.

Hajj is expressing humility with honour before God in the best form.

Hajj is beseeching and weeping before God in its deepest form.

Hajj is such an *'ibada* where all kinds of elements of expression of
devotion and bondage have been collected and one can clearly witness
humility, submission, piety, deliverance from desires and attachments of
this world.

The pilgrims to the House of Allah exhibit their deliverance from
material manifestations by wearing two pieces of cloths and in this way,
show that except for Allah, they have no interest in anything even to
their sons, family and relatives. The only thing which preoccupies the
minds of the pilgrims to the House of Allah is the saying of *labbayk*
in one harmonious voice.

This matter is completely evident and clear by paying attention to the
obligatory acts of Hajj, the places where these acts are to be performed
and the stops where the pilgrims have to make a halt. Therefore, one
should consider Hajj to be the greatest devotional act and the greatest
religious obligation.

However, apart from this matter, there is another matter to be looked
into and that is whether this act, apart from *'ibada*, has any
political and social dimensions or not? Or is it that, like the midnight
prayers, it ends only and only in *Ibadat* and worship without having
any relation with the common Islamic problems!

In other words, has God made Hajj obligatory upon all the Muslims
whether men or women and young or old so that with such deeds they
worship their Lord and except for this worship it does not hold any
political and social dimensions.

Or is it that this obligation is the point of combination for Ibadat and
politics and is the centre of relating worship of God with the other
social and economic matters. It is this matter which we are going to
discuss and we shall see that what the Qur’anic verses, the Islamic
traditions (hadiths) and the practise of virtuous companions approve is
the second point.

Observing the Benefits of Hajj
------------------------------

The Holy Qur’an describes the Hajj of Ibrahim ('a) as follows:

> وَأَذِّنْ فِي النَّاسِ بِالْحَجِّ يَأْتُوكَ رِجَالًا وَعَلَىٰ كُلِّ
> ضَامِرٍ يَأْتِينَ مِنْ كُلِّ فَجٍّ عَمِيقٍ {27}

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَشْهَدُوا مَنَافِعَ لَهُمْ وَيَذْكُرُوا اسْمَ اللَّهِ فِي أَيَّامٍ
مَعْلُومَاتٍ عَلَىٰ مَا رَزَقَهُمْ مِنْ بَهِيمَةِ الْأَنْعَامِ ۖ
فَكُلُوا مِنْهَا وَأَطْعِمُوا الْبَائِسَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> الْفَقِيرَ {28}

> ثُمَّ لْيَقْضُوا تَفَثَهُمْ وَلْيُوفُوا نُذُورَهُمْ وَلْيَطَّوَّفُوا
> بِالْبَيْتِ الْعَتِيقِ {29}

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَٰلِكَ وَمَنْ يُعَظِّمْ حُرُمَاتِ اللَّهِ فَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لَهُ عِنْدَ
رَبِّهِ ۗ وَأُحِلَّتْ لَكُمُ الْأَنْعَامُ إِلَّا مَا يُتْلَىٰ
عَلَيْكُمْ ۖ فَاجْتَنِبُوا الرِّجْسَ مِنَ الْأَوْثَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> وَاجْتَنِبُوا قَوْلَ الزُّورِ {30}

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُنَفَاءَ لِلَّهِ غَيْرَ مُشْرِكِينَ بِهِ ۚ وَمَنْ يُشْرِكْ بِاللَّهِ
فَكَأَنَّمَا خَرَّ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ فَتَخْطَفُهُ الطَّيْرُ أَوْ تَهْوِي
بِهِ الرِّيحُ فِي مَكَانٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> سَحِيقٍ {31}

> ذَٰلِكَ وَمَنْ يُعَظِّمْ شَعَائِرَ اللَّهِ فَإِنَّهَا مِنْ تَقْوَى
> الْقُلُوبِ {32}

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَكُمْ فِيهَا مَنَافِعُ إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ مُسَمًّى ثُمَّ مَحِلُّهَا إِلَى
الْبَيْتِ الْعَتِيقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And proclaim among men the pilgrimage: they will come to you on foot
and on every lean camel, coming from every remote path, that they may
witness benefits for them and mention*** ***the name of Allah during
stated days over what He has given them of the cattle quadrupeds, then
eat of them and feed the distressed one, the needy. Then let them
accomplish their needful acts of shaving and cleansing, and let them
fulfil their vows and let them go round the Ancient House.***

***That (shall be so); and whoever respects the sacred ordinances of
Allah, it is better for him with his Lord; and the cattle are made
lawful for you, therefore avoid the uncleanness of the idols and avoid
false words, Being upright for Allah, not associating aught with Him and
whoever associates (others ) with Allah, it is as though he had fallen
from on high, then the birds snatch him away or the wind carries him off
to a far-distant place.*** ***That (shall be so); and whoever respects
the signs of Allah, this surely is (the outcome) of the pity of hearts.
You have benefits in them till a fixed time, then their place of
sacrifice is the Ancient House. (Hajj: 27-33)”***

From among all these verses consider the second verse and ponder deeply
over this sentence, **ليشهدوا منافع للناس** so that it becomes clear
that:

Firstly, what is meant by these benefits where the pilgrims to the House
of Allah should be a witness. The fact that this sentence has come
before the sentence **ويذكروا اسم الله** somewhat shows that Hajj
possesses two dimensions, a devotional dimension which is embodied in
praise and remembrance of Allah and the social dimension which ends in
the witness of the benefits and;

Secondly: in this verse, **منافع** (benefits) which is an indicator to
social and political dimension is prior to **ذكر الله** (remembrance of
Allah).

Thirdly, the Holy Qur’an has brought the word of **منافع**in absolute
terms and without any restrictions so that it includes every kind of
benefits; economical, political and social and we have no right to adopt
this word and restrict its meaning to a particular benefit. We should
include in it, the economic benefits or social and political benefits.
This word, by decree of the next sentence ويذكروا **اسم الله** shows
that apart from devotion, Hajj possesses another domain which one should
benefit from and we should not consider it to be a dry *'ibada* having
no relation with the lives of the muslims.

It is advisable at this stage to know in what manner, the former head of
al-Azhar, Shaikh Mahmud Shaltut has interpreted this sentence.

He says: The **منافع** (benefits), where Hajj is the perceptional and
acquirable channel for that and which has been set forth as the foremost
philosophy of Hajj, is having a wide and comprehensive meaning which
cannot be concluded in any special forms. Rather, this sentence, with
all the universality and commonness it possesses, contains all personal
and social benefits. If purification of the soul and seeking proximity
of Allah are benefits, then seeking advice too is benefit. If these two
are reckoned to be benefits then, inviting the Muslims for centralizing
their forces for the spread of Islam too is a benefit. Therefore,
according to the necessities of time and the conditions of the Muslims,
these benefits differ in every era. [^2]

In another place too, the former Shaykh of Al-Azhar says:

‘By paying attention to the special position which Hajj enjoys in Islam
and the aims which have been set forth in it for one individual and one
society, it is worthy that people of knowledge, wisdom and culture, (the
responsible persons in charge of administrative and political affairs,
the experts in financial and economical affairs, the teachers in laws
and religion and the people in the battle-front) give special importance
to it (and a group derives its benefits from Hajj).

It is worthy that people from all walks of life make haste towards this
divine House. It is worthy that people of knowledge, insight, *ijtihad*
and faith and the ones possessing lofty aims gather over there so that
it is seen as to how Mecca spreads its wings of mercy over them and how
it collects their slogan of *tawhid* in and around the House and (so
that) they finally engage in seeking recognition, advice and help from
each other and then they leave for their respective countries as one
nation and with a single heart and united goals and outlook. [^3]

The point which is worthy of attention is this that just after the
aforesaid verses (which all manifested the position and benefits of
Hajj) the Holy Qur’an concludes the discussion with verses about *jihad*
and safeguarding of Islamic frontiers. As the Holy Qur’an says:

> إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُدَافِعُ عَنِ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا
> يُحِبُّ كُلَّ خَوَّانٍ كَفُورٍ {38}

> أُذِنَ لِلَّذِينَ يُقَاتَلُونَ بِأَنَّهُمْ ظُلِمُوا ۚ وَإِنَّ اللَّهَ
> عَلَىٰ نَصْرِهِمْ لَقَدِيرٌ {39}

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ أُخْرِجُوا مِنْ دِيَارِهِمْ بِغَيْرِ حَقٍّ إِلَّا أَنْ
يَقُولُوا رَبُّنَا اللَّهُ ۗ وَلَوْلَا دَفْعُ اللَّهِ النَّاسَ
بَعْضَهُمْ بِبَعْضٍ لَهُدِّمَتْ صَوَامِعُ وَبِيَعٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> وَصَلَوَاتٌ وَمَسَاجِدُ يُذْكَرُ فِيهَا اسْمُ اللَّهِ كَثِيرًا ۗ
> وَلَيَنْصُرَنَّ اللَّهُ مَنْ يَنْصُرُهُ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَقَوِيٌّ
> عَزِيزٌ {40}

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ إِنْ مَكَّنَّاهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَقَامُوا الصَّلَاةَ
وَآتَوُا الزَّكَاةَ وَأَمَرُوا بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَنَهَوْا عَنِ
الْمُنْكَرِ ۗ وَلِلَّهِ عَاقِبَةُ الْأُمُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah will defend those who believe; surely Allah does not
love anyone who is unfaithful, ungrateful. Permission (to fight) is
given to those upon whom war is made because they are oppressed, and
most surely Allah is well able to assist them, those who have been
expelled from their homes without adjust cause except that they say: Our
Lord is Allah. And had there not been Allah's repelling some people by
others, certainly there would have been pulled down cloisters and
churches and synagogues and mosques in which Allah's name is much
remembered; and surely Allah will help him who helps His cause; most
surely Allah is Strong, Mighty. Those who, should We establish them in
the land, will keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and enjoin good and
forbid evil; and Allah's is the end of affairs.*** ***(Hajj: 41-48)”***

Is it that the presentation of verses of *jihad* and defence just after
the verses of Hajj or so to say, the coming together of verses of Hajj
and Jihad is accidental and without any reason. Never! Qur’an never
brings together in one place the nonproportional verses and then fails
to observe their relation.

In accordance with the unity and necessity of relation between these two
sets of verses, we realize that there exists a special relation between
Hajj and *jihad*; between the field of intellect and the field of
defence and for such a relationship, the place of Hajj is the best place
where the Muslims can prepare themselves mentally and spiritually so
much so that they can rub the nose of the proud to the ground and pull
down the knees of colonization.

Yes, this great divine Congress where the representatives of every
nation gather is the best opportunity for the intellectuals amongst them
to come together and discuss their political and defensive matters and
form a united row before the enemies and teach them an unforgettable
lesson. Even though this duty is not confined to the time and place of
Hajj and rather the Muslims should face the enemies under any given
situation and time, yet the time of Hajj and the gathering of Muslims at
that place is the best opportunity for fulfilling this divine
obligation.

It is not only Shaykh Shaltut who has interpreted **منافع** (benefits)
which has come down in the verses in the general sense but the old
exegetist of Ahl al-Sunnah al-Tabari, after commenting a few words on
this matter, specifies that the most worthy utterance in the
interpretation of this verse is to say: God has meant a general concept
from this sentence. That is to say, the Muslims should perceive every
kind of benefits which is possible at any time or to derive every kind
of worldly and heavenly benefits and no tradition or rational decree has
assigned any special meaning for this sentence (which is having a
comprehensive meaning) [^4]

Ka’ba is the Existence of Life
------------------------------

The Holy Qur’an describes Ka'ba and *Bayt al-haram* by the following
sentence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَعَلَ اللَّهُ الْكَعْبَةَ الْبَيْتَ الْحَرَامَ قِيَامًا لِلنَّاسِ
وَالشَّهْرَ الْحَرَامَ وَالْهَدْيَ وَالْقَلَائِدَ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ
لِتَعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ يَعْلَمُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي
الْأَرْضِ وَأَنَّ اللَّهَ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah has made the Ka’ba, the sacred house, maintenance for the
people, and the sacred month and the offerings and the sacrificial
animals with garlands, this is that you may know that Allah knows
whatever is*** ***in the heavens and whatever is in the earth, and that
Allah is the Knower of all things.*** ***(Maida: 97)”***

The word of **قيام** which has come down in this verse, can be seen in
another verse too. As:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تُؤْتُوا السُّفَهَاءَ أَمْوَالَكُمُ الَّتِي جَعَلَ اللَّهُ
لَكُمْ قِيَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And do not give away your property which Allah has made for you a
(means of) support.*** ***(Nisa: 5)”***

Here, gives the meaning of existence and in fact is synonymous with
pillar and the meaning of the verse is this that the Hajj ceremonies and
the *ziyara* of Ka'ba and one's presence near the House of Allah is the
mainstay for the existence of worldly and heavenly life of the Islamic
community.

Gathering during Hajj season, not only ensures the spiritual life of the
Muslims but is the source of making secure every kind of element that
has a great influence in one's individual and social life. Pondering
over the meaning of this verse, guides us to a more comprehensive
meaning i.e. whatever is related to the interests of the Muslims and are
reckoned to be their life and existence is ensured in this Hajj season.
With such general application and extensive saying, is it possible to
conclude and limit this matter to only and only the interests related to
*'ibada* and worship?

What better expediency is better than one political platform that
organizes and unites the Muslims against the colonists and the
exploiters and makes them steadfast and encourages them to stand united
in the battle against them. The Holy Qur’an does not allow the parents
or guardians of the insane to give their wealth which is the source of
their living and existence to them. It emphatically says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا تُؤتُوا السفهاء أموالكم التي جعل الله لكم قياماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And do not give away your property which Allah has made for you a
(means of) support. (Nisa: 5)”***

Considering the contents of this verse, is it proper that the Hajj
formalities should fall in the hands of those who are unaware of it and
are fully heedless of the role it plays in the lives of the Muslims!

To acquaint the respected readers with the views of the commentators who
focused on the same axis, we present here some of their views regarding
the sentence of **قياماً للناس**

Al-Tabari says: “God has bestowed Ka'ba and *Bayt al-Haram* as a life
for the people!

Moreover, he later says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وجعلها معالم لدينهم ومصالح أمورهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“He has made Ka'ba the place of signs of people's beliefs and the base
for their interests and* *affairs.”* [^5]

The author of *Al-Manar* in interpreting the afore-mentioned verse,
says:

“God has made the Ka'ba a pillar for the people's religious affairs in
such manner that it refines their morals and trains them. These are
achieved through the Hajj obligations which is the greatest foundation
of our religion and it is an *'ibada* which is spiritual (but)
containing the economic and social dimensions. "

Then, he continues and says: "This **جعل** in the verse **حعل الله**
refers to both **تكويني** (creation) and **تشريعي** (laws) which
guarantees every kind of worldly and heavenly interests of the people."
[^6]

Expression of Aversion On The Occasion Of Hajj
----------------------------------------------

Even if you doubt in the generality of the sentence ليشهدوا منافع لهم
and orقياماً للناس yet you cannot doubt in the action of the Holy
Prophet’s (s) representative in the Hajj season which was totally a
political affair.

Because, in the year 9th Hijri, the Holy Prophet (s) gave charge to Ali
(‘a) to read out a letter which contained expression of disgust towards
the polytheists. This was at the time when 16 verses from the beginning
of Sura Bara'a (*Tauba*) were revealed to the Prophet (s) which
comprises of the following:

> بَرَاءَةٌ مِنَ اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ إِلَى الَّذِينَ عَاهَدْتُمْ مِنَ
> الْمُشْرِكِينَ {1}

> فَسِيحُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ أَرْبَعَةَ أَشْهُرٍ وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّكُمْ
> غَيْرُ مُعْجِزِي اللَّهِ ۙ وَأَنَّ اللَّهَ مُخْزِي الْكَافِرِينَ {2}

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَذَانٌ مِنَ اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ إِلَى النَّاسِ يَوْمَ الْحَجِّ
الْأَكْبَرِ أَنَّ اللَّهَ بَرِيءٌ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ ۙ وَرَسُولُهُ ۚ
فَإِنْ تُبْتُمْ فَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لَكُمْ ۖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ تَوَلَّيْتُمْ فَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّكُمْ غَيْرُ مُعْجِزِي اللَّهِ ۗ
وَبَشِّرِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"(This is a declaration of) immunity by Allah and His Apostle to
wards those of the idolaters with whom you made an agreement. So go
about in the land for four months and know that you cannot weaken Allah
and that Allah will bring disgrace to the unbelievers. And an
announcement from Allah and His Apostle to the people on the day of the
greater pilgrimage that Allah and His Apostle are free from liability to
the idolaters, therefore if you repent, it will be better for you, and
if you turn back, then know that you will not weaken Allah; and announce
painful punishment to those who disbelieve. (Tauba: 1-3)”***

After reciting these verses, Amir al-mu'minin (‘a) issued a four-point
resolution as such:

Behold O polytheists!

(a) The idol-worshippers have no right to enter the House of Allah.

(b) Circumambulation in the state of uncovered body is prohibited.

(c) Henceforth, no idol-worshipper will take part in the Hajj ceremony.

(d) Those that have signed a non-aggression treaty with the Holy Prophet
(s) and have been loyal in their treaty will be faithfully respected.
However, for those polytheists who are not having any pact with the
Muslims or have intentionally dishonoured their pact, they will be given
from this date (10th Dhu'l hijja) four months to clarify their stance
before the Islamic Government or will have to join the monotheists and
break-off from polytheism and dualism or prepare themselves for war.
[^7]

What deed can be more political than this action where, in the midst of
Hajj duties when the Muslims and polytheists were engaged in
circumambulation, Ali (‘a) climbs a high place and starts nullifying
some of the points of treaty and gives a four month deadline to either
discard polytheism and join the ranks of the monotheists or face the
consequences of a war.

Political Elegy of Farazdaq in Masjid al-Haram
----------------------------------------------

Once, during Hajj time, when Hisham son of 'Abdul Malik was
circumambulating the Ka’aba amidst a huge crowd, he tried many times to
kiss *al-hajar al-'aswad*. However, due to the enormous crowd, Hisham
did not get a chance and helplessly sat at one corner and glared at the
people. Suddenly he saw a thin, good-looking, divinely-bright
personality gradually advancing towards *al-hajar al-'aswad*. The people
respected him and involuntarily moved back so that he could easily reach
*al-hajar al-'aswad*. The people of Syria who were around Ibn 'Abdul
Malik asked him: Who is this man? Hisham, even though he knew that
personality very well refrained from introducing Imam and instead lied
and said: I don’t know him.

At this moment, a poet by the name of Farazdaq who enjoyed special
freedom and liberty un-hesitantly recited some poems and in this way,
introduced Imam al-Sajjad ('a) very nicely. Some of the verses of his
poem are as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا الذي تعرف البطحاء وطأته والبيت يعرفه والحِل والحرم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا ابن خير عباد الله كلهم هذا التقي النقيّ الطاهر العلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا ابن فاطمة إن كنت جاهله بجده انبياء الله قد خُتم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تكاد يُمسكه عِرفان راحته رُكن الحطيمم إذا ما جاء يستلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“He is someone who, the soil of Batha' is aware of his footprints and*
*Ka'ba, the House and its exterior are well-acquainted with him; He is
the son of the best servants of Allah; He is pious, pure, holy and
well-known. If you are unaware of him, he is the son of Fatima,
(daughter of the Holy Prophet (s). Soon, when he will touch
al-Hajar-ul-Aswad, it will not release his well-recognized hand.”* [^8]

The poem of al-Farazdaq had such far-reaching effect that Hisham became
wild and angry and immediately ordered for his arrest. When Imam ('a)
became aware of this matter, he consoled al-Farazdaq very much.

Political and Social Dimensions of Hajj in Islamic Traditions
-------------------------------------------------------------

So far, it has somewhat become clear from the verses and ways of the
Holy Prophet (s) that Hajj, while being one devotional deed, is
evidently having a political aspect too where sometimes the Holy Prophet
(s) himself considered them as identical. The Holy Prophet (s) has also
referred to this aspect in traditions which we shall now mention a few
of them:

In the book of *Al-Taj al-jami' li al-'usul fi ahadith al-Rasul,* vol. 2
pages 98-99, one can find the Holy Prophet (s) narrating as such:

(I) The best *jihad* is the Hajj which has been accepted. [^9]

(II) Hajj and 'Umra is a universal *jihad* and in that, men, women, the
weak and the powerful participate. [^10]

(III) Is there a *jihad* for women? Yes! there is *jihad* for women
wherein there is no battle but taking part in the Hajj ceremony. [^11]

(IV) The chosen ones before Allah are these: Those participating in
*jihad* and the pilgrims to the House of God for Hajj and for Umra.
[^12]

In this tradition, Hajj has been introduced as universal *jihad* and as
*jihad* for women and in the last part of the tradition, those
participating in *jihad* and those participating in Hajj are introduced
as the chosen ones whom Allah has invited.

If in this tradition, Hajj has been called as *jihad*, (then) there
should exist a kind of sign and similarity between these two that one
can apply the word of *jihad* to another. One of the reasons why Hajj is
called a *jihad* is because Hajj is similar to *jihad* in its objectives
and effects. This divine obligation, apart from being *'ibada*, is also
an occasion for special endeavour in pre-determined matters. The
strategies for practical *jihad* and the means and method of cooperation
between the Muslims are set forth on this very occasion.

Political Speech of the Holy Prophet (s) at the Time of Hajj
------------------------------------------------------------

A great and splendid gathering had taken place in Masjid al-Haram around
the House of God. The Muslims and polytheists, the friends and foes had
all come together and an aura of greatness had surrounded the
environment of the mosque due to the magnificence of Islam and the
greatness of Holy Prophet (s)

At such a moment, the Holy Prophet (s) began to speak by describing for
the people the actual visage of his invitation which had taken twenty
years from the date of its commencement. We bring here some of those
historical sayings:

(a) O people, under the light of Islam, God took away from you the (so
called) glories and the impunable acts attributed to your genealogy
which was prevalent during the period of ignorance (*jahiliyyah*). All
have come into existence from Adam and he too has been created from
soil. The best of the people is he who refrains from sins and
disobedience. [^13]

(b) O people, being an Arab is not a part of your nature. Rather, it is
only a lip-service. Anyone who is negligent in his duties then the
glories of his fathers and forefathers will be of no avail and will not
make any amends for his shortcomings. [^14]

(c) All the people of the past and present are similar and equal like
the teeth of a comb and no Arab is having preference over non-Arab nor
the white over the black. The standard for excellency is piety and fear
of God. [^15]

(d) I abrogate all the claims related to life and property and all the
delusive glories of the pars period and declare all of them as baseless.
[^16]

(e) A Muslim is the brother of another Muslim and all the Muslims are
brothers to each other and before the strangers they have one common
order. Their blood is the same as each other and the lowest amongst them
can make a commitment on behalf of the Muslims. [^17]

(f) After accepting this religion, do not take an about turn where in
such instances has resulted in the deviation of some and caused them to
become the owners of each others. [^18]

(g) Your blood and your property are forbidden for you and are
honourable like the honour of this day, this month and this city. [^19]

(h) All the blood which has been shed in the period of ignorance is
declared to be in vain and the first blood which I keep under my foot is
the blood of Rabie son of Harith. [^20]

(i) Every Muslim is the brother of another Muslim and all the Muslims
are brothers (to each other). Nothing from his property is permissible
for another except if he gives him as a good -will. [^21]

(j) There are three things which the heart of a believer is never
disloyal to:

(i) Sincerity in action for the sake of God.  
 (ii) Wishing goodness for the true leaders.  
 (iii) Attending the gathering of the believers. [^22]

Political Poems at the Time of Victory of Mecca
-----------------------------------------------

At the time of victory of Mecca, the Muslims, before the very perplexed
eyes of the polytheists were ordered, apart from performing their Hajj
obligation, to call out and say the following *du'a* which is full of
monotheism and epic.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا إله إلا الله وحده لا شريك له وله المُلك وله الحمد يُحيي ويُميت وهو
على كل شئ قدير. لا إله إلا الله وحده أنجز
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعده ونصر عبده وهزم الأحزاب وحده.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"There is no god except Allah; there is no partner for Him and the
Kingdom belongs to Him. (All) Praise is for Him; He gives* *life and
causes death and He is Powerful over all things. There is no god except
Allah; He is alone. He has fulfilled His promise and helped His servant
and alone He has destroyed the collective powers."* [^23]

### Signals and Implications

The Holy Prophet (s) has not restrained himself with such type of
expressions in determining the political dimension of Hajj. Sometimes,
through signs and indication, he showed that the most trivial actions of
Hajj are not far from political dimensions.

In so much as in the endeavour between Safa and Marwa at one particular
place, he increased his speed in walking so that in this way he wanted
to reject the gossip of the polytheists who spread rumours that due to
the inclemency of the weather of Medina, the Muhajirs (immigrants) and
helpers of Prophet (s) had become weak. Therefore in "Umra-Qadha" he
ordered the people to walk faster in the endeavour (between Safa and
Marwa) and while circumambulating in order to show their strength to the
polytheists. [^24]

In the prayers of *tawaf* the Holy Prophet (s) recited Sura al-Tawhid in
the first unit and Sura al-Kafirun in the second unit. All are aware
what dimensions, the contents of these two Suras have and how they
refute and forbid every kind of nonmonotheistic thoughts or unity with
any side from the camps of disbelief (*kufr*).

It is seen in history that at the time of touching or kissing *al-hajar
al-'aswad,* the Muslims used to recite the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله والله أكبر على ما هدانا لا إله إلا الله لا شريك له أمنت بالله
وكفرت بالطاغوت
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In the name of God, and God is great for He guides us, there is no God
save Allah, there is no partner to Him, I believe in God and I deny*
*Taghut* *(Tyrant)”* [^25]

Political Dimensions of Hajj in the Words of Inerrant Leaders
-------------------------------------------------------------

(a) Imam al-Sadiq (‘a): About the philosophy of Hajj and the secrets of
its legislations Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) say as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وجعل فيه الإجتماع من المشرق والمغرب والمغرب ليتعارفوا ولتُعرف اثار
رسول الله وتُعرف اخباره ولا تُنسى ولو
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كان كُل قوم إنما يتكلون على بلادهم وما فيها هلكُوا وخربت البلاد وسقط
الجَلب والأرباح وعميت الأخبار ولم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يقفوا على ذلك وذلك علة الحج.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"In the land of Mecca, there manifested a gathering from East and West
so that the people recognize each other and the effects of the Holy
Prophet's works (traditions) are recognized and not forgotten. If every
group depended upon what was taking place in their own lands, they would
be destroyed, the cities would head towards ruin, the trade and economic
affairs would collapse and the news and information would not reach the
people. This is the philosophy of Hajj.”* [^26]

This sentence shows that Hajj possesses scientific, economic and
political aspects. In fact, Hajj is a connecting chain between the
Muslims of the world who in this way engage in exchange of news and
current situation of the world and acquire knowledge of the traces and
*Sunnah* (practices) of the Prophet (s) which has been disseminated
through the companions, disciples of the companions and the scholars of
Hadith from the East and West. Meanwhile, every group present their
goods over there and the method of trade and commerce is acquired and
recognized.

(b) Again Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما مِن بُقعة أحب إلى الله مِن المسعى لأنه يُذل فيه كل جبار
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“**No spot of the world is more lovable to Allah than the place of
endeavour between Safaa and Marwa because in this place all the stubborn
people become abject and miserable and exhibit their servitude and
bondage.”* [^27]

(c) History, very clearly reports that the companions and the disciples
of the companions derived benefits from this occasion to the advantage
of Islam and the Muslims. The seed of most of the uprisings and movement
for freedom originated from here and on such an occasion the nations
would be invited to fight and combat the unjust rulers. Suffice it is in
this case to listen to the words of al-Husayn ibn Ali ('a) on the day of
Mina. At Hajj time, he called together the names of the sons of Ibn
Hisham, the great personalities, their women and even the Ansars who had
interest in him such that more than one thousand people attended his
speech. At this moment, when the companions and their sons were
listening to his speech, he began his speech as such

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أما بعد فإن هذا الطاغية قد صنع بنا ما قد علمتم ورأيتهم وشهدتم وبلغنكم
وإني أريد أن أسئلكم عن أشياء فإن صد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فصدقوني وإن كذبت فكذبوني اسمعُوا مقالتي واكتُموا قولي ثم إرجعوا إلى
امصاركم وقبائلكم من امَّنتُموه ووثقتم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
به فادعُوهم إلى ما تعلمون فإني اخاف أن يندرس هذا الحق ويذهب والله
مُتِم نُوره ولو كره الكافرون
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"After praising Allah and sending salutations upon the Holy Prophet
(s), he said: O people, Know that what evils this tyrant (Mu'awiya) has
committed against us to which you are all knowing and are aware* *about.
I ask you of some affairs which if you find truth in them, then approve
my saying and if I speak false, then reject my sayings. Now, listen to
my talks and keep them hidden in your hearts and thereafter return back
to your towns and among your tribes. You invite every person whom you
trust and have confidence towards what you have knowledge (religious
duty). I fear that the true religion gets eroded and nullified even
though God is the terminator of His light and the unbelievers dislike
it.”* [^28]

Thereafter, al-Husayn ibn Ali ('a) recited some verses which has been
revealed in favour of the Household of the Prophet and promised the
people that when they returned back to their home-towns, they should
relate his speech to the people whom they trust. Then he descended from
his pulpit and the people dispersed.

It was not only al-Husayn ibn Ali ('a) who had taken advantage of this
great gathering. Even the Christians and Jews who were living under the
protection of Islamic Government would, at times when their rights were
violated, plead for justice on such an occasion and demand back their
right from the Islamic ruler. This is a witness to the presence of such
a *Sunnah* (practice) amongst the Muslims. History has recorded it:

One of the coptics of Egypt, during the time of governership of 'Amr bin
al-'As, entered into a competition with the son of the ruler and won the
competition. The victory of one coptic over the son of ruler who was
dear to 'Amr bin al-'As and his son finally lead to his beating through
the son of 'Amr bin al-'As.

The coptic related the matter to the ruler of the time (‘Umar bin
al-Khattab) during Hajj time and explained his innocence. ‘Umar called
for the 'Amr bin al-'As and accounted a famous sentence in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
متى استعبدتم الناس وقد ولدنهم أمهاتهم أحرارً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Since when you have taken the people as your slaves whereas they have
been born free from their mothers!?”* [^29]

Thereafter he took revenge for the beaten one from the one who had
beaten him.

History has narrated such incidents on so many occasions that it itself
is a witness to the fact that Hajj is not only for worship and *'ibada*
and void of other dimensions. When Hajj is the centre of setting forth
complaints, then why it cannot be the centre of setting forth complaints
about the tyrant rulers of the East and West.

Sayings of Contemporary Thinkers about The Philosophy of Hajj
-------------------------------------------------------------

Now it is proper to narrate few sayings of the Islamic researchers about
Hajj responsibilities. We shall narrate three sayings from three
contemporary writers and one of them is the member of advisory board of
Abdul Aziz University in Sa’udi Arabia. Here is some portions of their
sayings:

(a) Farid Vajdi in the Islamic Da'irat al-Ma'arif writes about the
matter of Hajj as such:

“The philosophy of divine legislation of Hajj is not something which can
be explained in this book. What passes in one's mind is this that if all
the Islamic Governments take advantage from this occasion in
establishing Islamic unity amongst the Muslim nations, they will achieve
a perfect result because a gathering of tens of thousands of people from
different places in one common place and the attentiveness of their
hearts to those things which are inspired to them in this place creates
a special kind of impression in them and all return back to their
respective countries with one heart and there, they propagate to their
brothers whatever they have heard and learnt.

The example of this group is like the example of members of one big
congress which gather from all corners of the world and after the
termination of the congress disperse to different parts of the world
carrying a message. Whatever may be the result of this magnificent
Congress, gatherings on such occasions and later, the dispersion to the
home-towns bears the same result.

(b) Doctor al-Qardawi, the contemporary writer, writes in the book
*al-'Ibadah fi al-Islam* as such:

The greatest result which can be achieved from this gathering is that
Hajj is the most important factor for awakening the Islamic *ummah* from
its long sleep. For this reason, some of the puppet governments and
invaders of Islamic states become an obstacle for the Muslims from
visiting the House of Allah since they know that if the slightest
movement is set up amongst the Muslims, then no factor can stop them
from such a movement.

He writes in the book: *al-Din wa al-hajj 'ala al-madhahib al-'arba'a*,
on page 51 as such:

“Hajj is a means of acquaintance among the Muslims and the source of
forming affection and relation among the various kinds of people who
live under the banner of monotheism. This is because at such times their
hearts become one and their voice becomes united. Then, they embark on
rectifying their own condition and setting right the defects of their
own society.”

Doctor Muhammad Mubarak, advisor of al-Malik 'Abdul Aziz’ University
writes as such:

"Hajj is a world congress where all the Muslims gather in one line for
worshipping God. But this worship is not un-mixed and separate from
their lives. Rather, it possesses a special relation with their lives."

In this regard, the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَشْهَدُوا مَنَافِعَ لَهُمْ وَيَذْكُرُوا اسْمَ اللَّهِ فِي أَيَّامٍ
مَعْلُومَاتٍ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That they may witness advantages for them and mention the name of
Allah during stated days …..*** ***(Hajj, 22: 28)”***

By witness of the benefits and perception of the benefits nothing is
meant but a common purpose encompassing all the aspects of the affairs
of the Muslims.

Conclusion
----------

If truly the obligatory act of Hajj possesses such a place and position
which the Holy Qiran and Sunnah; the past practices of the Muslims and
the views of the contemporary writers guide us towards that then why
should we neglect in making use of it?

If Hajj is the means of introducing monotheism in the hearts and forming
a united front for the Muslims, then why shouldn't we mobilize through
this means, the Islamic forces and powers against the aggressors who
have committed oppression against the Islamic lands such as occupied
Palestine!? If Hajj exhibits scientific, cultural and economic
dimensions, then why shouldn't the Muslims during such an occasion find
a solution and ease their economic problems and other twisted matters?

Why shouldn't the oppressed ones of Palestine, Iraq, Afghanistan, Africa
and Lebanon be given the opportunity to cry out (their problems) in the
ears of the Muslims and why shouldn't they seek help from the Muslims in
defending their just rights?

During Hajj, why shouldn't vast and extensive gatherings and
congregations be held against the Eastern and Western Colonists and to
expose their plots so that the Muslims return back to their respective
countries with bright thoughts and united plans and programmes? For how
long should we lose such golden opportunities and bear these losses?

We hope for the day when the foreign hands, who are at work behind the
screen, are cut-off from the two holy shrines and the divine tombs and
the places of Islam are looked after by a group selected from the
Islamic society and the objectives of Hajj and its valuable effects are
fulfilled in its real sense.

[^1]: Russia was united at the time when this book was written

[^2]: Al-Shari'a wa al-'aqida, page 151.

[^3]: Al-Shari'a wa al-'aqida, page 150.

[^4]: Tafsir al-Tabari, vol.17 page 108 (Beirut print).

[^5]: Tafsir al-Tabari, vol. 7 page 49.

[^6]: Al-Manar, vol.7 page 11

[^7]: Tafsir al-Tabari, vol.10 page 47; Sira Ibn Hisham, vol. 4 page
545.

[^8]: Al-Aghani 5 vol. 21 page 376-377; Manaqib Ibn Shahr Ashub, vol. 4
page 169. The afore-said elegy of al-Farazdaq has come in most of the
historical and literary books. To doubt in the authenticity of this poem
is one kind of opposition with the reliable traditions.

[^9]: افضل الجهاد حج مبرور

[^10]: جهاد الكبير والصغير والضعيف والمرأة الحج والعمرة

[^11]: نعم عليهم جهاد لا قتال فيه الحد والعمرة

[^12]: وقَّد الله ثلاثة الغارى والحاج والمُعتمر

[^13]: ايها الناس إن الله قد أذهب عنكم نحوة الجاهلية وتفاخرها بابائها
ألا أنكم من أدم وأدم من طين إلا أن خير عبد اتقاه

[^14]: ألا أن العربية ليست "اب" والد ولكنها لسان ناطق فمن قصر عمله لم
يبلغ به حسبه.

[^15]: إن الناس من لدن ادم إلى يومنا هذا مثل اسنان المشظ لا فضل للعربي
على العجمي ولا للأحمر على الأسود إلا بالتقوى

[^16]: ألا إن كان مالٍ كان مال وماثرة ودمٍ في الجاهلية تحت قدمى هاتين

[^17]: المسلم أخ المسم والمسلمون اخوة وهم يد واحدة على من سواهم تتكافور
مائهم يسعى بذمتهم ادناهم

[^18]: لا ترجعوا بعدي كفار مضلين يملك بعضكم رقاب بعض

[^19]: إن دمائكم وأموالكم عليكم حرام كحُرمة يومكم هذا في شهركم ه1ا في
بلدكم هذا.

[^20]: ودماء الجاهلية موضوع وأول دمٍ أضعه دم ربيعة بن حارث.

[^21]:

[^22]: كل مسلم أخ المسلم وإن المسلمين اخوة فلا يحل لا مرئ من أخيه إلا ما
أعطا عن طيب نفسه منه. إن Our references for these are: Rawdat al-kafi,
page 246; Sira Ibn Hisham, vol. 2 page 412; al- Manar, al-Waqidi vol. 2
page 826 and others.

[^23]: Refer to the books of Hajj of Sahih Bukhari, Sahih Muslim and
others.

[^24]: Jami' al-'usul, vol. 4 Book of Hajj.

[^25]: Abu Walid al-'Azarqi, Ta'rikh Makka, vol.1 page 339.

[^26]: Bihar al-'anwar, vol. 99 page 33, narrated from 'Ilal
al-shara'i', by al-Saduq.

[^27]: Bihar al-'anwar, vol.19 page 49.

[^28]: Kitab Sulaym b. Qays al-Kufi, page 18.

[^29]: Farid Wajdi, book of Hajj vol.3 page 350 (Da'irat al-ma'arif).


