Construction of Mosque Near The Graves of Pious People
======================================================

Is construction of mosque near or in front of the grave of pious people
permissible or not? Supposing it is permitted, then what is the main
purpose of the tradition (hadith) of the Holy Prophet (s) regarding the
actions of Jews and Christians as it has come in a tradition that the
Holy Prophet (s) has cursed these two groups for considering the graves
of their Prophets as objects of worship? Moreover, is construction of
mosque near the graves of the Awliya inseparable with what has come down
in this tradition!?

**Answer:** By paying attention to the general principles of Islam,
construction of mosques, in the vicinity of graves of the awliya and
pious d oesn’t not have the least problem. This is because the purpose
of construction of mosque is nothing more than worshipping Allah near
the grave of His beloved who has become the source of receiving gifts.
In other words, the aim of establishing mosque in these instances is
that the visitors to the Divine leaders either before or after their
*ziyarat*, perform their duty of worship (*‘ibadat*) over there in as
much as neither *ziyara* to graves is forbidden (even from the viewpoint
of Wahhabis) nor performing of *salat*, after or before *ziyarat*.
Therefore, there is no reason to believe that the construction of mosque
near the graves of awliya for the purpose of worshipping Allah and
performing divine duties is forbidden.

By paying attention to the story of *Ashab al-Kahf* it is deduced that
this action was a custom prevalent in the previous religions and Qur’an
has narrated that without any criticism. When the incident of Companions
of Kahf was disclosed to the people of that time after 309 years, they
expressed their views about the ways of honouring the Companions of
Kahf. One group said that a structure should be made over their grave
(so that apart from honouring them their names, signs and memories are
kept alive). Qur’an expresses this view as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَالُوا ابْنُوا عَلَيْهِمْ بُنْيَانًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…..Erect an edifice over them…., (Kahf 18:21)”***

Another group said that a mosque should be built over their grave (and
in this way *tabarruk* sought). The Islamic commentators are unanimous
in their views.[^1] that the suggestion of the first group was related
to the polytheists and the suggestion of the second group was that of
the monotheists. The Qur’an, while narrating this saying, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الَّذِينَ غَلَبُوا عَلَىٰ أَمْرِهِمْ لَنَتَّخِذَنَّ عَلَيْهِمْ
مَسْجِدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Those who prevailed in their affair said: We will certainly raise a
masjid over them. (Kahf 18:21)*[^2]

History has it that the period of occurrence of the incidence of
Companions of Kahf was the period of victory of monotheism over
polytheism. There was no more of the sovereignty of the polytheists, nor
their calling the people towards idol-worshipping. Naturally, this
victorious group will be the same monotheist group, especially, that the
content of their suggestion was the matter of construction of mosque for
the sake of worshipping Allah. This itself is a witness that those
making the suggestion were monotheists and God-worshippers.

If really the construction of mosque over or near the grave of the holy
persons is a sin or polytheism, then why the monotheists made such a
suggestion and why Qur’an narrates this without any criticism? Is not
the narration of Qur’an together with this silence a testimony upon its
permissibility? It is never proper that God narrates the sign of
polytheism from a group but without specifically or implicitly
criticising them. And this reasoning is the same ‘assertion’ which has
been explained in *‘ilm al-‘usul.* (Methodology)

This event shows that it has been one kind of lasting conduct amongst
all the monotheists and was one way of honouring the one in grave or a
means of seeking *tabarruk*.

It was reasonable and polite of the Wahhabis that before arguing about
hadith, they should first have sought the reference from the Holy Qur’an
and then attempted the analysis of the tradition.

Now we shall discuss and examine their reasonings.

Reasoning Of Wahhabis That Construction Of Mosque Near Grave Is Forbidden
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

By presenting a series of traditions, the Wahhabis have analysed the
matter of construction of mosque near the grave of pious people to be
forbidden. We shall examine all such traditions:

Bukhari in his *Sahih* under the chapter of **يكره من إنخاذ المساجد على
القبور** narrates two traditions as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لما مات الحسن بن الحسن بن عليّ ضربَت إمراته القُبة عل قبره سنة ثم رفعت
فسمعوا صائحاً يقول الأهل وجدوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما فقدوا فاجابه الأخر بل يئسوا فانقلبوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

1. *When al-Hasan bin al-Hasan bin ‘Ali passed away his wife made a dome
(a tent) over his grave and after one year she removed it. It was heard
that one person cried out: “Have they found that which they had lost”,
another person replied: “No they have become disappointed and have given
up.”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لعن الله اليهود والنَّصار إتخذوا قبور انبيائهم مسجداً قالت (عائشة)
ولولا ذلك لابرزُوا قبره غير أنَّي أخش أن يُتخذ مسجداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. *May the curse of Allah be upon the Jews and Christians (for)
considering the graves of their Prophets as mosques. She (Ayesha) said:
“If it was not for this fear that the grave of the Holy Prophet (s)
would become a mosque, the Muslims would have kept his grave open (and
not put up a barrier around it).*

3. Muslim has narrated in *Sahih* the same tradition with slight
variation. As such we confine ourselves to narrating only one text. [^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا وإن من كان قبلكم كانُ,ا يتَّخذون قبور أنبيائهم وصالِحيهم مساجد ألا
فلا تتخذوا القُبور مساجد إنى أنهاكُم عن ذلك
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Know that people before you took the graves of their Prophets and the
pious people as mosques. Never take the graves as mosques, I forbid you
from that.* [^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن أُم حبيبة وأم سلمة ذكرتنا كنيسة رأيتها بالحبشة فيها تصاوير لرسول
الله (صلى الله عليه وأله) فقال رسول الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن أولئك إذا كان فيهم الرجُل الصالح فما بنوا على قبره مسجداً وصوَّروا
فيه تلك الصُور أولئك شرار الخلق عند
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الله يوم القيامة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4. *Umm Habiba and Umm Salama (Wives of the Holy Prophet) saw a
prophet's picture in the country of Ethiopia (when they had travelled to
that place along with a group). The Holy Prophet (s) said: They are such
people that whenever a pious man dies amongst them they construct a
mosque over his grave and draw his picture on it. They are the worst of
the people before God on the Day of Judgement.* [^5]

al-Nasa’i narrates from Ibn ‘Abbas in his *Sunan* under the chapter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
التغليط في اتخاذ السُرج على القبور
  </p>
</blockquote>

as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لعن الرسول زائرات القبور والمُتخذين عليها المساجد والسُرج
  </p>
</blockquote>

5. The Holy Prophet (s) has cursed those ladies who visit the grave and
those who take them as mosques and light a lamp over it.[^6]

Ibn Taymiyya who is the leader of such beliefs and Muhammad ibn ’Abd
al-Wahhab sharing his views interpret the aforesaid traditions in such a
manner that building mosque over or near the grave of pious people is
not permitted.

Thus Ibn-Taymiyya writes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال عُلمائنا لا يجوز بناء المسجد على القبور
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Our scholars have said that it is never allowed to construct a mosque
over the grave.”* [^7]

A Probe into The Context of Traditions
--------------------------------------

Now we have to pay attention to the contents of the traditions and
derive its correct meanings. We should not remain negligent to this
principle and it is as such: As one verse (*ayah*) can remove the
ambiguity of another verse and help its correct interpretation, in the
same way, one tradition too can remove the ambiguity and interpret
another tradition.

The Wahhabis have stuck to the apparent meaning of one tradition and
relied on that in such a manner that any kind of building of mosque over
or near the graves of awliya is prohibited whereas if they would have
collected all the traditions together, they would have understood the
objective of the Holy Prophet (s) in sending this curse.

The Wahhabis have closed the door of *ijtihad* and thus committed too
many mistakes in understanding many of the traditions.

Superficially, it is possible that the authenticity of the traditions be
reliable and its narrators trustworthy. Since the deliberation on the
references of these traditions will lengthen our discussion, we shall
limit ourselves to their contents only.

### Our Views about This Matter

Awareness about the objective of the traditions is related to throwing
light on the actions of the Jews and Christians near the graves of their
respective Prophets because our Holy Prophet (s) has prevented us from
the actions which they used to do. If the limits of their actions are
clarified, then surely the limits of *haram* in Islam too would be
clarified.

In the previous traditions there exist evidences which testified to the
fact that they took the graves of their prophets as their *qibla* and
refused from paying heed to the true *qibla*. More still, they were
worshipping their prophets near their graves instead of worshipping
Allah or at least were taking partners with God in their worship.

If the context of the traditions is this that we do not choose their
graves to be their *qibla* and do not consider them as partners with God
in worship, then we can never consider the construction of mosque over
or near the graves of the pious and virtuous as *haram* where the
visitors neither take their graves to be as their *qibla* nor do they
worship them. Moreover, they worship the one God facing the *qibla* in
their *salat* and the aim of constructing mosque near the graves of
awliya Allah is only to seek t*abarruk* from their places.

What is important is that it should be proved that the aim of the
tradition (that we should not take their graves as mosques) is the same
as what we have just said. Here are the evidences:

1. The tradition of *Sahih Muslim* (4th tradition) elucidates the other
traditions because when the two wives of the Holy Prophet (s) explained
to him that they had seen a portrait of a Prophet in a Ethiopian church,
the Holy Prophet (s) said:

“They are such people that whenever a pious person passes away they
would construct a mosque over his grave and put up his portrait in that
mosque.”[^8]

The purpose of putting portraits near the graves of pious people was
that people would worship them such that they considered the portrait
and grave to be their *qibla* or still more, consider them as idols for
worship and prostration. Worshipping of idols is nothing but placing the
idol in front and respecting and falling into humiliation before them.

The probability which we are having in this tradition, keeping in mind
the actions of the Christians who were and are always inclined towards
human worship and are always worshipping portraits and statues, is very
worthy of attention. With such strong probability we can never
rationalize with the help of this tradition, the prohibition of
construction of mosque over or near the grave of awliya Allah which is
devoid of such embellishments.

2. Ahmad ibn Hanbal in his *al-Musnad* and Imam Malik in his
*al-Muwatta’* narrate the tradition that the Holy Prophet (s) after
prohibiting the matter of construction of mosque said:

“Allah, do not make my grave as an idol which is subject to worship”
[^9]

This sentence shows that they were behaving with the grave and the
portrait which was next to it like one idol and taking them as their
*qibla* and still more is worshipping them in the form of idol.

3. Pondering over the tradition of Ayesha (2nd tradition) will elucidate
this fact to a greater extent. After narrating the tradition from the
Holy Prophet (s) she says:

“If it was not for the fear that the grave of the Holy Prophet (s) would
be taken as mosque the Muslims would have kept his grave open”. (They
would have not constructed a barrier around the grave)

Now it should be seen that from what aspects the barrier and wall around
the grave can become an obstacle? Undoubtedly the barrier will prevent
the people from reciting *salat* over the grave, from worshipping the
grave as one idol or at least from taking it as a *qibla*. However,
performing *salat* near the grave without worshipping the grave or
considering it as a *qibla* is absolutely possible, whether there exists
a barrier or not and whether the grave is open or hidden. This is
because for fourteen centuries the Muslims have been performing *salat*
near the grave of the Holy Prophet (s) facing the *qibla* and have been
worshipping Allah without the barrier preventing them from doing this
action.

To sum up, the appendix of the *hadith* which is the text of the sayings
of Ayesha clarifies the contents of the tradition because *Umm
al-mu’minin* says: ‘In order that the grave of the Holy Prophet (s)
would not be taken as mosque, they kept his grave hidden from the eyes
of the people and constructed a barrier around it.’ Now it should be
seen as to what extent this barrier can serve as an obstacle.

A barrier can prevent from two things:

1. The grave from taking the shape of idol and the people from standing
in front of it and worshipping it since with the presence of a barrier,
people are unable to see his grave to be able to treat it as an idol.

2. The grave from becoming a *qibla* since fixing it as a *qibla* is the
outcome of seeing and we can never compare it with the *ka’ba* which is
a *qibla* in all the situations whether it is seen or not. This is
because *ka’ba* is a universal conventional *qibla* in all the
conditions, making no difference if it is seen or not. However taking
the grave of the Holy Prophet (s) as a *qibla* for the attendants in the
mosque will be related to those who offer *salat* in his mosque and such
a deviation is more achievable in case the grave is uncovered and seen;
but when the grave is concealed the thought of prostrating over his
grave even in the form of *qibla* is much less. Due to this, *Umm
al-mu’minin* says that if no possibility existed for considering the
grave as mosque (ie. prostrating over the grave) it would have been kept
uncovered. Moreover, such a deviation takes place more when the grave is
seen and much less when the grave is hidden.

3. Most of the commentators of the tradition offer the same
interpretation as we have done.

Al-Qastallani in *Irshad al-sari* says: For keeping alive the memories
of their past ones, the Jews and Christians were fixing the portraits of
their virtous ones near their graves and worshipping their graves.
However, their sons and successors, under the influence of whisperings
of *shaytan*, started to worship the portraits near the graves.
Thereafter he narrates from *Tafsir al-Baydawi* as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لما كانت اليهود والنصارى يسجدون لقبور الأنبياء تعظيماً لشأنهم
ويجعلونها قبلة يتوجهون في الصلاة نحوها
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واتخذوها اوثاناً ، مُنِع المسلمون في مثل ذلك فاما من إتخذ مسجداً في
جوار صالح وقصد التبرك بالقُرب منه لا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
للتعظيم ولا للتوجيه إليه فلا يدخل في الوعيد المذكور.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“In view of the fact that the Jews and Christians were taking the graves
of their Prophets as their qibla for the purpose of respect, and were
paying attention towards them at the time of their prayers, their graves
took the position of idols. For this reason the Muslims have been
forbidden from this action. However, if someone constructs a mosque near
the grave of a pious person for the purpose of seeking tabarruk and not
for worshipping or paying attention towards them, he will never be
included in this prohibition.” [^10]

It is not only al-Qastallani who in his commentary on *Sahih Bukhari*
interprets this tradition as such but also al-Sindi, the commentator of
*Sunan al-Nasa’i* speaks with the same effect. We mention some of them
here.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إتخذوا قبور انبيائهم مساجد أي قبلة للصلاة ويُصلون إليها أو بنوا مساجد
عليها يُصلون فيها ولعلَّ وجه الكراهة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنه قد يُفض إلى عباده نفس القبر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The outcome of his dispensation is this that construction over the
grave is haram and occasionally makruh. If the grave is considered as
qibla it is haram, since it may lead to the worship of the one buried,
otherwise it is makruh.” [^11]

Again he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُحذر أمته أن يصنعوا بقبره ما صنع اليهود والنصارى بقبور أنبيائهم من
إتخاذهم تلك القبور مساجد إما بالسجود
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إليها تعظيماً لها أو يجعلها قبلة يتوجهون في الصلاة إليها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He (i.e. the Holy Prophet) prohibits his ummah from treating his grave
in the same manner as what the Jews and the Christians have done to the
graves of their Prophets. This is because, in the name of honor and
respect, they were prostrating over the grave or considering it as their
qibla.” [^12]

Regarding this matter, the commentator of *Sahih Muslim* says:

“If the Holy Prophet (s) has prohibited us from considering his grave
and other graves as a mosque, it is due to this reason that the Muslims
should stop from exaggerating his honour which might lead to infidelity.
Thus, when the Muslims were compelled to develop the mosque of the Holy
Prophet (s) and place the chamber of the prophet’s wives and the chamber
of Ayesha in the middle of the mosque, they fixed a round wall around
the grave so that it could not be seen and the Muslims would not
prostrate over it. The speech of *Umm al-mu’minin* too is a witness to
the same:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لولا ذلك لأبرزوا قبره غير أنه اخش أن يُتخذ مسجداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

If it was not for this fear that his grave (i.e. the grave of Holy
Prophet) would become a mosque, the Muslims would have kept his grave
open (and not put up a barrier around it).

Another commentator says: “The words of Ayesha are related to that
period when the mosque was not developed nor extended. After extension
and the admittance of her chamber inside the mosque, the chamber was
made in the shape of a triangle so that nobody could perform *salat*
over the grave. Thereafter he says that the Jews and Christians were
worshipping their Prophets near their graves and were taking them as
partners in their worship. With such evidence and perception of the
tradition, one cannot understand any meaning other than this.”

We shall now overlook all these evidences and will approach this issue
from another angle:

Firstly, the tradition is applicable to a situation where a mosque is
constructed over the grave and this matter does not bear any relation to
an adjacent place of the buried. In all the buried places, the mosque is
placed near the grave of Imams (*a’imma*) and awliya in such a manner
that the mosque is separated from the shrine. In other words, we are
having one shrine and one mosque. The shrine is set aside for *ziyarah*
and *tawwasul* and the mosque near that, for the worship of Allah.
Therefore these adjacent places (shrines) are outside the scope and
contents of the tradition assuming that the contents of the traditions
are the same as what the Wahhabis say.

Basically speaking how can it be said that the construction of mosque
over the grave is *haram* or *makruh* whereas Masjid al-Nabi (mosque of
the Holy Prophet) is placed near his grave?

If the companions of the Holy Prophet (s) are like the stars which
should be followed then why, in this case, we should not follow them.
They extended the mosque in such a manner that the grave of the Holy
Prophet (s) and the *shaykhayn* have been placed in the middle of the
mosque.

If really, construction of mosque near the grave of Holy Imams was
unlawful, then why the Muslims expanded the mosque of the Holy Prophet
(s) from every angle; while the mosque during the time of the Holy
Prophet (s) was placed on the eastern side of the grave, after the
expansion, the western side of the grave too became the part of the
mosque.

Is it that following the **سلف** i.e. predecessors and being **سلفي**
which the Wahhabis are always proud of, means that we should follow them
in one instance and disobey them in another?

From this description, it becomes clear that to what extent the sayings
of Ibn al-Qayyim that in Islam, grave and mosque do not exist together
are baseless and against the path of Muslims. Secondly, we do not derive
any meaning from these traditions other than the Holy Prophet (s)
prohibiting construction of mosque over or near the graves of the
awliya. However, no argument exists to prove that this prohibition is a
*haram* prohibition. Instead, it is possible that this prohibition is a
*makruh* prohibition just as Bukhari has interpreted the traditions and
discussed them under the title;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
باب ، يكره من اتخاذ المساجد على القبور
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Chapter: It is aversion to build mosques on graves.* [^13]

Another testimony is that this matter has come along with the curse upon
female visitors to the grave.[^14] Surely visiting the graves is
*makruh* and not *haram* for the ladies.

If the Holy Prophet (s) has cursed this group, this curse is no
testimony of it being *haram* because in many of the traditions those
committing *makruh* acts have been cursed too. In tradition, it is
mentioned that those who travel alone or eat alone or sleep alone are
cursed.

In the end we remind that the construction of mosque over the grave of
pious people was an act which was in vogue in the beginning of Islam.

Al-Samhudi says: “When the mother of Ali (‘a), Fatima bint Asad, passed
away, the Holy Prophet (s) ordered that she be buried in a place where
today stands a mosque named as ‘Grave of Fatima’. He meant that the
place of grave of Fatima appear as a mosque in later time. Again he
says: “Mus’ab bin ‘Umayr and ‘Abdulla bin Jahsh were buried under the
mosque which was built over the grave of Hamza.”[^15]

He further says that in the 2nd century there existed a mosque over the
grave of Hamza.[^16]

This mosque existed till the domination of the Wahhabis. They demolished
this mosque on these unfounded reasons.

[^1]: Refer to Tafsir al-Kashshaf of al-Zamakhshari, Ghara’ib al-Qur’an
of al-Naysaburi, and others.

[^2]: Sahih al-Bukhari, kitab al-jana’iz, vol. 2, page 111.

[^3]: Sahih al-Bukhari, kitab al-jana’iz, vol. 2, page 111; Sunan
al-Nasa’i, kitab al-jana’iz, vol. 2 p. 871

[^4]: Sahih Muslim, vol. 2 p. 68.

[^5]: Sahih Muslim, kitab al-masajid, vol. 2, p. 66.

[^6]: Sunan al-Nasa’i, (ed. Mustafa Halabi), vol. 4, p. 77

[^7]: Ibn Taymiyya, Ziyarat al-qubur, p. 106.

[^8]: إن اولئك إذ كان فيهم الرجل الصالح فمات بنوا على قبره مسجداُ وصورا
فيه تلك الصور

[^9]: Ibn Hanbal, al-Musnad, vol. 3, p. 248

[^10]: al-Qastallani, Irshad al-sari; and Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Fath
al-bari, vol. 3, p. 208 approve this view. Prohibition is applicable
under circumstances where the grave appears in the manner which was in
vogue amongst the Jews and Christians. Otherwise there is no problem and
objection.

[^11]: Sunan al-Nasa’i, (al-Azhar edition), vol. 2, p. 21.

[^12]: Sunan al-Nasa’i, (al-Azhar edition), vol. 2, p. 21.

[^13]: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 2, p. 111

[^14]: Sunan al-Nasa’i, (Egyptian edition), vol. 3, p. 77.

[^15]: Al-Samhudi, Wafa’ al-wafa’ fi akhbar dar al-Mustafa, (ed.
Muhammad Muhyiuddin), vol. 3, p. 897.

[^16]: Al-Samhudi, Wafa’ al-wafa’, (ed. Muhammad Muhyiuddin), vol. 3, p.
922 and 936.


