Visitation (Ziyarat) of Graves of Believers From The View-Point of The Holy Qur’an And Sunnah
=============================================================================================

The scholars of Islam with the support of verses of Qur’an and
traditions have recommended *ziyarat* of grave especially the *ziyarat*
of the Holy Prophet's grave and those of the pious people and consider
this to be a virtue and honour. However, Wahhabis do not consider the
principle of *ziyarat* to be *haram* (in apparent terms) but declare
that the journey for *ziyara* towards the grave of the awliya Allah as
unlawful and *haram*. After completion of the principle of *ziyarat*, we
shall discuss the matter of journey for *ziyarat* of the graves of the
awliya Allah

*Ziyarat* of graves has many ethical influences and is important for
moral education and training that we shall mention here very briefly.

Looking at this silent valley (i.e. graveyard) which has blown off the
light of life of everyone from the poor to the rich and the weak to the
powerful and all of them being buried with only three pieces of cloth,
purifies the mind and the heart and reduces greed and avarice of a
person to a great extent. If a person possesses an eye which can see
warnings he can there by learn a lesson and think within himself as
such: A transient life of 60 or 70 years ending in getting concealed
under the soil and then decaying and getting destroyed is not so much
valuable that a person strives hard to achieve wealth and position and
does injustice upon himself and the others.

Witnessing this silent valley which softens the most adamant heart and
makes the most heavy ear to hear and gives brightness to the most poor
eye-sight, causes a person to review his plans in life and ponder over
the great responsibilities which he has before Allah and the people and
controls his desires.

The Holy Prophet (s) referring to this point in a tradition says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زوروا القُبور فإنها تذكركم الأخرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Visit the graves; for visiting them becomes the cause of remembering
the next world.”* [^1]

While the authenticity and firmness of *ziyarat* of graves is so obvious
that it is needless to produce proofs and reasoning to a great extent
yet, we reflect here some of the proofs for those who are doubtful.

Qur’an and ziyarat of Graves
----------------------------

Qur’an clearly instructs that the Holy Prophet (s) should not perform
prayer over the dead body of the hypocrites and should not stand near
their graves. It says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا تُصلِّ على أحد منهم مات أبداً ولا تقم على قبره إنهم كفروا بالله
ورسوله وماتوا وهُم فاسقون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And never offer prayer for anyone of them who dies and do not stand
by his grave, surely they disbelieve in Allah and His Apostle and they
shall die in transgression. (Tauba 19:84)”***

In this verse, for destroying the character of the hypocrites and
rebuking the members of this group, the God commands the Holy Prophet
(s):

1. Not to perform *salat* over the dead body of anyone of them.  
 2. Not to stand over their graves; and this reality is presented with
the sentence;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا تقُم على قبره
  </p>
</blockquote>

When the Holy Qur’an commands that one should avoid these two actions
with regards to the hypocrites it means that for others who are not
hypocrites these actions are good and worthy to be performed.

Now let us see what **ولا تقم على قبره** means? Does it refer only to
the standing at the time of burial which in the case of hypocrites is
not permissible and in the case of the believers good and necessary? Or
it also refers to standing at the time of burial and at other instances?

Some of the commentators think that the verse refers to the matter of
standing at the time of burial but some others like al-Baydawi see the
verse from a far angle and interpret it as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا تقُم على قبره للدفن أو لزيارة
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Don’t stand on grave for burial or* *pilgrimage.”*[^2]

Paying attention to the contents of verse will show that it is having a
wider meaning i.e. it concerns standing at the time of burial as well as
stopping after the burial.  
 This is because two sentences form the gist of the subject matter of
this verse and these two sentences comprises of:

1.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تُصلِّ على أحدٍ منهم مات أبداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And never offer prayer for anyone of them who dies…… (Tauba
19:84)”***

The word of **احد**which has been placed in the course of prohibition is
good for all individuals.

The word of **ابدا** is good for all times and the meaning of the
sentence will be as such: “Do not perform *salat* for any one of the
hypocrites at any time.”

By paying attention to these two words we can easily understand that the
meaning of this particular sentence is not referring to recitation of
*salat* over the dead body because reciting *salat* over the dead body
takes place only once and that is before the burial and it cannot be
repeated. If it specifically meant recitation of *salat* over the dead,
then it was needless to bring the word**ابدا** **.** And to imagine that
this word serves the purpose of expressing all individuals is completely
irrelevant because the sentence **لا تصل على أحد** is sufficient for
such inclusion and purpose and there is no need to mention it once
again.

Moreover, the word ابدا in Arabic refers to time and not individuals
such as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا أن تنكحوا ازواجه مِن بعده أبداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nor that you should marry his wives after him ever;… (Ahzab
33:53)”***

Therefore the essence of the first sentence is: Never seek forgiveness
and mercy for anyone of the hypocrites whether at the time of reciting
*salat* or otherwise.

2. And now we will discuss the second sentence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا تقُم على قبره
  </p>
</blockquote>

The meaning of this sentence in connection with the previous sentence is
as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا تقُم على قبر أحدا منهم أبداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

Because the adverbs which are present in **معطوف** **عليه**are also
applicable for **معطوف.**

Therefore it cannot be said that *qiyam* (standing) refers to the
*qiyam* at the time of burial because it is presumed that *qiyam* at the
time of burial for each one is not subject to repetition and the word
**ابدا** too is commendable in this sentence which shows that this
action is worthy of repetition.  
 The reply to the supposition that this word is applicable for all
individuals was given in the previous sentence since with the presence
of **احد** it is needless to express that once again.

By paying attention to these two points in the words **لا تصل**and
**لا** **تقم** one can say:

God has prohibited the Holy Prophet (s) from seeking any kind of mercy
for the hypocrites whether by means of reciting *salat* upon the dead
body or merely by means of *du'a* and from any kind of standing over
their graves whether at the time of burial or after the burial. This
means that these two actions i.e. ‘seeking forgiveness’ and ‘standing’
is permissible and worthy for the grave of a believer in all the
instances and one of such instances is standing for *ziyarat* and
recitation of Qur’an for a believer who has been buried there for years.

Now we shall discuss the virtue and excellence of *ziyarat* of graves
from the viewpoint of traditions.

Traditions and ziyarat of Graves
--------------------------------

From the Islamic traditions which the authors of *Sihah* and *Sunan*
have narrated, we derive the conclusion that the Holy Prophet (s) had
prohibited, due to a temporary reason, the *ziyarat* of graves and later
on allowed the people to make haste for *ziyarat*.

Perhaps the reason for prohibition was that their dead ones were
predominantly polytheists and idol-worshippers and Islam had cut off
their relation and affection with the world of polytheism. It is also
possible that the reason for prohibition was something else and that is
the newly converted Muslims were writing elegies and saying un-Islamic
things over the graves of the dead polytheists. But after the expansion
of Islam and the ‘faith’ entering into the hearts of people, this
prohibition was lifted and the Holy Prophet (s) permitted the people to
go for the *ziyarat* of graves because of the educative benefits, so
that people should hasten to visit graves

The writers of *Sunan* and *Sihah* narrate as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُنت نهيتكم عن زيارة القُبور فزُوروها فإنها تُزهِّد في الدنيا وتُذكر
الأخرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I had prohibited you from* *ziyara* *of graves. From now on, go for*
*ziyara* *because it will make you feel unattached towards this world
and make you remember the hereafter.”*[^3]

It is on the same basis that the Holy Prophet (s) was visiting the grave
of his mother and informing the people to visit the graves since
*ziyara* is the source of remembering the hereafter. Here is the text of
the tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زار النبيّ قبر أمه فبكى وأبكى من حوله...إستأذنت ربي في أن أزور قبرها
فاذن لي فزوروا القبور فإنها تُذكركم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الموت
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The Holy Prophet (s) visited the grave of his mother and cried near
her grave and also made others around him to cry. Thereafter he said: I
have taken permission from my Lord to visit the grave of my mother. You
too should visit the graves because such a visit will remind you of
death.”*[^4]

4. Ayesha says that the Holy Prophet (s) freely allowed the *ziyarat* of
graves:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن رسول الله رخَّص في زيارة القبور
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Prophet of God permitted the visit of graves.”[^5]

5. Ayesha says: The Holy Prophet (s) taught me the manner of visiting
the graves. Here is the text of the tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فامرني ربي أتي البقيع فاستغفر لهم قلت كيف أقول : يا رسول الله قال
قولي: السلام على أهل الديار مِن المؤمنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والمسلمين يرحم الله المُستقدمين منا والمستأخرين وإنا إن شاء الله بكم
لاحقون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“My Lord commanded me to come to Baqi’ and seek forgiveness for them.
(Ayesha) says: I asked him how one should seek forgiveness to which the
Holy* *Prophet (s) replied: Say Peace* *(Salaam) be upon the people of
this place from the believers and muslims, May God have mercy on those
who have left and those who are to follow. We shall join you all very
soon.”*[^6]

6. In another tradition, there are some sentences which the Holy Prophet
(s) used when performing ziyarat of graves. It is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكم دار قوم مؤمنين وإنا وإياكم مُتواعدون غداً ومُواكلون وإنا
إن شاء الله بكم لاحقون اللهم اغفر لأهل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بقيع الغرقد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Peace be with you the groups of believers and we will be return to you
and rely on you and certainly if God wishes, we will join you. O God,
have mercy on all those (buried) in Baqi’ al-Garqad\*”*[^7]

\*Garqad was a tree in Baqi’ graveyard. And because of this tree, it was
commonly called as the land of Garqad.

7. In another tradition, the text of *ziyarat* is narrated in a
different way:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكم أهل الديار من المؤمنين والمسلمين وإنا إن شاء الله بكمك
لاحقون أنتم لنا فرط ونحن لكم تبع اسئل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الله العافية لنا ولكم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Peace be with you the groups of believers and Muslims, and certainty
we will join you. You will exhilarate us and we will follow you. We ask
welfare from you for ourselves and for yourself.”*[^8]

8. In the third tradition, the text is narrated still differently:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكم دار قومٍ مؤمنين وإنا إن شاء الله بكم لاحقون
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Peace be with you the groups of believers and if God wishes, we will
join you.”*[^9]

From the tradition of Ayesha, we got knowledge that whenever the last
part of night was approaching, the Holy Prophet (s) would go towards
Baqi’ and say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكم دار قومٍ مؤمنين واتاكم ما توعدون ، غداً مؤجلون وإنا إن
شاء الله بكم لاحقون اللهم اغفر لأهل بقيع
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الغرقد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Peace be with you! The groups of believers and what has been promised
to you will be given to you, soon in future your destiny will reach you.
And certainly, we will be the joiners to you soon.* *And if God wishes,
will be with you. O God! Have mercy on all those (buried) in Baqi’
al-Garqad.”* [^10]

From another tradition we come to know that the Holy Prophet (s) used to
hasten, along with a group of people for *ziyarat* of graves and teach
them the manner of doing *ziyarat*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كان رسول الله يُعلمُهم إذا خرجوا إلى المقابر فكان قائلُهم يقول: السلام
على أهل الديار (يا) السلام عليكم أهل الديار
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من المؤمنين وإنا إن شاء الله لاحقون اسئل الله لنا ولكم العافية.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The Prophet (s) used to teach them that when they go out to graves
they should say: Peace be with those who live in houses (graves). Peace
be with you the groups of believers and Muslims. Certainly if God
wishes, we will be joiners to you. We ask safety for ourselves and
you.”*[^11]

Women and ziyarat of Graves
---------------------------

The only matter which is remaining is the matter of *ziyara* by women
which in some of the traditions, the Holy Prophet (s) has prohibited
them from doing so:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لعن رسول الله زوارات القبور
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Prophet of God has cursed the women who go excessively for
ziyarat.”[^12]

But it should be known that utilizing this tradition for proving
prohibition of *ziyarat* is not correct due to a number of reasons:
firstly, most of the scholars think this prohibition to be in the
*makruh* sense and the reason for it being *makruh* was because of the
special conditions prevailing at that time. One of the commentators of
tradition i.e., the writer of *Miftah al-haja fi sharh Sahih Ibn Maja*
refers to that and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إختلفوا في الكراهة هل هى كراهة تحريم أو تنزيه ذهب ألا كثر إلى الجواز
إذا امنت بالفتنة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The scholars are having two opinions about the prohibition. That
whether it is prohibited in the* *makruh* *sense or prohibited in the*
*haram* *sense! But most of the scholars believe that women can go for*
*ziyara* *if they are certain of remaining safe from any trouble.”*[^13]

**Secondly**, we have read in the previous traditions (kindly refer to
tradition number 4) that Ayesha narrates from the Holy Prophet (s) that
the latter declared free the *ziyara* of graves. If the women were
excluded from this declaration then it is necessary to remind that this
declaration is exclusively for men especially when the narrator is a
lady and amongst the people to whom he (i.e. Prophet) was addressing was
a lady and every addressee will naturally think that the order and
declaration is directed to him or her.

**Thirdly,** some of the traditions mention the manner in which the Holy
Prophet (s) taught Ayesha to perform *ziyara* of graves[^14] and Ayesha
herself used to personally visit the graves after the Holy Prophet (s).

**Fourthly,** al-Tirmidhi narrates that when Ayesha's brother i.e. ‘Abd
al-Rahman bin Abi Bakr died in Ethiopia, his body was taken to Mecca and
buried there. When his sister Ayesha came to Mecca from Medina, she
visited grave of her brother and by the side of his grave, recited two
couplets in his sorrow and made speech (about him).[^15]

The commentator of *Sahih al-Tirmidhi* Imam Hafiz Ibn al-‘Arabi
[al-Maliki] (born in 435 AH and died in 543 AH) writes in his additional
notes on Sahih.

“The fact is that the Holy Prophet (s) has permitted the men and the
women to go for *ziyara*. If some of the traditions mention it to be
*makruh* it is because of restlessness and impatience near the grave or
because of not observing proper *hijab*.”

**Fifthly,** Bukhari narrates from Anas that the Holy Prophet (s) saw a
woman crying over her beloved one and comforted her to have faith and be
patient. The woman not recognising the Holy Prophet (s), said: “you
release me from the calamity which has befallen upon me and not befallen
upon you”. When it was said to her that he was the Holy Prophet (s) she
left the grave and went to the house of the Holy Prophet (s) pleading
pardon for not recognising him. The Holy Prophet (s) replied: “Patience
is advised at the time of misfortunes.”[^16]

If *ziyara* was forbidden, the Holy Prophet (s) would have prohibited
her from this action while he only asked her to adopt patience.
Moreover, after the women visited the house of the Holy Prophet (s) he
talked of patience and steadfastness at the time of misfortunes and did
not say anything about *ziyara* of grave; otherwise he would have
ordered her not to visit the grave of her beloved one anymore.

**Sixthly,** Fatima (‘a), daughter of the Holy Prophet (s), used to
visit every Friday the grave of her uncle Hamza and recite prayer
(*salat*) and cry sadly at his grave.[^17]

**Seventhly,** al-Qurtubi says that the Holy Prophet (s) did not
prohibit any lady going for *ziyara*. Instead he cursed those ladies who
were going for *ziyara* very often as he uses the words **زوارت**
**القبور** and **زوار** which is used for exaggeration.[^18]

Perhaps the reason of cursing such a habit is that excessive *ziyarat*
is the source of spoiling the rights of husband. If such factors are
absent in the *ziyara* of one lady then there is no problem as such
since remembering death is a matter which is necessary for both men and
women.

**Eighthly,** if *ziyara* of grave is the source of getting unattached
towards this world and a reduction of the greed of the person in helping
him to remember the Hereafter, it also brings some benefit for the dead
one i.e. for the one who is buried under the soil and is helpless from
doing anything. This is because the Islamic *ziyara* is usually
accompanied by recitation of *al-Fatiha* and giving its reward to the
deceased. In fact this is the best gift which an alive person can give
to his or her beloved dead one.

Ibn Maja narrates in his *Sahih* that the Holy Prophet (s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إقرءوا يس على موتاكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Recite Sura Yasin upon your dead ones*.”[^19]

Therefore, there is no difference between man and woman that one should
be permitted and the other should be forbidden, except that if the women
are faced with some special situations that we previously discussed.
Now, that the matter of *ziyara* of the graves of believers is clear for
us and it is now necessary to refer to the valuable effects of *ziyarat*
of the graves of the awliya Allah and the beloved ones of Allah.

[^1]: Tafsir al-Baydawi, vol. 3, p. 77.

[^2]: Tafsir al-Baydawi, vol. 3, p. 77.

[^3]: Sunan Ibn Maja, chapter of ما جاء في زيارة القبور vol.1, p.114,
(Indian edition); Sahih al-Tirmidhi chapter of جنائز vol. 3 p. 274 along
with commentary of Ibn al-‘Arabi Maliki, (Lebanon edition); After
narrating the tradition from Burayda, al-Tirmidhi says: حديث بريدة صحيح
والغمل على هذا عند اهل العلم لا يُرون بزيارة القبور باساً وهو قول ابن
المبارك والشافعي وأحمد واسحاق. ‘The tradition of Burayda is correct and
the people of knowledge act upon it. They do not put forward any
obstacle for performing ziyara of graves and they are people such as Ibn
al-Mubarak, al-Shafi’i, Ahmad and Ishaq.’ Meanwhile, you may refer to
the following documents: Sahih Muslim, vol. 3. page 65 chapter of
استثنذان النبي ربه غم وجل في زيارة قبر امه Sahih Abu Dawud, vol.2. p.
195, book of جنائز chapter of زيارة القبور Sahih Muslim, vol. 4 p. 73,
book ofجنائز chapter of زيارة القبور

[^4]: Sahih Muslim, vol. 3, p. 65, chapter of استثنذان النبي ربه غم وجل
في زيارة قبر امه Sahih Ibn Maja, vol. 1, p. 114. According to the
narrators of this tradition, the reason the Holy Prophet (s) took
permission from Allah for visiting the grave of his mother was that his
mother was a polytheist. Undoubtedly the mother of Holy Prophet (s) was
a monotheist and a believer like her father, grandfather and ancestors.
For this reason all the portion of this tradition is incompatible with
the religious standards. Sunan Abi Dawud, vol. 2 p. 195. Book of جنائز
Egyptian print along with the additional notes of Shaykh Ahmad Sa’d from
the scholars of Azhar. Sahih Muslim, vol. 4 p. 74, book of جنائز chapter
of زيارة قبر المشرك

[^5]: Sahih Ibn Maja, vol. 1, p. 114.

[^6]: Sunan al-Nasa'i, vol. 3 p. 76; and Sahih Muslim, vol. 3, p. 64
chapter of القبر ما يقال عند دخول

[^7]: Sunan al-Nasa'i, vol. 40, pp. 76- 77.

[^8]: Sunan al-Nasa'i, vol. 40, pp. 76- 77.

[^9]: Sunan Abu Dawud, vol. 2, p. 196.

[^10]: Sahih Muslim, vol. 3, p. 63 chapter of القبر ما يقال عند دخول

[^11]: Sahih Muslim, vol. 3, p. 110 chapter of القبر ما يقال عند دخول

[^12]: Sahih Ibn Maja, (1st Edition, Egypt), vol. 1, p. 478, book of
جنائزchapter of ما جاء في النهى عن زيارة النساء القبور

[^13]: Hawashi of Sunan Ibn Maja, (Indian edition), vol. 1, p. 114.

[^14]: Refer to tradition no. 5.

[^15]: Sunan al-Tirmidhi, vol. 4, p. 275 book of جنائز chapter of ما جاء
في زيارة القبور

[^16]: Sahih Bukhari, p. 100, book of جنائز chapter of زيارة القبور;
Sunan Abi Dawud, vol. 2 p. 171.

[^17]: al-Hakim, Mustadrak al-sahihayn, vol. 1, p. 377; al-Samhudi,
Wafa’ al-wafa’, vo1. 2 p. 112.

[^18]: Sunan Abu Dawud, vol. 2, p. 196 has narrated "زائرات"

[^19]: Sahih Bukhari, p. 100, book of جنائز chapter of زيارة القبور;
Sunan Abi Dawud, vol. 2 p. 171.


