Valuable Effects of Ziyarat of The Graves of Religious Personalities
====================================================================

The graves which attract the worshippers of God from all over the world
and in particular the Muslims, are the graves of those who were
possessing a divine mission in the society and had fulfilled their
mission befittingly. These people consist of:

1. Prophets and religious leaders who carried the divine message upon
their shoulders and guided the people by giving their lives, property
and blood of their dear ones and bore the hardships and difficulties in
this path.

2. Great scholars who, like a bright candle, have spread light to their
surroundings and have laboured in research and left behind a great
treasure by the name of knowledge and wisdom in the service of mankind.
They have acquainted men with the Divine Book, the Book of Nature and
the language of creation and have laid the foundation of religious,
human and natural sciences.

3. The group of people whose cup of patience had been overflowing from
the social oppression, ever-increasing injustices and unfair
discrimination. They are those who have put their life at stake against
the oppressive rulers and washed with their blood the cruelties
prevalent in the society. (the martyrs in the path of Islam). No
revolution and reform in society will remain worthless and the
significance of a holy revolution which wishes to bring down the palaces
of the oppressors and suffocate them, is the holy blood of those
combatants who wish to bring Justice, Equity, Liberty and freedom back
to the society.

It is they to whom the people go for their *ziyarat* and shed tears near
their graves or shrines and remember their valuable services and their
holy sacrifices. By reciting some Suras from the Qur’an they soothe
their souls and by reciting poems about their sacrifices, lofty human
merits and exalted morals, they enliven their memories and their school
of thought and invite the people to follow their path.

*Ziyarat* of graves of such group of people is one kind of thanksgiving
and appreciation of their heroism and self-sacrifices. It is a warning
to the contemporary generation that the reward of the person who selects
the true path and gives his or her life while defending true beliefs and
propagating freedom and liberty is that he or she will never be
forgotten.

The passage of time which turns everything old and extinct not only does
not make their memories to fade or disappear but causes the flames of
love to glow more in the pure and sincere hearts. Thus how good it is
that the contemporary generation and the future generation too follow
their path since they have seen with their own eyes the rewards of the
sacrifices of the men of truth. What was said till now has acquainted us
with the importance of honouring the great religious personalities and
the combatants in the path of truth and reality.

Therefore, based on this, we should always honour and respect these
people in their death time just as it was done during their life time
and should protect and safeguard their signs and memories. We should
celebrate their birth-days and declare the day of their deaths to be the
day of grief and sorrow. By holding big gatherings and delivering good
and effective speeches, we should invite the people to become acquainted
with their school of thought and protect and safeguard them in the
future. We should respect the soil and place of their burial and prevent
any kind of insult and segregation. This is because respecting their
graves means respecting their school of thought just as insulting and
degrading their grave is insulting their path and their conduct.

At present, anyone who steps into the cemetery of Baqi’ will see that
the graves of the leaders of Islam and the dear companions of the Holy
Prophet (s) who were self-sacrificing and striving in the propagation of
religion in such a insulted state that it will give him a severe shock
and grief and he will be astonished by attitude of the stone-hearted
Wahhabis who reckon themselves to be the propagators of religion.

This is because on the one hand they respect the names of religious
leaders and companions of the Holy Prophet (s) on the pulpits and on the
other hand whenever it comes to the matter of their graves, they do not
pay the least respect. They do not even care about the animals
contaminating the surroundings of their graves.

By using the words of *shirk* (polytheism) and *mushrik* (polytheist) as
an excuse, they strike down the respect and honour of the awliya and in
this manner, restrain the people from honouring them in any possible
manner (tongue, thoughts, expressions, actions etc) and to the extent
that they consider all these actions (in consideration of the services
of the awliya Allah) to be polytheism and label them as polytheists.
They have such a severe enmity with the awliya Allah that any kind of
respect manifested towards them will very much annoy them.

Now it is time to talk and discuss about *ziyara* of grave of the Holy
Prophet (s) from Islamic proofs and reasoning’s.

Ziyarat of the Grave of the Holy Prophet (s)
--------------------------------------------

We shall here bring forth the logical proofs from the Holy Qur’an and
traditions and request the respected readers for more concentration in
this section.

### Evidence from Qur’an

The Holy Qur’an commands the sinners to approach the Holy Prophet (s)
and request him to seek forgiveness for them from Allah since his
request and plead is accepted by Allah. The Holy verse says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ إِذْ ظَلَمُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ جَاءُوكَ فَاسْتَغْفَرُوا
اللَّهَ وَاسْتَغْفَرَ لَهُمُ الرَّسُولُ لَوَجَدُوا اللَّهَ تَوَّابًا
رَحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And had they, when they were unjust to themselves, come to you and
asked forgiveness of Allah and the Apostle had (also) asked forgiveness
for them, they would have found Allah Oft-returning, Merciful.***
***(Nisa 4:64)”***

If in case we were having only one such verse, we could say that the
verse is related to the day when the Holy Prophet (s) was living amongst
the people. However, due to a number of reasons, we can derive from this
verse, one general conclusion that it is not specific to this worldly
life.

They are, firstly the verses of Qur’an that consider a barzakhi life for
the Prophet (s), awliya and some particular group of people and
introduces them as the ones who can see and hear in that world. This
segment of verses will be discussed under the topic of *Tawassul*
(recourse) to the Holy souls.

Secondly, the Islamic traditions (hadiths) clearly bear testimony to the
fact that the angels transmit the messages of the people to the Holy
Prophet (s). This tradition has come in *Sihah* as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن رسول الله قال ما مِن احدٍ يُسلٍّم على إلا ردَّ الله على روُحى حتى
أرُد عليه السلام
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The Holy Prophet (s) said: “There is no one who sends greetings upon me
but that Allah makes his greetings reach me and I answer his
greetings.”*[^1]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقال رسول الله... وصلُّوا على َّ فإن صلاتكم يبلُغني حيث كُنتم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“And said the Prophet of God (s) …… ‘Send greetings upon me for your
greetings reaches me’.”* [^2]

Thirdly, right from the beginning, the Islamic society has grasped a
general and wider meaning from this verse (mentioned above) and acted
accordingly without the demise of the Holy Prophet (s) becoming any
obstacle in this regard. After the passing of the Holy Prophet (s), a
group from the Arabs would come for *ziyara* of Holy Prophet (s) with
clear and pure minds and recite this verse and request him to seek
forgiveness on their behalf.

Taqi al-Din al-Subki and al-Samhudi have reported examples regarding it
in their books *Shifa' al-saqam* and *Wafa' al-wafa'* respectively. We
shall mention here some of them:

Sufyan bin 'Anbar, who is one of the learned scholars of the Shafi'i
school, narrates from al-'Utabi - that latter was standing near the
grave of the Holy Prophet (s) when an Arab came and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليك يا رسول الله سمعت الله يقول وَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ إِذْ ظَلَمُوا
أَنْفُسَهُمْ جَاءُوكَ فَاسْتَغْفَرُوا اللَّهَ وَاسْتَغْفَرَ لَهُمُ
الرَّسُولُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوَجَدُوا اللَّهَ تَوَّابًا رَحِيمً وقد جئتك مستغفراً من دنبي
مستشفعاً بك إلى ربي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Peace be upon you Oh Prophet of God, I have heard Allah saying (in
Quran)* *‘And had they, when they were unjust to themselves, come to you
and asked forgiveness of Allah and the Apostle had (also) asked
forgiveness for them, they would have found Allah Oft-returning,
Merciful’* *and indeed as I have come near you, I seek forgiveness for
my sins and make you intercessor towards my Lord.”*

Thereafter he cried and sought forgiveness and left the shrine of the
Holy Prophet (s) after reciting this poem:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا خير من دُفنت بالقاع اعظمه فطاب من طيبهن القاع والاكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نفسي الفداء بقبر انت ساكنه فيه العفاف وفيه الجود والكرم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Regarding this matter al-Samhudi narrates from Ali (‘a) that: “Three
days had passed from the burial of the Holy Prophet (s). One Arab came
and threw himself over the Prophet's grave and sprinkling the soil of
the grave over his head said: O Prophet, you spoke to us and we
listened. You received from Allah what we received from you. One
sentence which has been revealed from God is the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولو أنهم إذا ظلموا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And I have done injustice to myself and I have come to you to seek
forgiveness for me.”

This action shows that the level and position which has been given to
the Holy Prophet (s) by order of this verse is not limited to his life
in this world but also applicable to his barzakhi life.

Basically, the Muslims do not consider the verses which are talking
about the matter of respect of the Holy Prophet (s) to be restricted to
his life-time. At the time of burial of Hasan ibn 'Ali (‘a), when a
section of the people had made an uproar, Husayn ibn 'Ali (‘a),
immediately recited the following verse in order to silence them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَرْفَعُوا أَصْوَاتَكُمْ فَوْقَ
صَوْتِ النَّبِيِّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Do not raise your voices above the voice of the
Prophet, and do not speak loud to him.*** ***(Hujurat 49:2)”***

Nobody, not even the Umayyads have said that this verse and this respect
is only related to the life-time of the Holy Prophet (s). At present,
the Wahhabis themselves have written this verse facing the grave of the
Holy Prophet (s) and put it over the wall and by this, they wish to say
that we should lower our voice and not speak loudly.

Therefore, we can grasp a wider meaning from the verse and it is this,
at present, the Muslims can approach the Holy Prophet (s) and request
him to seek forgiveness from Allah for their sins. *Ziyara* of the Holy
Prophet (s) of Islam has no purpose other than mentioned in this *ayah*
and has no parable in this regard.

This verse proves two matters:

1. After the demise of the Holy Prophet (s), it is possible to approach
him and request him to seek forgiveness from Allah on one's behalf. This
matter will be discussed later under the topic of “*Tawassul* (recourse)
with the Awliya Allah.”

2. This verse is a testimony to the fact that *ziyara* of the Holy
Prophet (s) is lawful since the reality of *ziyara* is nothing but the
presence of the visitor near the visited one. If one is allowed to visit
the grave of Holy Prophet (s) and request him to seek forgiveness from
Allah then in fact we have performed two actions:

(i). We have requested him to seek forgiveness from Allah.

(ii). We have, by approaching him, conversed with him and ziyarat
possesses no reality other than this and the subject matter of *ziyara*
is mainly shaped with the same theme.

Therefore, this verse is a testimony to both these matters.

### Another Evidence

The unanimity and consensus of the Muslims in various periods in a
decree related to the commandments of Islam is the most obvious
testimony upon its correctness.

Consensus over the *ziyara* of grave of the Holy Prophet (s) is one of
the better evidences of this decree. By referring to the books of
tradition, *fiqh*, morals and history - especially those related to Hajj
rites - the reality of this matter will be clarified.

Allama al-'Amini has narrated from forty-two Islamic sources, the
recommendation of *ziyara* of the shrine of the Holy Prophet (s). He has
accurately narrated the texts and wordings of them in Al-Ghadir, volume
5, pages 106 to 129.

The books which we have referred to are the following:

A. *Shifa' al-saqam fi ziyara khayr al-'anam* written by Taqi al-Din
al-Subki al-Shafi'i (died in 756). He has narrated in this book a part
of the texts and wordings of the scholars.

B. *Wafa' al-Wafa'* written by al-Samhudi (died in 911). He has narrated
in this book the texts and wordings of the scholars which all indicate
emphatic recommendation.

C. *Al-Fiqh 'ala al-madhahib al-arba'a* which has been written by four
men from the four schools of thought and exposes the thoughts of the
four Imams of Ahl-al Sunnah whom they follow. They have written as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زيارة قبر النبي أفضل المندوبات ورد فيها احاديث
  </p>
</blockquote>

The *ziyarat* of the grave of the Prophet (s) is the principal
recommendation as repeatedly found in traditions.

Now it's time to reflect upon a section of the traditions which have
been narrated by Islamic *muhaddithun* (traditionists).

Traditions Regarding Paying Homage to the Holy Prophet (s)
----------------------------------------------------------

The Islamic traditions (hadiths) about *ziyara* of the Holy Prophet (s)
are so many from the Sunni *muhaddithun* that we don’t feel need to pay
attention to their references. The great Sunni scholars from each of the
sects have narrated these in their books and it shows that *ziyara* of
the shrine of the Holy Prophet (s) has been one of their indisputable
matters. Now we shall narrate only a few of them as mentioning all of
the traditions will lengthen our discussion. First Tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن عبد الله بن عمر: من زار قبري وجبت له شفاعتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Anyone who visits my grave will never be deprived of my
intercession.”*

This tradition has come down in the book of *Al-Fiqh 'ala al-madhahib
al-arba'a* in volume l page 590 and the Sunni scholars of the four
schools of thought have given *fatwa*  
 (verdict) based on them. For reference consult the book of *Wafa'
al-wafa'* vol. 4 page 1336.

Certainly, such a tradition which the scholars have recorded right from
the middle of the 2nd century till now, cannot be said to be unfounded.
For completion of the matter, Taqi al-Din Ali bin Abdl al-Kafi al-Subki
(d. 756 AH) has discussed and investigated this matter and *isnad* of
the traditions in his valuable book *Shifa' al-saqam* on pages 3 to 11
and has proved the verity and accuracy of the methods of this tradition.

### Second Tradition

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من جاءني زائراً (ولا تحمله) إلا زيارتي كان حقاً علىيَّ أن أكون شفيعاً
يوم القيامة
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Anyone who comes to me with the intention of paying homage to me will
be having a right upon me to intercede for him on the Day of
Judgement”.*

Sixteen memorizers (of Qur’an) and *muhaddithun* have brought this
tradition in their books and Taqi al-Din al-Subki (d. 756 AH) has
discussed the narrators and *isnad* of the traditions in his book
*Shifa' al-saqam* page no.13. Also refer to the book *Wafa' al-wafa'*
vo1. 4, page 1340.

### Third Tradition

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من حجّ فزار قبري بعد وفاتي كأن كمن زارني في حياتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Anyone who visits the House of Allah and then visits my grave is like
one who has visited me during my life-time.”*

This tradition has been recorded by twenty-five of the renowned
*muhaddithun* and *huffaz* in their books and Taqi al-Din al-Subki has
spoken extensively about the references of this tradition in his book
*Shifa' al-saqam* pages 12 to 16. Also refer to *Wafa' al-wafa'* volume
4 page 1340.

### Fourth Tradition

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من حجَّ البيت ولم يزُرني فقد جفانى
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Anyone who visits the House of Allah and does not visit me has done
injustice upon me.”*

This tradition has been narrated by nine men from the *shuyukh* and
memorizers of tradition. Also refer to *Wafa' al-wafa'* volume 4 page
1342.

### Fifth Tradition

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من زار قبري (أو من زارتي) كنت له شفيعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I will become an intercessor for anyone who pays homage to me by
coming to my shrine.”*

This tradition has been narrated by thirteen *muhaddithun* and *huffaz*
. Refer to *Wafa' al-wafa'* volume 4 page 1347.

### Sixth Tradition

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من زارني بعد موتى فكأنما زارتي في حياتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Anyone who visits me after my demise is like one who has visited me
during my lifetime.”*

These are the examples from various traditions in which the Holy Prophet
(s) has invited the people for his *ziyara* and the number of such
traditions according to research of *al-Ghadir* amounts to twenty-two.

Al-Samhudi has collected seventeen traditions in his book *Wafa'
al-wafa'* volume 4 pages 1336-1348 and has discussed their references in
detail.

If the Holy Prophet (s) has invited the people for his *ziyara*, it is
because of a series of material and spiritual benefits which are hidden
in the *ziyarat* of great Islamic personalities.

By paying homage to the grave of the Holy Prophet (s), people become
acquainted with the propagation of religion of Islam and receive the
correct traditions and knowledge and spread them around the world.

Reasonings of Wahhabis about Prohibition of Journey towards Ziyarat of Graves
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Apparently, the Wahhabis permit the *ziyara* of the Holy Prophet (s) but
do not consider the journey for *ziyara* of graves (of others) to be
permissible.

Muhammad ibn ’Abd al-Wahhab writes in the second treatise in *al-Rasa'il
al-hadiyya al-saniyya*[^3] as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُسنُّ زيارة النبيّ إلا أنه لا يُشد الرَّحل إلا لزيارة المسجد والصلاة
فيه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Ziyara* *of the Holy Prophet (s) is* *mustahab* *(recommended) but
journey specifically undertaken for* *ziyara* *of mosques and reciting
prayer there in is not allowed.”*

Their main reasoning for *ziyara* being forbidden is the following
tradition which has been narrated in the *Sihah*. The narrator of this
tradition is Abu Hurayra who says that the Holy Prophet (s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تُشد الرحال إلا إلى ثلاثة مساجد مسجدي هذا ومسجد الحرام ومسجد الأقصى
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The load of journey cannot be fastened except for (journey towards)
three mosques - my own Mosque, Masjid al-Haram and Masjid al-'Aqsa.”*

The text of this tradition is narrated in some other way too and that
is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنما يُسافر إلى ثلاثة مساجد ، مسجد الكعبة ومسجدي ومسجد ايليا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Still this text has been narrated in a third way:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُشد الرحال إلى ثلاثة مساجد
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^4]  
 That the tradition has come in the books of *Sihah* is not doubtful and
we never dispute that its narrator is Abu Hurayra. However what is
important is to understand the context of the tradition.

Let us suppose the text of the tradition is as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تُشد الرحال إلا ثلاثة مساجد
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indisputably the word of **إلا**is an exception and requires **مستثنى
منه** (that from which the exception is made) and before referring to
the evidences we can presume the **مستثن منه** in two ways:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تُشد إلى مسجد من المساجد إلا ثلاثة مساجد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تشد إلى مكان من الأمكنة إلا إلى ثلاثة مساجد
  </p>
</blockquote>

Understanding the context of the tradition depends on selecting one of
the two assumptions.

If we assume the context of the tradition to be the first one, then in
such a case it would mean that no luggage for journey will be fastened
towards any mosque except these three mosques and it does not mean that
(**شد الرحال**) is not permissible for any place even if it is not a
mosque.

Anyone who fastens the luggage of journey for *ziyara* of the Holy
Prophet (s), Imams and virtuous men will never be included in the
prohibition of this tradition since the topic of discussion is journey
(only) towards mosque and amongst all the mosques these three mosques
have been excluded. But going to journey for *ziyara* of shrines which
is out of our topic of discussion is not included in this prohibition.

If we assume the context of the tradition to be the second case, it
would mean that except for the journey towards these three places, all
spiritual journeys are prohibited, whether the journey is for *ziyara*
of mosque or for *ziyarat* of other places.

However by paying attention to the decisive evidences it will become
clear that the context of the tradition is the same as the first one.

Firstly the **مستثنى** (the thing excepted) is of the three mosques; in
as much as the exception is a linked exception certainly **مستثنى منه**
will be related to the mosque and not place. [^5]

Secondly, if the aim is prohibition of all the spiritual journeys, it
will not be a correct restriction because, in the Hajj ceremonies people
do (**شد الرحال**) and fasten their luggage for Arafat, Mash'ar and
Mina. If religious journey (other than to these three places) is not
allowed, then why it has been permitted for these three places?

Thirdly, journeys undertaken for *jihad* in the path of Allah, seeking
knowledge, establishing bonds of relationship or visiting parents are
such journeys which have been emphasised in Qur’an and traditions.
Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَوْلَا نَفَرَ مِنْ كُلِّ فِرْقَةٍ مِنْهُمْ طَائِفَةٌ
لِيَتَفَقَّهُوا فِي الدِّينِ وَلِيُنْذِرُوا قَوْمَهُمْ إِذَا رَجَعُوا
إِلَيْهِمْ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَحْذَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Why should not then a company from every party from among them go
forth that they may apply themselves obtain understanding*** ***in
religion, and that they may warn their people when they come back to
them that they may be cautious? (Tawba 19:122)”***

Therefore great research scholars have interpreted the tradition in the
way which we have mentioned.

Al-Gazzali in his book *Ihya' 'ulum al-din* says:

“The second type of journey is to go on journey for worship like journey
for *jihad*, *hajj*, *ziyara* of the grave of Holy Prophet (s), his
companions and the awliya.

Anyone whose *ziyara* is the source of *tabarruk* during life-time will
also be the same during his death-time and **شد رحال** for these motives
is no problem and is not contradictory to the tradition which prohibits
**شد رحال** (other than the three mosques).

This is because the matter under discussion is about the mosques and
since other mosques are all equal as far as superiority is concerned it
is said that journey towards these mosques are not permitted. However,
if we overlook the matter of mosques, the *ziyarat* of Prophets and
awliya are having a great virtue although they possess ranks and
grades.”

Therefore what is prohibited is **شد رحال** towards the mosques (other
than the three mosques) and not “**شد رحال**” for *ziyarat* and or other
spiritual works. [^6]

Here we don’t have an alternative but to mention that when the Holy
Prophet (s) says that no luggage can be fastened for other than the
three mosques, it does not mean **شد رحال** is forbidden (*haram*).
Instead it means that it is not having any merit that a person fastens
his luggage towards them and takes the trouble of visiting them as all
the mosques (other than the three mosques) are not having any difference
as far as their superiority is concerned. The general mosque, the
district mosque and the community mosque are all having equal rewards;
it is needless that with the presence of the general mosque in a near
locality a person fastens his luggage for the general mosque situated in
another far-away locality. But it does not mean that if he does so, his
action will be *haram* and his journey will be a sinful one.

The proof of this matter is what the writers of *Sihah* and *Sunans*
narrate that the Holy Prophet (s) and his companions would visit Masjid
Quba on Saturdays and recite prayer at that place. Here is the text of
Sahih Bukhari:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن النبيّ كان يأتي مسجد قباء كل سبت ماشياً وراكباً وإن ابن عمر كان
يفعل كذلك
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The Holy Prophet (s) used to go for* *ziyara* *of Masjid Quba on every
Saturday either on foot or on a mount. The son of ‘Umar too would do the
same.”* [^7]

Fundamentally, how can travelling distances for performing *salat* for
Allah in one of the divine mosques without the least taint of sham be
considered as haram and unlawful? While establishing prayers in mosque
is *mustahab* (recommended) its preliminary steps too, as a rule, will
take the same colour.

[^1]: Sunan Abu Dawud, vol. 1 pages 470-471, book of Hajj chapter: زيارة
القبور

[^2]: Shaykh Mansur Ali Nasif, Al-Taj al-jami' li al-'usul fi ahadith
al-Rasul, vol. 2, p. 189

[^3]: It is the best book which has been written by any of the Sunni
writers against the fatwa (verdict) of Ibn Taymiyya regarding the
prohibition of journey for ziyara of the Holy Prophet's grave.

[^4]: These three texts have been narrated by Muslim in his Sahih vol. 4
page 126 book of Hajj, chapter of لا تشد الرحال. It can also be found in
Sunan Abu Dawud, vol. 1 page 469, book of Hajj and Sunan al-Nasa'i with
Sharh of al-Suyuti vol. 2 pages 37-38.

[^5]: If someone says: “ما جائني الأزيد” , then we have to say that
مستثنى منه is the word for human-beings and its like for example tribe
etc. and it is not referring to a more comprehensive meaning by the name
of “things” and “existence” which is either human-beings or other
things.

[^6]: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 2 page 76. Sahih Muslim (with Sharh of
al-Nawawi) vol. 9 pages 169-171; Sunan al-Nasa'i (with Sharh of
al-Suyuti) vol. 2 page 37.

[^7]: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 2 page 76. Sahih Muslim (with Sharh of
al-Nawawi) vol. 9 pages 169-171; Sunan al-Nasa'i (with Sharh of
al-Suyuti) vol. 2 page 37.


