Performance of Prayer And Supplication Near Graves Of The Holy Personalities
============================================================================

Among the matters which has been discussed and debated in the books of
Wahhabis is the issue of performing prayer and recitation of *du'a* near
the graves of the holy personalities and the matter of lighting candles
over their graves.

The founder of this school of thought says in the treatise of *Ziyarat
al-qubur* as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لم يذكر أحد من أئمة السلف أن الصلاة عند القبور وي مشاهدها مستحبة ولا
أن الصلاة والدعاء هُناك افضل بل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إتفقوا كلهم على أن الصلاة في المساجد والبُيوت افضل منها عند قبور
الأولياء والصالحين
  </p>
</blockquote>

“No one from the past leaders has said that salat near the graves is
mustahab (recommended) or that salat and du'a at these places are more
superior to other places. Instead all of them are of the same view that
salat in mosques and houses are more useful than reciting them near the
graves of the awliya and virtous people.”[^1]

Moreover, in a reply attributed to the scholars of Medina we read as
such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أما التوجه إلى حجرة النبي (صلى الله عليه وأله) عند الدعاء فالاولى منعه
كما هو معروف من معتبرات كُتب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المذاهب ولأن افضل الجهات ، جهة القبلة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“At the time of supplication, it is better to stop from concentrating
over the grave of the Holy Prophet (s) and what is well-known in the
reliable books is its prohibition. Moreover the best direction is the
direction of qibla.”*

This matter, over the passage of time has reached the level of *shirk*
(polytheism) from the level of prohibition and at present they consider
such an action to be *shirk* and its performer a *mushrik* (polytheist).

We remind you that anyone who performs *salat* for and worships the one
in the grave or takes his grave as a *qibla* will undoubtedly be called
a *mushrik*.

But no Muslim from anywhere in the world performs such an action near
the grave of the Holy Prophet (s) and the awliya. They neither worship
them nor take their graves as *qibla*.

Therefore the idea of *shirk* is no more than an imagination. The motive
of Muslims in performing salat and *du'a* near the graves of the awliya
is the very intention of *tabarruk* to the place where the beloved one
of Allah has been buried.

They imagine that since such a place beholds a special dignity due to
the burial of the beloved one of Allah, their actions will consequently
be having a great reward.

Now it is necessary to discuss whether a place enjoys sanctification due
to the burial of some virtuous and pious person or not?

If such a judgment is proved through the Qur’an and *sunnah*, then
naturally performing salat and *du'a* near the graves of the divine
leaders will be considered as commendable acts. And, even in other case,
we cannot declare it to be prohibited and *haram*. Instead, like all the
other places, performing *salat* and reciting *du'a* in those places too
will be permitted and lawful even though it may not be considered
admirable.

In this section we shall now focus our discussion on whether the burial
places and graves of the Prophets and awliya are possessing special
superiority and dignity or not and whether any proof exists in the
Qur’an and sunnah about this matter or not?

This reality can be known by paying attention to the following verses:

1. About the grave of ‘Ashaab-e-Ka'ahf’ the group of monotheist gave
their views as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لنتخذن عليهم مسجداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“……For we will certainly raise a masjid over them. (Kahf 18:21)”***

Their aim in considering the graves as mosques was nothing but to
perform their religious obligations or, so to speak, their prayer and
*du'a* over there.[^2] They imagined that this place possessed a special
dignity keeping in mind the fact that it contained the dead bodies of
the beloved servants of Allah. They thought of seeking *tabarruk* from
the superiority of that place and hence a greater reward.

Qur’an narrates this matter from the group of monotheists and does not
say anything more. If this action was unlawful, vain and useless, then
Qur’an would have never remained silent. It would have certainly found
fault with it and not kept silent which is naturally the sign of
approval.

2. The Holy Qur’an commands the people visiting the House of Allah to
recite salat at *Maqam Ibrahim* i. e. the place where Ibrahim (‘a) was
standing.

Thus it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّخِذُوا مِنْ مَقَامِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ مُصَلًّى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And appoint for yourselves a place of prayer on the standing-place
of Ibrahim. (Baqarah 2:125)”***

If you place this verse before anyone they will not understand anything
from it except that this place has achieved superiority and dignity due
to the standing of Ibrahim (‘a) over this spot and perhaps his
worshipping of Allah in that place. Due to the auspiciousness and
dignity this spot possesses, the Holy Qur’an orders the Muslims to
recite salat at that spot and seek ‘tabarruk’.

When the Qiyam (standing) of Ibrahim (‘a) in one place gives holiness
and dignity to such a place then, does not the burial of the bodies of
martyrs and virtuous people become the source of dignity and excellence
and does not prayers in such a place possess a greater value and dua's
get better answered?

Is it true that this verse has been revealed only in the case of Ibrahim
and we cannot derive a general judgement from it!?

Dawaniqi entered into a debate with Imam Malik (the founder of Maleki
School of thought) in the mosque of the Holy Prophet (s) and said:
“Should we stand facing the *qibla* at the time of *du'a* or should we
face the grave of the Holy Prophet (s)?” Malik replied: “Why should you
turn away from the Holy Prophet (s) while he is your channel and your
father, i.e. Adam's ('a) channel?! Instead turn towards the grave of the
Holy Prophet (s) and take him as your intercessor and request him to
intercede on your behalf.[^3]

This conversation and discussion shows that *du'a* near the grave of the
Holy Prophet (s) was having no problem and difficulty and the question
of Mansur to the leader of Medina was about the preference of one (act)
over the other and Imam Malik replied that paying attention to the grave
is like paying attention to the *qibla*.

3. Reference to the incident of *mi'raj* will make this fact more
evident since it has come in the traditions of *mi'raj* that the Holy
Prophet (s) recited salat in places like Taiyyaba, Mount Sinai and
Bethlehem.

Jibra'eel came to him and said: ‘O Prophet! do you know the place where
you recited *salat*? You have performed your prayer at the birth place
of 'Isa’ (Jesus).[^4]

From this tradition we come to know that performing salat in places that
have been in contact with the body of a Prophet have great significance
and tabarruk to this particular place was because of Hazrat Isa's birth
in that place and nothing else.

4. ‘Hajar’ and ‘Ismail’, due to their patience in the path of Allah and
their forbearance for being away from home, reached to such position
that the places where they used to walk became the places of worship
(i.e. the places between Safa and Marwa)[^5]

The following is the saying of the student of Ibn Taymiyya.

“If really the places of strides of these two persons who, because of
their patience and forbearance in the path of Allah became so much Holy
that the Muslims have been ordered to worship God in these places, then
why the grave of the Holy Prophet (s) who has exhibited the greatest of
patience and steadfastness on the path of rectifying the society cannot
be considered as Holy and sacred and why salat and *du'a* cannot be
recited near such a place?”

5. If truly performing salat near the grave is unlawful, then how Umm
al-Mu'minin (Ayesha) during her remaining life time performed *salat*
and worshipped in her chamber where the Holy Prophet (s) was buried.

The meaning of the Holy Prophet's tradition: (“God has cursed the Jews
and the Christians for considering the graves of their Prophets as
mosques”[^6]) which the Islamic traditionists narrate and which the
Wahhabis utilise for proving the prohibition of salat near the graves of
awliya is because they were prostrating over the grave of their Prophets
or that they were taking their graves as *qibla* both of which were
unlawful. If the meaning of the tradition is what they say then why
Ayesha, narrator of the tradition, performed salat in her chamber for
approximately fifty years.

6. If the burial place of the Holy Prophet (s) is not having any special
significance, then why the two Shaykhs insisted that they should be
buried in that place?

Why al-Hasan ibn 'Ali (‘a) mentioned in his will that his Holy body
should be buried near his great grandfather and if not possible due to
his enemies, he should be buried in the cemetery of Baqi!?

And what relation this tradition has with the actions of the Muslims who
perform *salat* for the sake of God, facing the *qibla* near the grave
of the Holy Prophet (s) and their motive is only to derive virtue from
that place!

The daughter of the Holy Prophet (s) whose happiness as per the decree
of traditions of *Sihah* is the happiness of her God and Messenger and
her anger is the anger of her God and Messenger used to visit every
Friday the grave of her Uncle Hamza and perform *salat* and mourn in
that place. Here is the text of history:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانت فاطمة رضى الله عنها تزور عمَها حمزة كل جُمعة فتُصلي وتبكي عنده
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^7]These reasons jointly show us the path of the Muslims who were
always reciting salat and supplications in places where the beloved ones
of Allah and the self-sacrificers on the path of truth had been buried
and gives the message that salat and supplication in such places enjoy
more honour and superiority and the motive is only to seek *tabarruk*
from that sacred place.

\* \* \*

Let us suppose that there is no proof from Qur’an and traditions that
such a place possesses distinction and performing salat and *du'a* in
such a place is honourable. But why prayer in such a place should be
considered as prohibited? Why such a place should not be included in the
general principles of Islam which considers all the places on earth to
be the places of worshipping God[^8] so that the Muslims are able to
perform prayer near the graves of the beloved ones of Allah!?

Previously, we had mentioned to you about the motive of the traditions
which says that the Jews and Christians have taken the graves of their
Prophets as mosques and never such a tradition includes those who
perform salat and *du'a* facing the *qibla* for the sake of God.

The matter of lighting candles and so on over the graves of the beloved
ones of God which the Wahhabis strictly prohibit is not an important
matter since their references is the same tradition of *Sunan al-Nasa'i*
who narrates from Ibn Abbas that the Holy Prophet (s) has cursed the
women visiting the graves and those who turn the graves into mosques and
light the candles.[^9] This tradition is applicable in the event that
lighting candles etc. is having no benefits other than wastage of money
or imitating some countries of the world.

However if the aim of lighting candle etc. is to recite Qur’an and
*du'a* or perform *salat* and other legal things, then certainly it will
not create any problem. Instead lighting candles etc. in such places and
that too for such holy purposes will be the proof to:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تعاونُوا على البرِّ والتقوى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…….And help one another in goodness and piety. (Maida 5:2)”***

Under these circumstances why should it be considered *haram* and
forbidden?

Incidentally a group of commentators of traditions have specified the
same fact,

Al-Sindi mentions in the margins of *Sunan al-Nasa'i*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والنهى عنه لإنه تضييع مالٍ بلا نفع
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Prohibition for lighting of candles was only because such an action
leads to wastage of wealth.”* [^10]

Tawassul (Recourse) To The Awliya Allah
---------------------------------------

*Tawassul* to the beloved ones of Allah is a matter which is in vogue
amongst the Muslims of the world and from the day the Islamic Shariat
was conveyed through the Holy Prophet (s) its legality was also declared
by the way of Islamic traditions.

It was only in the 8th century A.H. that *tawassul* was rejected by Ibn
Taymiyya and two centuries later Muhammad ibn ’Abd al-Wahhab intensified
this objection. *Tavassul* was introduced to be unlawful and heresy and
occasionally was labelled as worshipping the awliya And it is needless
to mention that worshipping other than God amounts to polytheism and is
forbidden.

We shall later on have a separate discussion regarding the meaning of
worship (*'ibada*) and we shall remind you that *tawassul* to the divine
leaders on the one hand will be counted as worship and polytheism and on
the other hand will be considered as desirable and *mustahab* having no
sign of worship. However, we shall not discuss them here. What is
important to know is that *tawassul* to the awliya Allah is done in two
ways:

1. *Tawassul* to themselves. For example we say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إني أتوسل إليك بنبيك محمد (صلى الله عليه وأله) ان تقي حاجتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Lord I take recourse to your Messenger Muhammad (s) in order that
you fulfil my wish.”*

2. *Tawassul* to their position and reverence before Allah and their
rights.  
 Like we say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إني أتوسل إليك بجاه محمد (صلى الله عليه وأله) وحُرمته وحقِّه ان
تقضي حاجتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Lord I take their position and their respect which they have before
Thee as the means for my need to be fulfilled by Thee.”*

From the viewpoint of the Wahhabis, both these types are declared to be
forbidden whereas the Islamic traditions and the practice of the Muslims
bear witness contrary to the views of the Wahhabis and recommend
*tawassul* of both these types.

At first, we shall mention the Islamic traditions one by one and then
state the practice of the Muslims. By paying attention to both these
reasonings, the matter of heresy and unlawfulness will automatically
cease to exist.

But, whether *tawassul* to divine leaders amounts to their worship or
not will be discussed in the section of ‘meaning of worship’ and that
section will be the most insightful part of our discussion.

Traditions
----------

There are many traditions mentioned in the traditional and historical
books which bear testimony to the correctness and verity of the matter
of *tawassul* to the divine leaders themselves and their position. Here,
we mention a part of those traditions:

First Tradition - Tradition of ‘Uthman ibn Hunayf

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن رجلاً ضريراً اتى إلى النبي (صلى الله عليه وأله) فقال ادعُ الله ان
يُعافينى فقال إن شئت دعوت وإن شئت صبرت
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهو خير قال فادعه ، فامره أن يتوضأ فيُحسن وضوه ويُصلّي ركعتين ويدعو
بهذا الدعاء: اللهم إني أسالك ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأتوجه بك إلى ربي في حاجتي لتقضي ، اللهم شفعه في. قال ابن حنيف فوالله
ما تفرقا وطال بنا الحديث حتى دخل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علينا كان لم يكُن به ضُرّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A blind person approached the Holy Prophet (s) and said: ‘Request
Allah to cure me.’ The Holy Prophet (s) replied: ‘If you wish so I will
pray for you but be patient for that is much better.’ The blind man
asked the Holy Prophet (s) to pray for him. The Holy Prophet (s) ordered
him to take proper Wuzu and then recite two Raka't (units) of salat and
this ‘Dua’: O’ Lord! I request from Thee; I pay attention to Thee
through (the channel) of your prophet Muhammad, Your blessed prophet.*

*O Muhammad, I turn to my Lord for the fulfilment of my need through you
so that my need is answered.*

O Lord, accept his intercession for me….”

### A Word about the Reference of this Tradition

The Authenticity And Verity Of The Reference Needs No Word From Us. Even
The Leader Of The Wahhabis I.E. Ibn Taymiyya Has Declared Its Reference
To Be Correct And Has Said That By Abu Ja'far Whose Name Has Come In The
*Sanad* Of The Tradition Is Mean Abu Ja'far Al-Khutami And He Is A
Reliable Man.[^11]

Al-Rifa'i, a contemporary Wahhabi writer who strives to cast down the
credibility of the traditions on *tawassul*, says with regard to this
tradition as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا شك إن هذا الحديث صحيح ومشهور وقد ثبت فيه بلا شك
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Undoubtedly this tradition is correct and well-known."*[^12]

In the book of *al-Tawassul*, Rafa'ee says: “This tradition has been
mentioned by al-Nasa'i, al-Bayhaqi, al-Tabarani, al-Tirmidhi and
al-Hakim in his *al-Mustadrak* and two recent writers have inserted the
sentence **اللهم شفعني فيه** instead of **وشفعه فيه** [^13]

Zayni Dahlan writes in *Khulasat al-kalam* that: “This tradition has
been narrated - with reliable chains of narration - by al-Bukhari, Ibn
Maja, al-Hakim in his *al-Mustadrak* and Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti in his
*al-Jami.”*

The writer narrates this tradition from the following references:

1. *Sunan Ibn Maja*, vol 1 page 441 from the publications of Dar Ihya
al-kutub al-'arabiyya, (ed. by Muhammad Fu'ad 'Abd al-Baqi), tradition
no. 1385.

Ibn Maja narrates from Abu Ishaq:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘This tradition is correct.’

Thereafter he adds:

"al-Tirmidhi has narrated this tradition in the book of Abwaab-ul-Adeeya
and said

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث حق صحيح غريب
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘This tradition is truly correct and Gharib.’*

2. *Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal* vol. 4 page 138. He has narrated this
tradition in three ways from the *Musnad* of ‘Uthman ibn Hunayf printed
from al-Maktab al-Islami, Mu'assassa Dar Sadir, Beirut.

3. al-Mustadrak of al-Hakim vol. 1 page 313 printed from Hyderabad.
After narrating the tradition he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح على شرك الشيخين ولم يُخرجاه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“This tradition is correct according to the criteria set by the*
*shaykhayn* *and they have not narrated it.”*

4. *Al-Jami' al-Saghir* written by al-Suyuti narrated from al-Tirmidhi
and *Mustadrak* *al-Hakim* page 59.

5. *Talkhis al-Mustadrak* written by al-Dhahabi (died in 748) which is
printed below *al-Mustadrak*.

6. *Al-Taj al-Jami'* vol. 1 page 286. This book is the collection of the
traditions of the five books of Sihah except Ibn Maja.

Therefore it is needless to speak and discuss about the reference of
this tradition.

You hand over this tradition to someone who is acquainted with Arabic
language and a person whose mind is completely free from the
controversies of the Wahhabis in the matter of *tawassul* and ask him
what the Holy Prophet (s) has commanded him in the *du'a* which he
taught the blind man and how he guided him as to how one's ‘Duas’ are
easily answered! He will immediately reply: “The Holy Prophet (s) has
taught him to consider the blessed Prophet as a channel and to seek
*tawassul* from him and ask God to fulfil his wish. This matter can
easily be understood from the following sentences:

. **A** “O Lord, I ask Thee and turn towards Thee through the channel of
your Prophet.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إني اسئلك وأتوجه إليك بنبيك
  </p>
</blockquote>

The word **نبيك** is pertaining to the previous two words **اسئلك** and
**اتوجه إليك**

In clearer terms, he asks from God through the channel of ‘Nabi’ and
also turns to God through him. Moreover by ‘Nabi’ is meant Nabi himself
and not the ‘Dua’ of Nabi; to imagine that it means the *du'a* of Nabi
is deficient of any reason.

Anyone who predetermines the word of *du'a* has no reason other than
pre-judgement since, the one who commends such a word and does not think
Tawassul to people to be correct forcibly strives to predetermine the
word of ‘Dua’ so that nobody opposes his idea and eventually he may say:
“It means *tawassul* to the ‘Dua’ of the Prophet (s) and not the Prophet
himself and *tawassul* to the ‘Dua’ of someone is proper.

**B**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد نبي الرحمة
  </p>
</blockquote>

In order to clarify that asking God for the Sake of the Prophet and
paying attention to Him through His channel is the right purpose, the
word of **نبيك** is mentioned along with the sentence **محمد نبي
الرحمة** which clarifies the fact much better and makes the meaning more
apparent.

(C) The sentence **يا محمد اني أتوجه بك إلى ربي** shows that he (i.e.
the blind man) is referring to Prophet Muhammad himself and not his
*du'a*.

(D) The sentence **وشفعه فيّ** means O God make him as my intercessor
and accept his intercession towards me. In all of these sentences what
is said and explained is the very personality of the Holy Prophet (s)
and his great position and there is no talk of the *du'a* of the Holy
Prophet.

With this explanation all the five objections which the Wahhabi writer
al-Rifa'i has mentioned in the book *al-Tawassul ila haqiqat
al-tawassul* is done away with and we have brought the details of the
objections and their reply in our book, *al-Tawassul*. Interested
readers can refer to them on pages 147 to 153.

Second Tradition: Tawassul to The (Right) Of Questioner
-------------------------------------------------------

'Atiyya al-'Awfi narrates from Abu Sa'id al-Khudri that the Holy Prophet
(s) said: “Anyone who leaves his house for *salat* and recites in this
state the following *du'a*, he will meet the mercy of Allah and one
thousand angels will seek forgiveness for him.”[^14]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إني أسئلك بحق السائلين عليك وأسئلك بحق ممشاي هذا فإني لم اخرُج
اشراً ولا بطراً ولا رياء ولا سُمعة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وخرجت إتقاء سخطك وابتغاء مرضاتك فاسئلك ان تعيذني من النار وان تغفر لي
ذنوبي إنه لا يغفر الذنوب إلا أنت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O God I ask Thee by the right of the questioners and by the honour of
the steps which I take in Thy direction, I have not left the house for
the purpose of disobedience or recreation or hypocrisy. I have left for
keeping away from Thy anger and achieving Thy satisfaction. I ask Thee
to keep me away from the Fire and forgive my sins for nobody forgives
the sins except Thee.”*

This tradition clearly bears testimony to the fact that man, while
asking God for his need to be fulfilled can take the position and status
of a pious person as his channel and the reasoning of this tradition
brings to light our objective.[^15]

Third Tradition: Tawassul to the Right of Holy Prophet (s)
----------------------------------------------------------

After disobedience of Allah, Adam (‘a) in the light of the words which
were manifested from God, repented as Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَلَقَّىٰ آدَمُ مِنْ رَبِّهِ كَلِمَاتٍ فَتَابَ عَلَيْهِ ۚ إِنَّهُ
هُوَ التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then adam received (some) words from his lord, so He turned to him
mercifully; surely He is oft-returning (to mercy), the Merciful.
(Baqarah 2:37)”***

Regarding the interpretation of **كلمات** (words) which has come down in
this verse, a group of commentators and traditionists, by relying on the
following tradition are having a view, which by paying attention to its
text will become clear for us.

Al-Tabarani in *Al-Mu'jam al-saghir,* al-Hakim Naysaburi in
*al-Mustadrak*, Abu Nu'aym al-Isfahani and al-Bayhaqi in the book of
*Dala'il al-nubuwwa,* Ibn 'Asakir al-Shami in his *al-Ta'rikh*,
al-Suyuti in *al-Durr al-Manthur* and al-Alusi in *Ruh al-Ma'ani*[^16]
have narrated from ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab that the Holy Prophet (s) has
said: [^17]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لما اذنب ادم الذي اذنبه رفع رأسه إلى السماء فقال اسئلك بحق محمد إلا
غفرت لي فأوحى الله إليه ومن مُحمد؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال تبارك اسمك ، لما خلقت رفعت رأسى إلى غرشك فإذا فيه مكتوب لا إله
إلا الله ومحمد رسول الله فقلت إنه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ليس أحد اعظم عندك قدراً: ممن جعلت اسمه مع اسمك فاوحى إليه إنه اخر
النبيين من ذريتك ولولا هو لما خلقتك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

When Adam committed the sin he raised his head towards the sky and said
(O God) I ask Thee by the right of Muhammad that You forgive me. God
revealed to him: “Who is Muhammad?”

Adam replied: When You created me, I raised my head towards the ‘Arsh’
(Throne) and I saw that on it was written “There is no God except Allah
and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. I said to myself that Muhammad
must be His greatest creature that Allah has kept His name besides his
own name. At this moment, it was revealed to him that Muhammad was the
last of the Prophets from his Progeny and if it was not for Muhammad,
God would have not created him.

### Our View about this Tradition:

1. In the Holy Qur’an the word of (words) is applied to personalities
contrary to what is common amongst us. For example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنَّ اللَّهَ يُبَشِّرُكَ بِيَحْيَىٰ مُصَدِّقًا بِكَلِمَةٍ مِنَ
اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ***“That Allah gives you the good news of Yahya verifying a Word from
Allah, (Aal-Imran 3:39)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا مَرْيَمُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُبَشِّرُكِ بِكَلِمَةٍ مِنْهُ اسْمُهُ
الْمَسِيحُ عِيسَى ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O Maryam, surely Allah gives you good news with a Word from him (of
one) whose*** ***name is the Messiah, Isa son of Maryam.***
***(Aal-Imran 3:45)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا الْمَسِيحُ عِيسَى ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ وَكَلِمَتُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ***“The Messiah, Isa son of Maryam is only an Apostle of Allah and His
Word, (Nisa 4:171)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَوْ كَانَ الْبَحْرُ مِدَادًا لِكَلِمَاتِ رَبِّي لَنَفِدَ
الْبَحْرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: If the sea were ink for the words*** ***of my Lord. (Kahf
18:109)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْبَحْرُ يَمُدُّهُ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ سَبْعَةُ أَبْحُرٍ مَا نَفِدَتْ
كَلِمَاتُ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"With seven more seas to increase it, the words of Allah would not
come to an end. (Luqman 31:27)”***

Considering that the word of **كلمات** has come in the verse under our
discussion, we can say that by **كلمات** is meant the same noble
personalities to whom *tawassul* is sought and in the aforesaid
tradition, only the name of Muhammad is mentioned from amongst the names
of those personalities. Therefore, in Shia traditions, this reality is
narrated in two ways. Sometimes **كلمات** is interpreted as a name of
these holy personalities and sometimes it refers to their sparkling
light. Here is both the interpretations:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن أدم راى مكتوباً على العرش اسماء معظمة مكرمة فسأل عنها فقيل له هذه
اسماء اجل الخلق منزلة عند الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تعالى والأسماء محمد وعليّ وفاطمة والحسن والحسين ، فتوسَّل ادم عليه
السلام إلى ربه في قبول توبته ورفع
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
منزلته
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^18]  

Adam saw the names which were written in *‘arsh* (throne) and did
*tawassul* to them. It was told to him that these names were the most
honourable creatures of Allah and they were Muhammad, 'Ali, Fatima,
al-Hasan and al-Husayn. Adam repented by doing *tawassul* to them.

Another Shia tradition mentions that Adam saw the sparkling light of
these five personalities. For knowing this tradition, please refer to
*Tafsir al-burhan*.[^19]

2. By referring to the historical and traditional books it becomes clear
that *tawassul* of Adam ('a) to the Holy Prophet (s) was one famous and
well-known matter. As, Imam Malik told Mansur al-Dawanaqi in the shrine
of the Holy Prophet (s) as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هو وسيلتك ووسيلة ابيك أدم
  </p>
</blockquote>

**  
**

[^20]**  
**

***“He (Holy Prophet) is your channel and your father, Adam's
channel.”***

The Islamic poets have put this reality into a form of verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
به قد اجاب الله ادم دعا ونجى في بطن السفينة نوح
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قوم بهم عفرت خطيئة ادم وهم الوسيلة والنجوم الطُلع
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On account of him, Allah accepted the ‘Dua’ of Adam and saved Noah
inside the ship. They are such people through whom Adam's sin was
pardoned and they are those*** ***who are the channels to Allah and the
sparkling stars.”***[^21]

Fourth Tradition: Tawassul of Prophet (s) by the Right of Prophet (s) and by the Rights of Previous Prophets
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لما ماتت فاطمة بنت أسد ، دخل عليها رسول الله (صلى الله عليه وأله) فجلس
عند رأسها ، فقال رحمك الله يا أمي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بعد أمي ثم دعا رسول الله (صلى الله عليه وأله) اسمامة بن زيد ، وابا
أيُوب الأنصارى وعمر بن الخطاب وغُلاماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اسود ، يحفرون ، فحفروا قبرها ، فلما بلغوا الحد ، حفر رسول الله بيده
واخرج تُرابه ، فلما فرغ دخل رسول الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(صلى الله عليه وأله) فاضطجع فيه ، ثم قال: الله الذي يُحيى ويُميت وهو
حيُّ لا يموت إغفر لأمي فاطمة بنت اسد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ووسّع عليها مدخلها بحق نبيك الدين من قلبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“When Fatima, daughter of Asad passed away and the Holy Prophet (s) was
informed about her death he came and sat beside her and said:*

*‘O my mother after my mother, may God have mercy upon you. Then he
asked Usama, Abu Ayyub, ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab and a black slave to
prepare one grave. When the grave was ready the Holy Prophet (s) made a
niche in the side of the grave and buried her with his own hands and
then recited this ‘Dua’:*

*'O Allah the One who gives Life and Death: the One who is All-Living
and never dies, Have mercy on Fatima daughter of Asad and make her abode
vast by the right of your Prophet and the Prophets who came before
me.’”*

The writer of *Khulasat al-kalam* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رواه الطبراني في الكبير والأوسط وابن حبان والحاكم وصحّحوه
  </p>
</blockquote>

“This tradition is narrated by al-Tabarani (in his al-Mu'jam), Ibn
Hibban and al-Hakim and they have confirmed its authenticity.”[^22]

Sayyid Ahmad ibn Zayni Dihlan writes in the book *al-Durar al-saniyya fi
al-radd 'ala al-wahhabiyya* as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روى ابن أبي شيبة عن جابر مثل ذلك ، وكذا روى مثله ابن عبد البر عن ابن
عباس ، ورواه ابو نعيم في حلية
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأولياء عن أنس ، ذكل ذلك كُله الحافظ جلال الدين السُيوطي في الجامع
الكبير.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The famous traditionist Ibn Abi Shayba has narrated this tradition from
Jabir. Ibn 'Abd al-Barr and Abu Nu'aym too have narrated this tradition
from Ibn 'Abbas and Anas respectively. Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti has
brought all these matters in al-Jami' al-kabir.[^23]

The writer narrates this tradition in the afore-mentioned form from two
books that some of them contain the supplication related to our
discussion while others do not.

1. Hilyat al-'awliya (Abu Nu'aym al-Isfahani, vol. 3 page 121.

2. *Wafa' al-wafa'* (al-Samhudi} vol. 3 page 899.

Fifth Tradition: Tawassul to Prophet (s) Himself
------------------------------------------------

Some of the Islamic traditionists have narrated that an Arab accompanied
with some villagers approached the Holy Prophet (s) and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لقد اتيناك وما لنا بعير يط لنا ولا صبيُ يعظ
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^24] [^25]  
*“We have come to you while we are neither having a camel with us to
groan nor a child to sleep.”*

Thereafter he recited these poems

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أتيناك والعذراء تُمى لبانُها وقد شُغلت أم الصبيّ عن الطفل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا شئ مما تأكل الناس عندنا سوى الحنظل العامي والعلهز الفسل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وليس لنا إلا إليك فرارُنا واين فرار الناس إلا إلى الرُسل
  </p>
</blockquote>

We have come to you while blood drops from the bosom of the horses; the
mother has been restrained from her baby. We are not having anything
with ourselves for people to eat except for bitter leaves which they eat
in the year of famine and some bad food from wool and blood. We are
having no alternative but to seek shelter in you, and in whom can people
seek shelter except the Prophets.

Then,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال رسول الله يجرر حتى صعد المنبر ، فرفغ يديه: اللهم إسقنا غيثاً
مُغيثاً...فما ردّ النبي يديه حتى ألقت
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السماء...ثم قال لله درابي طالب لو كان حياً لقرَّت عيناه ، من يُنشدنا
قوله؟ فقال عليُ بن أبي طالب ، وقال وكأنك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُريد يا رسول الله قوله:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وابيض يُستسقى الغمام بوجهه ثمال اليتامى للأرامل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يطوف به الهُلاك من أل هائم فهم عنده في نعمة وفواضل
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet (s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأنشد عليّ ابياناً من القصيدة والرسول يستغفر لأبي طالب على المنبر ، ثم
قام رجل من كنانة وأنشد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لك الحمد والحمد ممن شكر سُقينا بوجه النبي المطر
  </p>
</blockquote>

“‘Yes, my objective was the same as you have recited.’ Then Ali (‘a)
read a portion of his elegy and the Holy Prophet (s) asked blessings for
Abu Talib on top of the pulpit.’

*After this a man from the tribe of Bani Kanane stood up and recited
some lines where the first line meant as follows: “All the praise is for
You. O Allah; praise from Your worthy slaves. By resorting to the Holy
Prophet (s), we have become satiated by the rainfall.”*

Numerous references have been narrated for this portion but the writer
has narrated from the following documents:

a. *'Umdat al-qari fi sharh Sahih al-Bukhari*, vol. 7 page 31 written by
Badr al-Din Mahmud bin Ahmad al-'Ayni (died in the year 855) printed by
*Idara al-taba'a al-muniriyya*.

b. *Sharh Nahjul-Balagha* by Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. 14 page 80.

c. *al-Sira al-Halabiyya* by 'Ali bin Burhan al-Din al-Halabi, vol. 3
page 263.

d. *al-Hujja 'ala al-dhahib ila takfir Abi Talib*, written by Shams
al-Din Abi 'Ali Fakhar bin Ma'ad (died in the year 630), printed in
Najaf, 'Alawi press, page 79.

e. *Sira Zayni Dihlan* in the margin of al-Sira al-Halabiyya, vol. 1
page 81.

Sixth Tradition: Tawassul to the Self of Prophet (s)
----------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن سواد بن قارب رضي الله ، انشد لرسول الله قصيدته اليئ فيها التوسل
ويقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأشهد أن الله لا رب غيره وأنك مأمون على كل غائب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأنك أدنى المرسلين وسيلة إلى الله يابن الأكرمين الأطائب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فمُرنا بما يأتيك يا خير مُرسل وإن كان فيما فيه شيب الذوائب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكن لي شفيعاً يوم لا ذو شفاعة بمُغنٍ قتيلاً عن سواد بن قارب
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I bear witness that there is no God except Allah.* *You (O Prophet)
are trustworthy upon every hidden thing from the senses. From amongst
the Prophets you are the most nearest channel towards Allah. O the son
of the honourable and noble! you command us whatever you receive. O, the
most righteous Apostle! Although acting upon your commands causes the
hair on the head to turn white, you be my intercessor on the Day when
the intercession of the intercessors will be useless for Sawad bin
Qaa'reb even to the extent of string of dates.”*[^26]

Till here we were able to mention some of the traditions of *tawassul*
which have come in the historical and traditional books of Ahl
al-Sunnah.

However in the traditions of Shi’a leaders, the matter of *tawassul* to
holy personalities is so clear and obvious that it can be witnessed in
most of their ‘Duas’ (supplications).  
 Should we learn Islamic teachings and instructions from Ibn Taymiyya
and Muhammad ibn ’Abd al-Wahhab or acquire them from the Household of
the Messengership and the progeny of the Holy Prophet (s) who by the
order of Hadith al-Thaqalayn, are (The Lesser Weight) and witness to
Qur’an. Amongst the numerous ‘Duas’ that have come in *al-Sahifa
al-'Alawiyya*[^27] or in *du'a 'Arafa* or in *al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiyya*,
we shall content ourselves with only one of them which is most suitable
in connection with the previous tradition.

Seventh Tradition: The Leader of the martyrs says in du'a 'Arafa
----------------------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إنا نتوجه إليك في هذه العشية التي فرضتها وعظمتها بمُحمد نبيك
ورسولك وخيرتك من خلقك
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Lord at such a moment that You have made it obligatory and
honourable upon me, I turn towards You by Muhammad, Your Prophet, Your
Messenger and Your best of those* *created by You.”*[^28]

Practise of the Muslims Regarding Tawassul
------------------------------------------

The practise of the Muslims during the time of the Holy Prophet (s) and
also after him was that they were always seeking ‘tabarruk’ to the
awliya Allah themselves as well as to their position and status. Now we
shall mention some of them here:

(1). Ibn al-'Athir 'Izz al-Din 'Ali bin Muhammad bin Muhammad bin 'Abd
al-Karim al-Jazari (died in 630 AH) writes in the book *Usd al-ghaba fi
ma'rifat al-sahaba* as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واستسقى عمر بن الخطاب بالعباس عام الرمادة لما إشتد القحط فسقاهم الله
تعالى به واخصبت الأرض فقال عمر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والله الوسيلة إلى الله والمكان منه وقال حسان:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سال الإمام وق نتابع جدبنا فسقى الغمام بغرة العباس
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عمّ النبي وصنو والده الذي ورث النبي بذالك دون الناس
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحيا الإله به البلاد فأصبحت مخضرة الأجناب بعد اليأس
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولما سُقى الناس طفقوا يتمسحون بالعباس ويقولون هنيئاً لك ساقي الحرمين
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In the year when famine reached its peak, ‘Umar requested for rain
through the channel of Abbas. God satiated them through him and every
place became green. Thereafter ‘Umar faced the people and said: ‘I swear
by Allah that al-‘Abbas is our channel towards Allah and he is having a
high station before Allah.’*

*Hassan ibn Thabit recited a poem in his honour and said: ‘When famine
had severely engulfed the entire area, the Leader requested for rain.’*

*Thereafter the clouds in the sky, through the brightness of al-‘Abbas
satiated the people. Al-‘Abbas who is the Uncle of the Prophet (s) and
alike the father of the Prophet (s) has inherited such a position and
status from him. Almighty Allah enlivened the places through him and
every spot began to be filled with greenery after despair and
disappointment. When it rained, people everywhere started seeking*
*tabarruk* *by touching the body of al-‘Abbas and they said: Bravo O
Saqi (cupbearer) of the two holy sanctuaries.”*[^29]

Observation of the period of history, an example of which has also been
mentioned in *Sahih al-Bukhari*, shows that one of the means of
*tawassul* was through the honourable personalities who were embodiment
of nearness (to God) and meritorious and possessed virtues that make
them suitable for *tawassul*. What an elegant manner to express this is
to say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا والله الوسيلة إلى الله والمكان منه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘This is by God a means for seeking nearness to God and at His House.’*

(2). Al-Qastallani (died in the year 923 AH), who was a contemporary to
Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, writes in his book *al-Mawahib al-ladunniyya
bil-manha al-muhammadiyyah fil seerat al-nabawiyyah* that has been
printed in Egypt that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن عمر لنا استسقى بالعباس قال يا أيها الناس إن رسول الله (صلى الله
عليه وأله) كان يرى للعباس ما يرى الولد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
للولد فاقتدوا به في عمه واتخذوه وسيلة إلى الله تعالى ففيه التصريح
بالتوسل وبهذا يبطُل قول من منع التوسُل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُطلقاً بالإحياء والأموات وقول من منع ذلك بغير النبي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“When ‘Umar requested for rain through Abbas he said: 'O people! The
Holy Prophet (s) used to look at Abbas from a father's angle. You follow
him and take him as your channel towards Allah.'" This action nullifies
the notion and thought of those* *who have completely prohibited*
*tawassul* *or have prohibited it for personalities other than Holy
Prophet (s).”*[^30]

(3). When Mansur asked the grand Mufti of Medina, Malik bin Anas,
whether he should face the *qibla* and recite *du'a* or face the Holy
Prophet (s), the latter replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِم تصرف وجهك عنه وهو وسيلتك ووسيلة أبيك أدم (عليه السلام) إلى الله
يوم القيامة بل استقبله واستشفع به
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فيشفعك الله قال الله تعالى ولو أنهم إذ طلموا أنفسهم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Why do you turn your face away from him? He is your means and your
father, Adam's channel on the* *Day of Judgement. You resort to him and
take him as your intercessor as Almighty Allah* *accepts his
intercession. Allah declares (in Quran) that if those who do injustice
upon themselves..."*[^31]

(4). Ibn Hajar al-Haythami in the book of *al-Sawa'iq al-muhriqa* (which
al-Qadi Nurullah al-Shustari refuted under the title of *al-Sawarim
al-muhriqa)* has narrated the following two couplets:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن النبي دريعتي هم إليه وسيلتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ارجوا بهم أعطى غداً بيدى اليمين صحيفتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Household of the Holy Prophet (s) is my channel towards Allah and
it is through their means that I have hope that my book of deeds will be
given in my right hand."[^32]

By taking into consideration these testimonies and words, one can claim
that the Holy Prophet (s) and the outstanding personalities are one kind
of channel which Qur’an has ordered for that as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أيها الذين أمنوا اتقوا الله وابتغوا إليه الوسيلة
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! be careful of (your duty to) Allah and seek means
of nearness to Him.*** ***(Maida 5:35)”***

And **وسيلة** (Channel) is not confined to observance of the *wajib*
(obligatory) and *haram* (prohibited) acts. Instead, even the *mustahab*
(recommended) acts such as *tawassul* to Prophets is a **وسيلة**
(channel) too. Can we find fault with so many scholars in understanding
the meaning of**وسيلة** while they are the authorities in (passing)
judgement and the protectors of traditions and are reckoned to be the
Islamic scholars!

Those who do not give importance to these kinds of specifications and
testimonies and think of their justification and interpretation are
those who because of their prejudice do not intend to reap the benefits
of these testimonies and evidences. For presenting an example of their
prejudice and discrimination, we bring here a matter which al-Bukhari
has narrated about this historical event and hence see with the vision
of reality, how the curtain of prejudice has brought about deviation and
chaos in this matter. We have replied to them in the book of
*al-Tawassul* page 135 to 140.

(5) al-Bukhari narrates in his *al-Sahih* as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن عمر بن الخطاب كان إذ قُحطوا إستسقى بالعباس بن عبد المُطلب رضي الله
عنه ، وقال اللهم كُنا نتوسل إليك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بنبينا فتُسقينا وإنا نتوسل إليك بعمّ نبيينا فاسقنا قال فيُسقون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“During the period of famine, ‘Umar bin al-Khattab would take resort to
al-'Abbas bin 'Abd al-Muttalib and say: ‘O God! previously we were
taking resort to Your Prophet and You were sending Your mercy on us; Now
we take resort to Your Prophet's uncle send Your mercy on us.' At this
moment it started to rain and everything got satiated.”*[^33]

There is nothing to be said about the authenticity and consensus
regarding this tradition. Even al-Rifa'i who, under various pretexts,
rejects the reliable traditions on *tawassul* has admitted the
authenticity of this tradition and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن هذا الحديث صحيحُ... فإن صحَّ هذا الجواز شرعاً فنحن مِن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أسبق الناس إلى الأخذ به والعمل بمُقتضاه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Certainly this tradition is correct….If the purpose of the tradition
is a proof upon the correctness of* *tawassul* *to people then we are
the first people to take the step to accept that purpose and act upon
it.”*[^34]

By paying attention to the sentences of the Caliph himself which he
narrates to al-'Abbas about *tawassul* and especially when he swears by
Allah

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا والله الوسيلة إلى الله والمكان منه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“This is by* *God a means for seeking nearness to God and at His
House.”*[^35]

It becomes clear that the reality of *tawassul* in this case is
*tawassul* to the self or to the position and status of al-'Abbas before
God.

In this regard, Muhammad bin Nu'man al-Maliki (died in the year 683 AH)
narrates in his book *Misbah al-zalam fi al-mustaghithin bi khayr
al-'anam* the manner of *tawassul* of ‘Umar to al-'Abbas as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إنا نستقيك بعمِّ نبيك (صلى الله عليه وأله) ونستشفع إليك بشيبته
فسُقوا وفي ذلك يقول عباس بن عتبة بن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبي لهب: بعمِّي سقى الله الحجاز وأهله عشية يستسقي بشيبته عمر
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"O God we ask for rain through the channel of thy Prophet's uncle and
we take his authority and previous record in Islam as our intercessor.
At this moment, the mercy of Allah showered upon everyone. 'Abbas ibn
'Utba ibn Abi Lahab recited a poem in this regard and said: 'By the*
*blessings of my Uncle, the land of Hijaz and its inhabitants got
satiated. And at sunset, ‘Umar did* *tawassul* *to his (Al-Abbas’s)
virtuousness.'"*[^36]

In the same way, Hassan bin Thabit too recited a poem regarding this
matter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فسقى الغمام بغُرة العباس
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The cloud satiated (everything) due to the sparkling face of Abbas.”

Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalani says in the book of *Fath al-bari fi sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari:*

Al-Abbas in his *du'a* said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقد توجه القوم بي إليك لمكاني من نبيك
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The people resorted to me because of the bond of relationship which I
have with Thy Prophet.” [^37]

As the respected readers have observed, there is no place of doubt that
the aim was *tawassul* to the position and status of Abbas and we are
aware that from ancient times there is a saying that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تعليق الحُكم بالوصف مشعر بالعلية
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Anytime, a judgement is derived from a topic, its content will be a
testimony against the topic (and) a testimony upon the proof of
judgement.”*

That is to say, if the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعلى المولود له رزقهن
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Securing the necessities of life for the women is a matter
concerning those whose wives bear children for them… (Baqarah 2:233)”***

It is a judgement due to expression of the reason of judgement and since
women bring children for the men, their expenses in daily life should
naturally be met by the men.

If we say: A learned man and a scholar should be respected, it is
because of his knowledge and wisdom.

Therefore, if ‘Umar says **إنا نتوسل إليك بعمِّ نبيّك**he wishes to
indicate the reason for doing *tawassul* to al-'Abbas. In other words,
from among so many people, why should we do *tawassul* to him? As
al-'Abbas himself said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لمكاني من نبيك
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Because of my status in relation to your* *Prophet.”*

Taking into consideration these reasonings, we can decisively say that
the Muslims in the beginning of Islam were doing ‘*tawassul*’ to the
righteous and virtuous personalities.

(6) Poem of Safiyya in grief of the Holy Prophet (s):

Safiyya, daughter of Abd al-Muttalib and aunt of the Holy Prophet (s)
recited a poem in grief of the Holy Prophet (s). Two of its lines are:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا يا رسول الله أنت رجاؤنا وكُنت بنا براً ولم تك جافياً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكنت بنا براً رؤوفاً نبينا ليبكِ عليك القوم من كان باكيا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Prophet of God you are our hope. You were a righteous person and
never did you oppress anyone. You were good and kind to us; O our
Prophet, amongst your nation whosoever (claims to be) in grief should
shed tears for you.”[^38]

This part of the poem which was presented in the presence of the
companinons of the Holy Prophet (s) and which has been narrated by the
historians informs us of the following points:

Firstly, conversation with the spirits or so to speak, the address to
the Holy Prophet (s) after his demise was an action which was permitted
and was a common practice. As she said:**ألا يا رسول الله** which is
against the views of the Wahhabis, this kind of conversation is neither
polytheism nor useless.

Secondly, by the decree of the sentence **أنت رجاؤنا** the Holy Prophet
(s) was the hope of the Islamic society in all the conditions. Even
after his demise, his relation with us is not disconnected. Here we
shall mention some of the valuable writings of the great Sunni authors
regarding ‘Tawassul’ towards the Holy Prophet (s). Referring to these
books will clarify for the Islamic scholars the position of this matter
and will manifest the fact that the matter of Tawassul, contrary to the
views of the Wahhabis, was a practice in vogue amongst the Muslims.

(1) Ibn al-Jawzi (died in 597) has written a book by the name of
*al-Wafa bi 'ahwal al-Mustafa'*, and has earmarked one chapter for
*tawassul* to the Holy Prophet (s) and another chapter for ‘seeking
*shifa* from his grave’.

(2) Shamsuddin Muhammad bin Nu'man al-Maliki (died in the year 673 AH)
has written a book by the name of *Misbah al-zalaam fi al-mustaghithin
bi khayr al-'anam* and Sayyid Nur al-Din al-Samhudi has narrated a lot
from him in his book *Wafa' al-wafa'* in the chapter of ‘*Tawassul* to
the Holy Prophet (s)’.

(3) Ibn Dawud al-Maliki al-Shadhili has brought in his book *al-Bayan wa
al-'ikhtisar* the *tawassul* of scholars and pious people to the Holy
Prophet (s) in difficulties and hardships.

(4) Taqi al-Din al-Subki (died in the year 756 AH) has analysed this
matter in his book *Shifa al-siqam* pages 120 to 133.

(5) Sayyid Nur al-Din al-Samhudi (died in the year 911 AH) has discussed
this matter and brought testimonies to it in his book *Wafa al-wafa'* ,
vol. 2, pages 413 to 419.

(6) Abu al-'Abbas al-Qastallani (died in the year 932 AH) in his book
*al-Mawahib al-ladunniyya*.

(7) Abu 'Abdulla al-Zurqani al-Maliki (died in the year 1122 AH) in his
book *Sharh al-Mawahib al-ladunniyya* vol. 8 page 317.

(8) al-Khalidi al-Baghdadi (died in the year 1299 AH) author of *Sulh
al-'Ikhwan.* Apart from this, he has written a *risala* (treatise) in
reply to Sayyid Mahmud al-'Alusi Baghdadi about *tawassul* to the Holy
Prophet (s) and has been printed in the year 1306 AH.

(9) al-'Adawi al-Hamzawi (died in the year 1303 AH) has discussed about
*tawassul* in the book of *Kanz al-matalib*, page 198.

(10) al-'Azami al-Shafi'i al-Quda'i', author of *Furqan al-Qur'an*. This
book has been printed along with the book *al-'Asma wa al-sifat* of
al-Bayhaqi in 140 pages.

By referring to these books some of which have presented the facts and
most prominent amongst them being *Sulh al-'Ikhwan* and *Furqan
al-Qur'an,* one can know what was the practise of the Muslims in every
period concerning *tawassul* to the Holy Prophet (s) and will reveal the
exaggerations of Ibn Taymiyya and followers of his deviated ideology of
Wahabism.

In the end, we shall once more remind you of what Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَابْتَغُوا إِلَيْهِ
الْوَسِيلَةَ وَجَاهِدُوا فِي سَبِيلِهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"O you who believe! be careful of (your duty to) Allah and*** ***seek
means of nearness to Him and strive hard in His way that you may be
successful.*** ***(Mai'da 5:35)”***

This verse in general orders to seek *tawassul* but what exactly is
*tawassul* is not mentioned in this very verse.

There is no doubt that performing the religious duties is a channel (for
tawassul) but it is not confined to this meaning only. Instead by paying
attention to the short history of *tawassul* to the awliya Allah, it
will become clear that this action itself is one of the channels.
Moreover, this matter will fully become clear by referring to the
conversation of Imam Malik with Mansur and also the incident of the
second Caliph requesting for rain by doing *tawassul* to al-'Abbas, the
uncle of the Prophet (s).

[^1]: Ziyarat al-qubur, page 159-160.

[^2]: In interpreting the afore-said tradition, al-Zamakhshari in
al-Kashshaf says: يصلى فيه المسلمون ويتبركون بمكانهم About this verse
Nayshaburi writes in his Tafsir as such: يصلي فيه المسلمون ويتبركون
بمكانهم

[^3]: Wafa' al-wafa' fi akhbar dar al-Mustafa, volume 4, page 1376.

[^4]: al-Suyuti, al-Kasa'is al-kubra, vol. 1, page 154.

[^5]: Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyya, Jala' al-'afham fi salat wa al-salam
'ala khayr al-'anam, page 228.

[^6]: Sunan al-Nasa'i, vol. 4 page 96 (Beirut edition). لعن الله اليهود
والنصار اتخذوا قبور انبيائهم مساجد

[^7]: Sunan al-Bayhaqi, vol. 4 page 78; al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak, vo1. 1, page 377.

[^8]: جعلت لي الأرض مسجداً وطهورا. Ibn Hanbal, al-Musnad, vol. 2 page
222.

[^9]: لعن رسول الله زائرات القبور والمتخذين عليها المساجد والسُرج (Sunan
al-Nasa'i, vol. 3 page 77 (Egyptian edition) and vol. 4 page 95 (Beirut
edition) Sharh al-jami' al-saghir, vol. 2 page 198.

[^10]: Sunan al-Nasa’i, vol. 3 page 77 (Egyptian edition) and vol. 4
page 95 (Beirut edition). Also refer to Sharh al-jami' al-saghir, vol. 2
page 198.

[^11]: In al-Musnad of Ahmad, Abu Ja'far has come with the word of
Khutami although in Sunan of Ibn Maja Abu Ja'far has come independently.

[^12]: al-Tawassul ila haqiqat al-tawassul, page 158.

[^13]: Same reference.

[^14]: اقبل الله بوجهه واستفغر له ألف ملكSunan of Ibn Maja al-Qazwini
which is one of the six Sihah. vol. 1 page 261-262 chapter of ‘Mosques’
Egyptian edition, and refer to al-Musnad Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal vol. 3
hadith no. 21.

[^15]: The command which has come in the verse of ولا تقربا هذا الشجرة
(Sura al-Baqarah:35) is not an authoritative command. Instead, it is an
order in the guided sense or so to say an advisory aspect and opposition
to such a command will not result in punishment and chastisement. Its
consequence will be that the person will only be faced with the effect
of the state of the action itself. If a doctor commands his patient who
is suffering from cold not to eat sour things and muskmelon, opposing
his command will have no result other than intensification of his cold.
In the Holy Qur’an many verses testify that the divine prohibition was
of a guided nature resulting in nothing but expulsion from heaven which
is reckoned to be the effect of state of the action itself. Please refer
to verses 118 and 119 of Sura Taha and the book of ‘Correct Tafsir of
difficult verses of Qur’an’ the tenth matter from pages 73 to 82.

[^16]: Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol. 2 page 615; Ruh al-Ma'ani vol. 1 page
217; al-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 1 page 59 narrated from al-Tabarani, Abu
Nu'aym al-Isfahani and al-Bayhaqi.

[^17]: The text of the hadith is taken from al-Durr al-Manthur and
differs slightly from the text of al-Hakim in his al-Mustadrak although
both are same in their contents.

[^18]: Majma' al-bayan vol. 1 page 89; Tafsir al-burhan, vol.1. page
86-88; ahadith no .2, 5, 11, 12, 14 and 27.

[^19]: Tafsir al-burhan, vol. 1 page 87 ahadith no.13, 15 and 16.

[^20]: Sayyid Ahmad Zayni Dihlan writes in the both al-Durar al-saniyya,
page 10 that al-Qadi 'Iyad has narrated this incident with correct
reference. Imam al-Subki in his book Shifa al-Saqam, al-Samhudi in Wafa'
al-wafa', and al-Qastallani in al-Mawahib al-ladunniyya. Ibn Hajar said
in al-Jawhar al-munazzam that this incident has been narrated with
correct references. Al-'Allama al-Zurqani writes in Sharh al-mawahib
that Ibn Fahd has narrated this with a good (hasan) chain of narration
and al-Qadi 'Iyad has narrated it with an authentic (sahih) chain of
narration. The text of the conversation of al-Mansur with Imam Malik
will be mentioned later in the text.

[^21]: Kashf al-'irtiyab, pages 307, 308.

[^22]: Kashf al-'irtiyab, page 312 narrated from Khulasat al-kalam.

[^23]: al-Durar al-saniyya, page 8.

[^24]: يئط is derived fromاطيط which means the noise of a camel.

[^25]: اطيطis derived from غطيطwhich means the noise of a child while
sleeping.

[^26]: al-Durar al-saniyya, page 27 written by Zayni Dihlan and
al-Tawassul ila haqiqat al-tawassul, page 300

[^27]: al-Sahifat al-'Alawiyya, ad'iya of Amir al-mu'minin which
al-Shaykh 'Abdallah Samahiji has collected.

[^28]: Mafatih al-jinan, du'a 'Arafa.

[^29]: Usd al-ghaba, vol. 3 page 111. Egyptian edition.

[^30]: al-Mawahib al-ladunniyya, vol. 3 page 380 Egyptian editions and
in Ibn Hajar Asqalani, Fath al-bari, vol. 2, page 413 (Lebanon print).
It has also been reported in Sharh al-mawahib by al- Zurqani (1055 AH -
1122 AH).

[^31]: Wafa' al-wafa', vol. 2 page 1376.

[^32]: al-Sawa'iq al-muhriqa, page 178 (Cairo print).

[^33]: Sahih Bukhari, chapter of Salat al-'istisqa, vol. 2 page 32.

[^34]: Although, it was worthy to say إن هذا التاريخ صحيح because
technically, tradition is that which must be narrated from the Holy
Prophet (s) and our discussion too is about historical events and we
reminded you previously of the traditions of tawassul.

[^35]: Usd al-ghaba, vol. 3. page 111.

[^36]: Wafa' al-wafa', vol. 3 page 375 narrated from Misbah al-zalam.

[^37]: Fath al-Bari, vol. 2 page 413 (print of Dar al-Ma'rifa Lebanon).

[^38]: Dhakha'ir al-'uqba fi manaqib dhawi'l qurba, page 252 written by
al-Hafiz Muhibb al-Din al-Tabari, born in 615 AH and died in 694 AH,
(print of Maktab al-Quds, Cairo); and Majma' al-zawa'id, vol. 9 page 36,
(2nd edition) written by al-Hafiz Nur al-Din al-Haytami. Let it not
remain unsaid that the sentence of أنت رجاؤنا in the first line has
appeared as كنت وجاؤنا in the aforesaid book.


