Is It An Innovation To Commemorate The Birth And Death Anniversaries Of Awliya Allah?
=====================================================================================

The Wahhabis consider the honouring of birth and death anniversaries of
awliya and divine personalities to be forbidden and an innovation. They
are the staunch enemies of the awliya Allah and religious leaders and
consider the gatherings on their birth and death anniversaries to be
(*haram*) prohibited.

Muhammad Hamid al-Faqi, the leader of group ‘Ansar al-Sunnat
al-Muhammadiyya’ in his footnotes to his book *al-Fath al-Majid* writes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الذكريات التي ملاءت البلاد بإسم الأولياء هى نوعٌ من العبادة لهم
وتعظيمهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Remembering and celebrating on the days of birth and death of awliya
amounts to one kind of worshipping them and respecting before them.”[^1]

The root of all their mistakes is that because they have not determined
any limit and margin for polytheism (*shirk*), *tawhid* and specially
the meaning of *'ibada*, they think that every kind of respect and
honour is worship. As you must have noticed, he has brought the word of
*'ibada* and homage close to each other and imagines that both give the
same meaning.

In the one of next chapters, we shall explain the meaning of *'ibada*
and clearly prove that every honour and respect to the virtuous servants
of God with the intention that they are the ‘servants’ of Allah, does
not result in their worship at all. Therefore, we shall examine this
discussion from another angle (not polytheism in *'ibada*).

Undoubtedly, Qur’an has repeatedly praised the Prophets and awliya with
eloquent and rhetorical words.

About Zakaria, Yahya and others the Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا يُسَارِعُونَ فِي الْخَيْرَاتِ وَيَدْعُونَنَا رَغَبًا
وَرَهَبًا ۖ وَكَانُوا لَنَا خَاشِعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely they used to hasten, one with another, in deeds of goodness
and to call upon Us, hoping and fearing, and they were humble before
Us.*** ***(al-'Anbiya 21:90)”***

Now, if in a gathering which is held under their name, someone portrays
them in a similar manner which has come down in the contents of this
verse and by this way honours them, has he done anything other than
obeying the Holy Qur’an?

About the household of the Prophet, Allah (swt) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيُطْعِمُونَ الطَّعَامَ عَلَىٰ حُبِّهِ مِسْكِينًا وَيَتِيمًا
وَأَسِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And they give food out of love for Him to the poor and the orphan
and the captive.*** ***(Dahr 76:8)”***

Now if the followers of Ali come together on the birthday of Amir
al-mu'minin and say that Ali is one who used to give his own food to the
poor, orphan and the captive, have they by this act worshipped him!?

If on the birthday of the Holy Prophet (s) we translate the verse which
praises the Prophet into a non-Arabic language or write a poem on a
tablet and recite it in a gathering, have we committed a forbidden
action!?

They are having enmity with the matter of honouring the Holy Prophet (s)
and awilya Allah that they wish to stop this under the pretext of fight
against innovation.

At this stage a question is brought up to which the loud-speakers
amongst the Wahhabis lay great emphasis and it is this: ‘Since these
assemblies and gatherings are held under the name of religion and are
labelled as Islamic, they should be approved specifically and generally
by the Islamic rules. Otherwise it would be innovation (*bid’at*) and
forbidden (*haram*).

The reply to this question is quite clear because the verses of Qur’an
that draw our attention to the necessity of honouring the Prophet is
sufficient in this case and these kinds of gatherings are not held for
any reason other than respecting the awliya Allah. That thing is
considered to be ‘innovation’ which is not approved specifically or
generally by Qur’an or the *Sunnah* of the Holy Prophet.

The purpose of these honourings which is common amongst all the nations
of the world is nothing but paying respect and homage and this practise
is common among all the Muslims of the world except for these handful of
dry wahhabi ‘Najdis’. If it was innovation and something new and not
confirming with the general Islamic principles, it was impossible that
the Islamic scholars would celebrate the birthday of the Holy Prophet
(s) and make splendid such gatherings by reading scholarly monographs
and reciting sweet and elegant poems.

Here are some logical reasoning from Qur’an permitting such respect and
honourings:

First Proof
-----------

The Holy Qur’an praises that group of people who honour the Holy Prophet
(s):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فالذين امنوا به وعزَّروه ونصروه واتبعوا النُور الذي أنزل معه أولئك هُم
المُفلحون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So (as for) those who believe in him and honour him and help him,
and follow the light which has been sent down with him, these it is that
are the successful.*** ***(A'raf 7:157)”***

The words which have appeared in this verse comprises of:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أمنوا به
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غزروه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نصروه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واتبعوا النُور
  </p>
</blockquote>

Is it possible for one to think that the words **أمنوا به ,** **نصروه**
and **واتبعوا النور**are confined to the period of the Holy Prophet?
Certainly not! If such a probability cannot be given about these three
words, the word of **عزَّروه** which gives the meaning of honour and
respect[^2] cannot be assigned to the period of the Holy Prophet (s) and
thus this sublime leader should be respected and honoured at all times.

Is it not that arranging memorial gathering on the day of *bi'that* and
birth of the Holy Prophet (s) and delivering speeches and poems on such
occasions clear evidence to **عزَّروه?**

Surprisingly, the Wahhabis pay homage and respect their own tribal
leaders and rulers and honour even one ordinary person such that
observing one hundredth of that with regard to the Holy Prophet (s), his
pulpit and alter is considered to be innovation and anti-Islamic by
them. As a result they introduce Islam to the world as one dry religion
lacking any sentiments and affections and think that the *shari'a* which
is in fact simple and easy, matching with the human nature and feeling
and generous enough to attract the people is a dry "*shari'a*" which
does not consider the respect of divine leaders to be of any
significance and does not possess the ability to attract the people of
the world.

Second Proof
------------

What do the Wahhabis who oppose any kind of mourning ceremonies for the
martyrs in the way of Allah have to say about the story of Ya'qub ('a)?
If today, this great Prophet was living amongst these Najdis and the
followers of Muhammad bin ’Abd al-Wahhab how would have they judged him?

Day and night he was weeping for his separation from Yusuf and all the
time he was asking the people about the whereabouts of his beloved son.
He was so much sorrowful by the separation of his son that he lost his
eye-sight.[^3]

Sickness and loss of eye-sight did not deter Ya’kub (‘a) from forgetting
his son Yusuf (‘a). Instead, as the promise of re-union was drawing
closer the flames of love towards his son increased manifold and he
could smell Yusuf miles away.[^4]

And instead of the star (Yusuf) pursuing the sun (Ya'qub ('a)) it was
vice -versa.

Why expression of such affection during the life of the loved one (i.e.
Yusuf) is correct and confirms to Tawhid but after his death when the
heart becomes more prone to pain and suffering it amounts to polytheism
and becomes forbidden?

Now if the Ya'qubs of our time gather together every year on the death
anniversary of their Yusufs and speak about the value of his moral
qualities due to which they start crying, will such an act amount to
worshipping of their sons!?[^5]

Third Proof
-----------

Undoubtedly, **مودت ذوى القربى** (love towards kinship) is one of the
Islamic obligations which Qur’an explicitly commends us towards it. Now,
after fourteen centuries if someone wishes to act upon the religious
obligations then what should we do? Is it not that he should rejoice on
their joyous days and become sorrowful on the days of their grief and
sorrow?

Now, for expressing one's own pleasure, if someone holds a gathering
wherein he reveals their historical life and sacrifices and describes
their innocence and their deprivation from their rightful claims then,
has he done anything other than expressing his affection and manifesting
*mawadda dhawi'l qurba*? (**مودت ذوى القربى**)

If, for showing more affection, such a person visits their progeny and
comes near their graves and holds such gatherings near their graves
then, has he in the eyes of the wise and intelligent people, done
anything other than manifesting his love and affection!?

Except that the Wahhabis may say: Such love and affection should be kept
secret and confined to the heart and no one has the right to manifest
and express them (openly).

During the time of the Holy Prophet (s) and the period after him which
was the period of change of thoughts and beliefs, different tribes and
nations with different cultures and customs were turning towards Islam
and by reciting the *shahadatayn* (creed) their Islam was accepted. The
position of Prophet and the leaders was never to investigate, censor (by
establishing the ‘section for scrutinizing of beliefs’) than dissolve
the entire rites and customs of the nations and tribes and bring them
out in another form different from the previous ones.

Respect of leaders, establishing memorial ceremonies, attending the
graves and expressing love for their signs and traces was and is the
custom of all nations and tribes. At present too, the people of East and
West stand for hours in queue waiting to pay visit to the mummified
bodies and graves of ancient leaders in order to express their love and
shed tears in their grief. They consider this to be one way for
expressing respect and honour.

It was never seen that the Holy Prophet (s) would accept the Islam of
people only after investigating their beliefs and examining their
practises and customs in practical life. Instead, expressing the
‘Shahadatain’ was enough for him. If these practices and customs were
forbidden and or amounted to worshiping the ancestors, then it was
necessary to accept the Islam of nations and tribes (only) after taking
allegiance and promise from them about their exoneration (of such
practices) while such was never the case.

Fourth Proof
------------

We see Isa (‘a) asks for table (with food) from the Almighty Allah and
introduces the day of its dissension as the day of celebration and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا أَنْزِلْ عَلَيْنَا مَائِدَةً مِنَ السَّمَاءِ تَكُونُ لَنَا
عِيدًا لِأَوَّلِنَا وَآخِرِنَا وَآيَةً مِنْكَ ۖ وَارْزُقْنَا وَأَنْتَ
خَيْرُ الرَّازِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O Allah, our lord! send down to us food from heaven which should be
to us an ever-recurring happiness, to the first of us and the last of
us, and a sign from Thee, and grant us means of subsistence, and Thou
art the best of the Providers.*** ***(Maida 5:114)”***

Is the value of the Holy Prophet's existence lesser than one heavenly
table which Isa (‘a) declares the day of its dissension to be the day of
‘Eid’. If such a day is declared to be the day of ‘Eid’ because of the
table being a divine sign, then is not the Holy Prophet (s) the greatest
divine sign!?

Woe to those who are ready to celebrate the day of dissension of one
heavenly table that feeds the stomachs but ignore and label as
innovation, the celebration of the day of dissension of Qur’an and the
day of appointment (*bi’that*) of Prophet who blessed the minds of human
beings with perfection of thought over the period of history !

Fifth Proof
-----------

The Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ورفعنا لَك ذِكرَك
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And exalted for you your esteem? (Inshiraah 94:4)”***

Is it that arranging gatherings for celebrating the days of birth of the
Holy Prophet (s) having any purpose other than elevating his name and
fame! Why in this case we should not follow the Qur’an? Is not Qur’an an
example and the best model for us?

[^1]: al-Fath al-Majid, page 154. At this time when these pages and
papers are being composed, and in the entire Islamic countries
celebrations are being held on the occasion of the birth of the Holy
Prophet, the Mufti of the House of Sa’ud, Bin Baz has declared as
forbidden and innovation any kind of respect for the birthday of the
Holy Prophet (s). But the same person addressed King Faisal al-Sa’ud
during his reign as ‘Amir al-mu'minin’ and this action was biting and
shocking to the extent that the king too understood and excused for
accepting this title.

[^2]: Refer to al-Raghib, Mufradat al-Raghib, under " ' dh r".

[^3]: وابيضت عيناه من الحزنSura Yusuf: 84.

[^4]: إني لاجد ريح يوسف لولا أن تفندونSura Yusuf verse: 94.

[^5]: Moreover, reliable traditions have come down from the Infallibles
about holding of mourning ceremonies and in this connection, Allama
al-'Amini has collected in one chapter of his book titled: سيرتنا
وسنتناall the traditions from Sunni books


