Seeking Benediction And Cure From The Signs And Traces Of Awliya
================================================================

The Wahhabis reckon *tabarruk* (seeking benediction) towards the traces
of awliya to be polytheism and label the one who kisses the altar and
pulpit of the Holy Prophet (s) as polytheist even though in doing that
he doesn’t believe in any kind of godliness in it. Rather, love and
affection to the Holy Prophet (s) becomes the cause of kissing the signs
and traces related to him. Here we ask, what have they to say about the
shirt of Yusuf (a')?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذْهَبُوا بِقَمِيصِي هَٰذَا فَأَلْقُوهُ عَلَىٰ وَجْهِ أَبِي يَأْتِ
بَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Yusuf ('a) says:*** ***‘Take my shirt and cast it over my father's
face so that he regains his eye-sight.*** ***(Yusuf 12:93)”***

Ya'qub ('a) too kept the shirt of Yusuf over his eyes and at that same
moment realized that he could see. As he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا أَنْ جَاءَ الْبَشِيرُ أَلْقَاهُ عَلَىٰ وَجْهِهِ فَارْتَدَّ
بَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So when the bearer of good news came he cast*** ***it on his face,
so forthwith he regained his sight.” (Yusuf 12:96)”***

If Ya'qub ('a) would have done such a thing in front of the *Najdis* and
followers of Muhammad bin 'Abd al-Wahhab, how would have they behaved
with him? Now would they explain the action of an immaculate Prophet who
is free from sins and mistakes!?

Now if the Muslims keep the soil of the grave of the last of the
Prophets or his shrine over their eyes and kiss out of respect, the
grave and shrine of the divine leaders or seek *tabarruk* and say that
God has exerted some effect in this soil and wishes to follow the Ya'qub
('a) of today in so and so affair then why should they be subjected to
curse and be accused of heresy.[^1]

Those who are aware of the life history of the Holy Prophet (s) know
that the companions of the Holy Prophet (s) were always taking
precedence to each other in doing *tabarruk* to the water of his *wudhu*
(ablution). It is sufficient in this case, to briefly refer to *Sahih
Bukhari* and *Sahih Muslim* which are thought to be the most authentic
among the six *Sihah*. Here, we mention some of them:

(1) About the event of ‘Peace of Hudaybiyya’ Bukhari writes:

“Whenever the Holy Prophet (s) was taking ablution, his companions use
to take precedence to each other in collecting the drops of water of his
ablution.”[^2]

(2) In the chapter of ‘Last of the Prophets’, Bukhari narrates from
Sa'ib bin Yazid that: “My aunt took me to the Holy Prophet (s) and
informed him about my illness. The Holy Prophet (s) made ablution and
asked Allah for blessings for me and I drank from the water of his
ablution.”[^3]

(3) In the chapter of ‘The characteristics of the Prophet’, Bukhari
narrates from Wahab bin 'Abdullah that: “People were rubbing the hands
of the Holy Prophet (s) over their faces and I too took the hands of the
Prophet and rubbed them over my face and his hands were more fragrant
than musk.”[^4]

(4) In the chapter of ‘The characteristics of the Prophet', Bukhari
narrates:

The Holy Prophet (s) was in ‘Abtah’ standing beside the tents. Bilal
came out from a tent and called the people for prayers. Again he went
inside and brought out the remaining drops of water of ablution of the
Holy Prophet (s). The people rushed towards it and sought *tabarruk*
from it.[^5]

(5) Muslim narrates in his *Sahih* from Anas that: “When the Holy
Prophet (s) was shaving his head his companions were besides him and
each one of them held one string of his hair in their hands.[^6]

These were some examples of affection of the companions and their
*tabarruk* to the signs and traces of the Holy Prophet (s) and
collecting these incidents necessitates the writing of one separate
book.

By referring to the last chapter of *Sahih Bukhari* about *jihad* and
also the chapter related to the armour, stick, sword, vessels, seal,
ring, hair and shroud of the Holy Prophet (s) one can become aware of
the evident examples of *tabarruk*.

These traditions expose and explain the baseless nature of the culture
of the Wahhabism that prevents the people from seeking *tabarruk* to the
holy shrine of Prophet (s) and have employed special groups of persons
to beat physically and use foul language with those who seek *tabarruk*
to the holy shrine of the Holy Prophet (s). They thus stop the Muslims
from expressing such love and affection which had been in practice
during the period of the Holy Prophet (s) in his very presence.

The matter of prevention of *tabarruk* to the traces of the Holy Prophet
(s) and kissing of his shrine and pulpit is one of the greatest
ideological expressions of the Wahhabism. The Wahhabi Government of
Saudi Arabia under the garb of *‘amr bi al-ma'ruf* (enjoining the good)
and *nahi 'an al-munkar* (forbidding the evil) have stationed their
agents around the holy shrine in order to prevent the pilgrims from
performing such action and they too behave harshly and mercilessly with
the pilgrims. Many times at such occasions innocent blood is shed and
many persons’ honour and prestige got damaged. The root cause of their
belief is that kissing and honouring the shrine amounts to worshipping
the one in grave, as if ‘every respect is worship.’

Since these helpless people who are far from the reality of Islamic
teachings are unable to interpret *'ibada* (worship) in the logical
sense, they have become puzzled and confused and take every type of
respect to the dead to be an *'ibada*. In the next chapter, we shall
draw a precise limit and boundary for *'ibada*, but what is important
now is to know what was the practice of the Muslims in this matter:

(1) After the Holy prophet's burial, his daughter Fatima (‘a) stood near
his grave and then taking some soil from the grave she put it over her
face. She later cried and recited these two poems:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ماذا على من شَّم تُربة احمدا أن لا يشُم مدى الزمان غواليا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صُبَّت علىَّ مصائب لو أنها صُبت على الأيام صرن لياليا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“What happens to the one who smells the soil of grave of Ahmad, who
till he is alive, shall smell no more the expensive musks.”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صُبَّت علىَّ مصائب لو أنها صُبت على الأيام صرن لياليا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I was faced with such calamities that if it had befallen on the bright
day it* *would have changed to night.”*[^7]

(2) The great companion Bilal who left Medina for some reason and
settled by order of the frontier guards, in the districts of Syria saw
in his dream that the Holy Prophet (s) was saying:  
 “What kind of injustice is this, O Bilal? Has not the time come that
you visit us!? He woke up from his sleep in sadness and sat on his horse
and left for Medina. When he reached the grave of the Holy Prophet (s)
he started to cry and rubbed his face over it. Later he saw al-Hasan and
al-Husayn and kissed both of them.[^8]

(3) Amir al-mu'minin 'Ali ('a) says: “Three days had lapsed from the
burial of the Holy Prophet (s) when a Bedouin Arab came and threw
himself over the grave of the Holy Prophet (s). He sprinkled the soil of
his grave over his head and started to converse with the Holy Prophet
(s). He said: ‘O Prophet of Allah, you spoke and we listened. You
received the truth from Allah and we too received it from you. From the
things which Allah revealed to you is this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولو أنهم إذ ظلموا أنفسهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I have done injustice upon myself. So seek forgiveness for me from
Allah. Suddenly he heard a voice saying: Your sins have been forgiven.”*

This incident has been narrated by most of the historians mainly
al-Samhudi in *Wafa' al-wafa'*, vol. 2 page 612 and Shaykh Dawud
al-Khalidi (died in 1299 AH) in *Sulh al-'Ikhwan* and others.

(4) al-Hakim narrates in *al-Mustadrak* that: Marwan bin al-Hakam
entered the mosque and saw a man putting his face over a grave. Marwan
caught hold of his neck and said: “Are you aware of what you are doing?”
The man lifted his head and it became apparent that he was Abu Ayyub
al-Ansari. He said: ‘I have not come to visit a stone, but have come to
visit the Holy Prophet (s). O Marwan, I have heard the Holy Prophet (s)
saying: When the pious people bear the leadership do not cry for that.
Do cry when unworthy men become the leaders (i.e. you and your Umayyad
household).’[^9]

This period of history reveals the root of ‘creation of obstacle’ to
prevent seeking *tabarruk* from the grave of the Holy Prophet (s) and
shows that the companions of the Holy Prophet (s) were constantly
seeking *tabarruk* from the holy grave of the Holy Prophet. It was
people like Marwan bin al-Hakam who used to prevent people from this
well-known deed.

The historical incidents in this case are so numerous that narrating all
of them will lengthen our discussion. Interested readers can refer to
the book *Tabarruk al-sahaba* and the valuable book *al-Ghadir* vol. 5
page 146-156.

In the end, we are bound to mention that all these historical narratives
can never be false and baseless. Now, even if we assume that all of them
are false and baseless yet they will serve our purpose. Because, if such
an action was heresy, polytheism, unlawful or forbidden, then the
fabricators would have never attributed them to religious personalities
since the liars fabricate instances which are worthy of approval by the
society so that the people believe and accept their made up stories.
They never attribute anything which is heresy, polytheism, forbidden or
unlawful to the pious people because in such a case they will be
confronted with the resistance and non-acceptance of the people and
their arrows will hit the stone and miss the target.

[^1]: All the Muslims, right from the time of the Holy Prophet (s) till
now, have been seeking tabarruk to the traces of the Holy Prophet (s)
and Shaykh Muhammad Thahari Makki has proved this matter with decisive
historical evidences in his treatise which was printed in 1385. This
treatise is called تبرك الصحابة بأثار رسول اللهand has been translated
into Persian.

[^2]: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol.3 page 255.

[^3]: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol.4 page 227; and Sahih Muslim, Chapter of
‘Last of the Prophets’.

[^4]: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol.4 page 226

[^5]: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol.4 page 231.

[^6]: Sahih Muslim, vol. 4., Book of ‘Virtues of Companions’

[^7]: Many of the research writers have narrated this incident such as
al-Shabrawi in al-Tuhaf page 9 and al-Samhudi in Wafa' al-wafa', vol. 2
page 444 and al-Khalidi in Sulh al-'Ikhwan, page 57 and others.

[^8]: This incident has been narrated by a group like al-Subki in Shifa
al-Saqam narrating from Ibn 'Asakir, and Ibn al-'Athir in Usd al-ghaba,
vol. 1 page 28.

[^9]: Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol. 4 page 515


