Tawhid in 'Ibada and Worship (or Pretext of Wahhabis)
=====================================================

Monotheism (worship of the one God) is the basis of the invitation of
the Prophets in all ages. This means that all the human-beings must
worship the one God and refrain from worshipping creatures.

Monotheism and shattering the chains of ‘dualism’ and ‘polytheism’ are
the most fundamental heavenly commands and have been the epigraph of the
programme of all the divine Prophets.

Every Prophet had been appointed with one main aim and that is
establishing monotheism and fighting against absolute polytheism and
especially polytheism in worship.

The Holy Qur’an refers to this reality and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا فِي كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ رَسُولًا أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ
وَاجْتَنِبُوا الطَّاغُوتَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And certainly We raised in every nation an Apostle saying: Serve
Allah and shun the taghut. (Nahl 16:36)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ مِنْ رَسُولٍ إِلَّا نُوحِي إِلَيْهِ
أَنَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا أَنَا فَاعْبُدُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And we did not send before you any apostle but we revealed to him
that*** ***there is no god but Me, therefore serve Me. (Anbiya
21:25)”***

The Holy Qur’an introduces monotheism as a common base among all the
heavenly precepts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ تَعَالَوْا إِلَىٰ كَلِمَةٍ سَوَاءٍ
بَيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَكُمْ أَلَّا نَعْبُدَ إِلَّا اللَّهَ وَلَا نُشْرِكَ
بِهِ شَيْئًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: O followers of the Book! come to an equitable proposition
between us and you that we shall not serve any but Allah and (that) we
shall not associate aught with Him.*** ***(Aal-e Imran 3:64)”***

*Tawhid* in worship is a decisive and firm foundation which has never
been opposed by any of the Muslims and all the sects hold a common view
about it. Although the group of Mu'tazilites are having a different view
in **توحيد** **افعالى** (*Tawhid* in actions) and the group of
‘Asharites differ in **توحيد صفات** (*Tawhid* in attributes), still all
the Islamic sects have had one opinion in this respect and no Muslim can
deny this principle. And if there is any differences, they are all
related to **مصاديق** (its applicability); that is to say some of the
Muslims imagine some of the actions to be ‘*ibadat* (worship) whereas
others consider that to be honour and respect. Whatever dispute which
exists is in**صغرى** (minor type) i.e. whether so and so act is
‘*ibadat* or not and not in **كبرى** (of major type) i.e. ‘*ibadat*
other than Allah amounts to polytheism and is forbidden. It is here that
we should properly clarify the meaning of ‘*ibadat* from the viewpoint
of dialect and the Qur’an and then the relevant duties and **مصاديق**
(applicability) of the matters under discussion will automatically
become clear.

*Tawhid* in ‘*ibada* is not something which some particular group can
attribute it to themselves. Instead, all the monotheists, especially the
Muslims are of one view in this regard. What is of concern is the talk
and discussion of a series of actions which some manifest them as
‘*ibada* while others do not consider them to have any relation to
‘*ibada*. Thus we have to talk and discuss about this matter in this
section. We have to define ‘*ibada* in logical terms and clarify its
limits and boundaries and hand over a criterion to the other person so
that under the light of this he can distinguish the true ‘*ibadat* from
the false one.[^1]

Limits of ‘Ibada and its Comprehensive Meaning
----------------------------------------------

*‘Ibada* in Arabic is equivalent to ‘worship’ in English. Just as the
word 'worship' is having a clear and obvious meaning for us, in the same
manner the word of ‘*ibada* is having a clear meaning even though we may
not be able to give it a logical definition, and interpretation.

Undoubtedly, the meaning of ‘land’ and ‘sky’ is very clear and obvious
for all of us but still, most of us are unable to define and explain
them perfectly. However this matter cannot prevent us from understanding
the clear and obvious meaning of these two words if ever we hear them.

*'Ibada* and worship too are similar to the words ‘land’ and ‘sky’
Everyone is aware of its actual meaning even though we may not be able
to define it logically as the actual dispensations of each of the words
of ‘*ibada* and *ta'zim* or worship and honour is clear for us and
differentiating the instance of each from the other is simple and easy.

A lover who kisses the door and walls of the house of beloved one or
keeps dress or puts it over chest or after death, kisses the grave of
beloved will never be taken as a worshipper in the eyes of anybody. The
action of those who hasten for visiting the mummified bodies of great
world leaders who are a centre of attraction for a group of people or
visit their traces, houses and haven or for honouring them go into a few
seconds of silence and hold ceremonies, will not be reckoned as ‘*ibada*
(worship) even though their humility and manifestation of love is in the
rank of humility of monotheists in front of God. In this discussion,
only the awakened consciences can be the judges in order to
differentiate between *ta'zim* (respect) and ‘*ibada* (worship).

Now if we wish to explain *‘ibada* in the logical sense and wish to test
and analyse it, we can define it in three ways and all the three
explanation can pursue the same objective. However, before that we shall
mention two defective introductions upon which the Wahhabis rely.

Two Defective Presentation of ‘ibada
------------------------------------

### A. Ibadat: Humility (خضوع) and Submissiveness (تذلل)

In dictionaries, the word of *‘ibada* has been interpreted as humility
or humbleness (**خضوع**) and manifestation of meekness or submissiveness
(4) (**اظهار تذلل**) Such an interpretation cannot give a precise,
correct and perfect meaning of the word of *‘ibada* because:

(1) If *‘ibada* is synonymous to either humility (**خضوع)** and
meekness, (**تذلل**) then we cannot issue an identity card of *tawhid*
for anybody in this world and cannot call anyone as a monotheist because
man, by nature, is humble and meek in front of the spiritual and
material perfections of those who are above him and better than him,
like a student in front of his teacher, a child in front of his teacher,
a child in front of his father and mother, a lover in front of his
beloved one and so on.

(2) The Holy Qur’an commands the children to be low and humble before
the parents. It says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واخفِض لهُما جناح الذُّل مِن الرحمة وقُل رب ارحمهُما كما ربّياني
صغيراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And make yourself submissively gentle to them with compassion, and
say: O my Lord! have compassion on them, as they brought me up (when I
was) little.*** ***(Bani-Israel 7:24)”***

If an abject humility is the sign of ‘*Ibadat*’ of that person, then all
the obedient children have to be called as polytheists and all the
disobedient ones as monotheists.

### B. 'Ibada: Unlimited Humility

When some of the commentators became aware of the deficiency of
interpretation of the compilers of dictionaries, they strived to amend
it and interpreted it in another manner. They said: *'ibada* is that
unlimited humility in sensing, perfection and greatness.’

Such an interpretation is no less than the first interpretation because
God orders the angels to prostrate before Adam (a'). As Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قُلْنَا لِلْمَلَائِكَةِ اسْجُدُوا لِآدَمَ فَسَجَدُوا إِلَّا
إِبْلِيسَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when We said to the angels: Make prostration to Adam they did
prostrate except Iblis. (Baqarah 2:34)”***

Prostration in front of a creature is evidence of meekness and the
manifestation of unlimited humility.

If such an act is the sign of *‘ibada,* then all the obedient angels are
to be declared as polytheists, and the disobedient Satan as a
monotheist.

The sons of Ya'qub ('a) and even he himself along with his wife
prostrated before the magnificence of Yusuf as the holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَخَرُّوا لَهُ سُجَّدًا ۖ وَقَالَ يَا أَبَتِ هَٰذَا تَأْوِيلُ
رُؤْيَايَ مِنْ قَبْلُ قَدْ جَعَلَهَا رَبِّي حَقًّا ۖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they fell down in prostration before him, and he said: O my
father! this is the significance of my vision of old, my Lord has indeed
made it to be true. (Yusuf 12:100)”***

The Holy Qur’an narrates the dream of Yusuf ('a) in his childhood and
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي رَأَيْتُ أَحَدَ عَشَرَ كَوْكَبًا وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ
رَأَيْتُهُمْ لِي سَاجِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely I saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon making obeisance
to me. (Yusuf 12:4)”***

Following the leader of the monotheists, the Holy Prophet (s) - all the
Muslims honour *hajar al-'aswad* (black stone) and rub their hands over
it. That is to say, they act in the same way as idol-worshippers do to
their idols with the difference that our action is purely *tawhid* and
their action purely heresy.

By paying attention to this point, one should not search the reality of
*‘ibada* only in the external form of action and in the absolute
humilities and meekness even though humility and meekness are amongst
the actual elements and essentials of *‘ibada*. However, the elements
and essentials are not confined to that; rather humility and meekness
should also be linked with some special belief and in fact if humility
whether unlimited or to a lesser degree originates from a special
belief, it will be counted as *‘ibada*. As a matter of fact, it is
belief that gives the colour of *‘ibada* to one’s action and without it,
the action cannot be regarded as *‘ibada*.

Now, what is this second element? This is what we are going to discuss
in this section. i.e. the logical explanation of *‘ibada*.

First Definition of ‘Ibada
--------------------------

*‘Ibada* is that practical, literal or verbal humility which originates
from belief in the divinity of source entity.

Now we should see what is meant by ‘Divinity’ and the crucial point of
our discussion lies in understanding the meaning of ‘Divinity’.
**الوهيت** or Divinity gives the meaning of Godliness and gives the
meaning of God. If incidentally, the word of (God) has been interpreted
as ‘deity’, it necessitates explanation and not that deity is the actual
meaning of . Rather, in view of the fact that the genuine and / or the
imaginary have been the deity and object of worship among the people of
the world, it is supposed that gives the meaning of deity; otherwise
deity is from the requisites of and not its primary meaning.

A clearer evidence that the word or denotes the meaning of God and not
deity is the very pure creed (of faith) i.e **لا إله إلا الله.** If in
this sentence, the word of is interpreted as ‘deity’ then this creed
will be a false one because it is clear and obvious that with the
exception of ‘Allah’ , there are thousands of other deities too.

Therefore, for relieving themselves from the difficulty, some people
have commended the word of **بالحق** so that in this way they remove the
falsehood and thus the meaning of the sentence becomes **لا معبود بالحق
إلا بالله** (no deity with the truth except Allah). However appreciating
such a sentence is nothing but a formality.

A clear proof of this definition is a verse which has come in this
regard. Examining this verse will clarify the fact that *‘ibada* is that
kind of speech and action which originates from the belief in
divinity[^2] and till such a belief does not exist in a person his
humility and bowing down or honour and respect will not be counted as
*‘ibada*. When Qur’an gives command to perform *‘ibada* of Allah, it
immediately convinces that except for Him there is no god. As Qur’an
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا قَوْمِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ مَا لَكُمْ مِنْ إِلَٰهٍ غَيْرُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O (my) people, worship Allah; there is no god for you except Him.***
***(al-A'raf 7:59)”***

The main theme of this verse has come in nine or more instances and our
dear readers can refer to Sura A'raaf, verses 65, 73, 58, Sura Hud,
verses 5, 61 and 84 Sura Anbiya, verses 25 Sura Mominun, verses 23 and
32 and Sura Taha, verse 14.

Such interpretations indicate that *‘ibada* is that humility and
meekness which originates from belief in divinity and if such a belief
does not exist, then it cannot be regarded as *‘ibada*.

This verse and its contents is not the only verse which bears testimony
to this matter. Rather other verses too bear testimony to this fact such
as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا إِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا اللَّهُ
يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely they used to behave proudly when it was said to them: There
is no god but Allah.*** ***(Safaat 37:35)***

That is to say, they do not pay attention to this talk because they
believe in the divinity of other creatures.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ لَهُمْ إِلَٰهٌ غَيْرُ اللَّهِ ۚ سُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ عَمَّا
يُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Or have they a god other than Allah? Glory be to Allah from what
they set up (with Him). (Tur 52:43)***[^3]

In the above verse, the basis of polytheism has been shown to be belief
in the divinity of someone other than Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَجْعَلُونَ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَٰهًا آخَرَ ۚ فَسَوْفَ
يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who set up another god with Allah; so they shall soon know.
(Hejr 15:96)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ لَا يَدْعُونَ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَٰهًا آخَرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they who do not call upon another god with Allah…. (Furqaan
25:68)”***

The proof that the call of the polytheists was along with the belief in
divinity of their idols are the following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّخَذُوا مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ آلِهَةً لِيَكُونُوا لَهُمْ عِزًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they have taken gods besides Allah that they should be to them a
source of strength. (Maryam 19:81)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَئِنَّكُمْ لَتَشْهَدُونَ أَنَّ مَعَ اللَّهِ آلِهَةً أُخْرَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do you really bear witness that there are other gods with Allah?
(Ana’am 6:19)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قَالَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ لِأَبِيهِ آزَرَ أَتَتَّخِذُ أَصْنَامًا
آلِهَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when Ibrahim said to his sire Azar: Do you take idols for gods?
(Ana’am 6:74)”***

By referring to the verses that have come down about the polytheism of
idol-worshippers, this reality becomes clear that the polytheism of
idol-worshippers was the result of their belief in the divinity of their
deities and they considered these deities which were man-made ones to be
as various gods. They believed that some of the affairs of the great god
had been entrusted to them and because of this, they used to worship
them.

It was because of their belief in divinity of their idols that whenever
they were invited to believe in the One God, they would deny this matter
and if a partner was associated with Him they would readily believe just
as the following verse confirms so:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَٰلِكُمْ بِأَنَّهُ إِذَا دُعِيَ اللَّهُ وَحْدَهُ كَفَرْتُمْ ۖ وَإِنْ
يُشْرَكْ بِهِ تُؤْمِنُوا ۚ فَالْحُكْمُ لِلَّهِ الْعَلِيِّ الْكَبِيرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That is because when Allah alone was called upon, you disbelieved,
and when associates were given to Him, you believed, Judgement belongs
to Allah, the High, the Great.*** ***(Ghafir 40:12)”***

When (late) Ayatullah al-Shaykh Muhammad Jawad al-Balaghi comes to the
point of analysing and interpreting the reality of *‘ibada* in his
valuable *tafsir* called *'Aala al-Rahman* explains it as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العبادة ما يرونه مستشعراً بالخضوع لمن يتخذه الخاضع إلهاً ليُوفيه بذلك
ما يراه من حق الإمتياز بالإلهية.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**  
**

**  
**

[^4]
*'Ibada* (worship) is that very action which arises from the humility of
a person in front of the One whom he selects as God, so that he fulfils
His superior right which He possesses due to His distinguished position
(divinity).

Al-Balaghi has described *‘ibada* by his own conscience and perception
and the afore-mentioned verses clearly confirm and elucidate the
correctness and firmness of this description.

The great teacher, Ayatullah Khumayni has written the same view in his
valuable book and says: *‘ibada* consists of glorifying someone as God
either as a major God or a minor god.[^5]

The most evident testimony to this view is the observation of the
collective verses which speak against polytheism. All the polytheist
sects would consider as (God, whether big or small and real or
metaphorical) all such creatures whom they would pay homage and worship.

The key to this interpretation lies in this that by referring to the
verses, we should clarify the point that means ‘God’ and not ‘deity’ and
to be a God it is enough that a being (in the eyes of a worshipper) is
the owner of some of the affairs and actions of the Creator God even
though he himself may be a created one as was the view of the ignorant
Arabs with respect to their idols.

Second Definition of ‘Ibada
---------------------------

Ibadat is humility in front of the one whom we consider as **رب**
(Lord).

We can change our perception of *‘ibada* and say: *‘Ibadat’* is a verbal
and practical humility that arises from belief in the **ربوبيت**
(Lordship) of the source entity and the word of **عبوديت** (submission)
is in contrast to Lordship.

Whenever a person imagines himself to be a servant and slave and the
opposite person to be his creator Lord and with this intention, he pays
homage to his Lord (whether or not he is his actual Lord) such an action
will be considered as ‘*Ibadat*’.

From the verses mentioned hereunder we can derive this conclusion that
‘*Ibadat*’ is from the rank of Lordship. Here are some of them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الْمَسِيحُ يَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ رَبِّي
وَرَبَّكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the Messiah said: O Children of Israel! serve Allah, my Lord and
your Lord.*** ***(Maida 5:72)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ رَبِّي وَرَبُّكُمْ فَاعْبُدُوهُ ۗ هَٰذَا صِرَاطٌ
مُسْتَقِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah is my Lord and your Lord, therefore serve Him, this is
the right path.*** ***(Aal-Imran 3:51)”***

Such contents have come in other verses too. In some of the verses,
*‘Ibadat’* is reckoned to be from the rank of **خالفيت** (creative
power) as it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَٰلِكُمُ اللَّهُ رَبُّكُمْ ۖ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ ۖ خَالِقُ كُلِّ
شَيْءٍ فَاعْبُدُوهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That is Allah, your Lord, there is no god but He, the Creator of all
things, therefore serve Him.*** ***(An’am 6:102)”***

### What is meant by رب (Lord)?

In Arabic language, Lord is attributed to the One to whom the management
and direction of all things is entrusted and their destiny rests in His
authority. If in Arabic, the owner of a house; the nurse of a child and
the farmer of a farm are called as Lord, it is because the authority of
their management is entrusted to them and their destiny lies in their
hand. If we recognize God to be our Lord, it is because our entire
destiny, right from existence, life, death, sustenance, legislation and
forgiveness lies in His hands.

Now if someone imagines that one of the affairs related to our destiny
lies in someone else's hand, for example, if God entrusts the affair of
life, death, sustenance, legislation and forgiveness to some other
person so that the person independently assumes the responsibility of
all or one of these positions, we have taken him as Lord. If with this
belief, we pay homage to him, we have worshipped him.

In other words, ‘Ibadat’ and worship originates from the feeling of
bondage and the reality of bondage is nothing other than taking oneself
as slave and the higher authority as the Master of existence, life,
death and sustenance or at least the Master and authority of
particularly forgiveness,[^6] intercession,[^7] and enactor of laws and
responsibilities.[^8] In such a case, he has imagined him to be his Lord
and anyone who manifests such feelings either verbally or practically
has undoubtedly worshipped him.

Third Definition of ‘ibada
--------------------------

Here we can interpret *‘ibada* in a different manner and that is:
“*‘Ibada* is humility in front of the one whom we think as God or the
source of divine works”.

There is no doubt that the affairs connected with the world of creation
and existence such as, planning of the affairs, bringing to life the
human-beings, causing the people to die, giving sustenance to the living
creatures and forgiving the sins of the people, are all from God. If you
refer to the verses [^9] related to planning of the affairs, creation of
things, reviving the dead and causing the alive ones to die and other
such verses, you will realize that Qur’an recognizes, with emphatic
emphasis, all such affairs to be the work of God and strictly prohibits
its connection to anyone other than Him.

On the other hand, we know that the world of creation is a
well-organized and systematic world and every action which takes place
in this world does not occur without the numerous causes which all
finally lead to God. On various occasions the holy Qur’an has itself
specified the causes of these actions which are the agents of God but
act according to the command of God.

For example, Qur’an mentions with special emphasis that the Giver of
Life and Death is God. As it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي يُحْيِي وَيُمِيتُ وَلَهُ اخْتِلَافُ اللَّيْلِ
وَالنَّهَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He it is Who gives life and causes*** ***death, and (in) His
(control) is the alternation of the night and the day.*** ***(Mominoon
23:80)”***

But the same Qur’an in another verse introduces the Angels to be the
Giver of death. It says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتَّىٰ إِذَا جَاءَ أَحَدَكُمُ الْمَوْتُ تَوَفَّتْهُ رُسُلُنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Until when death comes to one of you, Our messengers cause him to
die.*** ***(An’am 6:61)”***

Therefore the way of drawing a conclusion is that we say: The agency and
causality of these natural causes whether material or non-material, such
as the Angels is by the permission and command of God and the
independent executor is God Himself. In other words, these two doers are
besides each other, one being an independent doer and the other being a
dependent one and this is one of the sublime gnosis of Qur’an which by
referring to the numerous verses one can understand the actions of God.

Now if a person reckons the actions of God to be cut off from Him and
says that these affairs have been entrusted to splendid creatures like
Angles and Prophets and with such a belief, he pays homage and becomes
humble in front of them, then certainly his humility is ‘Ibadat’ and his
action will amount to polytheism.

In other words, if he believes that God has bestowed the accomplishment
of these affairs to them and that they independently fulfil all of them,
then in such a case, he has likened them to God. Such a belief is
undoubtedly polytheism and any kind of humility or request towards them
will be *‘ibada*.  
 As the Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَنْ يَتَّخِذُ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ أَنْدَادًا
يُحِبُّونَهُمْ كَحُبِّ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And there are some among men who take for themselves objects of
worship besides Allah, whom they love as they love Allah.*** ***(Baqarah
2:165)”***

No creature can be, to our imagination, the example and like of Allah
except if he is independent or has absolute authority in fulfilling one
or more affairs. However, if he works by the permission and command of
God then not only will he not be likened to Him, but also he will be an
obedient creature who performs his duty by His command.

Incidentally, the polytheists during the time of the Holy Prophet (s)
were of the belief that the gods which they were worshipping had
independent powers in fulfilling the affairs.

The lowest kind of belief in the form of polytheism during the period of
ignorance was that a group of people were of the belief that the duty of
legislation has been entrusted to the monks [^10] and ‘intercession’ and
‘forgiveness’ which are specifically the right of Allah have been given
to their idols and deities and that they are independent in these
actions. Thus the verses which are related to intercession lay great
emphasis that nobody can perform intercession without the permission of
Allah. [^11]

If they were of the belief that their deities could do intercession by
the permission of God, then it was needless to emphasize the matter of
negation of intercession without the permission of God.  
 Some of the sages of Greece had imagined a god for everything in this
world and thought that the management of these things (which is the
action of God) had been entrusted to them. Those ignorant Arabs who used
to worship the angels and the fixed and the moving stars were of the
opinion that the management of the world of creation had been bestowed
upon them i.e. the angels and stars and they were the Masters in
managing this world and that God had been completely dethroned from the
position of management. [^12]

Therefore any kind of humility and bowing down which is accompanied by
such a belief will amount to *‘ibada*.

Some other group of ignorant Arabs did not consider the wooden and
metallic idols to be their Creator and / or the manager of the affairs
of this world but regarded them to be the Masters of intercession. They
would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شُفعاؤُنا عِند اللهِ هؤلاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They are our intercessors towards Allah.*** ***(Younus 11:18)”***

Based on this false belief that they are the Masters of intercession,
they worshipped them and thought that their worship was the source of
gaining proximity to God. As they say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما نعبدهم إلا ليُقربُونا إلى اللهِ زُلفى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We do not serve them save that they may make us nearly to Allah.
(Zumar 39:3)”***

In short, any action which originates from such perception that shows
some kind of devotion will be taken as *‘ibada*. As against this, any
action which does not originate from such a belief and any person devoid
of such belief exhibits his humility before someone and honours him then
it will not be *‘ibada* and polytheism even though the action may be
forbidden.

For example, the prostration of a lover before his beloved one or of a
slave before his master or of a wife before her husband etc, are not
*‘ibada* even though it is forbidden in the religion of Islam. This is
because no one can prostrate (even if it does not amount to such
*‘ibada*) before anyone without the permission of Allah.

Conclusion of Our Discussion
----------------------------

Up to this point, we were able to acquaint you clearly with the reality
of *‘ibada*. Now it is necessary to derive a conclusion from the
foregoing discussion. If someone becomes humble and shows humility in
front of someone else without considering them as God or lord or the
source of divine acts but respects them because of the fact that they
are:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِبَادٌ مُّكْرَمُونَ لَا يَسْبِقُونَهُ بِالْقَوْلِ وَهُم بِأَمْرِهِ
يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ***“They are honoured servants, they do not precede Him in speech and
(only) according to His commandment do they act,”*** ***then surely,
such an act shows nothing but honour respect, humility and humbleness.
(Anbiya 21:26)”***

God has introduced a group of His servants with such qualities that will
attract the interest of every person towards honouring and respecting
them. As the holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ اصْطَفَىٰ آدَمَ وَنُوحًا وَآلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَآلَ
عِمْرَانَ عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah chose Adam and Nuh and the descendants of Ibrahim and
the descendants of 'Imran above the nations.*** ***(Aal-Imran 3:33)”***

Almighty Allah (by specification of Qur’an) has appointed Ibrahim to the
position of *imama* and leadership:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال إني جاعلك للناس إماماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…..He said, Surely I will make you an Imam of men….. (Baqarah
2:124)”***

Almighty Allah has described Nuh, Ibrahim, Dawud, Sulayman, Musa, 'Isa
and Muhammad in the Holy Qur’an with such sublime qualities that each of
these qualities is the source of attraction for the hearts to such
extent that the love of some of them has been made compulsory. [^13]

If the people respect and honour these servants in their life-time and
even after their death from this viewpoint that they are the honourable
servants of Allah and without recognizing them as God or imagining them
to be the source of divine affairs, then such respect will never be
considered as *'ibada* and no one can call them as polytheists.

As you are all well-informed, following the Holy Prophet's custom, we
respect and sanctify Hajar al-'Aswad which is no more than a black
stone; we circumambulate around the House of God which is no more than
stone and mud and strive between the two mountains named Safa and Marwa.
That is to say, we perform the same actions which the idol-worshippers
used to perform with regards to their idols. Under these circumstances,
no one till now has thought that by these actions we are worshipping the
stones and mud because we never imagine the least benefit or harm from
them.

However, if we perform these actions with this belief that these stones
and mountains are God and are the source of divine works, then in such a
case, we will be equal to the idol-worshippers. Therefore, kissing the
hands of the Holy Prophet (s) and Imams; master or teacher; parents or
kissing Qur’an, religious books, shrines and all other things which are
related to the honourable servants of Allah will only be an expression
of respect and honour except that if we believe in their divinity or
lordship.

The prostration of angels before Adam and prostration of brothers of
Yusuf in front of Yusuf has come in the Holy Qur’an. [^14]

No one interprets the action of the angels or the action of the brothers
of Yusuf as *'ibada* of Adam or Yusuf. The point is that the prostrators
did not consider the least position of ‘divinity’ or ‘lordship’ for the
prostrated ones and never did they take them as God nor the source of
divine actions. Therefore, their actions were purely an expression of
respect and not *'ibada* or worship.

When the Wahhabis are faced with such verses they at once say: “The
reason that these actions were not prostration of the prostrated ones
was that it was performed by the command of God.”

Although it is true that all these actions together with the action of
brothers of Yusuf in front of Yusuf was by the command and satisfaction
of Allah, yet the Wahhabis are heedless of one point and it is this that
the very essence of their action (i.e. prostration) too was not
*'ibada*. And it was due to this that God commanded for that action.

If the reality of the action amounted to worship of the prostrated one,
then God would have never ordered it.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَأْمُرُ بِالْفَحْشَاءِ ۖ أَتَقُولُونَ عَلَى اللَّهِ
مَا لَا تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Surely Allah does not enjoin indecency, do you say against
Allah what you do not know?*** ***(Araf 7:28)”***

In short, the order and command of God does not change the essence of
action. Before the command of God, the essence or nature of action
should be non-*'ibada*; then only the command of God will pertain to it.
It can never be imagined that the ‘essence’ of one action is *'ibada*
but due to the command of God in performing that action it automatically
becomes non-*'ibada*. This reply which we have repeatedly heard from the
Wahhabi leaders in Mecca and Medina shows that they have closed the
doors in their analysis of Qur’anic teachings.

*'Ibada* has an independent essence and concept for itself which is
sometimes commanded for and sometimes prohibited. That is to say, an
affair which in its essence is *'ibada*, is ordered by God such as salat
and fasting and sometimes prohibits it for example fasting on the day of
Eid. Whenever the prostration of angels and sons of Ya'qub ('a) is, in
its essence, *'ibada* of Adam and Yusuf, then ordering for its
performance will not change it to non-*'ibada*.

The Basis of Solving the Dispute
--------------------------------

Respected readers should realize that the basis of solving most of the
controversial matters between the Wahhabis and us lies in analysing the
concept of *'ibada* and unless and until *'ibada* is not interpreted in
logical terms and we cannot reach to an agreement with an impartial
person with regards to it and any kind of talk or discussion will be
useless.

Therefore, a person of research should deeply study and investigate this
matter (more than what we have mentioned) and should not be deceived by
the interpretation of most of the dictionaries which often intend to
give an abstract explanation of a word and not its actual analysis. In
this regard, pondering over the verses is the best guidance.

Unfortunately, all the Wahhabi writers and some of those writers who
wish to refute their beliefs have given greater importance to secondary
matters rather than laying emphasis on this point.

To sum up, a Wahabi says:

“Most of the actions which you perform with regard to the Holy Prophet
(s) or Imam is *'ibada* and necessarily results in polytheism in
worship”. For this reason we have to disarm him with the precise
interpretation of the word of *'ibada*.

For making clear our objective, we shall now bring examples of those
actions which the Wahhabis show to be worshipping of the dead. We remind
you that all of them like our other ordinary actions, can be fulfilled
in two ways: Either it will be counted as *Ibadat* or not.

1. Seeking intercession from the Holy Prophet (s) and the virtuous
ones.  
 2. Asking for *shifa’* (cure) from the awliya Allah.  
 3. Request for fulfilling one's need from the divine leaders.  
 4. Respecting and honouring the one in grave.  
 5. Seeking help from the Holy Prophet (s) and others.  
 They say: *Shafa'a* (intercession) by decree of the verse

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لله الشفاعة جميعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

is from the actions of Allah just as *shifa’* is from the actions of
Allah,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإذا مرِضتُ فهو يشفين
  </p>
</blockquote>

and asking or requesting from the actions of Allah from someone other
than Him will amount to his worship.

Here, it is necessary to interpret the Actions of Allah and mention what
are the Actions of Allah?

The reply to this is as such: “Any kind of *shafa’a* and *shifa’* of the
sick which the doer is independent in fulfilling them (not that he has
achieved this privilege from somewhere and that he is in need of the
strength and power of some superior being) will be counted as the Divine
Action.

To request such an action from anyone is accompanied with the belief in
his ‘divinity’ and ‘lordship’ and naturally will amount to *'ibada* and
worship.

However, if seeking *shafa'a* and *shifa’* from someone is not
accompanied with this belief but rather, the person seeking *shafa'a*
reckons the intercessor to be a doer who while being a servant of Allah,
relies on a superior power in his actions and affairs and accomplishes
them by His Wish and Will, then in such a case making a request will not
be accompanied with the belief in ‘divinity’ and ‘lordship’.

The same explanation prevails for the matter of request for fulfilment
of needs and or asking for help from someone other than Allah.

Request for fulfilment of needs has two forms: one of them may be
reckoned to be *Ibada* and the second to be having no relation with
*'ibada*. This explanation is not only a limit of demarcation between
*'ibada* and non-*'ibada* concerning this action but is a general rule
which separates monotheism and polytheism from each other in all the
causes and effects.

The belief in the effect of anti-biotics in killing the microbes and
curing the sick can be one of the two ways. If we imagine it to be
independent in life and existence or independent in its action and
effect and reckon it to be needless in a superior being (i.e Allah) then
in such a case we have imagined it as a small god which is independent
in its actions. And if we unknowingly respect and honour it, we have
considered it as Allah and our actions will be *'ibada*. And asking any
help from it will be *shirk* and amount to worshiping it.

However, if we consider it as a possible being whose life, effects and
actions are dependent on a superior one and a being which gives life and
does not accomplish any task without His Wise Will, then our belief will
be exactly *tawhid*. (*la muathar fil Wujud illa hua*). In the realm of
existence no one is effective except Him.

Thus we have reminded you that the solution to the disputes and the
disarming the opposite person in most of the matters concerning
monotheism (*tawhid*) and polytheism (*shirk*) is dependent on the
analysis of *'ibada* and sometimes the meaning of ‘divinity’ and
‘lordship’ and understanding the Divine actions.

Incidentally, the actions of the ignorant Arabs were linked all in all
with the belief in the divinity and lordship of the idols and they
considered them as the absolute authority in some of the divine actions.
They believed that God had handed over the reins of these affairs to
them and if they wished, they could give intercession to any one or can
reject intercession of anyone they wished so.

This is the abstract of our discussion. For a more detailed explanation
interested readers can refer to the books of:

1. **معالم التوحيد** (*Ma'alim al-tawhid*) and

2. **التوحيد والشرك في القرءان** (al-Tawhid wa al-shirk fi al-Qur'an).

[^1]: In the Holy Qur’an too, sometimes this meaning has been utilised
like Sura Shu’ra. وتلك نعمة تمنها علي ان عبدت بني اسرائيل

[^2]: When it is said that the idols are god it does not necessarily
mean that they are the Creators or that they are managing the affairs of
this world. Rather God is having a wider meaning which includes real and
imaginary gods. Whenever we reckon some being to be the source of divine
activities and imagine that some of the affairs of God like intercession
and forgiveness has been entrusted to him, then we have considered him
as god, of course a small god before a bigger God!

[^3]: Also refer to Sura al-Tawba verse 43 and Sura al-Nahl verse 63.

[^4]: Tafsir Aala al-Rahman, page 57.

[^5]: Kashf al-Asrar, page 29.

[^6]: Aal 'Imran, verse 135.

[^7]: Zumar, verse 44.

[^8]: Tawba, verse 31.

[^9]: Qasas verse 73; Sura al-Naml verse 60-64; Sura al-Zumar verse 5-6.

[^10]: Tawba, verse 31

[^11]: Baqara, verse 255.

[^12]: al-Milal wa al-nihal, vol. 2. page 244.

[^13]: Shura, verse 23:

[^14]: Baqara, verse 34 and Yusuf, verse 100.


