Preface
=======

***In the Name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate***

In the cosmic realm, human beings are like balls released into space
which have within them a hidden potential energy for flight into an
infinitely sublime world. But the gravitational attraction of worldly
pleasures draws them toward the depths of the material world, as a
result of which they fall and become degenerate; and the selfish
tendencies and Satanic temptations which have become embodied in
materialistic civilizations and cultures increase the speed of their
downfall.

Amidst all this, there are a few individuals and groups of people the
eyes of whose hearts are open to spiritual truths and the ears of whose
souls have become familiar with divine messages who have the resolution
to turn aside from the pollution of their animalistic desires, who open
their wings to the illuminated horizon of the angelic domain and in the
course of their evolution they begin an ascent to the origin of all
beauties, splendours, powers, and raptures and the infinite source of
perfections, and in a word, ascend toward God.

Like balls which have bounced down to the ground, they are disillusioned
with the dead-end of materialism and once again, with the same speed
with which they descended, they move in the opposite direction and rise
toward the sublime world. It is quite likely that this process will
recur repeatedly

This reaction may be well observed, nowadays, among groups of people who
have become disillusioned with corrupt Western culture and who feel
within themselves a great thirst and longing for spiritual values, and
wander to and fro in order to find the fountainhead of this lucid water.
But, alas, most of them fall into the traps laid by sorcerers who in
place of the nectar of gnosis pour the poison of perdition down their
throats. They lead them from pitfall to abyss, and through a rear door
to the realm of ruin and destruction.

The centrifugal motion of materialistic culture and the turn back toward
spiritual culture is not merely restricted to individual tendencies. We
are now witnessing movements toward Islam in all corners of the world,
even in the most polluted and corrupt of afflicted lands.

These movements have been accelerated by a great Islamic revolution led
by a prominent gnostic, who, taking advantage of the flourishing talents
of the people, was able to gain victory over the Satanic forces in the
rays of the lights of Islamic teachings.

Despite the great obstacles put in its way on all sides, it still
gallops forward. But, although this is not the first time that a divine
man and gnostic of the Lord has undertaken the leadership of a popular
movement, it is not easy to find another example with such scope and
depth and with such firmness and stability.

In any case, this phenomenon, in turn, also can be a very strong motive
for the investigation of the role of spiritual tendencies, especially
the role of Islamic gnosis, in the positive and desirable changes in the
lives of human beings.

Gnosis (\`Irfan) in the Islamic World
=====================================

From antiquity, in the Islamic world there have been tendencies by the
names of gnosis (*\`irfan* ) and sufism (*tasawwuf* ), and from the
4th/10th to 8th/14th centuries they reached their summit in many
countries such as Iran and Turkey. Today, there are various sufi sects
all over the world. Similar tendencies also may be found among the
followers of the other religions.

Considering this common aspect, it is natural for the question to be
raised as to whether there really is any such thing as Islamic gnosis to
be found in Islam, or whether Muslims have taken this from others, so
that what is called Islamic gnosis is really the gnosis of Muslims, not
a truly Islamic gnosis. If there is such a thing as gnosis in Islam, is
this the very thing which currently exists among Muslims, or has it been
subjected to changes?

In answering these questions, some have absolutely denied the existence
of gnosis in Islam and have regarded it as heretical innovation to be
repudiated. Others consider it to have come from outside the context of
Islam, while holding it to be compatible with it. In this line, some
have said that sufism is an acceptable innovation in Islam, like
monasticism in Christianity. In this regard, the Glorious Qur'an states:

<p dir="rtl">
…وَرَهْبَانِيَّةً ابْتَدَعُوهَا مَا كَتَبْنَاهَا عَلَيْهِمْ إِلَّا
ابْتِغَاءَ رِضْوَانِ اللَّهِ …
</p>

***“And as for monasticism, they invented it themselves; We did not
prescribe it for them, except for seeking the pleasure of Allah.”
(57:27)***

Finally, there is a group who consider gnosis to be not only a part of
Islam, but the kernel and spirit of it which comes from the Qur'an and
prophetic sunnah, just as the other parts of Islam. It is not that it
was adapted from other schools of thought and trends, and the aspects
common to gnosis in Islam and other religions is no reason to hold that
Islamic gnosis was derived from them, just as the similarities between
the religious law (shari\`ah) of Islam and the heavenly religious laws
of the previous religions does not mean that the former was derived from
the latter.

We approve of the last response to the question, and we add that the
assertion of the originality of Islamic gnosis is not to condone
whatever has been called gnosis or sufism in Islam. Likewise, it is not
just any sort of creed or conduct found among groups related to Islam
that can be considered truly Islamic beliefs and practices; otherwise,
Islam would necessarily be a contradictory set of beliefs with a
conflicting set of values, or there would be conflicting and
contradictory Islams!

In any case, with our admission of the originality of Islamic gnosis, a
gnosis whose highest degree was reached by the Noble Prophet, may the
Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him and his folk, and his true
successors, we do not deny the existence of foreign elements among the
Muslim gnostics and sufis. Many of the views and manners of behaviour of
the sufi orders are disputable.


