The Concepts of 'Irfan, Sufism, Hikmat and Philosophy
=====================================================

Before explaining the originality of Islamic gnosis, in order to avoid
confusion and misunderstanding it is appropriate here to give an
explanation of the terms gnosis (*\`irfan* ) and sufism (*tasawwuf* ).

The term gnosis (*\`irfan* ), like another term of the same family,
ma\`rifah, [also translated as gnosis] literally means knowledge, but
its technical meaning is specific to knowledge of a certain kind which
can be achieved neither through the senses nor experience, nor through
reason nor narration, but rather is acquired by inner witnessings and
interior unveilings. Then, these are generalized to some propositions
which describe these witnessings and unveilings.

Considering the fact that the acquisition of such witnessings and
unveilings which depend on special exercises and spiritual discipline
are also called gnosis (*\`irfan* ), it is known with the qualification
\`amali (practical), i.e., as practical gnosis, or the manner of
spiritual wayfaring (sayr wa suluk), just as the propositions which
describe the witnessings are called theoretical gnosis, and also, like
the Philosophy of Illumination,1 is mixed to some extent with rational
argumentation.

The expression sufism (*tasawwuf* ), which, according to the most likely
possibility, is derived from the word*suf* (wool), meaning wearing
woolen garments, which symbolizes the hard life far from comforts and
hedonism, is more appropriately used for practical gnosis, as the term
gnosis (*â€˜irfan* ) is more appropriate to theoretical gnosis.

In this way, in the realm of gnosis, at least three elements can be
identified. One is the specific practical instructions which are alleged
to lead man to intuitive and interior gnosis and conscious knowledge by
presence related to God, the Exalted, and the Most Beautiful Names and
His sublime attributes and their manifestations.

The second is the specific spiritual and psychic states and traits of
character, and ultimately, the unveilings and witnessings achieved by
the wayfarer. The third is the propositions and statements indicating
these intuitive direct findings, and even for those who personally have
not travelled the pant of practical gnosis, can be more or less
understood, although finding their truth and essence is specific to the
true gnostics.

By attending to these explanations it becomes clear that the true
gnostic is the one who follows a specific practical programme and
attains an intuitive and direct gnosis of God, the Exalted, and His
attributes and actions. Theoretical gnosis is, in fact, an account and
interpretation of this gnosis, which, naturally, has many shortcomings.

If we are not very exact about the terminology and expand its scope we
can use the term gnosis for all spiritual wayfaring which is undertaken
to find the truth and attain felicity, as well as the resulting
spiritual states and witnessings. In this way, gnosis will include even
the kinds of gnosis found in Buddhism and Hinduism and the gnosis of
some of the tribes of Siberia

and the native tribes of Africa, just as the term religion may be
applied, with the same sort of extended meaning to Buddhism, totemism,
and the like.

Here it is appropriate to indicate the concepts of wisdom and
philosophy, too.

***The expression hikmah (wisdom), which is an originally Arabic word,
means a firm and certain gnosis (ma\`rifah), and it is often applied to
practical gnosis, as the sense in which it is used in the Glorious
Qur'an (17:39).***

However, in current terminology it has the meaning of divine philosophy
as well as practical philosophy and the science of ethics, and in ethics
itself it is used in the sense of a trait of the soul related to the use
of reason, and as the mean between the extremes of cunning and
stupidity.

In any case, it is not applied to atheistic philosophies or skepticism,
to the contrary of philosophy which is derived from Greek roots meaning
any intellectual or rational efforts to understand the problems of all
existence, even if this leads to the rejection of certain and
established gnosis, or even the rejection of objective existence.


