Gnosis and Reason
=================

One of the fundamental problems which is a matter of contention between
the supporters and opponents of gnosis is whether reason can make any
judgment about what is given through gnosis, which is supposedly
acquired by interior unveilings and witnessings, or whether, for
example, reason can refute some of them or not.

The answer to this question is important with regard to the fact that
many gnostics make assertions which cannot be given any rational
explanation. They claim that they discovered these things through the
esoteric way, and that reason does not have the capacity to understand
them, and naturally, that reason thus has no right to refute or reject
them.

The most important subject of this kind of controversy is that of the
unity of existence (*wahdat al* *-* *wujud* ), which has been propounded
in various forms. One is that, basically, there is nothing, has been
nothing and shall be nothing but God, the Exalted. Whatever has been
called other than Him, is said to be nothing more than illusions and
fantasies.

Another form of this proposition is that nothing exists outside the
essence of God or outside the vessel of His knowledge. In this way, a
sort of multiplicity in oneness may be accepted. Another form of this
claim, which is more prevalent, is that the wayfarer at the end of his
journey, reaches the station of annihilation (land), and nothing remains
of him save a name.

Finally, the most moderate form of the claim is that the wayfarer
reaches a station in which he sees nothing but God, and all things fade
away into God. In more exact terminology, he witnesses the fading of all
things into the existence of God, the Exalted, like the fading of a weak
light before the light of the sun.

In such cases, the opponents generally take advantage of rational
arguments, and the proponents eventually say that these sorts of matters
transcend the limits of reason. In this way they shirk the burden of the
rational explanation of their claims. Considering these developments,
this basic question will be posed: Are there truths about which reason
is incapable of comprehending and has no right to reject?

What may be said in summary here is that although reason is concerned
with concepts and the function of reason is not to recognize the truth
of the objective existence or origin of any objective thing, let alone
the divine exalted existence, but the positive and negative judgments of
reason, when they are self-evident or may lead to self-evidence, are
undeniable and through concepts may be applied to objective things.

The assumption of the error of such judgments involves contradiction. In
other words, although the function of reason is not knowledge of the
origins of existence, with the above-mentioned qualifications, there can
be no doubt about the validity of judgments about phenomena.

As for the issue of the unity of existence, it must be said that the
denial of existence of things other than God and the absolute denial of
multiplicity not only imply the denial of the validity of the judgments
of reason, but also involve the denial of the validity of knowledge by
presence belonging to the active and passive aspects of the soul.

In this way, how can we hold that witnessings and unveilings have any
validity, regarding the fact that the best evidence for their validity
is their being present to consciousness? So, the unity of existence, on
this interpretation, is not acceptable at all. However, we may consider
an acceptable interpretation which is propounded in transcendent
philosophy2 from which it is obtained that the existence of creatures in
relation to God, the Exalted, is a relative and dependent existence, and
to be precise it may be said that they are the very relation and
dependence, and they have no independence of their own. That which is
discovered by the gnostic is this very denial of the independence of
other things [than God], which they call the denial of their real
existence.

Here the question may be posed in another form: Can we consider the
judgment of reason prior to intuition and unveiling? In reply, it should
be said that pure knowledge by presence is in truth the discovery of
reality itself. Thus, it is irrefutable.

However, knowledge by presence is usually accompanied by a subjective
interpretation in such a way that any distinction between them requires
great care. These subjective interpretations which involve conceptual
knowledge, are fallible.

What are rejected by rational proofs are incorrect subjective
interpretations of observations and knowledge by pretence, not the
objects of knowledge by presence themselves. In the case of the unity of
existence, that which is realized through witnessings is restricted to
the independent existence of God, the Exalted, which due to inattention
is called true existence, according to which true existence is denied of
other existents.

It is worth mentioning that the great Islamic gnostics have explicitly
claimed that some unveilings are Satanic, invalid, and may be recognized
through some evidence, and ultimately may be distinguished from others
by placing them under the scrutiny of rational certain arguments, the
divine Book and the Sunnah.

It is clear that an investigation into all the kinds of unveilings and
witnessings and the types of knowledge by presence and the ways-in which
they are qualitatively reflected in the mind, the causes for the
incorrectness of some subjective interpretations and the way to
distinguish the correct from the incorrect, are beyond the scope of this
article.


