Gnosis and Religious Law
========================

Another important problem worthy of consideration at the end of this
article is the relation between practical gnosis and the precepts of
religious law, or the relation between tariqah and shari'ah. A group has
imagined that practical gnosis is an independent way to discover truths,
to be used without regard to religious law, and that Islam either
corroborates it (by acceptable innovation) or; at the very least, poses
no obstacle to it.

And they have continued in this direction to the point of holding - that
basically, they considered it to be unnecessary to be committed to any
religion in order to reach gnostic stations, and others have considered
commitment to any one of the religions, and in a more moderate form,
commitment to one of the divine religions, to be sufficient.

However, from an Islamic point of view, gnostic spiritual wayfaring is
not along a way independent of and aside from that of religious law;
rather it is a more exact and subtle part of it. If we restrict the term
shari’ah to the outward precepts, it must be said that tariqah is along
with shari’ah, or in its interior, and it may only be realized with the
observation of the precepts of shari’ah.

For example, shari’ah determines the precepts for the ritual prayer; and
tariqah undertakes the ways of concentration and the presence of the
heart in prayer; and the conditions for the perfection of worship. In
shari’ah the performance of worship in order to avoid divine
chastisement and to reach the blessings of heaven is sufficient.

However, gnosis emphasizes the purification of intentions of everything
other than God. This is what is known in the language of the Ahl al
Bayt, Peace be upon them, as “the worship of the free.” Likewise,
idolatry (shirk ) according to shari'ah is exoteric idolatry by
worshipping idols and the like; however, in tariqah there are more
precise types of hidden idolatry and levels of hiddenness.

Having any hope in anything other than God, fear of other than God,
seeking the help of other than God, and love for other than Him, if all
of these are taken as fundamental and independent, and not based on
obedience to the divine commands, they will be considered kinds of
idolatry.

Therefore, all kinds of innovations (*bid\`ah* ) and arbitrary rites are
not only undesirable but may be obstacles to the achievement of true
gnosis, let alone the use of things which have been explicitly and
definitely prohibited and forbidden.

Although it may be the case that some works may bring about transient
so-called gnostic states, they do not have a good result. They may be a
Satanic trap for ultimate downfall, and we should not be deceived by
them. It is to be concluded that the way of Truth is the one that God,
the Exalted, has stated:

<p dir="rtl">
..فَمَاذَا بَعْدَ الْحَقِّ إِلَّا الضَّلَالُ…
</p>

***“And what is there after the truth but error?” (10:32)***

And Peace be upon those who follow the Guidance.

Notes
-----

[^1]: The Philosophy of illumination was formulated by Shihab al-Din
Yahya Sohravardi (1153-1191).

[^2]: Transcendent philosophy refers to the philosophy of Sadr al-Din
Shirazi, known as Mulla Sadra (1571-1640).
