Qom; Geographically and Historically
====================================

 

 

 

 

 

There is no an accurate dating about the establishment of this city nor
a certain reason behind its name. There are some historians confirming
that its history belongs to the pre-Islamic conquest period relying on
some historical manuscripts, which show clearly that the city has been
available during the age of Anushirvan, the Persian king.**[1]** It
(Qom) has been mentioned during the Islamic conquests when talking about
the battle of Jalawla’ against Khosrow, the last king of the Sasanian
dynasty, where Hijr bin Adiy was one of the leaders of the Islamic
armies at that day.

Hence the history of the city belongs to the period before the year
twenty-third A.H. (the year of (al-Fat~h-the Conquest) for a long time.

Many stories have been said about the name of the city each trying to
give an explanation about it. Some have said that its name was
“Kumondan”**[2]** and then some of its letters have been dropped and
others have said that the original name was “Kam” meaning “little” that
it was a small village and then it was Arabized into “Qom” after the
Islamic conquests.**[3]**

But the name of the city began to shine on the Islamic map after it had
been occupied by the Ash’arites**[4]** in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbar at-Tiwal by ad-Daynowari, p.67.  
 **[2]** Mo’jamul Buldan, vol.4 p.397.  
 **[3]** Encyclopedia of the Shia Imamiyya.  
 **[4]** People of an Arab tribe.  

ninety-four A.H. They had tried their best to build the city. It grew
and became one of the important cities in Persia after its people had
believed in Ahlul Bayt**[5]** (s) and after it had become independent of
Isfahan**[6]** in 189 A.H.

The fate had willed that the city was to be one of the sacred cities
after its ground had embraced the pure body of Fatima, the daughter of
Imam Musa al-Kadhim**[7]** (s) in 201 A.H. Hence it could be said that
since that date the city of Qom had begun to ascend the stairs of glory
to be at the head of the Islamic capitals.

The city has paid the price of its allegiance and love to Ahlul Bayt (s)
so expensively along all the ages. The Abbasid policy has followed a
degrading means by imposing very heavy taxes.

In spite of that there was a kind of political ease towards Ahlul Bayt
(s) during the reign of al-Ma’moon.**[8]** History has recorded that a
revolution has broken out in Qom in 210 A.H. because of the heaviness of
taxes but the revolution has been suppressed severely, the walls of the
city have been destroyed and the taxes have been increased three and a
half times.**[9]**

Some books of history mentions stories, which are like fables, about the
name of the city. One of them says that the Prophet (s), during his
ascension to the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[5]** The Prophet’s progeny (s).  
 **[6]** A province in Persia.  
 **[7]** The seventh Imam of the Shia.  
 **[8]** He was an Abbasid caliph.  
 **[9]** Refer to The Encyclopedia of the Islamic History, vol.1 p.1206.

Some books of history mentions stories, which are like fables, about the
name of the city. One of them says that the Prophet (s), during his
ascension to the Heaven, has seen a place on the earth, which was more
beautiful than the color of saffron and with a fragrance better than the
fragrance of musk, and has seen an old man putting a long cap on his
head. The Prophet (s) asked Gabriel and Gabriel said: “This is the place
of your Shia and your guardian’s Shia and this old man is Iblis. He
invites people to disbelieve.” The Prophet (s) asked Gabriel to swoop
down and Gabriel swooped down faster than lightening. The Prophet (s)
shouted at Iblis: “Get up (qom)**[10]** O you cursed!” Then the city was
called as “Qom”!

In spite of the vicissitudes of time, the city has withstood throughout
the ages of history and has remained as a capital of knowledge and
intellect and as a refuge for the wronged and subdued people of the
Prophet’s progeny. This is why there are many shrines of the
Hashemites**[11]** in this great city.

Qom in traditions
-----------------

Much praise has been mentioned in traditions related to Imam
as-Sadiq**[12]** (s). He said:

###### “Above Qom there is an angel flapping his two wings. No arrogant intends to offend it (Qom), unless Allah will make him melt away like salt being melted in water.”**[13]**

He also said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[10]** Qom in Arabic means “get up” or “leave”.  
 **[11]** The Hashemites are the Prophet’s family. Hashem was the
Prophet’s grandfather.  
 **[12]** He is the sixth imam of the Shia.  
 **[13]** Biharul Anwar, vol.60 p.216.

###### “If you are afflicted with distress and suffering, you are to resort to Qom because it is the refuge of the Fatimites and the resort of the believers.”**[15]**

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (s) said:

###### “Qom is the shelter of Muhammad’s progeny and the resort of their Shia.”**[16]**

He also said in another tradition, which was as an astonishing
prediction:

###### “There will be a man from Qom, who will invite people to the truth and great masses of people will join him. They will not be shaken by the most violent storms.”**[17]**

This tradition has become real after the Islamic revolution under the
leadership of Imam Khomeini (may Allah be pleased with him).

There is another tradition of Imam as-Sadiq (s) deserving to be pondered
on. Imam as-Sadiq (s) said:

###### “The ground of Qom is sacred. Its people are from us and we are from them. No arrogant tries to offend them, unless his punishment will be hastened to him as long as they do not betray their brothers. If they do that, then Allah will subject them to the offenses of the arrogants.”**[18]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[14]** The progeny of Fatima, the Prophet’s daughter.  
 **[15]** Biharul Anwar, vol.6 p.214.  
 **[16]** Ibid.  
 **[17]** Ibid, vol.53 p.216.  
 **[18]** Ibid, vol.6 p.218.

There is another tradition related to Imam as-Sadiq (s) talking about
Fatima al-Ma’ssooma (s).

He said:

###### “We have a sanctum. It is the village of Qom, in which a woman from my progeny will be buried. Her name will be Fatima.”**[19]**

Biography of Fatima al-Ma’ssooma
--------------------------------

Fatima al-Ma’ssooma (s) was born in Thil Qa’da,**[20]** 173 A.H. She was
six years old when her father Imam al-Kadhim (s) was put in prison in
179 A.H.**[21]**

She had several surnames but she was known as “al-Ma’ssooma”. It not
known exactly why she has been surnamed as al-Ma’ssooma but there might
be some reasons behind that.

The girl was pure and infallible besides that she was a daughter of the
seventh imam of the infallible house of the Prophet (s), a sister of an
infallible imam (Imam ar-Redha**[22]** (s)) and an aunt of an infallible
imam (Imam al-Jawad**[23]** (s)).

We could add another reason that she had died oppressedly far from her
nation while she was still a

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[19]** Mustadrakul Wassa’il, vol.10 p.268.  
 **[20]** Thil Qa’da is the eleventh month in the Islamic calendar.  
 **[21]** Imam al-Kadhim (s) was put in prison by the orders of Haroon
ar-Rasheed, the Abbasid caliph, himself. He (Imam al-Kadhim) was
assassinated in one of the prisons of Baghdad in 183 A.H.  
 **[22]** He is the eighth imam of the Shia.  
 **[23]** He is the ninth imam of the Shia.

famous than her name.

In 201 A.H. Fatima al-Ma’ssooma (s) decided, with some of her brothers,
to travel to Marw,**[25]** which was then the capital of the Islamic
state after the end of the war between the two Abbasid brothers,
al-Ameen and al-Ma’moon, who won the war and killed his brother.

Al-Ma’moon, after becoming the caliph, took a decision, whose motives
have been still disputable until now, to make, apparently,
reconciliation between the Alawite**[26]** house and the Abbasid house
and to put an end to the distresses of Ahlul Bayt (s). Many people
doubted the intents of al-Ma’moon when he appointed Imam ar-Redha (s) as
his crown prince. They had convincing justifications about doubting the
real intents and aims of al-Ma’moon towards the progeny of Ali (s).

It was very probable that the travel of Fatima al-Ma'ssooma (s) with her
brothers, which was in tow separate caravans; one followed the way of
Basra to Shiraz and then to Marw and the other followed the way of
Hamadan-Sawa**[27]** and then to Marw, was to confirm the situation of
Imam ar-Redha (s), whom al-Ma’moon had begun to confine. What confirmed
these doubts

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[24]** The Iranians often say “an infallible (ma’ssoom) child” to mean
an innocent child. Infallibility in the Persian literature means
innocence.  
 **[25]** Marw belonged to Khurasan at those days but now it is Mary in
Turkmenistan.  
 **[26]** Concerning Imam Ali’s progeny.  
 **[27]** Shiraz, Hamadan and Sawa are in Iran.

that the two caravans did not reached Marw. The first one stopped at
Shiraz and its people separated here and there after a clash with
government forces and the other stopped at Sawa. Some historical sources
mentioned that the second caravan had been attacked too and that Fatima
al-Ma'ssooma (s) felt that she was about to die after she had felt too
weak and this made her ask about the city of Qom. It was said to her
that Qom was about eighty kilometers and so she asked to be taken there.

Whether her sickness was because of poison, which had been inserted into
her food, or because of the great tiredness and sufferings that she had
faced, she died after seventeen days only after arriving at Qom. She was
as a guest of Musa bin**[28]** Khazraj until she died after some days to
be buried in a land called Babulan belonging to this man.

After a period of time, this land became a great graveyard containing
bodies of thousands of narrators, speechers, leaders and rulers. This
peace of land became the central part of the city, which began to grow
rapidly.

The Holy Shrine
---------------

The shrine (of Fatima al-Ma'ssooma) was at first as a shed of straw mat
erected according to the order of Musa bin Khazraj al-Ash’ari to be now
as a high gold dome, around which high minarets rising towards the
Heaven.

Through twelve centuries the shrine has been rebuilt many times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[28]** Bin and ibn mean the son of.

The first dome, after that straw mat shed, has been built after half a
century by the order of Zaynab, the daughter of Imam al-Jawad (s) in the
middle of the third century of hijra. It has been built with adobe,
stone and plaster.

Then two other domes have been built after some Alawite ladies have been
buried (in the same shrine). The three domes remained until the middle
of the fifth century of hijra when the first high dome has been built to
replace those three domes. It has been built by the vizier of Tugril the
Great**[29]** after encouragement by Sheikh at-Toossi. This dome has
been decorated with colored figures, bricks and tiles (kashi).

In 925 A.H. the roof of the dome has been decorated with mosaic
according to the order of Lady Beigam, the daughter of Shah Issma’eel
as-Safawi (the Safavid). Also a hall and two minarets have been built in
the old yard.

Finally, Fathali (Fat~h Ali) Shah al-Qajari**[30]** has ordered to
decorate the roof of the dome with gold plates to remain shining for two
centuries.

After some damage had happen to some of the gold plates, the office of
the custodian of the shrine decided to rebuild the dome. The old gold
plates have been collected to be replaced with others in a great
project,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[29]** He was a Turkish ruler controlling the western part of Persia
at that time.  
 **[30]** He was a king of Qajar; a northern Iranian people of Turcoman
origin, who formed the ruling dynasty of Persia from 1794 to 1925.

whose cost might be twenty-five milliard Iranian rials (one dollar
equals eight thousand rials).

In general the shrine is a structure with wonderful signs of Islamic
architecture. It has been adorned with marvelous figures.

The total area of the shrine is about fourteen thousand square meters
including the haram, the porches, the halls, the three yards,**[31]**
the tombs of the kings and the two mosques; at-Tabataba’iy and Balasar
(over the head). Lately the Great Mosque has been added to the shrine.
The area of the Great Mosque alone is about twenty-five thousand square
meters.

When a visitor arrives at the outskirts of the city, he will see two
minarets shining distantly.

The dome leans over a silver tomb crowned with gold. The tomb is four
meters high, five meters and twenty-five centimeters long and four
meters and seventy-three centimeters wide.

The northern hall is fourteen meters and eighty centimeters high, eight
meters and seventy centimeters wide and nine meters long. It is adorned
with gold from inside and its figures are demarcated with gold too. Upon
this hall the two minarets go high in the space until thirty-two meters
and twenty centimeters from the ground. The diameter of each minaret is
one hundred and fifty centimeters. This hall is called “the hall of
gold” and its gate is called “the gate of gold”.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[31]** After adding the yard of the Great Mosque (al-Masjidul
A’adham).

In the eastern side there is a hall decorated with hundreds of mirrors
where lights reflect to make it more beautiful and wonderful. This hall
adjoins with the haram by a porch, which is seven meters and eighty
centimeters high, seven meters and eighty-seven centimeters wide and
nine meters long. The porch stands on four stone pillars. Each of them
is eleven meters high.

There are two minarets on this hall. Each of them is twenty-eight meters
high from the roof of the hall. It is written on the top of them in one
meter width “la hawla wela quwatta illa billah: there is no power save
in Allah” and on the other one “subhanallah, wel hamdu lillah, wela
ilaha illallah, wellahu akbar: glory be to Allah, praise be to Allah,
there is no god but Allah and Allah is Great”.

The visitors feel a state of spirituality and happiness under the
shadows of the shrine and in the new yard where several minarets extend
high towards the Heaven and lights reflect in the hall, which is
decorated with hundreds of mirrors besides the flying flocks of doves,
which have taken this holy shrine as warm nests while the fountains
dance in a glittering pool.

In the past the visitors and tourists could come into a museum from the
yard of the shrine directly but now this way is closed and the museum
has a gate outside the shrine in the Moozeh (museum) street.

The museum, which consists of two floors, contains a good group of gifts
and valuable things that have been gifted to the holy shrine throughout
its long history.

Surely whoever visits the museum feels eager to see al-Faydiyya school
beside it, which is one of the most

famous religious schools and hawzas.**[32]** This school, according to
certified facts, has replaced al-Aastana school. It is connected with
the haram by a hall in the old yard.

A tourist’s attention may be drawn by the masses of the passer-bys
between the small park adjacent to the street and between the school,
the museum and the markets. He may think to take his way to the bazaar!

A tourist will feel that he enters a museum showing him different kinds
of arts of architecture and different handworked goods in this ancient
bazaar.

A tourist may ask, in the other side of the bazaar, about “Baytun noor:
the house of light”, which is one of the important marks in the city
that has become a school called as-Satiyya, where Fatima al-Ma'ssooma
(s) had lived as a guest for seventeen days before she left to the
better world.

Qom; Country and People
-----------------------

Qom is the smallest governorate in Iran. Previously it was as a district
belonging to the governorate of Arak and then it was attached to Tehran
until it was certificated to be as independent governorate.

Its population was not more than one hundred and fifty thousand in 1957
A.D. In 1979, when the Islamic revolution triumphed, the population of
the city was about three hundred thousand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[32]** Hawza is the greatest institute of teaching and learning
Islamic knowledges.

The city has progressed so much and has gotten much attention from the
government after the years of deliberate neglect during the reign of
Shah. After the triumph of the Islamic revolution, the city began to
grow rapidly until its population became more than one million besides
the many foreign students coming from the different continents of the
world. They have come to study in Qom and then they got married and make
families or they have brought their families with them. There are also
many Afghan emigrants, who are more than half a million besides some
thousands of Iraqi emigrants.

The city has flourished and prospered in every side especially that
there is cheap employment because of the great numbers of the emigrant
Afghans.

The cultural life has become too prosperous because of the availability
of learned Arabs, among whom the Iraqis form a great proportion.

As for the texture of the local population of the governorate, we can
say that only nine percent live in the countryside whereas ninety
percent live in the city.

Nearly half a century ago the farms and gardens covered most parts of
Qom and then they began to abate little by little before the expansion
of building.

Some people, who have lived in the city about fifty years ago or those
who have been born in the city, refer to some main streets of the city
and say that they were as gardens full of pomegranate and fig trees.

Some famous quarters in the city are still having names that refer to
their rural origins.**[33]**

Nevertheless Qom was and is still as a district having a desert and
semi-desert climate.

There are some certain areas having cold mountainous climate and others
having moderate climate but the general climate of this governorate is
the semi-desert climate.

At the shores of the “Lake of Salt” there is a long line of desert
having many dunes. After that and towards the north and the west-north
there are wide wild lands, in the western side of which Qom is. As for
the moderate areas, they form the western line and have an area four
times more than the area of the desert line. There is a small area
having a cold mountainous climate around Mountain Ghaleek, which is 3171
meters high.

The western line has an important role in the life of the governorate
because it has fertile agricultural lands and many water sources.

From among fourteen rivers flowing in the land of the governorate there
are only two permanent rivers; one is “Qara Chai”, which flows from the
mountains of “Shazand” in Arak to the west of Qom and the other is
“Qamrood”, which flows from the mountains of “Khawansar” in the south.

The rate of raining in the governorate is about 138 millimeter. It is
very little rate in comparison with the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[33]** There is a quarter called (Zanbeelabad). Zanbeel means basket
where fruits have been gathered in baskets during the season of harvest.

general rate of rain in Iran, which is about 255 millimeter.

Once Sayyid Muhsin al-Ameen al-Aamily has passed by this city and
written down his notes about it in his Iraqi-Iranian travel in 1353 A.
H., 1933 A/D.

Here are some lines of his notes:

“A flood has come and covered all the streets (of Qom) so we were
obliged to walk away from the places being covered by the flood. We
couldn’t reach Qom at that day. We spent the night some kilometers
before Qom in a café near a village there. In the café there was an
official having a high position in the army. He began to smoke opium
with the keepers of the café. In the morning we set out towards Qom. We
found that the flood had covered the way. We could not pass the bridge
near Qom by the car so we passed it on foot.”

The Village of Qom
------------------

Qom is a flourishing village with an ancient history. Particular
histories have been written about it. Most of its people are poor. They
are famous of their Shiism since the ages of the infallible imams (s)
like the people of Kufa.**[34]**

Most narrators (of traditions) of the Shia were from these two cities
(Qom and Kufa). The Arab Ash’arites had come to live in Qom after the
advent of Islam. They were followers of Ahlul Bayt (s) and from among
the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[34]** Kufa is a town in Iraq. It was the capital of the Islamic state
during the rule of Imam Ali (s).

narrators of their (Ahlul Bayt’s) traditions. The people of Qom nowadays
are well-known for their piety.

In Qom there was a big river, on which there was an arch, flowing from
the west to the east in the north part of the city.

Most buildings of the city were made of adobe and some were made of
brick.

The water of the city was and is somehow salty but it is said that it is
useful. There are many old wells, to which it is come down by ladders.
They are too deep. They were the source of drinking water.

Mosquitoes spread in the city in big numbers. The prices were
satisfactory. Eggplants were sold singly. One hundred eggplants equaled
one kiran (five Syrian piasters) in comparison with the Ottoman lira,
which equals five hundred and fifty Syrian liras. Pistachio is much
cultivated in the governorate.

One of the wonders of this governorate is that there is a sandy land
near it, which no one can walk in. Whoever enters this land will sink as
if he sinks in water and mud and he cannot save himself from that.

The river of the city flows until it reaches this sandy land to sink in
it.

In Qom there is a high minaret. It is said that it has been erected
during the reign of Umar bin Abdul Aziz, the Umayyad caliph.

Sheikh Abdul Kareem al-Yazdi
----------------------------

He was the jurisprudent and teacher of Qom. He taught Sayyid Muhammad
al-Isfahani. He was so prudent and strong-minded with great knowledge,
high morals and

deep thinking. We could not say that his knowledge was more than his
mind or his mind was more than his knowledge because he was so skilled
in both.

He lived in Sultanabad and then he moved to live in Qom, in which he
established a religious school, until he died.

Everyday the postman came to the sheikh with a parcel of books and
letters. The sheikh had a clerk, who used to receive the parcel. If
there was something not so important, the clerk himself would answer it
and bring it to the sheikh in order to sign it but if there was
something important, the sheikh himself would reply to it.

In his meeting many scientific deliberations were held. I often attended
them. They all were in Persian.

He had a disease in his stomach so he was confined to certain kinds of
food and in certain times according to the doctors’ recommendations.

Because he was so prudent, he used not to take the monies that came to
him (as religious rights) but he let them with a merchant and asked him
to spend them in paying the students’ salaries and he himself took a
salary from the merchant. By such he lived in ease and let none
criticize him. The poor are always at his door. He either gave them from
his own money or asked his companions to give them what they needed.

Al-Mutawally Bashi
------------------

From among the notables of Qom was al-Mutawally Bashi (the responsible)
of the holy shrine of Fatima al-Ma'ssooma (s), whose name was Sayyid
Muhammad Baqir bin Sayyid Hasan al-Husayni al-Aamily al-

Qommi. He was a lofty Hashemite man from Mountain Aamil in Lebanon. Once
he went to perform hajj and we met him in Damascus.

When we came to Qom, we were told that he had been cripple. We visited
him in his house. One day his son Sayyid Misbah visited us in our house.
Now he undertakes the affairs of the shrine instead of his father.

The School of Qom
-----------------

Sheikh Abdul Kareem (mentioned above) had established the (religious)
school of Qom. It was said to us that the school had about nine hundred
students. Sheikh Abdul Kareem paid the most of the students’ expenses.
He had appointed to them a special doctor. Every six months and at the
end of every year, Sheikh Abdul Kareem made a test for his students.

A delegate from the government attended this test to exempt the students
from joining the military service. Sheikh Abdul Kareem often complained
and said:

“We educate a student until he ripens and then he puts off the turban
and the dress of the ulama to put on the dress of the people of rule to
work in of the offices.”

Mirza Abdullah at-Tehrani
-------------------------

In Qom there was a man from Tehran called Mirza Abdullah at-Tehrani. He
was one of the best students in the school of Sheikh Abdul Kareem. He
was virtuous, prudent, with high morals, altruistic, sincere and kind.
He often visited us, stayed with us and achieved our needs and affairs.

The flood in Qom
----------------

The flood-as we mentioned before-had occurred in Qom three days before
we arrived. It had destroyed about three hundred houses in the new
quarter because all the houses were built of adobe but no one was killed
and no wealth was lost because usually the flood came to the city from a
distant place and so the people had enough time to prepare their
affairs.

A telegram had reached warning them of the flood. They got their
furniture and animals out of the houses and they also got out of the
houses, which were liable to fall down. When the flood came, the houses
were empty; therefore no loss was among people, their cattle and
furniture.

The Safavids had built a dam some distance away to prevent floods but it
had been destroyed by time.

At the same time the news came saying that a flood had occurred in
Tabriz and destroyed many houses there.

Ma’ssooma Qom
-------------

In Qom there is the holy shrine of Fatima, the sister of Imam ar-Redha
(s). The Iranians call her Ma’ssooma (of) Qom. The shrine is so great
and is visited by people from everywhere in the world. The shrine has
its own officials and caretakers.

Inside the shrine, Mirza Ali Asghar Khan has been buried. He has been
killed by the people of the (mashroota: constitutional movement). He was
the vizier of Nasiruddeen Shah and the vizier of his son after him.

Tombs of the Ulama and Narrators in Qom
---------------------------------------

In Qom there is a graveyard called the graveyard of “Sheikhoon”, which
means the sheikhs. Sheikhoon is the plural form of Sheikh in Persian. In
fact it is sheikhan because the mark of plurality in Persian is by
adding “AN” at the end of a word but when speaking the Iranians often
change the “AN” into “O(O)N”.

In this graveyard there are many tombs of great narrators (of
traditions) like Zakariyya bin Adam and some of bani**[35]** Babwayh and
tombs of famous ulama like al-Mirza al-Qommi. These tombs are about to
be obliterated because the government**[36]** has made streets in the
graveyard without paying any attention to the tombs. In fact the
government has intended to remove the graveyard totally.

Our Relatives in Qom
--------------------

Sayyid Hasan bin Sayyid Muhammad al-Ameen, who was the brother of our
grandfather Sayyid Ali bin Sayyid Muhammad al-Ameen, has traveled to
Iraq to study (religious knowledges) with his brother Sayyid Husayn. His
brother has stayed in Najaf and got a high position in knowledge but he
himself has traveled to Qom and stayed there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[35]** “Bani” means the family of or the tribe of.  
 **[36]** The government of the Shah but after the triumph of the
Islamic revolution, the new government took much care for the graveyard
and now it is one of the prominent historical places in Qom.

He had a progeny in Qom but they became extinct. One of his daughters
had got married to a sayyid**[37]** from the sayyids of Qom and had
offspring from him. Two virtuous sayyids, who are two brothers, of her
progeny have still been living in Qom till now. Each of them is an imam
of a mosque.

One of them has told us about the coming of our grandfather’s brother to
Iran and his living in Qom in a wonderful story.

Our Works in Qom
----------------

We found in Qom “Thayl as-Sulafa”, from which we quoted necessary things
in our book “A’yan ash-Shia”.

We kept on looking in the libraries for the books that we might make use
of in writing our book mentioned above. We found a volume of “al-Majmoo’
ar-Ra’iq” and quoted some things from it. Also we found some other books
that we do not remember their titles now.

We were told that in Isfahan there was a copy of “Riyadhul Ulama’” for
sale. We asked Mirza Abdullah at-Tehrani about this and he confirmed the
news and said:

###### “The keepers of the book want sixty tomans but we can buy it with less than this price.”

Sixty tomans equaled thirty Syrian liras or nearly five and a half
Ottoman gold liras at that time.

We asked him to send a telegram to the keepers of the book. He said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[37]** Sayyid is one, who belongs to the Prophet’s progeny.

###### “The telegram will make them insist on the price. We send them a letter.”

Then he was told that the book had been bought by Hajji Agha Husayn
at-Tehrani, the king of the merchants, with one hundred and twenty
tomans, which was as twice as the previous price they wanted for the
book.

We kept on looking for another copy. We found two volumes; the second
and the third. We bought them with expensive price. The first and the
fourth volumes of the book were lost. We could not find the fifth volume
but we found a copy of it with somebody. We hired someone to copy it by
hand and we gave him his wage. He said that it would be completed after
our return from Khurasan. He corrected it and sent it to us in Tehran.

After buying the second and the third volumes and hiring somebody to
copy the fourth volume, another volume, which was a manuscript written
by the author himself, was offered to us. The keeper of this volume was
a woman. She wanted thirty Ottoman liras for it. We would have bought it
if she had deducted the price a little but she hadn’t. We could not buy
it with this expensive price.

We stayed at Qom for about fifteen days and in the last of
Safar,**[38]** 1353 A.H. we set out towards Tehran.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[38]** Safar is the second month in the Islamic calendar.

The Salty Lake
--------------

On the right side of the way between Qom and Tehran there was a salty
lake, which was called in Iran as “Daryatcha Namak”.

It would be useful to mention here what the Egyptian writer and
journalist Professor Fahmi Huwaydi had written about Qom through his
visit to the city in 1983 A/D. nearly half a century after the visit of
Sayyid Muhsin al-Ameen al-Aamily.

Professor Fahmi Huwaydi says:

###### “Qom remains as the key and the lock in Iran after the Islamic revolution.”

We often read longingly the reportages written by Professor Fahmi
Huwaydi, which took the Arab readers to far horizons, especially when
they (the reportages) were accompanied with the camera of the
photographer Oscar Mitry. His writings had a great historical and
scientific value.

Let us read what the professor and journalist has said about Qom:

Shahr-e-Muqaddas:**[39]** The Other Face
----------------------------------------

With the sunshine of the next day we were at the gates of Qom. We moved
on the wide and well-paved way, whose building started at the reign of
the Shah to be completed at the age of the Revolution as the fate
willed! We passed by wide wild land. We passed by the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[39]** In Persian “shahr” means city and “muqaddas” means holy or
sacred.

Lake of Salt, in which the men of SAVAK**[40]** used to throw whomever
they wanted to get rid of to be swallowed by the lake and then to be
dissolved by the salty water. We stopped at one of twelve checkpoints
established recently to control coming and going. A bearded young man
from the guards of the revolution with a machine gun on his shoulder
gazed at us. His eyes stopped at me. The driver said to him: “He is a
foreign Muslim”. He smiled and murmured: “Ya Allah!” he turned to check
the bag of the car to be sure that there was no weapon or any kind of
bombs or any forbidden thing else. Then he permitted us to move.

After two hundred meters we stopped at another checkpoint. The same
procedures were done and then we entered Qom. The first thing we faced
was a big signboard, on which it was written:

###### “Until the appearance of al-Mahdi our revolution will still be continuous.”

After some minutes, my host, whom I met for the first time, was leading
me welcomingly to a rectangular hall, whose walls were hidden behind the
shelves of the books and whose floor was covered with a modest rag
whereas cushions and pads were here and there. No seat there was in the
hall. We sat squatting on the ground and we were acquainted with each
other so quickly. He said to me in good Arabic:

###### “Take your ease as if you are at your home or try here the life of the weak.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[40]** The secret intelligence organization of Iran during the reign
of Shah.

Then he recommended his younger brother, who was one of the intelligent
young students of the hawza, to take care of me and then he left to do
his affairs. I did not see him during that week that I spent in his
house-residing in that room-except two times only.

This was not my first visit to Qom although it was my first residence in
it. I had come to Qom for the first time with Professor Muhammad
Hasanayn Haykal, the famous writer and journalist, who had visited Iran
in 1980 when he was trying to write his book about the Islamic
revolution in Iran, which was published later on under the title of “The
guns of Aayatullah”. At that time Imam Khomeini was still in Qom.
Professor Haykal went to meet Imam Khomeini in Qom where I accompanied
him and then we went back to Tehran in the evening of the same day.

We saw the Leader of the Revolution where his house was surrounded by a
sea of people, who had come from every spot in Iran to announce their
allegiance to him. We did not see anything in Qom save the shrine of
al-Ma’ssooma with its gold dome shining in the sky of the city and with
its wonderful building, which seized the sights of the visitors and
which no eye would miss even if the visitor was-like us-just a passerby
in his car towards the abode of the Imam.

At first sight, Qom takes you some centuries backward in the past when
the Islamic world was full of centers of knowledge and science from
Bukhara and Samarqand in central Asia to al-Qayrawan in the north of
Africa and to Timbuktu in the west of the continent. Your eye is caught
by the great numbers of libraries, jurisprudents, who walk in the
streets with their distinguished turbans and wide cloths, the minarets
and domes, the activity of

trade in the roofed markets with the narrow streets and the sellers of
rosaries, perfumes and charms. The new thing may be the voices of the
reciters and mourners, which follow you wherever you go and the
loudspeakers impose them on your hearing. Then you see the ads of the
only cinema “al-Fajr”, which has been established after the Revolution.
The film, which was on at that time and whose title was “sincere
repentance”, conformed to the general condition of people in the city.

But this scene changes little by little whenever you approach to the
other parts of the city and knock at its many gates. After the first
round in Qom, you will discover that it is not just a “Shahr Muqaddas”
holy city but it is a big centre followed by many quarters and
districts. Among these quarters there is one called
“Neauphle-le-château”. It is the name of the place in which Imam
Khomeini has resided when he resorted to France after he has been exiled
from Iraq in 1978.

You will discover too that it is not the city of the hawza only because
the old of the hawza is just a little more than half a century, since it
has been established by Sheikh Abdul Kareem al-Ha’iry after his
departure from his birthplace Arak. Sheikh Abdul Kareem died in 1355
A.H. whereas the old of the city (Qom) is more than thirteen centuries.

As knowledge is what the city has become known of but it is just one
face among its other faces, which have been prevailed by the hawza,
whose fame has spread throughout the world during the last quarter of
the century.

Just a few people know that Qom is an agricultural city having a good
production of wheat, cotton, pomegranate, melon, fig and pistachio. Also
a few people know that Qom is an industrial city. The merchants of
carpets are more aware of Qom’s expensive silk carpets, which is enough
to refer to and to say that they are made in Qom. As for its production
of pottery, plastic products and materials of building no one outside
Iran may have known about it.

At the same time the commercial Qom is unknown too. The city has gained
its commercial value because it is a market that millions of peoples
come to from everywhere to visit the shrine of al-Ma’ssooma (s) and to
be blessed by visiting the tombs of the progeny of the infallible imams
and the other saints. The excellent location of Qom, which is at the
crossroads that connect the north of Iran with the south, has
contributed to gain this value. Besides these excellences that have been
realized by the good location of the city, its people have tolerated
unwillingly its only disadvantage. It is the one that the river coming
from the mountains of Bakhtiyariyya in the middle of Iran has brought to
them. The river is called “Roodkhana-e-shoor” which means the salty
river. The fate has decided that the people of Qom have to coexist with
this river and to swallow its salt willingly and submissively since the
existence of the two; Qom and the river. This river is the main source
of the city’s drinking and irrigating water because the rain water in
general is little and have no value in this concern besides that the
winter is not long here anyhow.

If these faces have been unknown to those, who have known Qom through
the books and the media, the

visitors of the city will meet them all when their feet lead them to the
main streets like “Imam Khomeini Street”, “Musa al-Sadr Street” and
“Talaqani Street” besides the bazaar. In fact these streets show you
more and more about the city and give you an impression that the city
lives in its golden age since the Revolution has broken out and that the
age of the ulama has circulated to everything in Qom from the hawza
until the bazaar.

This is the functional Qom. But as for Qom the city, since it has become
as a center of attracting people after the Revolution its population has
been tripled to be more than one million.

A visitor can easily distinguish between three faces of the city; the
old Qom surrounding the shrine of al-Ma'ssooma (s) with its narrow,
circuitous, roofed and earthy streets and with its houses decorated from
inside with beautiful architectural figures that distinguish the city
from among the other cities, the modern Qom with its wide paved streets,
high buildings, restaurants and hotels, which swim in seas of
fluorescent lights and the most modern Qom, which has appeared after the
Revolution and the beginning of the age of prosperity and flourishing,
which has brought with it the agencies of the most modern Mercedes cars
and the big supermarkets. Salarya quarter (the quarter of the notables)
is a part of the most modern Qom although it is in the southern part of
the city on the contrary to Tehran, whose quarter of the notables is in
the north.

What I wanted to concentrate on through showing all these faces of the
city was the hawza, which would have not existed unless the shrine of
al-Ma’ssooma (s) had been there. The holy shrine of al-Ma’ssooma (s) was
the

cornerstone of the city and by which the birth certificate of the holy
city had been written and then to have had a passport to enter into
history.

Al-Ma’ssooma and the Hawza
--------------------------

Before I knocked at the doors, I had been busy with the meanings of the
words that had succeeded in the record of time as the following: Qom,
al-Ma'ssooma and the hawza and I found what I have looked for in the
bookcase, which was above my head and against which I opened my eyes
every morning along my residence in Qom.

The sayings were different about the name of the city although the
likeliest of them was the story saying that there was a small village in
the same location of the city called “Kam”, which means “small” or
“little” in Persian, and when the Arabs conquered it in 23 A.H. and came
to live in it, they changed its name from Kam into Qom. Some Arabs of
the tribe of al-Asha’ira had come to live in the city and then some
families of the Hashemites and the Alawites resorted to it in the first
centuries of hijra when they had fled from the pursuits of the Umayyads
and the Abbasids.

The Islamic encyclopedia of the Shia mentions that building has begun in
Qom at the end of the first century of hijra whereas it does not refer
to any history about the city before Fatima al-Ma'ssooma (s), the
daughter of Imam Musa al-Kadhim (s), has been buried in it in 201 A.H.
It is said that she has come from Medina to Marw in order to see her
brother Imam Ali bin Musa ar-Redha (s) but she has fallen ill and asked
to be carried to Qom, where she has died some days later. Since then she
has been called as Ma’ssooma

Qom. Since she was from the progeny of Ahlul Bayt (s) her tomb has
become a holy shrine and then it has been referred to as “the haram”.

The notables, the emirs and the kings have competed to spend on the
shrine and to enrich it costly; therefore it has become as a splendid
architectural masterpiece surrounded by gates and windows made of gold
and silver. It has always been expanded and developed until it has
become as big as 13500 square meters in area.

Another kind of competition has occurred in burying the notables, the
emirs and the kings near the tomb of Fatima al-Ma'ssooma (s). Her shrine
has been still as a center of attraction to the masses of the Shia
everywhere. They come to be blessed by visiting the holy shrine and to
attend the different religious occasions. This has given the city of Qom
a high and distinguished position.**[41]**

As for “al-hawza al-ilmiyya” it is an accurate Arabic name. Hawza in
Arabic means a place or an area, which if is assigned for studying and
learning can be called as hawza ilmiyya.**[42]** According to the
linguistic origin, a hawza can be assigned for any human activity. But
this word, according to the Shia intellect, has been correlated with
“learning” until it has been understood spontaneously that a hawza must
be a center of knowledge. In fact the word “hawza” itself has been dealt
with as having this meaning and nothing else until it has been used
alone without assigning to give the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[41]** Refer to Hasan al-Ameen-the Shia Islamic Encyclopedia, vol.3
p.229-article of “Qom”-at-Ta’aruf Publications, Beirut.  
 **[42]** Ilmiyya in Arabic means scientific.

meaning of the two; “hawza” and “ilmiyya” at the same time.

Al-hawza al-ilmiyya is not one scientific institute as many people
think, but it refers to the whole city of Qom as a place of learning
through many religious schools with different ranks. The government has
nothing to do with spending on al-hawza al-ilmiyya, which is run by the
heads of the sect (the Shia), who are called “maraji’
at-taqleed**[43]**”.**[44]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[43]** Taqlid refers to the necessity for a layman to accept and
follow the opinions of an expert in Islamic law (*mujtahid*). Every
individual who does not himself have the qualifications to interpret the
sources of the law must choose a member of the religious class (the
'*ulama*') whom he accepts as his *marji’ at-taqlid* (“source of
authority”) and whose teachings he observes.  
 **[44]** Iran from inside by Fahmi Huwaydi, p.115-121.
