Qom in Photos
=============

 

 

![](images/041_a.jpg)

Qom is the smallest governorate in Iran. It is the twenty-eighth one.  
  

![](images/041_b.jpg)

A spatial photo from about 705 kilometers high

![](images/042.jpg)  
 The relief of the earth and the height from sea level

![](images/043_a.jpg)

All the seasons meet in this small governorate.

Desert climate along the coast of the Lake of Salt

Semi-desert climate forming the greatest part of the governorate’s area

![](images/043_b.jpg)

![](images/043_c.jpg)

 

Moderate climate

Cold climate in the mountainous regions where snow falls heavily

![](images/043_d.jpg)

A scene of the wide wild lands

![](images/044_a.jpg)

 

![](images/044_b.jpg)

![](images/044_c.jpg)

 

 

![](images/045_a.jpg)

 

![](images/045_b.jpg)

 

The camel is still the master of the desert in the line extended along
the coast of the Lake of Salt.

![](images/045_c.jpg)  
 One of the emigrating birds that land in the eastern parts of the
governorate

![](images/046.jpg)  
 Historical city of Qom drawn by a European artist in the past century

![](images/047.jpg)  
 Such was the tomb of Lady Fatima al-Ma’ssooma in the past.

![](images/048.jpg)  
 This photo has been photographed thirty-three years ago.

![](images/049.jpg)

![](images/050.jpg)  
  
 As you are at the outskirts of the city, you will see these two
minarets, which visitors’ hearts beat to see.

This shining gold dome in the blue sky has become a symbol for the city
of Qom.

 

![](images/051_a.jpg)

Silver tomb crowned with gold under a dome decorated with mirrors from
which chandeliers and lamps hanging down

 

![](images/051_b.jpg)

 

Bayt an-Noor (the house of light), in which Lady Fatima (s) has stayed
as a guest among the people of Qom

![](images/051_c.jpg)

![](images/052.jpg)  
  
 Al-Masjid al-A’dham (great mosque): it has been established by the late
leader Sayyid Buroojardi in 1374 A.H. It lies beside the pure shrine of
Lady Fatima al-Ma’ssooma (s). After the Islamic Revolution, the mosque
has been joined to the haram by removing the wall that has separated
between them in Ramadan, 1413 A.H.

![](images/053_a.jpg)

 

 

![](images/053_b.jpg)

 

Faydhiyya School: it has been established in the middle of the sixth
century of hijra. It has been established by the order of the Safavid
king Tuhmasab. The oldest part of the school now is the southern hall,
which has been decorated with beautiful veined kashi (tiles).Faydhiyya
School is considered as one of the first scientific centers in the
Islamic world. From this school the first step of the struggle against
the extinct regime of the Shah has started.

![](images/054.jpg)  
 A copy of the holy Qur’an from the second century of hijra

Aastana Museum contains valuable historical antiques, which have been
kept before in a place called Khizana (wardrobe or bookcase). The museum
occupies an area of 1000 sq m in two floors.

![](images/055.jpg)  
 A gilded tableau from the tenth century of hijra

![](images/056.jpg)  
 One of the valuable things in the museum

![](images/057.jpg)  
 A gilded tableau from the Safavid age

![](images/058.jpg)  
 A gilded tableau from the tenth century of hijra

![](images/059.jpg)

Jamkaran Mosque lies in the east-south of Qom about six kilometers from
the city. The history of the mosque belongs to the year 393 A.H. It is
mentioned that it has been established according to directions from Imam
al-Mahdi (s).Thousands of Muslims visit the mosque to offer the prayer
and to be blessed. Crowdness in the mosque reaches its culmination on
Tuesdays and nights of Wednesdays to recite du’a for the sake of the
appearance of the disappearing imam (may Allah hasten his deliverance).

![](images/060.jpg)  
  Al-Masjid al-Jami’ in Qom is one of the very ancient mosques.

![](images/061.jpg)  
 This school lies in the area of al-Masjid al-Jami’ (mosque). It belongs
to the Safavid age.

![](images/062.jpg)

 

The Library of al-Mar’ashi an-Najafi is one of the international
libraries. 12200 manuscripts have been indexed recently. The indexes
have been published in thirty volumes whereas work is on to publish the
rest of indexes, which are expected to reach sixty volumes. The
manuscripts in the library are more than 32000 ones. The first brick of
the library has put in holy Najaf in Iraq and after the emigration of
its founder Ayatollah al-Mar’ashi an-Najafi to Iran in 1343 A.H. he has
kept the books in his room but when the books and manuscripts, which he
has kept on buying day after day, have become too many, he has gifted
278 rare manuscripts to the College of Theology in Tehran in 1338
A.H./1959 A.D.

![](images/063_a.jpg)

![](images/063_d.jpg)

A copy of the holy Qur’an written in Kufic handwriting by Ibnul Bawwab
(Ali bin Hilal) in 392 A.H.

 

![](images/063_b.jpg)

![](images/063_e.jpg)

![](images/063_f.jpg)

![](images/063_c.jpg)

A copy of the Qur’an written on parchment in Maghribi handwriting-the
fourth century of hijra

 

 

![](images/064_a.jpg)

![](images/064_d.jpg)

![](images/064_b.jpg)

The shrine of Ali bin Ja’far (s)

![](images/064_c.jpg)

![](images/064_e.jpg)

![](images/065_a.jpg)

![](images/065_b.jpg)

 

![](images/065_c.jpg)

 

![](images/065_d.jpg)

The land of the governorate is full of tombs of the saints. Most of them
have belonged to the tree of Ahlul Bayt (s). The tombs of the saints in
Qom are about 444 ones.

![](images/066.jpg)

![](images/067.jpg)

Qom is famous for hand-weaving silk carpets. Silk carpets of Qom are
considered as the best and at the top of handcrafts in Iran and in the
world.

The big bazaar is one of the wonderful architectural works. It has been
built by the Iranian architect Hasan al-Mi’mar, who was from Qom, in
1278 A.H.

An ancient market of silk carpets (Teemtcheh) belongs to 1301 A.H. The
high quality of this kind of carpets and its beauty and coordination of
colors has put Iran in the first row internationally due to this craft.

![](images/068.jpg)

![](images/069.jpg)  
 These stages are done by the skilled hands within about five seconds
only!

![](images/070.jpg)

![](images/071.jpg)

![](images/072.jpg)

![](images/073.jpg)

![](images/074_a.jpg)

 

![](images/074_b.jpg)

In this house Imam Khomeini has been arrested and exiled to Turkey and
from Turkey to Iraq and then to France.

![](images/075_a.jpg)

![](images/075_d.jpg)

![](images/075_b.jpg)

![](images/075_e.jpg)

 

The west and the south-west parts of the governorate are considered as
summering places for their wonderful spring weathers. In summer the
visitors feel joy and happy with the fascinating scenes of these areas
and the high morals of their good people.

![](images/075_c.jpg)

![](images/075_f.jpg)

![](images/076.jpg)

![](images/077.jpg)

![](images/078.jpg)

Kuhak: a suburb in Qom that has been named Neauphle-le-Château as a
memory of the small town, in which Imam Khomeini has lived when he has
resorted to France after being exiled from Iraq in 1978 A/D. In a
mountain at the outskirt of this beautiful town the Iranian philosopher
Sadruddeen Shirazi (Mulla Sadra) has spent seven years of his age in his
ponderings, which has led to wonderful discoveries mentioned in his book
(al-Asfaar al-Arba’a-the four travels), in which he has announced for
the first time that time is a quantitative dimension of objects (the
fourth dimension), which is the amount of the renewed nature in itself
and in its spontaneous preceding and delaying, which is an extended and
quantitative thing because (all the existed things in the world lie by
themselves in time and changing, being under saying “when” as they are
lying in place and being under saying “where”. So time is an original
dimension and not a cause of movement as movement is not a cause for it
too. These thoughts have been mentioned in his famous theory (The
Essential Movement). Refer to al-Asfaar al-Arba’a, vol. 7 p. 293, vol.3
p.110.

Ansariyan Publications
----------------------

**In 1975 A/D a candle was lit. It began to shine and its light spread
little by little.**

**Yes! Such was the beginning; mercy of Allah and interests undertaken
by believers who have believed in Islam as a religion and as a
mission.**

**Such was the beginning; the letters of the Iranians, who have roved
throughout the world for studying and trading.**

**Faithful youths and “men who are true to the covenant which they made
with Allah” have seen the world, which has drowned in confusion, stray
and suspicion…they inquired: Where is the preaching of Islam? Where is
its humane mission?**

**They lived there and saw closely the confusion of the human beings;
Muslims and non-Muslims. Everyone was looking for the right path.**

**Moreover, the fruitful meetings with Allama (jurisprudent)
Tabataba’iy, with Professor Mahmood ash-Shahabi after his return from a
travel then, and with others of ulama and learned people of the world of
Shiism of Ahlul Bayt (s); all that has led to the establishment of
Ansariyan Publications in the holy city of Qom. Ansariyan Publications
has been granted with blessings of Allah, His messenger and Ahlul Bayt
(s). The beginning was as any beginning. It opened its way slowly and
step by step and when the Islamic Revolution triumphed the establishment
of Ansariyan flourished to grow up, be firm and fruitful.**

###### Worth mentioning that Ansariyan Publications is proud, in spite of all problems and defects, of suffering what it has suffered while opening its way to stand up nowadays with honor of what it has achieved and what it has presented to the Arabic, Islamic and international libraries, of witnessed services in this concern in spite that it has not got any official or personal subsidy.

###### And this book before you is one of the fruits of its efforts, which have continued for thirty years of perseverance. Nevertheless, it considers itself as in the beginning of the way beseeching Allah for help and invoking our master and imam al-Mahdi, the authority of Allah on His earth, to keep on this blessed work determinedly and sincerely.

###### Respectable visitor:

###### O you, whose heart burns for pure Islam!

###### O you, whose heart flourishes with loving the Prophet and his progeny!

###### O you, whose soul has absorbed allegiance to Ameerul Mo’mineen Ali (s)!

###### You undertake, today, a serious responsibility before Allah, the Almighty, with your tongue, pen, social position and moral and material capabilities and know well that Allah will ask us all about our deeds!

###### O our brothers in belief and humanity, come on to work and to cooperate and to invoke Allah to grant success to our Islamic Umma.

![](images/080.jpg)

In Tehran International Book Fair

The meeting of the head of the establishment Professor Muhammad Taqi
Ansariyan with the president of the Islamic Republic
