The Virgin of the City
======================

 

##### Scenes from the Life of Fatima al-Ma'ssooma

 

### (1)

As Musa bin Imran (Prophet Moses) had stood against the Pharaoh, Haman
and Qaroon (Croesus), Musa bin Ja’far stood against Haroon**[45]**…
Haroon, whose grandfather**[46]** had said before:

###### “I am the authority of Allah on the earth… the shadow of the heaven on the earth… the will and determination of Allah…”

Because of this Musa had risen by the will of Allah to say to Haroon
“No!”… had come to ask for Fadak… Fadak, which once had been a small
piece of land and then the Heaven had granted to Fatima**[47]** to be
her gift…to be her inheritance and to be, later on, as a symbol of the
extorted inheritance and the defeated truth…a symbol of all the Islamic
lands.

Because of this Fatima bint**[48]** Muhammad (s) had risen to ask for
her right of Fadak. How small Fadak was on the earth and in geography
but how wide it was on the map of history!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[45]** Musa bin Ja’far is Imam al-Kadhim, the seventh imam of the Shia
and Haroon is ar-Rasheed, the Abbasid caliph.  
 **[46]** It metonymically refers to the Pharaoh.  
 **[47]** The Prophet’s daughter.  
 **[48]** “Bint” means the daughter of.

Medina was shaken from its beginning to its end because Musa had come to
ask for the inheritance of his grandmother az-Zahra’…had come to get
Fadak back with its wonderful limits; from Aden to Samarqand to Africa
to the shore of the sea beyond the islands and Armenia…!

Haroon was filled with spite…Musa had come to threat his throne, wealth,
palaces, rule and state…

Fatima,**[49]** with her six years of old, stood up waiting for the
coming back of her father, who had gone out in the dawn and had not come
back yet. It was not only Fatima, who was waiting for the coming back of
the brown man, who had images of prophethood in his face, but Medina all
in all was expecting what Haroon wanted from Musa.

She was looking at her brother Ali, whose face seemed like a sky with
sad clouds. Fatima thought that her father would be far away or he might
never come back again. She might not see him or hear his warm voice
again. She felt cold. Fear filled her inwards. Her eyes were filled with
tears of sorrow.

The waves of sorrow have deeper influence than the shakes of joy. They
dig their places deeper in memory. Nothing is more eternal in the world
of innocent childhood than the scenes of orphancy.

Fatima had lost her mother while she was unable yet to understand what
there was around her in this world. Then she faced the storm. It was the
storm of the fate when the severe hands snatched her kind father away

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[49]** Fatima al-Ma’ssooma.

from his family and children to burden him with ties and chains.

Fatima looked at her brother…She thought that she saw a sky with heavy
clouds. Allah was the only One, who knew the bottom of the love, whose
pure springs flowed inside the heart of Fatima…Fatima, who saw with her
own eyes the storm of the bitter time!

The time of separation had begun…the time of vagrancy…the time, in which
the accusation of disbelief was much easier than to be said that this
one was from Ali’s progeny…from Muhammad’s grandsons…

Haroon feared Musa…feared his words. They were the echo of Muhammad’s
words…the echo of Ali’s speeches.

Fatima stopped to farewell from far a caravan taking its way towards
Basra and her heart beat rapidly longing after a howdah surrounded by
swords and spears. Her heart would not fail her.

The caravan disappeared far away while the sky was still raining little
by little.

Fatima came back with her brother Ali. She came back trailing her self
and feet to the house that seemed as a tent torn by the wind in that
cloudy morning. The father departed. The pole of the tent collapsed.
Peace left far and it might not come back again. Fatima looked at the
cloudy sky and the rain. Childish tears fell from her eyes. Tears like
sad rain began to fall silently.

How bitter orphancy is in the orphans’ hearts. How bitter cold is…the
cold of fear…the fear of the unknown.

When the father departs, life becomes cold and frosty…with no sun, no
light and no warmth.

### (2)

There is nothing bitterer than to see the moments of collapse…collapse
of things and shaking of the firm principles of life.

Everything shook. The voice of the man died down and tens of obscure
voices appeared…voices that took their powers from instincts hidden in
the human inner in the moment when mind failed before the shine of
greed.

Life is like a top whirling with its people in the middle of a fiery
storm.

In that bad time where everything shook under the hoofs of mad horses,
that fifty years-old-man stopped…his eyes traveled through an infinite
sky and his hands extended whereto hearts would turn towards in the
moment when the waves were about to destroy a straying ship…calm words
entreating Allah suppliantly:

“O, You, Who have guided me to Yourself and made my heart submit to
believe in You… I beseech You to grant me safety and belief in this life
and the afterlife.”**[50]**

Fatima came in and sat beside her brother to feel security in a world
full of terror…to absorb goodness in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[50]** Usool al-Kafi, vol.2 p.579.

a world swarming with evils. Bitter sorrow shone in her eyes…a sorrow
that belonged to quarter a century; all her life that was full of
sadness.

She still remembered twenty years ago the moments when her good father
had been taken to Baghdad. She had never seen him since then. She could
not forget yet the moment when her mother left to the better world. It
was a very cold winter night. She could not find warmth except near her
brother Ali.

And then was Ali in the middle of the storm…exactly in the calm spot…in
the central point where there was no any stormy movement.

And there was Fatima, who had never found her equal since long ago,
eager to find the man, with whom she would feel she was near the
Kingdom…the Kingdom of the far Heavens. Near him Fatima would feel she
had passed the limits of the self so that her soul would swim in a pool
of that light, which shone in the hearts. As if thousands of lamps
lighting inside her. Such Fatima lived near her alone brother.

The shakes of the volcano that had broken out in Mecca reached Medina,
the capital of the Prophet (s). Muhammad bin Ja’far**[51]** revolted but
his revolt was

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[51]** He was Muhammad the son of Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (s). He was
surnamed as ad-Deebaj. He was one of the ulama. He narrated knowledge
from his father Imam as-Sadiq (s). He lived in Mecca and when the war
between al-Ameen and al-Ma’moon broke out; he revolted in Mecca and was
paid homage as the caliph. He was called as ameerul mo’minen. The people
of Hijaz paid homage to him. Then al-Ma’moon sent an army to defeat the
revolution. Muhammad bin Ja’far yielded after his forces had been
defeated. He ascended the minbar to announce his apology to al-Ma’moon.

defeated while it was yet a bud and then the forces of al-Ma’moon went
towards Medina to revenge on the Alawites. Al-Juloodi, the harsh man,
led led his soldiers to plunder the houses of the Talibites**[52]** in
frightened Medina.**[53]**

The invading forces entered Medina to plunder the houses of the
Talibites and to confiscate all what they had. In the mind of rude
al-Juloodi there were personal orders from the seventh Abbasid caliph to
rob the women their garments and jewels and not to leave for each of
them save one dress to wear.

Terror spread. Everything shook. The invaders paid attention to no
sacreds and al-Juloody kept on achieving his task.

Ali rose to stand against the coming terror. He gathered the women in
one room and got ready to face the plunderers.

The heart of Fatima, which was the only heart that held all the pains
waving in that room, began to beat rapidly. Her memory was full of all
eternal valors…all that history over burdened with sorrow…all the bitter
moments that the woman suffered; the pains of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

He was sent under escort to Marw, the capital of al-Ma’moon at that
time. He died in the way when coming back to Baghdad in mysterious
circumstances. Al-Ma’moon attended the funerals. Refer to Murooj
ath-Thahab, vol.3 p.439.  
 **[52]** The progeny of Abu Talib (Imam Ali’s father).  
 **[53]** Tareekh Baghdad, vol.2 p.113.

Khadeeja, the emigration of Fatima and the sorrows of Zaynab.**[54]**

The storm was still whistling with rage wanting to pluck up a good tree,
whose root is firm and whose branches are in the Heaven.

Fatima, while pondering on the totters of the past, heard a dialogue
near the door. A voice with harshness of executioners said:

“I just carry out the order of the caliph.”

A calm voice replied: “If your aim is to rob the women, I will do that
for you.”

The harsh voice said: “How can I be certain that you will do that? The
orders of the caliph state that the women must be robbed of their
garments and jewels except one dress.”

The angelic voice said: “I swear that I will do that.”

Al-Juloodi looked at the Alawite man and saw in his eyes determination
and firmness as if he was a mountain. He thought that if he broke into
the house, he would pay the price so expensively and the public
situation might break out. He had never met during his life a man
standing so calmly before drawn swords. He saw many men bowing before
him and their eyes shone with fright and fear. But now he found himself
before a man of another kind…a man, whose eyes led to a bottom flooded
with peace!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[54]** Khadeeja was the Prophet’s wife, Fatima was his daughter and
Zaynab was Imam Ali’s daughter, who had accompanied her brother Imam
Husayn (s) when was martyred on the day of Aashura’.

Al-Juloodi made a sign to his soldiers to retreat and turned towards the
man, who was about fifty years old, saying:

“I am waiting.”

Ali went into the yard of the house and then to a room in one of its
corners. He looked at the women and young girls.

The little hearts beat rapidly listening to the neighing of mad horses.

Fatima knew what was there inside her brother’s heart. The most
difficult thing to a man was to rob a woman her jewels…to snatch her
earrings, necklace and bracelets from her wrists.

Therefore Fatima advanced to destroy those bitter moments. She pulled
out her own earrings and necklace, drew her hands out of her silver
bracelets and offered them to her brother. Soon the rest of the women
did the same one after the other. The garments and jewels heaped in
Ali’s hands. He went with them to the wolves awaiting at the threshold.

Such the yellow storm passed thinking that it had pulled out everything
standing in its way. It did not care about the violet flowers that
spread here and there sending fragrance into the wide space without
being paid attention by anyone.

In that winter night, while al-Juloodi was going away from the house,
Fatima sat to talk to the women, who had gathered around her expecting
her warm sacred words. She said:

“Fatima bint Ja’far bin Muhammad as-Sadiq told me from Fatima bint Ali
bin al-Husayn from Fatima bint

al-Husayn bin Ali from Umm Kulthoom that her mother Fatima, the
Prophet’s daughter (s), had said:

“Have you forgotten the saying of the messenger of Allah on the day of
Ghadeer Khum “Whomsoever I am his guardian, Ali is to be his guardian”
and his saying (to Ali) “You are to me as was Aaron to Moses…”**[55]**

Fatima turned to a young girl and said: “O My niece, write it down lest
the heritage of the prophets is lost.”

Fatima became silent. She new that this storm coming from Marw wanted to
get rid of Ali, who was still standing against the storms of time and
whose love was still beating in the hearts of the free and the
oppressed. Therefore Fatima said:

“Fatima bint Ja’far as-Sadiq told me from Fatima bint Muhammad al-Baqir
from Fatima bint Ali bin al-Husayn from Fatima bint al-Husayn from
Zaynab bint Fatima that Fatima, the Prophet’s daughter (s) had said: “I
heard the messenger of Allah saying:

“When I had been carried to the Heavens in night, I entered into
Paradise. I saw a palace of white hollow pearl. It had a gate crowned
with pearls and corundum. There was a curtain on the gate. I raised my
head to see that it had been written above the gate: “There is no god
but Allah. Muhammad is the messenger of Allah. Ali is the guardian of
people.” On the curtain it was written: “How great! Who is like the
followers of Ali?!”

I came in and I saw a palace of hollow carnelian with a silver gate
crowned with olivine. There was a curtain on the gate. I raised my head
to see that it had been written on the gate: “Muhammad is the messenger
of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[55]** Asna al-Matalib, p.49.

Allah. Ali is the guardian of al-Mustafa**[56]**”. On the curtain it was
written: “Tell the followers of Ali of their good birth”. I came in and
saw a palace of hollow aquamarine that I had never seen more beautiful
than. It had a gate of ruby crowned with pearls. There was a curtain on
the gate. I raised my head to see that it had been written on the
curtain: “The followers of Ali are the winners”. I said: “O my beloved
Gabriel, for whom is this?”

He said: “O Muhammad! It is for your cousin and guardian Ali bin Abu
Talib…All peoples will be resurrected barefooted on the Day of
Resurrection except the Shia of Ali. People will be called with the
names of their mothers except the Shia of Ali, who will be called with
the names of their fathers.”

I said: “O my beloved Gabriel, what for?”

He said: “They love Ali; therefore their end will be good.”**[57]**

A fountain of divine love flowed to fill the hearts with joy and the
souls with pellucidity.

Life becomes unbearable hell if the real hope of a better tomorrow that
is full of light and spring beauty disappears.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[56]** Al-Mustafa is one of the Prophet’s surnames.  
 **[57]** Kitab al-Musalsalat, p.250.

### (3)

The scene of sunset was generous with its transparent colors; orange,
golden and red like a winter hearth full of firebrands. The sky seemed
calm but there was some scattered clouds moving slowly as sleepy boats
in a calm lake.

The wind of autumn roved through the houses and told of the coming of a
long cold winter.

Fatima was pondering on her brother’s face. She had never seen him so
depressed as in this evening. As if he was burdened with mountains of
sorrows. She did not know why the old scenes…the very old scenes when
her father was taken and she believed that she would not see him again
had come to her mind! She might know that through her brother’s face,
which seemed at that moment as a sky burdened with sad rain.

The letter that Imam ar-Redha (s) had received was like honey mixed with
poison. It was like a smooth adder brimful of deadly poisons.

Al-Fadhl bin Sahl**[58]** knew how to dodge between the lines. It was an
ambiguous letter from the highest official in the state asking him to
leave Yathrib

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[58]** He was the vizier of al-Ma’moon.

(Medina) as soon as possible to assume his responsibility in the
caliphate.**[59]**

Fatima asked herself about the secret of her brother’s sadness. She was
conscious of the worries of her brother, who was pondering on the far
extents where all the pains and dreams of the prophets were shaped.

There was no doubt that al-Ma’moon had known the source of the real
challenge. He found that a personality like Imam ar-Redha (s) would
uncover to the public opinion the extent of the moral corruption of the
rulers besides that the farness between Medina and Marw would give Imam
ar-Redha (s) some freedom to act and this would be dangerous to the
rule, which was still shaking under the effects of the disturbances and
revolts.

Sending for Imam ar-Redha (s) to go to Marw meant that al-Ma’moon hit
tens of birds with one stone.

Imam ar-Redha (s) murmured with a sad voice: “Al-Ma’moon wants to tell
people that Ali bin Musa (Imam ar-Redha) (s) has not abstained from this
worldly life but the life has abstained from him. Have you seen how he
hastened to Marw when life was offered to him? But how far! I do not
accept any of his offers.”

Fatima knew that her brother had confronted the fox of the Abbasids, who
was full of deceit and cunning. She knew that from the sadness of Imam
ar-Redha (s) and the news she heard.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[59]** The Political Life of Imam ar-Redha by Ja’far Murtadha
al-Aamily, p.446.

The love that her brother had among the people of Khurasan and its
outskirts no one else had. If al-Ma’moon put him in the rule, it would
give him allegiance of many districts and by this al-Ma’moon would prove
to the nation that he had achieved the best hopes of people.

A servant knocked at the door saying: “A man says that he is Raja’ bin
ad-Dhahhak. He wants to meet you now.”

Imam ar-Redha (s) turned to his sister and said: “This is a man sent by
al-Ma'moon with what I dislike. We belong to Allah and to Him we shall
return!”

Imam ar-Redha (s) got up to receive the man and Fatima left the room.

As Raja’ sat down, he offered a sealed letter from al-Ma'moon. Imam
ar-Redha (s) opened the letter and took a look at it. A sign of sorrow
appeared on his forehead. The light of the lamp was enough for Raja’ to
discover the depth of the ordeal on Ali’s face. He assumed to be glad
and said:

“O my master, congratulations!”

Imam ar-Redha (s) replied while looking to the far horizon:

“Do not be glad. It is a thing that will not be completed.”

Raja’ became silent for this Alawite man was different from many of the
revolters, whom he had met. He was before a man reading ambiguous pages
of the future. In fact he understood what was waving inside Ali’s self
because Raja’ knew well the intents of al-Ma'moon and

many secrets of his plan! Therefore he got up rapidly assuming to be
happy by carrying out his task.

He said while bowing respectfully: “Everything will be ready after
tomorrow.”

Imam ar-Redha (s) said: “If it must be, then first we go to Mecca and
then to Marw.”

Raja’ said: “As you like, my master!”

The brown face was covered with divine sorrow. Something was burning
inside him. Something informed of tearing roots of a flower planted in a
good soil.

Nothing is bitterer than to pull out a tree with its roots…Thus was the
sorrow of the man, who had been touched by the Heaven. His roots had
been extended into the good soil tens of years until that moment when
the Messenger of the Heaven had put his feet in Yathrib.

The traces of Gabriel were still in those quarters, whose date-palms,
mosque and beloved mountain were blessed.**[60]**

Ali turned his mind upon his calamity and the lamp was ejecting its last
faint lights.

The Medinian**[61]** man (Imam ar-Redha) woke up from a deep pondering
when a boy of seven years entered the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[60]** The prophetic tradition says: “Uhud is a mountain that loves us
and we love.” Refer to the Mission of Islam, Muhammad, the messenger of
Allah. P.261.  
 **[61]** From Medina.

room.**[62]** He was carrying a vessel having some oil because the lamp
was about to go out. Muhammad began to pour the oil into the lamp. The
lamp breathed and the circle of light became more and more.

The sad father noticed his son, who came in walking on his toes
regarding his father’s pondering, in the room. The father got up
welcoming Abu Ja’far**[63]** and tens of stars shone in the sky of his
eyes.

The son bowed to kiss his father’s hand. The father did not give his son
time and embraced him as the leaves when embracing a new bud in its
first spring.

The lamp recovered its youth and began to send its light and warmth in
the little room.

The father said when a part of night had passed: “O my son, get ready to
travel.”

The son asked: “O father, whereto?”

The father said: “To the Old House (the Kaaba).”

The boy wanted to remove from his father’s heart a grief depressing him.
He said:

“Is it hajj or minor hajj?”

The father said: “I have been ordered to travel.”

The son said: “O my father! Do what you are commanded. If Allah wills,
you will find me of the patient ones.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[62]** The Life of Imam Ali ar-Redha by Baqir Shareef al-Qarashi,
vol.2 p.278.  
 **[63]** He is Muhammad the son of Imam ar-Redha (s). He is the ninth
imam of the Shia. His surname is al-Jawad.

Muhammad got up as he came in on his toes leaving his father, who
returned to another pondering.

He, who watched his shining eyes and followed in their bottoms the
reflections of light, would know the secret of that divine sorrow. As if
his sharp mind swam in the far horizons to Tooss where Jabir bin Hayyan
al-Kufi**[64]** had inhaled his last breaths and where Abul Saraya had
been crucified on the bridge in Baghdad…and to the banks of the Tigris
where Ma’roof al-Karkhi**[65]** used to sit pondering on the flowing
waves and to farewell the life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[64]** He was born in Tooss (in Khurasan-Iran)-and it was said in
Tarsoos- about 128 A.H. He was skilled in chemistry. He learned this
science from his teacher Imam Ja’far bin Muhammad as-Sadiq (s). Jabir
said in his philosophical book AL-HASIL: “…it is a book of measures and
is considered as one of the philosophical books. I have titled it as
Kitab al-Hasil because my master Ja’far bin Muhammad (as-Sadiq) peace be
upon him, said to me: “What is the result (hasil) now after these books
of measures and weights and what is the use of them?” I said: “The use
is the science of the big formulations…” I wrote this book and my master
called it as Kitab al-Hasil. It is of the science of measures
(formulas). It is clear and does not need other than it to be
understood. Such I have been ordered by my master (peace be upon him).
Refer to Studies on the History of Sciences among the Arabs,
p.249-252.  
 **[65]** Abu Mahfoodh Ma’roof bin Fayrooz al-Karkhi (ascribed to
al-Karkh in Baghdad). He was a Christian and then turned a Muslim by
Imam Ali bin Musa ar-Redha (s) and then his parents became Muslims. He
was known of asceticism and piety. People visited him to be blessed.
Among those, who used to visit him for blessing, was Ahmad bin Hanbal.
Refer to Al-A’lam, vol.8 p.185, Wafiyyatul A’yan, vol.5 p.231, Tareekh
Baghdad, vol.13 p.199.

He might watch (the Battle of the River) at the shores of (Aroon) or he
might come down to the bottoms of the valleys with his brother Ibraheem,
who had fled to Yemen and his news were unknown.

No one knew the distresses of the Medinian man…distresses as heavy as
the mountains of Tehama, al-Hijaz and Najd.**[66]**

There in Marw the spider wove its house, which was the weakest of
houses.**[67]**

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[66]** Tehama, Hijaz and Najd are places in Arabia.  
 **[67]** No one of the Alawites, who had gone to Marw, came back. All
of them were killed in ambiguous circumstances.

### (4)

In that cloudy morning Medina seemed as a place of ghosts. The houses
lost their joy. The lanes were covered with grief especially that lane
where the camels had knelt down to carry those, who determined to travel
unwillingly.

The man of the fifty years entered the mosque of the Prophet (s) with
his son, who followed him as his shadow. The sky was burdened with
clouds. Some tears gathered in this Medinian man’s eyes. He stopped
before the tomb, which contained the last of the prophets. The man with
the white cloths seemed as a sad cloud.

Those, who attended the meeting, were astonished at the tears of
Muhammad’s grandson. The sorrow was as a rivulet flowing in autumn. Ali
inhaled the fragrance of prophethood. He controlled himself to get up.
He stepped one step backward and then fell down to the pure place again
as if his roots were planted in that soil where Muhammad (s) had closed
his eyes peacefully.

A man from Sajistan**[68]** approached and said: “O my master,
congratulations on what you are going to be!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[68]** A province in Iran.

Imam ar-Redha (s) said: “Let me alone! I am going away from the
neighborhood of my grandfather to die there in desolation.”**[69]**

The man became astonished and made his mind to accompany the Imam to see
by himself how his predicts would become real.

Muhammad put his small warm hand on his father’s shoulder and the father
got up as if new blood flowed in his interiors and a new hope refreshed
in his entity.

Fatima watched what happened. There was something tying her to her
brother. It was not the tie of brotherhood. She lived the ordeal of her
orphancy twenty years ago when her father had been taken and had never
come back again and the death of her mother while she was a child yet.

Fatima stopped and the ordeals of the bad time came to her mind. She saw
how the bad time snatched her darlings as if the years and days were mad
wolves snatching the livestock of her dreams while grazing peacefully in
the green valley.

A sacred anger exploded inside her heart…in that beating part, which
summarized the entire world.

Imam ar-Redha (s) got up touching the pure tomb with his hand and
embracing his son, whom Allah had granted wisdom while yet a child. He
said to his son:

“I have ordered all my guardians and followers to listen to you and to
obey you. I have told my close companions about you.”**[70]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[69]** A’yan ash-Shia, vol.4 p.122.  
 **[70]** The Life of Imam ar-Redha, vol.2 p.287.

The camels got up. The caravan arranged and moved southward to the
Kaaba.

When the caravan passed (Thaniyyatul Wada’) the Medinian man said to his
son while dialoguing with him:

“The friend of everyone is his mind and the enemy of him is his
ignorance.”**[71]**

“The best of intelligence is knowing oneself.”**[72]**

“From among the signs of understanding there are; discernment, knowing
and silence. Silence is a gate of wisdom…silence brings love…it is a
guide to every goodness.”**[73]**

Yassir, who was the servant of Imam ar-Redha (s), came near and heard
the Imam saying:

“Man becomes most desolate in three positions; the day when he is born
and he comes out to see the world, the day when he dies and sees the
afterlife and its people and the day when is resurrected to see
judgments that he has never seen in the worldly life. Allah has saluted
Yahya (Prophet John) in these three positions and calmed his fear by
saying:

And peace on him on the day he was born, and on the day he dies, and on
the day he is raised to life.**[74]**”**[75]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[71]** Usool al-Kafi, vol.1 p.11, Wassa’il ash-Shia, vol.11 p.161.  
 **[72]** A’yan ash-Shia, vol.4 p.196.  
 **[73]** Usool al-Kafi, vol.2 p.24.  
 **[74]** Qur’an, 19:15.  
 **[75]** Noor al-Absar, p.140.

Some whiffs blew from the north carrying with them a humming of a
shepherd complaining the time.

The caravan went on crossing the desert until it reached (Ghadeer Khum).
The travelers stopped near a spring, whose water went out from under a
rock and flowed into a wide valley. Some date-palms had grown because
travelers often stopped here to rest and to have their food, among which
dates were.**[76]**

The full moon shone from above the far hills. The man of fifty years
pointed with a brown finger and said:

“That is the place when the messenger of Allah has stopped to say:
“Whomever I am his guardian, here is Ali to be his guardian. O Allah,
assist whoever assists him and be the enemy of whoever opposes
him!”**[77]**

The old memories revived and the travelers were filled with reverence as
if they were listening to the Prophet (s) making his speech in this
place. The holy words were still roving in the space. The fragrance of
Gabriel was still emitting while reciting the word of Allah:

This day have I perfected for you your religion and completed My favor
on you and chosen for you Islam as a religion**[78]**.**[79]**

Ali turned to his sister, who was looking at the moon on the far hills,
and said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[76]** The Way to Ghadeer Khum, p.9.  
 **[77]** Ibid.  
 **[78]** Qur’an, 5:3.  
 **[79]** Mustadrakul Wassa’il, vol.10 p.368, Uyoon Akhbar ar-Redha,
vol.2 p.267.

“I have heard my father narrating from my grandfather as-Sadiq his
saying: “Allah has a sanctum. It is Mecca. The Prophet has a sanctum. It
is Medina. Ameerul mo’mineen has a sanctum. It is Kufa. And we also have
a sanctum. It is the village of Qom, in which a woman from my progeny
called Fatima will be buried. Whoever visits her will be in Paradise.”

The young boy (Muhammad) looked at his aunt, who was still looking at
the moon in a state as if she was offering the prayer. She was
standstill in her place while the whiffs were playing with the hems of
her garment, which touched the brownness of the desert.

In that blessed spot of the world of Allah a fountain of prayers broke
out. The words of praising and thanking Allah, the Creator of the earth
and the heavens, shone through the dreamy darkness of the sunset. Little
by little the stars appeared in the sky.

Some of them went to collect firewood. The sound of breaking the dry
branches of the trees broke with it the silence of night.

After a short time two hearths lit through the darkness; one for cooking
and the other for light and warmth. Some boys went toward a dune made by
the wind to take it as a stage for their innocent playing.

 

### (5)

The news of joy flew to the capitals and cities like butterflies
announcing the coming of spring.

In Yathrib, the city of the Prophet (s), Abdul Jabbar al-Masaheeqi
ascended the minbar in the holy mosque to announce loudly:

“O people, this is the thing you have wished, the justice you have
expected and the goodness you have hoped. This is Ali bin Musa bin
Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Ali bin al-Husayn bin Ali bin Abu Talib…six,
whose fathers are the best of people.”**[80]**

But in Baghdad the volcano of the Abbasid spite awakened and the
dragon**[81]** rose. The Abbasids rose with him and announced to depose
al-Ma'moon and his heir apparent.

Baghdad fell in disturbance after the caliphate was despised to be as a
toy in the hands of the singer ibn Shukla, who had not known save
playing lute.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[80]** Al-Iqd al-Fareed, vol.5 p.226.  
 **[81]** It was Ibraheem bin al-Mahdi (the Abbasid), who was known as
ibn Shukla. He was surnamed as (the dragon) because of his corpulence.
Shukla was his mother. She was a black bondmaid. Refer to Wafiyyatul
A’yan, vol.1 p.20.

In a short time anarchy and corruption spread in all of Baghdad. The
streets became under the control of thieves and robbers. Stealing and
adultery spread widely.

Public groups were formed to enjoin the right and to forbid the wrong in
order to resist the corruption.

In Kufa fighting broke out between the followers of the Abbasids and the
followers of al-Ma'moon whereas Mecca received the news from Marw
joyfully.

Soon the resistance stopped because of the popularity of Imam ar-Redha
(s). Baghdad became separated from the other provinces except Kufa,
which was under the control of Baghdad.

The month of Thul Qa’da was about to elapse. The clouds of spring
appeared in the sky and then they were swept away by a northern wind.
The rain did not bring good news about a fertile season because it
didn’t rain along the winter and spring did not bring except a few
drizzles, which did not nourish nor released from hunger.

Al-Ma'moon did not think about going to offer the hajj. Some people
remembered the words that had been said by Imam ar-Redha (s) in Mecca
many years ago when ar-Rasheed was circumambulating the Kaaba:

“Haroon (ar-Rasheed) is the last one of this family (the Abbasids), who
offers the hajj.”**[82]**

Thul Qa’da gathered up its last days and the crescent of Thul Hijja
appeared in the sky. The crescent appeared like a smile in the middle of
the sky, in which some sad

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[82]** The Life of Imam ar-Redha.

clouds scattered here and there. In the second night it became as a
straying boat crossing the sky rapidly.

While the Muslims were circumambulating the Kaaba, the cities near Basra
received silently the news of the revolution of the Negroes and other
news about killing and plundering.

Medina lived those days looking to the future hopefully.

An honorable house was there, whose windows lit with transparent light…a
house, in which the family of Ali lived. An honorable letter came from
Marw. It was from Abul Hasan (Imam ar-Redha) and it was in the name of
Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful:

“May I sacrifice myself for you! I have been informed that when you ride
your sumpter, the mawali**[83]** make you go out from the small gate of
the garden. It is because of stinginess in them lest no one (of people)
may get some goodness from you!

I ask you with my right upon you…do not come in or go out except from
the big gate.

When you ride your sumpter inshallah, let some gold and silver be with
you. No one asks you for something unless you give him. If one of your
uncles asks you to be pious to him, do not give him less than fifty
dinars and you may give him more if you want. If one of your aunts asks
you, do not give her less than fifty dinars and you may give her more if
you want. If someone of Quraysh**[84]** asks you, do not give him less
than twenty-five dinars and you may give him more if you want.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[83]** Mawla means a freed slave. Mawali is the plural form.  
 **[84]** Quraysh was the greatest tribe in Mecca.

I just want Allah to make you succeed, so fear Allah and give and do not
fear stinginess from Allah.”**[85]**

In that night Fatima was crying for her brother because she was the only
one, who understood his ordeal. The position of the (heir apparent), of
which the Alawites became delightful, was just a house woven by a
spider. Her brothers Ahmad, Muhammad and Husayn and some of her cousins
thought of going to Marw. A new era had come. The emigrants returned to
their countries and families. The hidden and pursued people appeared.

Fatima listened to the document of the (position of) heir apparent when
it had been written in the mosque of the Prophet especially the part
that her brother Imam ar-Redha (s) had written. She found that it
aroused hopes that her brother was trying his best to revive this
straying nation to the right path.

It was the meaning of his saying: “…and I have made Allah upon my self
that he has entrusted me with the affairs of the Muslims and invested me
with His caliphate to achieve their affairs in obeying Him and obeying
His messenger…and to choose the best as possible as I can.”

Fatima would not leave her brother alone. She would travel to him. She
would ask her nephew for some money to be able to travel to Marw.

People became delighted when Imam ar-Redha (s) had been appointed as the
heir apparent. The Alawites felt safe and there was no fear any longer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[85]** The Life of Imam ar-Redha, vol.2 p.334.

Fatima got up to offer the prayer in her mihrab. Thus she did whenever
obsessions came to her mind.

Allah, glory be to Him, was the only One, Who knew what griefs was there
inside that gentle and pure heart. She would not tolerate more than
that. There was something pulling her to Marw or to a point that she did
not know where!

 

 

 

### (6)

Fatima would not be able to tolerate more than this. Her heart was in
Marw…in that city of the Far East. The news coming from Baghdad showed
that the situation had been very bad and her brother faced the world
alone and no one was with him.

The letter she received recently swept away all the obstacles that
prevented her traveling. It aroused in her a determination that could
not be resisted!

The letter was not sent to Fatima alone even it appeared as a personal
letter. Imam ar-Redha (s) suffered his ordeal alone. The Abbasids would
not be quiet as long as Imam ar-Redha (s) was the heir apparent and
al-Ma'moon would not be able to resist long. Moreover she could not
trust in this caliph, who had killed his brother a short time ago and
committed massacres against the innocent. The bloods of the revolters in
Kufa and Mecca had not dried yet.

She knew her brother well. He farewelled Medina with tears. So the
letter looked like a call for help uttered by an oppressed man…a man
trying to correct the path of history.

The phenomenon of emigration in the human life will remain as one of the
most important human phenomena in history. Even it appears as just quiet

protest against oppression and injustice, yet it is considered as a
great event and as a beginning of a new age in the life of man.

In a dawn of one of the last days of Safar while the moon was in wane, a
caravan with some of the Alawites, in front of whom were the brothers of
Imam ar-Redha (s); Ahmad, Muhammad and Husayn, set out. The number of
the travelers in the caravan became three thousands when it left Medina.
The camels set towards Basra then to Shiraz**[86]** and then to Kirman
“if the wind flew as the ships liked”.

No one knew why this desert way had been chosen! Had the brothers of
Imam ar-Redha (s) liked to gather a great number of men as much as they
could throughout the way?!

The caravan grew bigger and bigger. The men of some cities and villages
joined the caravan moving towards Marw in a thorny way full of dunes and
dangers.

When the caravan arrived at Shiraz, the number of its travelers became
five times more.**[87]**

As for the caravan of Fatima, it moved toward Kufa through a way passing
through some mountains then the desert of Najd to Rafha**[88]** and then
to Kufa to cross the Euphrates toward the East through the mountains of
Hamadan after some curves between very high ranges of mountains.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[86]** A’yan ash-Shia, vol.3 p.192.  
 **[87]** Ibid.  
 **[88]** Najd and Rafha are places in Arabia.

And thus the caravan set about carrying twenty-two Alawites headed by a
girl called Fatima and her brothers Haroon, Fadhl, Ja’far and Qassim.

In every village or city on the way, the caravan stopped and Fatima
talked about the glory of Ali…Ali, whose name had become as a banner of
revolution, a signpost of justice and epitome of honor and freedom.

Those, who looked forward to the green tomorrow, had to join the caravan
of Ali, which had set out in the dawn from the mihrab of Kufa.

Fatima said: “Our (grand) mother Fatima (s) said:

“I have heard the Prophet (s) saying: “It is written on the curtain: How
great! Who is like the Shia of Ali!”

Our mother Fatima (s) said too: “The Prophet (s) said: “Whoever dies on
loving the Prophet’s family, will die as a martyr.”

Also she said: “Have you forgotten the saying of the Prophet (s) on the
day of Ghadeer Khum: “Whoever I am his guardian, here is Ali to be his
guardian” and his saying (to Ali): “You are to me as was Aaron to
Moses.”

Ah! O you, the Day of al-Ghadeer! You are a day of the days of Allah!
How have you been omitted from memory to be lost and then all the
beautiful things have been lost with you?! You are an Eid that has been
martyred since it has been born! Is that because you have become a
symbol for the day of the Imam and an Eid for the Imamate?!

Fatima was drowned into a tragedy that she did not know its secrets. How
was the truth defeated and why?! Why did people walk in the way of evils
looking for happiness in dark valleys full of snakes and adders?

Why did Baghdad become so mad when it heard the news that Imam ar-Redha
(s) had become the heir apparent? Did Baghdad decline to this extent
until it became like “Sodom”?**[89]**

Fatima’s soul was moved by words said by her brother in moments full of
prophets’ anger. When the umma had forgotten the words of the Heaven
revealed in Ghadeer Khum, the words of her brother when arguing with his
friend were still like fireflies scattering darkness:

“O Abdul Aziz, the people have ignored and have been deceived by their
opinions. Allah has not made His messenger (s) die until He has
perfected the religion and revealed the Qur'an to detail everything;
permissible and impermissible things, judgements and penalties and every
thing that people might need in their lives. Allah has said:

"We have not neglected anything in the Book."**[90]**

And He has revealed to His messenger in the last (farewell) hajj this
verse:

"This day have I perfected for you your religion and completed My favor
on you and chosen for you Islam as a religion."**[91]**

Definitely the matter of the imamate is from the religion and that
religion is not perfected without it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[89]** Sodom was the village, whose people had disbelieved in Prophet
Lot (s) and wanted to drive him away because he had glorified the purity
of man.  
 **[90]** Qur'an, 6 :38.  
 **[91]** Qur'an, 5:3.

The Prophet (s), before leaving to the better world, has declared to his
umma the principles of their religion and has showed them the straight
path and the clear truth. He has appointed to them Ali as the imam. He
has not left anything that the umma need unless he has declared it to
them.

Then whoever claims that Allah has not perfected His religion denies the
Book of Allah and so he becomes unbeliever.

Do they know the importance of the imamate and its position to the umma
so that they determine as they like?

The imamate is much more important, greater in position, higher in rank,
more impervious and profounder than to be perceived by their own minds
or to be refuted by their own opinions or that they themselves appoint
the imam according to their fancies.

The imamate is a divine position that Allah has favored Abraham (s) with
after prophethood then He has honored him with companionship thirdly.

Allah has said:

###### "Surely I will make you an Imam of men."**[92]**

Abraham said delightfully:

###### "And of my offspring?"**[93]**

Then Allah has said:

###### "My covenant does not include the unjust."**[94]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[92]** Qur'an, 2:124.  
 **[93]** Ibid.  
 **[94]** Ibid.

So this verse has annulled every imamate of every unjust one until the
Day of Resurrection…

The imamate has been still in Abraham’s progeny inherited by one after
the other and age after age until it has been inherited by Prophet
Muhammad (s). Allah has said:

###### "Most surely the nearest of people to Ibrahim are those who followed him and this Prophet and those who believe and Allah is the guardian of the believers."**[95]**

Then the Prophet (s) has entrusted Ali (s) with it (the imamate)
according to the order of Allah and then it has been inherited by Ali’s
pure progeny, whom Allah has granted faith, knowledge and wisdom as He
has said:

###### "And those who are given knowledge and faith will say: Certainly you tarried according to the ordinance of Allah till the Day of Resurrection."**[96]**

The imamate has been limited to the progeny of Ali (s) until the Day of
Resurrection because there is no prophet after Muhammad (s). Then how
can these ignorants choose the imam?

The imam is like raining clouds, like the shining sun, like the shady
sky, like plain ground, like a flowing fountain, like a brook and a
garden.

The imam is the trustee of Allah among His people, is like a close
companion, a kind father, a good brother…”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[95]** Qur'an, 3:68.  
 **[96]** Qur'an, 30:56.

Tears gathered in Fatima’s eyes. She cried for the umma that was still
going too far in straying to drown into a sea of darkness.

The caravan was still making its way to reach the outskirts of Sawa
through a wavy land, in which the caravans had drawn curled lines.

 

 

 

 

### (7)

The caravan that had set out towards Shiraz reached Khan Zeinan. It was
a big caravan of fifteen thousand persons willing to go to Marw but the
fate was lying in wait for them.

The caravan, which had stopped to rest, was surprised by a big army of
forty thousand soldiers! Qatlagh Khan, the ruler of Shiraz, appeared
wearing a skin of a tiger.

In a place of twenty-two miles away from Shiraz the ruler shouted
harshly:

“Where do you want to go?”

Ahmad replied: “We want to go to Marw.”

His brother Muhammad said: “We want to meet our brother ar-Redha. No one
has blocked our way. Here is the permission of travel!”

The ruler said: “It may be as you say but we have orders from the caliph
to prevent you from traveling to Marw.”

Then he shouted loudly to be heard by the all: “Go back to where you
have come from!”

The brothers kept calm to discuss the matter between themselves to take
a decision. The ruler of Shiraz was taken by vanity. He ordered his
knights to do an ostentatious move around the caravan to frighten the
travelers.

The ground around the caravan shook and dust rose. The hoofs of the
horses leveled the ground.

Ahmad said to his brothers: “What do you think?”

Muhammad al-Aabid said: “We have passed hundreds of miles. Our brother
(Imam ar-Redha) has invited us to come and surely he does not do that
without the permission of al-Ma'moon.”

Husayn said: “How do we go back and leave our brother alone?”

Ahmad said: “We keep on our way. If they block our way, then the final
word will be of the sword.”

In the next day the caravan moved toward the east.

The leader of the army shouted threateningly: “Go back to where you have
come from!”

The travelers said: “If we do not do?!”

He said: “It will be your end.”

They said: “You are worse than the highwaymen.”

The harsh-hearted leader gave his order to attack the caravan. The
camels knelt down and brave men got down.

Violent clashes happened. The swords shone through the dust like
thunderbolts celebrating on a mad land. The brave men fought
courageously. The neighing of the horses reminded of a fierce battle
that had happened near the bank of the Euphrates.

The harsh-hearted leader used the weapon of deceit when he shouted: “If
your aim is to visit your brother, (your brother) ar-Redha has died.”

The rumor acted upon them and despair slipped into the hearts that had
dreamt of the meeting.

The brothers began their deliberation. It was not easy to risk the lives
of those people. They declared their agreement to cease fighting. While
the caravan was getting ready to go back, the three brothers fled toward
Shiraz and hid there. The ruler of Shiraz gave his order to arrest them.

And there at hundreds of miles were another caravan moving toward
ar-Riyy. It had reached Sawa on the mountainous way, which led to
Khurasan.

The autumn wind of October had divested the gardens of pomegranate of
their bright greenness and given them a color of reddish orange.

The orders coming from Marw were clear and firm. They had decided to
block the way before the Alawites, who were going to Khurasan.

What was expected took place. Some forces of the police clashed with the
Alawites. The men, “whom neither merchandise nor selling diverts from
the remembrance of Allah and the keeping up of prayer” showed extreme
courage.

Fatima looked with regret and sorrow at the killed beloved Haroon,
al-Qassim, Ja’far, al-Fadhl and some of her nephews. It was a scene like
the scenes of Kerbala’.**[97]**

Fatima fell down to the ground, which was dyed with the bloods of the
innocent. When she opened her eyes,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[97]** Kerbala’ is a place in Iraq, where Imam Husayn (s), his family
and companions have been martyred in 61 A.H.

she found herself in the middle of crying women. It was the noon. Far
azan streamed sadly and movingly:

“I witness that Muhammad is the messenger of Allah”

Fatima said sorrowfully: “Where are you O, my grandfather, to see what
has happened to your progeny?!”

When she wanted to get up to offer the prayer, her faint body could not
carry her soul, which was getting ready to leave for a world faraway
from the misfortunes of this earth and the evils of man.

There was the girl of twenty-eight years standing alone in the middle of
the way between Medina and Marw. Neither she could return nor could she
keep on her way.

She began to melt like a candle at the end of a long winter night.

In the memory of Fatima some traditions that she had heard in her
childhood and youth shone. She still remembered her father when saying:

“Qom is the home of Muhammad’s progeny and the shelter of their
Shia.”**[98]**

She had heard her brother saying:

“If seditions spread in the countries, you are to resort to Qom and its
surroundings because afflictions do not include it.”**[99]**

Once again she had heard him narrating from her grandfather Imam
as-Sadiq (s):

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[98]** Biharul Anwar, vol.60 p.214.  
 **[99]** Ibid.

“The soil of Qom is sacred. Its people are from us and we are from them.
No arrogant tries to do wrong to them, unless his punishment is hastened
on him as long as they do not betray their brothers. If they do that,
Allah will empower bad arrogants to rule them.”**[100]**

A divine light lit in her heart and the words of her grandfather
as-Sadiq shone when saying:

###### “We have a sanctum. It is the village of Qom. A woman from my progeny called Fatima will be buried in it.”**[101]**

Because of this Fatima asked:

“How far is it to Qom?”

“Forty miles.” It was said.

She said while a hope of meeting shone in her heart:

“Take me to it!”

When the caravan took its way toward Qom, Fatima felt she was going to a
good land and forgiving Lord.

Her weak body was melting under the burden of fever but her soul was
shining like a shining star. In every station in the way she asked about
some of her brothers, who had disappeared after the fighting. She wished
they kept on their way to Marw in order to meet their brother.

But the news she had heard were not pleasant. The news of ar-Redha were
unknown and there were other news talking about his griefs and
loneliness and about

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[100]** Ibid.  
 **[101]** Mustadrakul Wassa’il, vol.10 p.368.

the sufferings of his Shia whenever they wanted to meet him!

Qom was the store of the brave men and the home of Muhammad’s progeny so
she might, when arriving there, be able to do something for her alone
brother!

And her brothers might come to visit her in Qom…or they might live in
this good village…perhaps!

 

 

 

### (8)

As the little caravan was about to reach the Mountain of Salt, the news
of the coming of Muhammad’s granddaughter spread in Qom…Like a butterfly
informing of the coming of spring the happy news roved through the
houses of the small village.

The caravan passed across the Mountain of Salt about twenty miles from
Qom and stopped at (Khan al-Qawafil) caravansary.

Fatima suffered her illness but her unsubdued will made her so
determined to reach that good land.

Fatima asked with a faint voice: “How much distance remained (to Qom)?”

A young girl replied: “Some miles, O my lady. This khan is the last
station on the way.”

The past events and days lit in her memory…old and new scenes, which the
last one of was that bloody scene at the boundaries of Sawa. She had
seen the killing of those sincere men…burning of butterflies in the
middle of firestorm…she saw the killing of her brother Haroon. She saw
how the human wolves attacked him while he was eating a bite of bread to
support him to be ready for the last round.

But she did not see her brothers al-Fadhl and Ja’far!

A hope flourished in her heart like a rivulet, whose water flowed on its
banks, or like a pure stream, which granted its nectar to the
butterflies and flowers on its way.

The people of Qom went out to receive the daughter of the divine
missions. Women and men were waiting for the daughter of Imam al-Kadhim
(s) and the sister of Imam ar-Redha (s) and looking at the way of the
caravans…the sun would shine from the north!

An Ash’arite man**[102]** leaned against a wall of an old castle, whose
history belonged to Anushirvan. He was an Arab sheikh. He had heard
during his youth traditions from Imam as-Sadiq (s)…traditions looking
like prophecies. He was looking at the way, which appeared to him as
full of crystals. The tears in his eyes changed the seen objects into
scattered crystals and pearls!...Tears that he did not know their
meaning…tears of joy or sorrow…joy of receiving the daughter of the
mission or sorrow for the children of the prophets, who spread in the
earth here and there like a rough sea scattering pearls and shells or
like a sky dispersing its young stars on the earth!

An eagle-eyed man shouted: “There is a caravan coming!”

A vision appeared in the far horizon and little by little the image of
the camels, which were like calm boats streaming towards the banks,
cleared.

A young girl shouted joyfully: “Fatima has come!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[102]** Musa bin Khazraj al-Ash’ari.

The hearts submitted to the shining name of the head of the ladies;
Fatima az-Zahra’ (s). It was her daughter, who had her name, a light
from her soul, features of her shining image and a memory of her as if
the pure Zahra’ had offered her to the young girls of Qom as an
excellent example in purity and straightness.

The Ash’arite man approached to take the reigns of the she-camel of
Fatima. Fatima entered the small city and the city entered into a new
gate of history. The city turned to be as a shell containing a pearl of
the human existence.

The she-camel passed through farms of vegetables and then crossed the
Salty River where there were humble houses of clay expressing the
suffering of their inhabitants because of the severity of nature,
drought and the oppression of the rulers in collecting taxes.

When Fatima entered the house of the generous man, the young girls of
Qom flocked toward the house to be blessed by serving her. Young girls
sent by their mothers or fathers to ladle from the purity, abstinence
and knowledge of Ahlul Bayt (s), whom Allah had granted wisdom and
purified a thorough purification.

Life flourished in the house and springs flowed with the Qur’an, prayers
and principles of the prophets.

The sura of Maryam (Marry) shone…Marry the pure virgin…blessed was
Fatima the daughter of Musa (al-Kadhim)…pure was the sister of ar-Redha.

A corner in one of the rooms became as mihrab and place of prayers. In
spite of the rough winds of autumn in the last days of September, the
words of Fatima brought good news about spring coming from the far
horizon. She had heard her father saying:

“There will be a man from Qom inviting people to the truth. Great masses
of People will gather with him. They will not be shaken by the violent
storms…”**[103]**

While the wind of autumn was blowing violently, the world was waving
with seditions and conspiracies, Marw was drowned into plots and Baghdad
was in anarchy, Fatima sat in her mihrab quietly and tranquilly. Her
soul shining with infinite faith glared from two large eyes like a houri
coming from far heavens.

Fatima sat talking to the people of the earth before going back to the
homeland.

Thus Fatima appeared with her luminous face surrounded by a rosy veil
and a white garment like a dove of peace.

As Ulayya,**[104]** the aunt of the caliph of Marw and the sister of the
caliph of Baghdad was singing and playful Baghdad was heedless…Baghdad,
which had appointed ibn Shukla as the caliph in order to prevent Imam
ar-Redha (s) from becoming the caliph, Fatima sat in the mihrab teaching
traditions:

“I have heard Fatima bint Ja’far as-Sadiq (s) narrating from Fatima bint
Muhammad al-Baqir (s) from Fatima bint Ali as-Sajjad (s) from Fatima
bint al-Husayn (s)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[103]** Biharul Anwar, vol.53 p.216.  
 **[104]** Ulayya bint al-Mahdi (the Abbasid caliph) and the sister of
Haroon ar-Rasheed has become famous for her singing and composing tunes.
She has been in love with one of the servants of ar-Rasheed. She has not
refrained from that even after been threatened many times by her
brother. She has died in 210 A.H. Refer to A’lam an-Nissa’, vol.3 p.335.

from Zaynab bint Ali (s) that Fatima the daughter of the Prophet (s) had
said:

“I have heard the messenger of Allah saying: “He, who dies on loving
Muhammad’s family, dies as a martyr.”**[105]**

Those holy words turned to seeds planted in that good land, which would
be the shelter of the Fatimites.**[106]**

In the nights of Rabee’ ath-Thani**[107]** and while autumn was
gathering up its few days and moving by its wind longing in the hearts
of the strangers, the hearths of winters glowed to get ready for the
long nights of cold. Sincere prayers from hearts full of loving the
Prophet (s) and his family ascended toward the Heaven so that Fatima not
to leave…this angelic soul to stay among them…but when a soul glared too
much, the human body would not be able to bear it and so it was to go
back to the Heaven after removing the dresses of clay and soil.

Thus Fatima was getting ready to leave…to leave the earth that was full
of calamities. Nothing of her springlike age remained save some
days…like a candle at the end of a long night…as a lamp sending its last
circles of transparent light…like a sun, a moon or a star just before
the setting.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[105]** Awalim al-Uloom, vol.1 p.354.  
 **[106]** Biharul Anwar, vol.60 p.214.  
 **[107]** It is the fourth month in the Islamic calendar.

### (9)

The clouds of December crowded in the sky. They drew gulfs, coasts, blue
lakes and hills of cotton. The scene of the sky became wonderful.

Fatima went to the mihrab. The weak body was unable to carry the glaring
soul, which was dazzled by the longing to leave for worlds full of
light, love and peace.

She wanted to lighten up from the elements of the earth…the earth, which
was burdened with bloods and soaked in tears. She wanted to leave for
another world, which had no grief or suffering. There was some power
pulling her upwards.

Her eyes dozed to open in another world, which would not be seen except
after man would have closed his eyes forever.

She was in a white garment like the ice on the tops or like a dove of
peace.

She flew high and high. She saw herself entering into a green world
where everything was like the color of spring. The houris of Paradise
were strutting between the eternal trees. She saw herself roving in a
colored transparent world…a world full of wings of the angels…two, three
and four.

She saw a young girl strutting in garments of brocade and sarcenet,
around whom houris circled. She found herself hastening toward her and
shouting: O, mother! Take me to you!

She began to cry in a lap full of the fragrance of Paradise. She
awakened and some tears still hanged on her eyelashes. She murmured:

O mother, take me to you!

The sky began to rain softly and quietly like the tears of Fatima when
crying silently.

The smell of the ground sprinkled with the pure water of the heaven
diffused. Fatima was melting little by little as a candle in the
darkness…the darkness of the earth in the last nights of autumn.

The women of the city understood that Fatima was about to leave. Her
voice fainted while saying to a young girl of her old:

“O sister, I would like to take a bath.”

The young girl hurried joyfully with a hope that Fatima would recover.

Fatima bathed and became pure from the filths of the earth. She put on a
new dress perfumed with the smell of camphor.

Her face shone with an angelic smile…a smile of the last moment before
leaving…a moment of love to the girls of Qom, the good city, to remain
as a dear memory.

Everyone in the house felt that this small room would witness the moment
of leaving…the leaving of the pure soul…going out of the
candles…departure of the

stars…setting of the sun that had been lighting the city of Qom for
seventeen days.**[108]**

Fatima went to her bed. This night contentment shone from her eyes,
which seemed as two windows looking at a world full of love, tranquility
and peace.

A young girl, who had accompanied Fatima in her travel from Medina,
thought that Fatima had recovered her health and the poison,**[109]**
which had been mixed for her in Sawa, had become vain.

After the dawn men, women and children came to visit the virgin of Qom.
But Fatima had gone far. She had left to the high world…the world of
peace.

They didn’t found save a bier and tears like the rain of autumn the last
night.

The Ash’arite man cried. He cried for the leaving spring…the girl that
farewelled this life alone…no father, no mother and no brother beside
her.

It was the fate that blew away with the children of Fatima az-Zahra’.
They had been scattered on the different regions of the earth and
different parts of the oppressed Islamic nation.

In the morning of the twelfth of Rabee’ ath-Thani the sun did not rise.
It remained behind the clouds, which shed their heavy tears as if the
sky was crying.

The funerals were carried out in silence and sorrow. It was autumn.
Autumn often moved the feelings of longing in the selves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[108]** The History of Qom, p.213.  
 **[109]** Qiyam Sadat Alawi (in Persian), p.168.

The departure of Fatima in that cloudy morning seemed as the departure
of all the beautiful things and the emigration of the sun.

A great procession moved and the white coffin upon the shoulders
appeared as a martyred pigeon.

The sky was still showering. The sun appeared from behind the clouds
pale and matt. The gardens of pomegranate shook off the remained yellow
leaves, which were burdened with the moisture of the rain. A flock of
emigrating birds passed. A thread of smoke rose from the middle of a
small garden of vegetables. The escorts smelt a smell of firewood.

The procession, which girls and mothers formed the greater part of, went
toward Babulan at the bank of the river, which the girl (Fatima) had
crossed toward the city (Qom).

The smell of the ground diffused where the coffin was put. A problem
appeared that no one had thought of before. Who would bring the dead
girl down in her tomb?

Some of them remembered the pious man Qadir. He was a good old man.
People new him well.

The Ash’arite man shouted: “Send for him!”

While the sky was showering its pure rain and the smell of the perfumed
soil was rising to fill the space, two veiled knights appeared from the
direction of ar-Ramla. They got down from their horses and approached
toward the coffin where the all were astonished. Were they some of her
brothers; al-Fadhl, Ja’far or al-Qassim?

One of them approached to go down into the grave. The other one carried
the coffin to put it on the hands of the first one. It was a light
coffin. It was pure. The fragrance of the pure soul confirmed that.

Blessed was Fatima. Blessed was the virgin, who had hastened to help her
brother but the time and the fate assassinated her. Pure was the virgin
of Qom.

The smell of the soil that was showered with rain diffused. It was still
showering on the place where the pure girl had slept until the Day of
Resurrection.

A heap of good soil rose about two spans. Mothers and girls gathered
around the tomb. The virgins touched the soil that was perfumed with the
fragrance of Paradise. They touched the tomb with white handkerchiefs to
be blessed and pure. The mothers shed tears silently like the rain of
autumn.

The two veiled knights rode their horses, moved toward ar-Ramla and
disappeared in the cloudy horizon as they appeared in the first time!!
