Ziyara[119] of Lady Fatima Al-ma’ssooma (s)
===========================================

Peace be upon Adam, the choice of Allah,

 

السَّلامُ على آدَمَ صفوَةِ اللهِ

peace be upon Noah, the prophet of Allah,

 

السَّلامُ على نوحٍ نَبيِّ اللهِ

peace be upon Ibraheem (Abraham), the friend of Allah,

 

السَّلامُ على إبراهيمَ خَليلِ اللهِ

peace be upon Musa (Moses), the speaker to Allah,

 

السَّلامُ على مُوسى كَليمِ اللهِ

peace be upon Eesa (Jesus), the spirit of Allah,

 

السَّلامُ على عيسى رُوحِ اللهِ

peace be upon you O messenger of Allah,

 

السَّلامُ عليكَ يا رَسولَ اللهِ

peace be upon you O the best of the creatures of Allah,

 

السَّلامُ عليكَ يا خَيرَ خَلقِ اللهِ

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[119]** Ziyara: visiting sacred places and reciting certain du’a
(invocation) as a kind of salutation.

peace be upon you O the choice of Allah,

 

السَّلامُ عليكَ يا صَفيَّ اللهِ

peace be upon you O Muhammad the son of Abdullah the last of the
prophets,

 

السَّلامُ عليكَ يا مُحَمّدُ بنَ عَبدِ اللهِ خاتَم النَّبِيِّينَ

peace be upon you O ameerul mo’mineen Ali bin Abu Talib the guardian of
the messenger of Allah,

 

السَّلامُ عليكَ يا أميرَ المُؤمنينَ عَليّ بنَ أبي طالبٍ وَصِيّ رسولِ
اللهِ

peace be upon you O Fatima the head of the ladies of the worlds,

 

السَّلامُ عليكِ يا فاطِمةُ الزهراءُ سيّدةَ نِساءِ العَالمين

peace be upon you O the two grandson of the prophet of mercy, O you the
two masters of the youths of Paradise,

 

السَّلامُ عليكُما يا سِبطَيْ نَبِيِّ الرّحْمَةِ وَسَيِّدَيْ شَبابِ أهْلِ
الجَنَّةِ

peace be upon you O Ali bin al-Husayn the master of the worshippers and
the delight of the eyes,

 

السَّلامُ عَليكَ يا عَلِيّ بنَ الحُسينِ سيّدَ العابدينَ وقُرَّةَ عَينِ
النّاظِرينَ

peace be upon you O Muhammad bin Ali al-Baqir, who have cut open
knowledge after the Prophet,

 

السَّلامُ عليكَ يا مُحَمَّد بنَ عَليٍّ باقِرَ العِلمِ بعد النّبِيِّ

peace be upon you O Ja’far bin Muhammad as-Sadiq the truthful, the
pious, the faithful,

 

السَّلامُ عليكَ يا جَعفَر بنَ مُحَمّدٍ الصّادقُ البارُّ الأمِينُ

faithful,

 

 

peace be upon you O Musa bin Ja’far the pure in utmost purity,

 

السَّلامُ عليكَ يا مُوسى بنَ جَعفَرٍ الطّاهِرُ الطُّهْرُ

peace be upon you O Ali bin Musa ar-Redha the contented,

 

السَّلامُ عليكَ يا عَليّ بنَ موسَى الرِّضا المُرتَضَى

peace be upon you O Muhammad bin Ali the pious,

 

السَّلامُ عَليكَ يا مُحَمَّدُ بنَ عَلِيٍّ التّقِيّ

peace be upon you O Ali bin Muhammad the pure,

 

السَّلامُ عليكَ يا عَليّ بنَ مُحَمَّدٍ النّقِيُّ النّاصِحُ الأمِينُ

peace be upon you O Hasan bin Ali,

 

السَّلامُ عَليكَ يا حَسَنُ بنَ عَلِيٍّ

peace be upon the guardian after you.

 

السَّلامُ على الوَصِيِّ مِنْ بَعدِهِ

O Allah, bless Your light, the guardian of Your guardian and Your
authority upon Your people.

 

اللّهُمّ صَلِّ عَلى نورِكَ وَسِراجِكَ وَوَلِيِّ وَلِيِّكَ وَوَصِيِّ
وَصِيِّكَ وَحُجَّتِكَ عَلَى خَلْقِكَ

Peace be upon you O the daughter of the messenger of Allah,

 

السَّلامُ عَلَيكِ يا بِنتَ رَسولِ اللهِ

Peace be upon you O the daughter of Fatima and Khadeeja,

 

السَّلامُ عَلَيكِ يا بِنتَ فَاطِمَةَ وَخَدِيجَة

peace be upon you O the daughter of ameerul mo’mineen,

 

السَّلامُ عَلَيكِ يا بنْتَ أمِيرِ المُؤمِنِينَ

peace be upon you O the daughter of al-Hasan and al-Husayn,

 

السَّلامُ عَلَيْكِ يا بِنْتَ الحَسَنِ وَالحُسَيْنِ

peace be upon you O the daughter of the guardian of Allah,

 

السَّلامُ عَلَيكِ يا بِنْتَ وَلِيِّ اللهِ

peace be upon you O the sister of the guardian of Allah,

 

السَّلامُ عَلَيكِ يا أُخْتَ وَلِيِّ اللهِ

peace be upon you O the aunt of the guardian of Allah,

 

السَّلامُ عَلَيكِ يا عَمَّةَ وَلِيِّ اللهِ

peace, mercy and blessing be upon you O the daughter of Musa bin Ja’far.

 

السَّلامُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ مُوسَى بنِ جَعْفَرٍ وَرَحْمَةُ اللهِ
وَبَرَكاتُهُ

Peace be upon you.

 

السَّلامُ عَلَيْكِ  
  

We pray Allah to make us close to you in Paradise,

 

عَرَّفَ اللهُ بَيْنَنا وَبَيْنَكُمْ فِي الجَنَّةِ

to insert us in your group,

 

وَحَشَرَنا فِي زُمْرَتِكُمْ

to bring us to the pond of your prophet,

 

وَأَوْرَدَنا حَوضَ نَبِيِّكُمْ

to water us with the cup of your grandfather by the hand of Ali bin Abu
Talib.

 

وَسَقَانَا بِكَأسِ جَدِّكُمْ مِنْ يَدِ عَلِيِّ بْنِ أَبِي طَالِبٍ

The blessings of Allah be upon you all.

 

صَلَواتُ اللهِ عَلَيْكُمْ

I pray Allah to make us delighted by your

 

أَسْأَلُ اللهَ أنْ يُرِيَنَا فِيكُمُ السُّرورَ وَ

deliverance

 

وَالفَرَجَ

and to gather us with you in the group of your grandfather Muhammad,
peace be upon him and upon his progeny,

 

وَأَنْ يَجْمَعَنا وَإِيّاكُمْ في زُمْرَةِ جَدِّكُمْ مُحَمَّدٍ صَلّى
اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ

and not to deprive us of believing in you,

 

وَأَنْ لا يَسْلُبَنَا مَعْرِفَتَكُمْ

He is guardian, He is powerful.

 

إنَّهُ وَلِيٌّ قَدِيرٌ

I approach to Allah via loving you,

 

أَتَقَرَّبُ إلَى اللهِ بِحُبِّكُمْ

detesting your enemies

 

وَالْبَرَاءَةِ مِنْ أعْدائِكُمْ

and submitting to Allah contentedly,

 

وَالتَّسْلِيمِ إلَى اللهِ راضِياً بِهِ

neither denying nor priding,

 

غَيْرَ مُنْكِرٍ وَلا مُسْتَكْبِرٍ

and believing sincerely in what Muhammad has brought and being satisfied
with it.

 

وَعَلَى يَقِينِ مَا أَتَى بِهِ مُحَمَّدٌ وَبِهِ رَاضٍ

O Allah, I pray You to be pleased with me and to enter me into Your
paradise!

 

اللّهُمّ وَأَسْأَلُكَ رِضَاكَ وَالدَّارَ الآخِرَةَ

O Fatima, intercede for me in Paradise because you have a great standing
near Allah.

 

يا فَاطِمَةُ اشْفَعِي لِي فِي الجَنَّةِ فَإنَّ لَكِ عِنْدَ اللهِ شَأناً
مِنَ الشّأْنِ

O Allah, I pray You to end my life with happiness

 

اللَّهُمَّ إنِّي أَسْأَلُكَ أنْ تَخْتِمَ لِي بِالسَّعَادَةِ

and not to deprive me of what I am in.

 

فَلا تَسْلُبْ مِنِّي مَا أنا فِيهِ

There is no power save in Allah, the Most High, the Great.

 

وَلا حَوْلَ وَلا قُوَّةَ إلاّ بِاللهِ العَلِيِّ العَظِيمِ

O Allah, respond to us and accept (our deeds) with Your generosity,
honor,

 

اللَّهُمَّ اسْتَجِبْ لَنا وَتَقَبَّلْهُ بِكَرَمِكَ وَعِزَّتِكَ

Mercy and peace.

 

وَبِرَحْمَتِكَ وَعَافِيَتِكَ

O Allah, make Your blessing and peace be upon Muhammad and his pure
progeny,

 

وَصَلَّى اللهُ عَلى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ الطّاهِرِينَ وَسَلَّمَ تَسْليماً

You are the Most Merciful.

 

يَا أرْحَمَ الرّاحِمِينَ
