Physical and Social Infrastructure
==================================

The state should invest capital in the physical infrastructure which
allows the economy to grow and develop in a healthy and prosperous way.
Public works programs for the improvement and extension roads and
highways, building of dams and bridges, provision of irrigation
networks, construction of ports, airports and telecommunication services
are necessary for the physical infrastructure of the economy.

Economic policies with technology should be based on four principles:

1. Workplaces should be located where people live (thereby avoiding the
need for migration into overcrowded cities).

2. Workplaces should be cheap to organize (thereby avoiding the
problems of borrowing a great deal of capital to get started).

3. The manufacturing systems should be uncomplicated (so that demand
for high skills is avoided).

4. The production should be based on local materials for local use
(thereby avoiding high transportation costs).

**Education: Religious and Scientific**

It is essential that the masses are literate order to work with the
government in introducing change that would bring about the Islamic
environment as laid down in the Quran and as shown by the Holy Prophet
(s). Therefore the state should invest in education so that all citizens
regardless of ethnic group or tribe enjoy equal rights to education and
physical training regardless of colour, race and language.

The government has the duty to create equal conditions for all citizens
the opportunity to learn and utilize talents, expertise and knowledge in
order to become competent at different kinds of work. The teaching of
new skills aimed at continuous improvement and development so that the
incentive for research and invention of new techniques of production and
distribution is stimulated amongst the people in order to utilise
resources to their maximum potential.

It is essential to raise the spirituality of the individual with the
aim of building morally upright characters but also inculcates the
spirit of hard work and efficiency, economy and frugality, avoiding
waste and extravagance. This encourages people to make productive
investment of savings so that both the individual and the society
benefits.

**Art and Culture that portrays the Awaiting**

Art and culture is the most eloquent way of portraying and promoting
the principles of justice, honour and equity so that it reflects the
hopes and longings of people for the Reappearance and the loathing of
injustice, aggressive power and oppression.

The art acceptable to the Holy Quran is that which glosses the true
Islam of the noble Prophet (s), of the Imams of guidance, of the
suffering poor people, of the barefooted and of the down-trodden in the
bitter and disgraceful history of deprivation.

The responsibility of artists of the nation is to illuminously depict
equity, honour and fairness and to personify the disappointment of the
hungry inflicted by the wrath of power and money. Theatre and cinema
present arts should actively the culture of Awaiting to create in the
hearts of people a devout and real link with Imam Mahdi (af) to
symbolize the longing for His Eminence (af).

In order for such culture to evolve and be refined, people should
acquaint themselves with the Imam (af) and be prepared for the
appearance of the Imam. They must learn and reflect in their behaviour
the characters and merits of the companions of the Imam (af). Their
hearts and souls should blaze with love and affection for him.

Their thoughts should be devoted to his service and their desire should
be to meet His Eminence. Their prayers ask for the blessing of Allah to
be showered on the Imam (af) and their supplications should be for their
salvation.

**Health**

Public health is another sphere of the social capital that is the
responsibility of the state. This includes the provision of adequate
medical facilities in order to improve the health people and to reduce
suffering from ill health and disease in all living, leisure and working
areas. Sanitation facilities in residential and public places, promoting
public awareness of keeping a clean environment and curbing of
pollution, providing clean water supplies, comfortable housing and
encouraging healthy eating habits and regular physical upkeep and
exercise are essential to achieve a healthier public.


**Stability of real value of monetary assets**

In a world where all countries are mutually interdependent and where
the monetary fiscal policies of certain countries are responsible for
substantial degree of price stability, it is necessary for the Islamic
state should be clear about its own role and work with determination to
resort to healthy financial policies and appropriate direct controls.

" O believers, fear God; and give up outstanding interest, if you are
believers. But if you do not, then be informed of the declaration of war
( against you) by God and His Messenger; yet if you repent, you shall
have your principal, neither you shall suffer nor inflict injustice." (
Sura Baqarah Verses 278-279). It is critical for the long term growth of
the economy that inflation and decline in the real value of money is
contained due to the adverse effects this erosion has on social justice
and welfare of the society.

**The Quran unequivocally states:**

And give full measure and weight with justice (6:152). So give full
measure and weight without defrauding men in their belongings and do not
corrupt the world after its reform. This is better for you, if you are
believers." (7:85, and see also 11: 48, 17:35 and 26:181). These
injunctions towards honesty and justice in all measures apply not just
to individuals but also to society and the state. This term encompasses
all measures of value and not just conventional weights and measures.

**Market forces**

The state should play an active and conscious role in not only
determining priorities and guiding or challenging the scarce resources
in the light of those priorities but also regulating demand so that
occurrence of recession or inflation is avoided in order to lead to
optimum efficiency in the use of resources.

Undisciplined self-interest and unguided play of market forces do not
always work out for the best of all sections of society because of
limitations or individual horizon, lack of awareness or appreciation of
social costs, and unbalanced growth in different sectors of the economy
unrelated to the welfare needs of the people.


