Non Governmental Organisations
==============================

Non governmental organisations (NGOs) are important elements in a
society as they are at the leading edge of change. They share crisis
intervention work with the government and take an interest in long term
development of society.

This enables individuals to take an active role in working for a better
society such as through voluntary work. People would willingly volunteer
their time, money and services to NGOs that they may not necessarily be
able to do so for official government jobs.

The Islamic state should encourage NGOs to bring about change and
alternative models. Through their advocacy work they provide
innovations, fresh thinking and new visions.

They are sometimes response for setting the pace in areas like economic
development and environmental protection. Ethical investment guidelines
based on the guidance provided by God in the Holy Quran should be
adopted by the government so that there is no investment in foreign
corporations that are major defence contractors, or corporations which
injure the environment, discriminate against women or minorities or are
involved in repressive regimes. Imam Ali (a) said: "Do not appropriate
to your self that in which all the people have an equal share."

**Taxes**

The Islamic state has the right to raise resources through taxes
provided that taxes are raised in a just manner and are within the
bearable limit of the people. Imam Ali has stressed that taxes should be
collected with justice and kindness. The taxes and the budget suggested
by Islam were not only to meet the needs of the poor and the needy ones
of the Holy Prophet's (s) descendents, but to establish a government and
to meet its necessary expenditure required for a vast
executive-administrative system.

Khums is one the huge incomes pouring into the Islamic treasury forming
part of the budget. It is levied on profits coming from agriculture,
commerce, the internal and external and resource and in general it is
taken equitably from all kinds of profits and incomes. After extracting
their own expenditures, every individual has to pay one-fifth of his
surplus profits to the Islamic authority. The aim of such a tax system
is to remove the financial needs of the several departments and enable
it to discharge the functions of a modern Islamic state.

**Law and Order**

The degree of law and order in a society and the extent of security of
life and property are one of the prime determinants of growth and
stability of an economy and the inner happiness of individuals. Thus it
is the duty of the state to safeguard the life and property of all
individuals within its boundaries.


**Social and economic justice**

Equal treatment of all individuals in society and before the law would
be not be meaningful unless everyone gets his due for his contribution
to society and there is no exploitation of one individual by another.
"Defraud not people in their dues goods" (Holy Quran Sura Ash-Shu'ara:
183) where God cautions man not to withhold what is justly due to
others.

**Women's rights**

Islam shows a concern for women that it does not show for men in that
it pays greater regard to their rights than those of men. "… and they
(women) have rights similar in fairness…" (Holy Quran Sura 2:228). The
government should ensure the rights of women in all respects, in
conformity with Islamic criteria and create a favourable environment for
the growth of woman's personality and accord her material and
intellectual rights. The state should provide protection for mothers
during pregnancy and child rearing.

Imam Khomeini held women in especially high regard especially in their
role as mothers. He prayed to Allah to protect women so that they may
carry on the job of training human beings, a job that the prophets were
also assigned . Imam Khomeini addressed the ladies in stressing: "It is
in your laps that virtuousness, decency and greatness are fostered. You
have a duty to raise your children well, to bring up with Islamic
values, with human values…"

Orphans and destitutes without guardians.

In absence of legal guardians, the orphan's interest is to be protected
by awarding their guardianship to worthy mothers. "…And they ask you
concerning the orphans. Say: To set right for them (their affairs) is
good," (Holy Quran Sura Baqarah: 220).There is the establishment of
special social security for widows and aged women and women without
support.

**Justice**

It is the indisputable right of every citizen to seek justice by
recourse to the judicial system. "… And whoever judges not by what God
has sent down, they are the unbelievers."(Holy Quran Sura Maidah : Verse
44). "… And whoever judges not by what God has sent down, they are
unjust." (Sura Maidah Verse 45). "… And whoever judges not by what God
has sent down, they are corrupt."(Sura Maidah:Verse 47). The state
should ensure that access to courts and lawyers must be easy and
affordable.

This also entails that no one is entitled to exercise his rights in a
way that is detrimental to others or public interests. The judges of
courts are not to execute laws and regulations of the government which
are in conflict with Islamic laws.

Social security and equitable distribution of income and wealth.

It is the duty of the Islamic state to ensure a respectable standard of
living for every individual who is unable to take care of his own needs
and hence requires assistance.

Imam Ali emphasized the gravity of this role: "Beware! Fear God when
dealing the problem of the poor who have none to patronize, who are
forlorn, indigent and helpless and are greatly torn in mind - victims to
the vicissitudes of time." "For God's sake safeguard their rights; for
on you rests the responsibility of protection. Assign for their uplift a
portion of the state treasury, wherever they may be..." For no excuse
will be acceptable to God. "Make such provision for these poor people as
shall not oblige you to offer an excuse before God on the Day of
Judgment."

**To harmonise international relations and ensure national defence**

Islam has come to all nations and to all peoples. Therefore the Islamic
state is not hostile to any nation and it has friendly relations with
those who want to have friendly relations with it. This humanistic
leadership is expected from all nations and governments.

Struggle and defending of human rights is an important role of the
Islamic state regardless of borders. Under the Islamic leadership the
two principles are applied: "Be neither a wrongdoer nor a wronged". The
struggle is the stand of the right with the wrong and it has no end.

The state's foreign relations policy is based on the principle of
protecting the freedom of the people, independence, interests of Islam
and the Muslims. Therefore if another country accepts that, then the
Islamic state will act on mutual respect. Imam Ali (a) has cautioned:
"Bear in mind that you do not throw away the offer of peace which your
enemy may himself make.

Accept it for that will please God. "…Under the peace treaty if you
have accepted any obligations these are to be discharged scrupulously.
It is a trust and must be faithfully upheld." Imam Ali (a) exhorts to
exercise extreme vigilance so that the enemy does not lull the state
into a false sense of security.

With regard to national defense, peace is a source of comfort to the
army; it reduces the government's worries and promotes order in the
state. "And make ready for them whatever you can of force and of horses
tethered." (Holy Quran Sura al-Anfal: 60). This is an order by God to be
on the alert by preparing as much as possible of the armed forces and
defensive power in general. It is an order to be ready and to always
keep watch during peacetime. The army has to be not only well prepared
but also hold high morale and have an unwavering belief in its ability
to achieve victory.

**Unity in Rising: Difficult times ahead**

God the Blessed and Exalted says: "I exhort you only to one thing: to
rise for Allah." (Holy Quran Sura Saba': 46). Imam Hussain (a) the
Master of Martyrs said of an oppressive ruler that whoever sees an
unjust ruler governing among the people unjustly; he must oppose and
stop him as much as he can. Rising against injustice and steadfastness
are the two characteristics of prophets.

God exhorts "Arise and warn" (Holy Quran Sura al-Muddaththir: 2) The
steadfastness and keeping to the right path will prove valuable in
paving the path for easy and pleasant reappearance of His Eminence our
Imam (af). "Continue then in the right path as you were commanded."
(Holy Quran Sura Hud: 112).

The system encourages the citizen at every level to be resolute and
determined. This firm determination will cause the individual not to
despair or become pessimistic, despite the fact that there may be no
help while the all powerful and influential forces of evil are seemingly
against him.

**Impostors and false representations of the Mahdi (a)**

The writers, orators and speakers must think and tell the person of the
danger and confusion which threatens the entire humanity. All the people
of the world should be informed about devastating destruction and
uncertainty including the rise of impostors and false propaganda and
representations of the Mahdi (a) that will prevail before the
reappearance of our Imam (af). The people should be supported so as not
to lose heart but to be steadfast and mobilized to raise a single call
and to have a single objective.

The Islamic state which is prepared for the Reappearance of Imam al-
Mahdi (af) stands for effort, struggle, movement and social
reconstruction. "Allah does not change the condition of a people until
they change what is in their souls" (Sura ar-Ra'd:11).

The Islam that is practiced by the people in the Islamic state is not
merely a set of beliefs. This is why both the state and the citizen work
together as one, hand in hand to achieve the state's primary function of
guiding the citizen's development with economic development which is how
it will lay the foundations in preparation of the Reappearance.

Each individual has to be inspired to seek the One Creator and
purifying oneself to rise to protect Islam so that both individually and
collectively with the state, each citizen will contribute to creating a
firm establishment that withstand the turbulence and utter confusion
that will prevail before the emergence from occultation of Imam al-Mahdi
the Remainder of Allah on Earth to firmly establish the absolute
peaceful and productive environment where there will be tolerance and
justice for all of mankind.

May Allah (swt) hasten the reappearance of our Twelfth Imam (af) to
establish equality, truth, and justice throughout the world.

**Bibliography**

1. Nahj Al Balaghah, Letter 53. Vol 2, Selection from sermons, letters
and sayings of Amir Al-Mu'minin Ali Ibn Abi Talib (AS). Selected and
compiled by As Sayyid Abul-Hasan Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ar-Radi
Al-Musawi.

The Narrative of Awakening - A look at Imam Khomeini's ideal,
scientific and political biography ( from birth to ascension), Hamid
Ansari, The Institute for compilation and publication of the works of
Imam Khomeini, International Affairs Department.

Popular Sovereignty in Contemporary Shi'i Political Thought, TM Aziz,
Message of Thaqalayn A Quarterly Journal of Islamic Studies, Vol 1, No.
2, and Vol 1, No.3, April 1994, Dhu al Q'adah 1414.

Suter K, Global Agenda Economics, The Environment and the Nation-State,
1995 Albatross books, Australia.

Chapra M U, 'The Islamic Welfare State and its Role in the Economy',
Islamic Perspectives Studies in Honour of Mawlana Sayyid Abul A'la
Mawdudi, 1979, The Islamic Foundation, UK.

'The role of the family and women in nurturing human beings', The
position of women from the viewpoint of Imam Khomeini, The institute for
compilation of Imam Khomeini's works ( International Department), 2001,
Tehran.

Kashfu'l ghummah, vol iii; al-Manaqib, sec iii.

Fundamentals of The Islamic Revolution Selections From the thoughts and
opinions of Imam Khomeini The Institute for Compilation and Publication
of Imam Khomeini's works (international Affairs Department), 2000.

Alavi Mehr K, 'Islamic Sources of Iran's Constitution', Message of
Thaqalayn, A Quarterly Journal of Islamic Studies, Vol1, No 3, April
1994, Dhu al Q'adah 1414.


