Jesus of Nazareth
=================

The Flight to Egypt represents the displaced, the emigrants, the
homeless, all those persons who, for political, social or economic
reasons find themselves forced to abandon their land and the land of
their fathers to save their lives.

Now after they have left, an angel of Lord appeared to Joseph in a
dream and said, "Get up, take the child and his mother, and flee to
Egypt, and remain there until I tell you; for Herod is about to search
for the child, to destroy him."(8).

Without waiting for dawn, he prepared to flee to Egypt. The journey
must have been gruelling and very hard, but nonetheless he was faithful
to the words of the angel and the will of God, he made the preparations,
and he trusted in the goodness of the Lord.

Egypt, as we know, was the classic country of political refuge in that
time, being a Roman province. There were many Jews there, flourishing
colonies and districts inhabited by them. There is no data specifying
where they settled upon reaching Egypt.

Herod, fearful of a Messianic plot, gave the brutal order to kill all
male children younger than two years of age in the town of Bethlehem, an
order that was fulfilled and which went down in history as "the massacre
of the Holy Innocents".

"Thus says the Lord: "A voice is hear in Ramah, lamentation and bitter
weeping, Rachel is weeping for her children; she refuses to be comforted
for her children, because they are no more. (9)

Once more, as he rested, the angel appeared to him in dreams and
announced that he could return already, as Herod had died. "Get up, take
the child and his mother and go back to the land of Israel, for those
who were seeking the child ´s life are dead." Then Joseph got up, took
the child and his mother and went to the land of Israel. (10)

The flight to Egypt is the icon of emigration of a family, the
emigration that causes hunger, wars, social marginalization and
persecution. Jesus began his peregrinations as a child and became an
emigrant , a refugee, someone who had to abandon his land to save his
life.


**Muhammad (PBUH)**

In the Islamic history and tradition, Ethiopia is known as the "Haven
of the First Migration of Hijra." Ethiopia was the country chosen by the
Prophet (Pbuh) when his followers needed protection and freedom from
oppression.

After the conversion of Hamza, the Companions of the Prophet (Pbuh)
began to offer prayers publicly. In turn the Quraysh intensified their
opposition by torturing the Muslims. The companions and relatives of the
Prophet (Pbuh) were prepared to sacrifice and suffer all sorts of
hardship and alienation rather that give up their own convictions and
freedom.

"Those who believe, who migrated and strove hard in God´s way with
their possessions and their persons, are in God´s eyes much higher in
rank; it is they who will triumph; and their Lord gives them the good
news of His mercy and pleasure , Gardens where they will have lasting
bliss" . (11) The Prophet (Pbuh) slowly began to attract some followers,
most of them young and modest social standing, including his cousin Ali
(Pbuh), the son of his uncle and protector Abu Talib.

When Muhammad (Pbuh) began to impugn the traditional polytheism of his
native town, the rich and powerful merchants of Mecca realized that the
religious revolution taking place might be disastrous for their own
interest.

Members of the two warring tribes the Banu Awz and the Banu Khazraj,
asked the Prophet (Pbuh) to act as peacemaker in a conflict between
them. His mediation was impeccable and revealed great political wisdom.
In the Prophet (Pbuh), prophetic mission and political ability
complemented each other, making him a statesman apart from Messenger of
God.

The First Migration of the companions and relatives of the Prophet
(Pbuh) to Ethiopia celebrates the birth of freedom of expression and
beliefs, whereas, the Second Migration of the Prophet (Pbuh) to Madinah
celebrates the end of oppression.

History has shown that both migrations have laid down the foundations
of the Islam as an universal religion. They accepted the universality of
the message of the Prophet (Pbuh) and the Qu´ran describes their belief
in these words:

This people are not given to arrogance and when they listen to what has
been sent down to the Messenger, you will see their eyes overflowing
with tears because they recognize the Truth. They say, "Our Lord, we
believe, so count us amongst the witnesses." (12)

The Holy Scriptures tell us that the lives of God's Chosen are
sustained by two fundamental pillars: one, their nomadic existence, and
the other, their faith in God.

"Provide yourself for the journey because the call for departure has
been announced…(…).You should therefore cut away all the attachments of
this world and assist yourself with the provision of Allah´s fear."
(13)

Through their absolute faith in God, they progressively live their
faith and their reality in perfect coherence with the promises received
from God. And this opens them to a new and transcendent hope that keeps
them tensing towards a future that they are called to built, knowing
that the promise will come true in the same process and that it will be
God who makes it so, even in the most adverse human conditions. And it
will come true unexpectedly, because their faith in the promise advances
inseparably from their faith in God.


**II. Emigration and mass movements in the world today**

World stateless people

Recent research suggest that may be eleven million people globally
without a country to "call their own". Article I of the 1954 Convention
Relating to the Status of Stateless Persons spells out the legal
definition, indicating that, "someone who is not a national of any state
under relevant laws is therefore stateless."

Parents cannot officially register the birth of a newborn baby. He or
she may not be able to attend school or university and when these people
die, they will be buried in an anonymous burial without official
recognition, like if they never existed. People who do not have a
country to call their own.

The issue of statelessness is politically sensitive in many affected
countries and often viewed as an internal problem. Doubt to this many
governments have not made accurate figure what makes it very difficult
to really know the magnitude of the actual problem.

They became stateless through a very complicated series of political,
legal, or administrative directives, which includes among others:
Arbitrary deprivation of nationality by a government; Administrative
oversight, misunderstandings or conflicts of law; Administrative
procedural problems. Several international and regional treaties offer a
degree of guidance and emphasize that everyone should have a
nationality. However, international support of these treaties has been
lethargic and needs to be strengthened. Fewer governments know the
precise magnitude of the problem in their countries.


