Internally Displaced People
===========================

They are the world´s largest group of vulnerable people. The overall
number of internally displaced people is around 25 million in 52
countries and that half of them are in Africa.

The definition of the internally displaced describes them "as persons
or groups of persons who have been forced or obliged to flee or to leave
their homes or places of habitual residence, in particular as a result
of or in order to avoid the effects of armed conflict.

The internally displaced often face a very difficult situation because
they may be trapped into the ongoing internal conflict of their own
country. Their governments retains ultimate control of their fate.

Competent authorities have the primary duty and responsibility to
establish conditions, as well as provide the means, which allow
internally displaced persons to return voluntarily, in safety and with
dignity, to their home or places of habitual residence.

**III.- Poverty and Globalization
POVERTY AND HUNGER**

"Take away from this world your hearts before your bodies go out of it,
because herein you have been put on a trial, and you have been created
for the other world." (14)

According to the latest data facilitated by the FAO, there are now 854
million malnourished and hungry persons in the world and another 100
million on the verge of becoming so.

The UN calls this drama that causes the death of 25,000 human beings
every day, among them one malnourished baby every five seconds, a
"silent tsunami". As a result of the lack of food in a fair part of the
planet and the rising prices of the last three decade, reality is got
worst. (El Mundo, Editorial, June 6th 2008)

The FAO, which, since 1945, has held the mandate for guaranteeing food
security, spent several million of euros in gathering together
representatives from 183 countries at the Food Summit, which concluded
last 5th of June in Rome with "disappointing results", according to the
majority of attending observers and experts. The result was a paltry
declaration of intentions that skirted around the fundamental problems.
(El Pa?s, International, June 6th 2008)

The FAO and the international community have given evident signs that
they are not prepared to govern a business that kills millions of people
from starvation. Behind the almost 72 hours of diplomatic discussions in
Rome lies a terrible reality: almost a fifth part of the population on
our planet does not have anything to eat.

"O´ibne Hunaif I have come to know that a young man of Basra invited
you to a feast and you leapt towards it. Foods of different colours were
being chosen for you and big bowls were being given to you. I never
thought you would accept the feast of a people who turn out the beggars
and invite de rich." (15)

**Emigration**

In 2007 the total number of both refugee and internally displace people
came to approximately 32.9 million persons. The phenomenon of emigration
today occupies international attention and public debate in numerous
countries.

Which of these three, do you think, was a neighbor to the man who fell
into the hands of the robbers? He said the one who showed him mercy."
Jesus said to him, "Go and do likewise."(16)

The change of millennium has come accompanied by an intense
revitalization in international migratory currents, to the point of
making this phenomenon, along with the free movement of capital, one of
the characteristic features of our current reality: globalization. A
greater international freedom in the flow of trade and the movement of
capital in the world logically demands a greater and growing freedom of
movement for people in the world.

"The poor emigrants who were driven from their homes and possessions,
who seek God´s favour and approval, those who help God and His
Messenger - these are the ones who are true. " (17)

Emigration is one of the fundamental dimensions of the globalization
process that we are living. It is likewise a result of the rupture of
traditional and collective ties, as well as the absence of collective
and individual projects for progress in the country of origin. This is
the reason why the phenomenon increases in the cases of social crisis
and decomposition in the affected countries.

He postrated himself at Jesus feet and thanked him. An he was a
Samaritan. Then Jesus asked, "Were not ten made clean? But the other
nine, where are they? Was none of them found to return and give praise
to God except this foreigner." (18)

We are confronted with a growing and lasting phenomenon. It is not a
question of tolerance, is a question of respect for the dignity of all
human beings, regardless of their social situation, ethnic origin,
nationality, religion, or any other difference. Only then will peaceful
coexistence and the construction of a just and free global society be
possible.

"What will you do with this vast house in this world, although you need
this house more in the next world. If you want to take it to the next
world you could entertain in it guest and be regardful of kinship and
discharge all (your) obligations according to their accrual. In this way
you will be able to take it to the next world. (19)

**Who rules de world**

One of the rulers of our world today, perhaps the most powerful, is the
G20.

The G20 is a group consisting of 19 of the world´s largest economies,
together with the European Union. This Economies are the following: US,
UK, Germany, France, Italy, Canada, Russia, Japan, South Africa, China,
Brazil, Australia, Argentina, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Saudi Arabia,
South Korea and Turkey.

"Together, this countries, account for 90% of the world gross product
and over 80% of the world trade. Added to this, with their combined
voting power in the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World
Bank, these countries completely dominate these institutions." (The New
Ruling Aristocracy of the World? , Shawn Hattingh)

"No one can serve two masters; for a slave will either hate the one and
love the other, or be devoted to the one and despise the other. You
cannot serve God and wealth." (20)

We live in a world with an economic system organized for the profit of
the few. More and more people in the world are becoming aware of this
situation that is affecting their lives and the society as a whole.

Evidence is mounting that economic growth and free trade are not
leading us toward economic and justice and environmental sustainability.
To the contrary, they are taking us in the direction of increasing
economic injustice and environmental un-sustainability.

Capitalism in the age of the new digital technology produced hundreds
of new billionaires in the world, meanwhile, three billion people,
nearly half of the world, lived on less that $2 per day.

Jesus looked at him and said, "How hard it is for those who have wealth
to enter the kingdom of God! Indeed, it is easier for a camel to go
through the eye of needle than for someone who is rich to enter the
kingdom of God." (21) The world´s most powerful instrument of governance
is not a government, nor is a global corporation, rather is a global
financial system, running dangerously out of control.

A poor widow came and put in two small copper coins, which are worth a
penny. Then he called his disciples and said to them: "Truly I tell you,
this poor widow has put in more than all those who are contributing to
the treasury. For all of then contributed out of their abundance; but
she out of her poverty has put in everything she had, all she had to
live on." (22)

**Another type of Globalization**

Means an integrated and supportive economy that woks for peace and not
for war. We know from experience which are the results of wars. Wars
provoke more poverty and more hunger in the world. A real global economy
cannot accept that millions of people in the world suffer from hunger
and lack or food as they suffer today. Our first task is the
humanization of our societies and this means working continuously on
different fronts at the same time.

"Beware practicing your piety before others in order to be seen by
them; …(…). But when you give alms, do not let your left hand know what
your right hand is doing, so that your alms may be done in secret…(…)."
(23) Opening ourselves to global communication in an open and sincere
dialogue will make us see that our problems are not so different from
the problems of the other people. We will then see that unity creates
the necessary strength and capability to change the urgent matters that
have to be changed soon.

**IV.-International Responsability**

**Political and social leaders.**

"……(…..) Certainly, Allah, the Sublime, has made it obligatory on true
leaders that they should maintain themselves at the level of low people
so that the poor do not cry over their poverty." (24)

The management of global issues in the 21st century will require the
active participation of all members of the international community. The
developing countries with 80 per cent of the world´s population, must be
part of a shared vision for this new century. The success or failure of
poor people and poor countries in making their way in an interdependent
world will have a profound influence in shaping the 21stCentury. One
should chose to be among the persecuted, rather than the persecutors.
(25)

The heads of States and Governments representative, gathered together
at the United Nations General Assembly in New York between the 6th and
the 8th of September 2000, adopted the "United Nations Millennium
Declaration".

Allow me to highlight one of the most relevant points that make
reference to "dignity, equality, equity, vulnerable people and extreme
poverty". - "We recognize that, in addition to our separate
responsibilities to our individual societies,, we have a collective
responsibility to uphold the principles of human dignity, equality and
equity at the global level. As leaders we have a duty therefore to all
the world´s people, specially the most vulnerable and, in particular
children of the world, to whom futures belongs. (Values and Principles,
Point I, paragraph 2)

Here is my servant, whom I uphold my chosen, in who my soul delights; I
have put my Spirit upon him; he will bring forth justice to nations."
(26) As long as there is a contradiction between the stands of righteous
and the corrupt ways of worldly societies, there will be those righteous
people who will rise up and call society and their rulers to account.
This people will put their lives at risk to speak out for the welfare of
the community.

"If however, you warn the righteous not to sin, and they do not sin,
they shall surely live, because they took warning; and you will have
saved your life." (27)

All authorities and international actors shall respect and ensure
respect for their obligations under international law, including human
rights and humanitarian law, in all circumstances.

"Enter through the narrow gate; for the gate is wide and the road is
easy that leads to destruction, and there are many who take it. For the
gate is narrow and the road is hard that leads to life, and there are
few who find it". (28)

The chief concern of any government should be the welfare of its
citizens. Therefore the ruler, and hence the government, should be like
parent to the people, putting their concerns and needs ahead of his own.
The ruler should give his highest consideration to the poor and provide
them sufficient means of support. Such a government will be respected by
the people, who then will easily submit to its rule.

Guardianship is not to give an order but to give one´s self. (29)

Government should operate impartially and with integrity. Its leaders
should be honest, moral, and virtuous people, who will no take bribes or
act corruptly. Because people look up to a nation´s leaders as role
models, they should set a good example for people. "The best deed of a
great man is to forgive and forget. " (30)


