Horizentalization of Vertical Eschatology As Recipe For Planetary Survival
==========================================================================

Twelve years ago, while we were sitting in front of a college in
Mindanao State University-Main Campus, Philippines, a Seventh-Day
Adventist friend of mine from Bukidnon, Mindanao, told me, "Everything
can serve any purpose. You see, if I position this horizontally
(referring to a blue ballpen he was holding), it serves as a bridge, but
if I put it this way (that is, vertically), it becomes a wall."

Accordingly, 'horizontal' God is He who is viewed as the Creator and
Lord of the universe and all mankind.

"Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord." (Deuteronomy 6:4 and
Mark 12:29)

"I, even I, am the Lord; and beside me there is no savior." (Isaiah
43:11)

"I am the Lord, and there is none else, there is no God beside me."
(Isaiah 45:5)

"I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like
me." (Isaiah 46:9)

"Thou shalt have no other gods before me." (Exodus 20:3-5)

"And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ, whom thou has sent." (John 17:3)

"Say, 'He is Allah, the One. Allah is the All-embracing. He neither
begat, nor was begotten, nor has He any equal." (Surah al-Ikhlas, 1-4)

This Supreme Being becomes 'vertical' when He is thought to have
certain few 'favorites' at the expense of a 'damned' majority.

Religions also function as a bridge if the common elements among them
such as spirituality, moral principles and a notion of Judgment Day are
more emphasized. This function was illustrated by la convivencia
('coexistence' or 'living together') put into practice in Toledo in
particular during the Moorish rule of Spain. As a microcosm of the
atmosphere of religious tolerance then prevalent in the city, Jews,
Christians and Muslims were working together in the city's libraries,
translating books from Arabic into Castilian Spanish and then into
Latin.

This scientific collaboration continued for sometime after the end of
the Moorish rule. Jane Smith thus observes:

Transmission of knowledge from Arabic to Latin came close on the heels
of the Christian reconquest of Sicily and of large areas of Muslim
Spain. When Toledo was taken in 1085, a major step in the Christian
reconquest of Spain, a large number of Arabic manuscripts were made
available to Christian scholars. By the twelfth century Toledo had
become a center of study as scholars from all over Europe came to work
with native speakers of Arabic.

As corroborated by J.B. Trend,

The gates of oriental learning and story were opened both to Spain and
to the whole of Europe by the capture of Toledo (1085), which became a
school of translation from oriental languages. As early as 1120 Petrus
Alfonsi, a Spanish Jew who was baptized and whose godfather was Alfonso
VII, introduced Indian fable into Spain by the celebrated collection of
stories known as Disciplina Clericalis. The Spanish translation of the
'Indian tales' of Calila e Dimna made directly from the Arabic text
dates from 1251.

When "Toledo, the greatest center of Muslim learning in the West, fell
before the Spanish Christians" also says Max Meyerhof:

Latin students began to come to the new capital to admire the remains
of Moorish civilization and to study the Artes Arabum. The
intermediaries for the learning and later on the translation work were
native Jews and former Muslim subjects (Mozarabs). Charles and Dorothea
Singer… have painted a lively picture of this collaboration, which gives
a clear idea of a curious scientific syncretism.

The first prominent European man of science who came to Toledo was
Adelard of Bath, an English mathematician and philosopher. On the other
hand a Spanish Jew converted to Christianity, Petrus Alphonsi, went to
England where he became physician to Henry I and spread the science of
the Muslims there for the first time.

On the contrary, there is no more need of embellishing this paper with
accounts of religions in 'vertical' position as human history is
drenched enough with innocent blood spilled in their name.

**Eschatology**

Eschatology is no exception to this horizontal-vertical binary.
Etymologically derived from the Latin eschatos ('last' or 'farthest'),
eschatology refers to the branch of theology concerned with the final
events in the history of the world or the ultimate destiny of mankind.
Simply put, eschatology is a doctrine or theory (logos) of the end
(eschaton) whose origin, according to Encarta Encyclopedia, is almost as
old as humanity as "archeological evidence of customs in the Old Stone
Age indicates a rudimentary concept of immortality.

According to The Encyclopedia of Philosophy, "end" here can have two
meanings:

First, it can mean the end of each individual human life. Second, it
can mean the end of the world-or, more narrowly, of the human race. In
the first, the individualistic, sense eschatology is an account of the
destiny that awaits each person after death. In the second, the cosmic
or social, sense it is a description of a goal (telos) in which history
will be fulfilled.

This goal may be either a this-worldly or an otherworldly kind.

One of the important subjects of eschatology is the idea of a 'savior'
to come at the end of time. This awaited savior is known by various
names and titles-Saoshyant, Messiah, Christ (in his Second Coming), and
Mahdi, among many others. Since after the reign of King Solomon, the
Jews have been waiting for the coming of a Messiah who, it is believed,
would restore their lost glory and grandeur. Post-ascension of Jesus
Christ is a period where the Christians have been longing for the second
coming of Christ (Parousia).

The Muslims, on the other hand, have been expecting for the advent of
Al-Mahdi (the Guided One) who, as a descendant of both Ishmael and
Isaac, is believed to have been the epitome of fulfillment of the
Abrahamic Covenant:

"And when his Lord tested Abraham with certain words, and he fulfilled
them, He said: 'I am making you the Imam of mankind.' Said he: 'And from
among my descendants?' He said: 'My pledge does not extend to the
unjust.'" (Surah al-Baqarah, 124)

Neither is Filipino folklore devoid of it. Legend tells us that
Bernardo Carpio who is confined in a cave in Mt. Tapusi in Montalban
Mountains (or Mt. San Mateo in Rizal) or trapped within two clashing
mountains for a long time will one day come out to redeem the
Philippines. (Ferdinand Marcos, as I was told by a Marcos loyalist when
I was 12 during the 1986 Presidential Snap Election in the Philippines,
was the personification of Bernardo! Remember the catchphrase, "This
nation can be great again!")

Sociologically, human society in whatever appearance it takes-race,
nation, class or religious order-upholds this concept. As argued by Dr.
'Ali Shari'ati, a contemporary Iranian sociologist and historian, all
known communities, without exception, display two common
characteristics.

First, every community holds that in the distant past it had a 'golden
age' during which there was justice, peace, tranquility, and love, and
that this golden age came to an end at some point in time and was
followed by corruption, darkness and injustice. Secondly, they believe
in a great and liberating upheaval in the future and a return to the
golden age-the age of victory of justice, equality and brotherhood.

These beliefs obviously serve as a bridge as they give a sense of hope,
determination and common universal vision and purpose for all peoples of
diverse cultural currents and religious persuasions. This is the
'horizontal' side of the story.

'**Vertical' Eschatology

** Its 'vertical' side is now spectacularly moving toward its
catastrophic climax as suggested by the carnage of civilians perpetrated
daily by 'Islamist puritans' in Iraq, Pakistan and elsewhere.
Interestingly enough, certain messianic extremists in Iraq are
reportedly as zealous in resisting foreign occupiers as in engaging in
intra- and inter-sectarian frenzy of reprisals, executions and
vandalism.

How to convey a sectarian message totally comprehensible to adherents
and at the same time capable of fending off outsiders' accusation of the
message's advocacy of sectarian-based civil war and division of the
ummah? The solution lies in playing with the ambiguity of the word
rafidah. Literally means 'one who rejects', rafidah (plural rawafid) is
translated as 'heretic' and its derivative modifier rafidi as
'sectarian'.

For centuries and especially more recently, it is increasingly used as
a pejorative designation for the Shi'ah who are demographically the
majority in Iraq before and after its British-midwifed birth in 1920.
Until the fall of the Ba'ath regime in 2003, however, this majority had
been persecuted and politically disenfranchised.

Vitriolic verdicts on the urgency of killing rawafid channeled through
audiotapes distributed within the flock of votaries and downloadable at
insurgent websites are coupled with everyday carnage of civilians in
public places such as markets and houses of worship. Condemnation of
these mass murders is immediately deflected by claiming that the targets
are only the "collaborators working with the Crusaders".

Granting that police stations, military outposts and political figures
are legitimate targets, why market-goers and worshippers are daily
victims?

If ever pounded with this question, rafidah-manipulators argue that
voters are responsible for the actions of leaders they elected: "[T]hey
are not ordinary people… for they have become the soldiers of the
infidel occupier… Did not al-Ja'fari, al-Hakim and others come to power
through their votes?"

Given this line of argument, one may wonder how and at which voting
precinct the dome and two minarets in Samarra cast their votes for which
they were condemned to destruction for two counts. Hence, the use of
such word is truly a powerful bomb that must be detonated. In
postmodernist parlance, this textual interplay at work requires either
deconstruction or double reading, or both.

Meanwhile, televangelists and other 'new armies of God' are passionate
enough in freeing the genie of apocalyptic prophecies (e.g. Daniel 9,
Ezekiel 38, Revelation 16:14-16) out of the bottle and wish for their
governments to unleash trigger-happy dogs of war in the Middle East,
thereby heralding the 'coming of the Lord'.

In a recently published book, titled "Beyond Iraq: The Next
Move-Ancient Prophecy and Modern-Day Conspiracy Collide" (Whitestone
Books, Florida, 2003), Texas-based author and preacher Michael Evans who
is one of the most notorious American Christian fundamentalist preachers
today, spells out a grand design for American global hegemony under the
guise of a holy global war in which key players include the CIA, the
American government and army, and Israel, besides various Christian
fundamentalist outfits.

Another popular televangelist, Pastor John Hagee, who leads the
18,000-member Cornerstone Church in San Antonio, Texas, argues in his
2006 book, "Jerusalem Countdown," that a confrontation with Iran is a
necessary precondition for Armageddon and the Second Coming of Christ.
He insists that the United States must join Israel in a preemptive
military strike against Iran to fulfill God's plan for both Israel and
the West.

An equally smart version of 'vertical' eschatology is the espousal of
God's alleged consignment of land to His selected 'darlings' to the
detriment of the 'outcasts' and 'bastards'. Obviously, political Zionism
is an illustrious example of this version of 'vertical' eschatology.

Zionists seemingly regard themselves as the chosen children of God, who
had been granted the privilege to take other peoples' land and
properties by trickery when in a state of weakness and by force when in
a state of power. By invoking the alleged curse of Noah upon his son
Ham, believed to be the ancestor of the Africans, and his descendants to
a status of slavery (Genesis 9:18-27), the Dutch Reformed Church of
South Africa gave theological support to the Apartheid in the 1930s.


**Conclusion**

In this critical moment when eschatology is extensively fielded via
satellite and in the cyberspace as a weapon of mass destruction (WMD), a
universal campaign to stop its 'verticalization' is an indubitable
recipe for planetary survival. Sincere followers of the three Abrahamic
faiths have the religious potential as well as duty to spearhead this
campaign, first to their co-religionists, and then to members of other
creeds.

This annual worldwide gathering on Messianism/Mahdism is a seminal
stride, though a limited one, in a long gradual process of forging a
'Non-Proliferation Treaty' specifically covering this more devastating
type of WMD.

**References**

"Analysis: America's New Christian Zionists," BBC,
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle\_east/1969542.stm, May 7,
2002.

Authorized (King James) Version of the Bible, 1611.

Davis, Uri. Israel: An Apartheid State, abridged edition. South Africa:
Media Review Network, 2001.

"Dutch Reformed Church," Encarta Reference Library Premium 2005 DVD.

"Eschatology," Encarta Reference Library Premium 2005 DVD.

"Evangelical Christians Pleads for Israel," BBC,
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle\_east/1969542.stm, July 19,
2006.

Meyerhof, Max. "Science and Medicine." In The Legacy of Islam, ed. Sir
Thomas Arnold and Alfred Guillaume. New Delhi: Kitab Bhavan, 1997:
311-355.

Muhsin, Ali. Let the Bible Speak. Saudi Arabia: Cooperative Office for
Call and Foreigners Guidance, n.d.

Owen, H.P. "Eschatology." In The Encyclopedia of Philosophy, vols. 3-4,
ed. Paul Edwards. New York: The Macmillan Company and the Free Press,
1972.

Posner, Sarah. "Lobbying for Armageddon," AlterNet,
http://www.alternet.org/story/39748, August 3, 2006.

Qara'i, 'Ali Quli. The Qur'an with a Phrase-by-Phrase English
Translation. London: ICAS Press, 2004.

Rizvi, Sayyid Saeed Akhtar. Slavery: Islamic and Christian
Perspectives. British Columbia: Vancouver Islamic Educational
Foundation, n.d.

Shari'ati, 'Ali. Awaiting: The Religion of Protest. Tehran: Sohof
Publications, 1991.

Sikand, Yoginder. "American Christian Fundamentalist Leader Calls for
Global War," Countercurrents,
http://countercurrents.org/us-sikand171105.htm, November 18, 2005.

Smith, Jane I. "Islam and Christendom: Historical, Cultural, and
Religious Interaction from the Seventh to the Fifteenth Centuries." In
The Oxford History of Islam, ed. John L. Esposito. Oxford and New York:
Oxford University Press, 1999: 305-346.

"The Next Iraqi War? Sectarianism and Civil Conflict," International
Crisis Group, Middle East Report No. 52 (February 27, 2006).

Trend, J.B. "Spain and Portugal." In The Legacy of Islam, ed. Sir
Thomas Arnold and Alfred Guillaume. New Delhi: Kitab Bhavan, 1997:
1-39.

Utley, Jon Basil. "'Dual Covenant' Christians: Christian Zionists and
the Strangest Alliance in History," http://antiwar.com/utley.

Von Grunebaum, G.E. Classical Islam: A History 600-1258, tr. Katherine
Watson. London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1970.


