A Study of the Socio-cultural Conditions Leading To the Realization of the Appearance of the Mahdi (as)
=======================================================================================================

"It is He who has sent His messenger with the guidance and the religion
of truth to make it prevail over every other religion. However much the
disbelievers may dislike it."

(Surah al-Tawbah: 9:33 and Surah As-Saff: 61:9)

**Introduction**

This paper will InshaAllah begin by looking at the historical movement
of human beings and the progression of society over time. We will also
show how this progression will reach its climax with the appearance of
the Imam of our time (may Allah hasten his appearance). This is based on
the promise of Allah (SWT ) that Islam will be implemented globally by
the last and final successor of Prophet Muhammad (SAW ).

This movement of humankind will be studied in the context of the
socio-cultural conditions prevailing before the appearance of the 12th
Imam (AS ). The socio-cultural conditions that will prevail before the
appearance will be studied from two different angles.

The first will be the conditions prevailing in the general society, the
society of individuals ignorant of the existence of the 12th Imam (AS)
and those who are aware but have not paid any heed to it. The second
angle will look at the conditions of the society of individuals who are
aware of the existence of the 12th Imam (AS) and who are anxiously
awaiting his appearance.

This paper will end with Ahadith from the Aimmah (AS) on what believers
should do in the absence of the Imam (AS) while awaiting his (AS)
appearance.


**Historical progression of mankind and the belief of Islam**

The way we have progressed as human beings from time immemorial may
point to future direction of humanity. Based on history, human beings
have been pursuing a path of pure materialism along with its selfish
moral and social values. And as long as we, as human beings, are not
brought back to our spiritual origins, it is impossible to imagine how a
God-centered human society can materialize.

With materialistic consumerism at its height, and individualism and
secularism functioning as its two wings, God and God's ethical and
spiritual directives have been practically trivialized and
systematically removed from our public life. At the same time, there is
this natural urge in human beings to seek out their Creator, to worship
the Merciful, Compassionate God. Until and unless that is satisfied
human beings will not find peace and harmony.

Islam has emphasized this natural urge of humanity as it is founded
upon an innate disposition to worship One God. The divine leaders of
Islam also sought to implement the Will of God on earth by creating an
ethical and spiritually-oriented society.

It is only when humanity acknowledges a God-centered universe that it
will be able to further the ideal global community. Such a community
will naturally respond to the call of Islam and the Prophet of Islam
(SAW) whose invitation to the peoples of the Book was to abandon
differences and concentrate on One Lord, the Almighty God, as is
enshrined in the Holy Quran.

"O People of the Book! Come now to a word common between us and you,
that we serve none but God, and that we associate not aught with Him,
and do not some of us take other as Lords, apart from God."
Surah Al 'Imran, verse 64

The Quran presents this revolutionary program of creating an ethical
order that will reflect the divine Will on earth through God's righteous
servants who have submitted themselves to His will. The Prophet has also
informed us that the uniquely qualified person to lead humanity to
become united under Allah (SWT) by abandoning all forms of idolatry and
concentrating on the divine purposes for humanity will be the promised
Mahdi (AS), a descendant of his.

A God-centered human will therefore materialize, based on our certain
belief in the appearance of the Mahdi (AS). The Holy Quran says:

"Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good that He
will most certainly make them rulers in the earth as He made rulers
those before them, and that He will most certainly establish for them
their religion which He has chosen for them, and that He will most
certainly, after their fear, give them security in exchange; they shall
serve Me, not associating aught with Me; and whoever is ungrateful after
this, these it is who are the transgressors."
Surah An-Nur, verse 55

**General socio-cultural conditions before the appearance of the Imam
(AS)**

One of the socio-cultural conditions that has to prevail universally
before the appearance of the 12th Imam (AS) is that all believers will
have been born. It has been mentioned in a Hadith from Imam Sadiq (AS)
that:

"In the loins of disbelievers and hypocrites God has deposited a seed
for believing persons. It was for this reason that Imam 'Ali b. Abi
Talib (AS) refrained from killing the fathers of disbelievers so that
believing children could be born of them. After that whenever he met
them he would endeavour to kill them. Similarly, our Qa'im (AS) will not
rise until God's trust from the loins of the disbelievers has been
delivered. After that he will appear and will eliminate disbelievers."

When the 12th Imam (AS) appears, he will offer the religion of Islam to
the non-believers. Anyone who accepts that call will be saved from being
killed. All those who refuse to accept Islam will be killed. Now, we
know that history is replete with cases of believing children born of
non-believing and hypocritical parents. This was the case of the early
Muslims who were born of non-believing parents in the pre-Islamic age.

If the Prophet had killed all the non-believers during the conquest of
Makkah, the Muslims then born of their generation would never have come
into existence. God's grace and benevolence necessitates that human
beings should be left alone to their beliefs so that in time those
believers among their children will be born.

As long as a human being procreates and brings forth a believer and
worshipper of God, he or she should remain on earth. When the Imam of
the Age (AS) appears, those who persist in their disbelief, and who will
be killed, will be the people from whom there will be no believing
offspring.

In another tradition Imam Muhammad Baqir (AS) said in response to a
question asked by a companion on when the Qa'im (AS) will emerge, "At
the time when men will imitate the women and women will imitate the men;
when women will ride on saddles; when people will cause their prayers to
die and will follow their carnal desires;

when people will turn usurers; when shedding of blood will become
something insignificant; when trade and business of the people will be
based on usury; when people will openly commit adultery; when they will
make towering constructions; when they will consider lie to be lawful;
when they will accept bribes; when they will follow their lusts and
desire; when they will sell their religion for this world;

when they will sever their relation (with others); when they will hold
under obligation the one whom they feed; when they will consider
forbearance to be the sign of weakness and feebleness and injustice to
be an honour; when their rulers will be evil and their ministers liars;
when the trustworthy amongst them will be traitors;

when the helpers amongst them will be unjust; when the reciters of
Quran will be transgressors; when cruelty and oppression will become
manifest; when divorce will increase; when people will engage in
debauchery and libertinism; when forced witness and lie will be
accepted; when they will engage in drinking and gambling; when men will
be mounted on; when women shall engage with women (indecent acts); when
people will consider Zakat to be a booty and charity to be a loss;

when they will fear from the tongues of the wicked people; when Sufyani
shall revolt from Syria and Yemen; when Baidah which is between Mecca
and Medina will sink; when a child from the progeny of Muhammad (SAW)
will be killed between Rukn and Maqaam and when a live voice will be
heard from the heavens crying out that the truth is with Mahdi (AS) and
his followers. It will be then that our Qa'im will emerge. When he
re-appears, he will stand with his back against the wall of Ka'aba and
313 of his followers would gather around himâ€¦"

This Hadith summarizes the socio-cultural conditions preceding the
advent of the Imam (AS). It talks about a time when men will imitate
women and women will imitate men. This imitation could be in the form of
dress, appearance, role in society and so on. The Imam (AS) also
mentions the rise of carnal desires.

This perhaps means that people will pursue their lusts for wealth,
power and physical desires without caring whether what they receive in
return is Halaal or not. Usury has also been noted as one of the
conditions in the society - a condition which will be the norm and
businesses will be based on it.

The Imam (AS) also points to the openness and lack of guilt in
committing sins such as adultery, lying, drinking, gambling, taking
bribes, committing indecent acts and so on. The prevalence of such vice
and corruption in society will throw humanity into disarray and it is
amidst all this that the Imam (AS) will appear.

The Hadith touches on the rise of oppression in the society. This will
be in the form of severing relations with others, holding under
obligation one who is fed and rise of unjust rulers, among others. There
will be widespread injustice and oppression and total absence of peace
and security in such a way that fear, terror, calamities, problems,
corruption, mischief and ignorance will dominate human society.

The people shall do anything for the sake of the world and they shall
compete with each other on the way of sin and evil and in their view sin
would be considered good and the Islamic Law, like in the beginning,
would be unknown to the people. This oppression will be obliterated and
replaced with justice and freedom under the rule of the 12th Imam (AS)
when he appears.

The Imam (AS) concludes by talking about some of the physical
conditions that will take place just before the rising of the 12th Imam
(AS). This will be the rising of the Sufyani, the sinking of Baidah and
the killing of the child from the progeny of the Holy Prophet (SAW),
among others.

The final point is crucial. Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (AS) says that in
these conditions, which can be summarized as political, economic and
socio-cultural conditions, the 12th Imam (AS) will emerge. This Hadith
gives the followers of the Ahlul Bayt (AS) and insight into what sort of
environment shall prevail before the appearance of the Hujjah (AS).

In another Hadith, it is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (AS) that he
said, "Mahdi (AS) will reappear at the time when fear, mischief,
calamities, epidemics, violence, divisions in religion and
transformation of the peoples' condition shall be dominant on the world
and society. Day and night people would yearn for death and shall be at
each other's throat.

In other words despair and hopelessness would have conquered them. At
that time His Eminence would reappear; and congratulations to the one
who reaches Imam Mahdi (AS) and becomes his supporter and woe to the one
who opposes him."

This above Hadith further expounds the socio-cultural condition of the
society in general before the appearance of the 12th Imam (AS).
Specifically, it talks about the despair in the people with the state of
affairs and that it is these conditions that will lead to the appearance
of the Qa'im (AS).

Conditions of those awaiting his appearance and Those awaiting the
appearance of the 12th Imam (AS) will be Shia who will have acknowledged
and believed in his existence and Wilayah (unconditional authority). The
condition of such people will be in resonance with the Ahadith from the
Aimmah (AS), which speak to the characteristics of those waiting for the
Qa'im (AS). Some of the Ahadith will be studied in this section to
identify the conditions of those who are consciously awaiting the
appearance of the 12th Imam (AS).

Imam Zainul Abideen (AS) said, "Truly those people who in the
occultation (of Imam Mahdi (AS)) acknowledge his Imamate, await his
reappearance, are better then the people of all times because Allah has
given them such an understanding that occultation for them is as good as
meeting him. At the time of occultation these people are like those who
did Jihad under the command of the Holy Prophet (SAW). In the sense they
are sincere and they are our true Shias, they invite to the way of Allah
(SWT) secretly and openly."

The first thing that the 4th Imam (AS) says is that those who have
acknowledged the Imamate of 12th Imam (AS) are better than the peoples
of all times. The Imam (AS) ends by identifying a quality or a trait of
the people who have acknowledged the Imam and are awaiting his
appearance - and this is that these people will invite to the way of
Allah (SWT) secretly and openly. And we can add that they will continue
to do this, if given the opportunity, until the appearance of the 12th
Imam (AS). They will carry out such activities in anticipation of
deliverance from the appearance of the 12th Imam (AS).

Abu Saeed Khudri narrated that the Holy Prophet (SAW) said, "In the
Last Age, severe tribulations would afflict my community from their
rulers and kings such that they have not heard of more severe atrocities
and the earth shall become constricted for them and become filled with
injustice and oppression and the faithful believer would have no place
of refuge from those oppressions.

At that time, Almighty Allah would send a man from my progeny who would
fill the earth with justice and equity and all inhabitants of the earth
and heavens would be satisfied and happy and the earth would spew out
its treasures and the sky would shower its blessings..."

The point we want to identify in this Hadith is that the Holy Prophet
(SAW) says that the faithful believer will have no place of refuge from
the oppressions of the rulers. This is another condition that will
prevail for those who are consciously awaiting the appearance of the
12th Imam (AS). They (believers) will suffer oppression and will be
victims of tyranny before the appearance of the 12th Imam (AS).


