Preparation For the Coming of the 12th Imam (as) in Light of the Conditions That Will Prevail Before His (as) Appearance
========================================================================================================================

Our scholars have identified and written in their books certain things
Muslims ought to do during the occultation: to pray for the twelfth
Imam; to do charitable works for him; to perform hajj and to appoint
someone to do that on his behalf; to seek his help and assistance in
times of difficulty, and so on. There is no doubt that all these
suggestions are praiseworthy, however the most important obligation
mentioned in the sources and that which needs further elaboration is
awaiting deliverance through him (intizar al-faraj).

There are many traditions from the Imams, both recommending the
awaiting and enumerating its merits and excellences, during the
occultation. Some of these Ahadith are presented below.

Imam Sadiq (AS) says, "Any one who dies with the love (Wilayat) of the
Ahl al-Bayt while awaiting deliverance (through the appearance of the
Qa'im (AS)), resembles the one who will be in the Qa'im's tent."

Imam 'Ali Rida (AS) reporting from his forefathers and from the Prophet
(SAW) relates the Hadith from the latter, who said: "The best deed of my
community is to await for the deliverance."

Imam 'Ali b. Abi Talib (AS) says, "Any one who awaits our government,
resembles the one who, in the way of God, has rolled in his own blood.

In another tradition Imam Rida (AS) praises the one who awaits the
deliverance, and says, "How praiseworthy are patience and awaiting for
deliverance! Have you not heard that God says in the Quran: 'You await,
and We too are awaiting?' So be patient because deliverance will come
after despair. Those who were before you were even more patient than
you."

Imam Ja'far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (AS) said: "A person who would like
to be among the companions of al-Qa'im (AS) should be in a state of
(active) waiting (Intizar), and perform all of his deeds with Wara' [a
level higher than Taqwa] and with the most beautiful etiquette and then
one will be counted as being in a state of (true) waiting (Intizar).
Then if such a person was to die and al-Qa'im (AS) was to make his
advent after this, then that person would receive the reward as the one
who witnessed his (al-Mahdi's) advent."

There are numerous traditions on a similar theme. The Imams always used
to advise their followers to await deliverance. They reminded them that
the mere act of awaiting for deliverance is a kind of emancipation. The
one who awaits is like the one who fights against the disbelievers on
the battlefield and has rolled in his own blood. As such, there is no
doubt that the weightiest obligation for Muslims during the occultation
is to anticipate deliverance.

In the next few paragraphs we would like to expound on the meaning of
this awaiting or anticipating deliverance. How can a person who
anticipates deliverance acquire the greatest reward that accrues to the
one who does good? It is not sufficient for the one awaiting the
deliverance to materialize to just say with their tongue that they are
awaiting the appearance of the Imam of the Age.

An individual cannot escape every kind of social responsibility, and
stay away, from the moral responsibility of commanding the good and
forbidding the evil; from taking a stance against corrupt and sinful
behaviour; from not stopping injustice, and simply say: "O God, let the
deliverance through the Imam of the Age be imminent so that he can
prevent this corrupt behaviour!" This is not awaiting the appearance of
the 12th Imam (AS).

This person's status cannot be the comparable to the status of the one
who is killed defending his religion. His status cannot be equal to the
one who has sacrificed all his wealth, his family, and his comfort and
security in the way of God and attained the status of a martyr.

There is a deeper meaning and significance to the act of awaiting the
appearance of the Imam.

Imam Ja'far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (AS) has said: "Surely the possessor
of this command (Imam al-Mahdi) will go into an occultation. So the
servant should have consciousness (Taqwa) of Allah during the period of
the occultation and should hold firm to his religion."

Therefore firstly, as Muslims, we need to work diligently at reforming
ourselves from within and with all the necessary seriousness. We should
adorn ourselves with Islamic virtues, perform all the duties that are
obligatory on us, and apply the directives provided by the Quran in our
daily lives. We should endeavour to attain Taqwa and hold firm to the
teachings of Islam.

Second, we should extract the social teachings of Islam from the Holy
Quran, the Prophet (SAW) and the Ahl al-Bayt (AS), in order to execute
those perfectly in our societies. By implementing the Islamic economic
programs we should resolve our economic problems and fight against
poverty, unemployment, and concentration of illicit wealth. By adopting
the divinely ordained laws we should rid ourselves of injustices and
corruption.

In short, we should commit ourselves to set in motion the realization
of an Islamic political, social, economic, and legal system, and present
this to the world as a viable alternative, to the best of our ability.

We realize that the perfect system of governance in all aspects can
only be implemented by the 12th Imam (AS). In addition, by combining a
complete legal code with the spiritual and moral concerns of the Islamic
system, Muslims can become the source of emulation for a humane
political, social and economic system.

Those who are engaged in these endeavours to make the revolution of the
Mahdi (AS) possible and successful are the ones who are truly awaiting
for deliverance through the appearance of the 12th Imam (AS) . It is in
way that we can also affect our social and cultural surroundings and
thus be in the state of readiness for the realization of the appearance
of the 12th Imam (AS).


**Conclusion**

Over time, man has been evolving into a materialistic being. The true
purpose of life is not at the forefront of man's life, as is evidenced
by the increasing war, instability and oppression in the world today.
However, Allah (SWT) has promised in the Holy Quran that, "It is He who
has sent His messenger with the guidance and the religion of truth to
make it prevail over every other religion. However much the disbelievers
may dislike it."

From this verse, we deduce that the religion of Islam will prevail over
all other religions and from Ahadith we are told that this will occur
under the rulership of the 12th Imam (AS).

Ahadith tell us the general state of the society before the appearance
of the 12th Imam (AS). The condition of the rulers has been painted as
being oppressive and tyrannical whereas the ruled will be oppressed and
victimized. In this environment, the condition of the believers will be
that of awaiting the reappearance of the Imam. Their condition amidst
all the oppression and tyranny will be that of Taqwa - and this is what
we as the followers of the Imam (AS) must aim for.
