Government Which Paves the Way For the Reappearance of Imam Mahdi (af)
======================================================================

In the name of Allah, the unblemished One Who bestows safety to the
believers. The One with majesty and greatness, May Allah bless Muhammad
and the progeny of Muhammad, the most pure and chaste of the creatures
and exalt them with the most exalted of the blessings.

"One who dies while expecting the government of Al-Qaim is like one who
is in the presence of al-Qaim." (Imam Jaafer as-Sadiq (a))

The Holy Quran clearly predicts the final victory of the forces of
righteous, peace and justice over those of evil, oppression and tyranny,
of the world-wide spread of Islam, the complete and all-round
establishment of high human values, the formation of a utopian and an
ideal society at the hands of the representative of God. Surely, the
land is Allah\\'s; He gives it for an inheritance to whom He wills, from
His servants and the future shall be for the pious and devote servants.
(Holy Quran, Sura Aaraaf, verse 128).

This paper presents a study on the concept how we could achieve the
preferred political, social and cultural conditions to establish a fair
and just global government in preparation for the reappearance of Imam
Mahdi (af).

History has shown that man is incapable of electing the right people to
leadership. Islam itself makes it necessary for its believers to live
within the framework of an Islamic order. Some of their religious
obligations can only be fully realized within a political state where
the leadership and structure of government are divinely ordained. The
Islamic government is an extension of the authority of the Prophet (s)
and holy Imams (as) because it works for social justice and welfare of
the people which is the main purpose of divine laws and decree.

The invaluable guidance from Imam Ali (a) as collected in the Nahj ul
Balaghah is a reliable source for a jurist at helm of any government to
explore political fiqh and draw strategies so as to overcome the
problems concerning human rights, internal policy, international
relationships, and economics, military and political sociology.

The famous epistle in the Nahj ul Balaghah, letter 53 from Imam Ali (a)
to Malik al-Ashtar al-Nakh'i his just Governor of Egypt is still the
greatest set of administrative commands on human freedom and rights.
Dated from 662AD/37 Hijri this 7th century historical charter written by
Imam Ali deserves to be called the constitution of Islamic policy.

It is based on the Holy Quran and the principles of Islam and is a
basic guide to administration covering almost all its essential
aspects - the advisory, the services, judiciary, revenues, and clerical
establishment.

Every article of this constitution serves as a custodian of common
interests and protector of collective society. Its enforcement has no
touch of selfishness or any degree of self-interest.
It contains such basic principles of the fulfillment of our obligations
to Allah, the protection of human rights without distinction of religion
or community, the care of the destitute and the poor and the provision
of support to the down-trodden and helpless.

It provides full guidance for the propagation of rights and justice,
establishment of peace and security and the prosperity and well-being of
the people. It presents discreet ways of dealing with the different
classes of society, the poor, business, industrial, farmers and sectors
engaged in agriculture. This provides direction not only for men of
position but it is also a desirable code of conduct for anyone engaged
in people management and is a handy guide in dealing with various
administrative situations.

The nature and structure of the first Islamic state to exist in modern
history, the Islamic Republic of Iran, is based on the political
doctrine of Imam Khomeini (ra) and those who advocate the idea of
wilayat al-faqih (guardianship of the jurisconsult). This is the
formation of a government on the basis of the guardianship of the faqih
(jurisconsult) during the occultation of the awaited Imam al Mahdi
(af).

The guardianship (wilayah) is absolutely indivisible and should be
vested in the wali-amr. The notion of jurists consulting and working
with the people responsible for selecting experts in various scientific
and technical fields to governorship is expected to be more successful
in achieving Islamic unity at political, intellectual and emotional
levels.

However the authorization of the extent of the Wali e Faqih and its
dimensions has not so far been fully explored in any government because
the conditions have not been conducive as yet.

My study examines how effectively this concept can be further enhanced
and replicated to encourage similar robust systems globally to bring
about the renaissance to establish the Will of Allah, the last of
Allah's representatives to mankind, Imam Mahdi (af) on earth. "It is He
who has sent His messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to
make it prevail over every other religion. However much the disbelievers
may dislike it." (Holy Quran Sura al-Tawbah 9:33 and Sura As-Saff
61:9).


**Belief in One God and human freedom**

The root and essence of Islamic belief is monotheism. We believe that
the creator of the world and of all beings in the universe including
mankind is the one and only Exalted God who knows all and is capable of
all things and to Him belongs all things and objects.

This principle teaches us to be submissive only before the power of God
and to obey no man unless obeying him is equal to obeying God. On this
basis no individual has a right to force any other man to bow to him.

"Say: O followers of the Book! Come to an equitable proposition between
us and you that we shall not serve any but Allah and we shall not
associate anything with Him, and that some of us shall not take others
for lords besides Allah;â€¦"(Holy Quran Sura Ale-Imran:64).

This code of faith teaches us the principle of human freedom. That is
no man has the right to deprive an individual or community of liberty,
to legislate for them, to regulate their conduct according to his own
understanding of it which is generally defective, or regulate the
conduct of others according to his wishes or desires.

The most important pillar of Islam is the belief that man has been
created by God and is subservient to none but Him ( Holy Quran Sura
Ar-Ra'd:36) and that one of the primary objectives of the Prophet's(s)
mission is to release mankind from all burdens and chains enslaving it
(Holy Quran Sura Al-A'raf:157).

This provides not only the essence of the Islamic Charter for
individual freedom from all bondage but also subjects man to the
sovereignty of God in all aspects of life which essentially implies
subordination of man to the moral law as specified in the Holy Quran and
by the examples and traditions of the Ahlul Bayt (a).

It is for this reason that the social rules and regulations begin with
opposition to tyrannical and colonialist powers. From the principle of
faith and belief in one God who has created everyone and belief that we
are all His Creatures and born to obey and attest to His Glory and thus
worship Him is what leads to the principle of equality of men.

Man's only distinction and preference to one another rest in his
desirable quality and keeping detached from perversion and sin.
Therefore anything that upsets this equality and create self-important
and ridiculous distinctions must be fought in every community.

The Islamic state should ensure that it does not discriminate between
religious minorities and other segments of society. The only difference
between people is their degree of piety and fear of God Most Exalted,
according to the Qur'an "The most honorable of you in the sight of Allah
is the best in practicing taqwa" (Holy Quran Sura Hujurat: 13).

Man is inclined intuitively to achieving perfection. However it is a
domain which exclusively belongs to God Most Exalted for it is He who is
the source of all perfections and power. In order to elevate man from
his base nature to lofty heights of achieving awareness and closeness to
his Creator, man should be shown how to actively seeking perfection.
Thus he will be disposed to achieving the ideal environment for
himself.

The legislation for man's progress lies with God alone, just as the
laws of creation and being are willed by Him. Man's success and movement
towards perfection is linked to the obedience to divine laws which have
been brought to humanity by the Messengers of God (peace be upon them
all) - the great reformers of mankind.

In fact the philosophy of the prophetic missions was a means for
leading men from darkness towards the light that the Almighty God - to
activate man's perfection seeking power, in reformation of society and
in the establishment of equity and justice. This is the first step
towards creating the foundations of the perfect Islamic society to pave
the way for the reappearance of Imam al Mahdi (af).

**Purpose**

To achieve political, social and cultural conditions of performance in
preparation for the reappearance of Imam Al Mahdi (af), it is necessary
to raise spiritual awareness and readiness to recognize the Imam of the
Age. The people and leadership together must work together to create and
establish a conducive environment in their personal lives and in society
that lays the foundation of the establishment of a just government by
His Eminence, Imam Mahdi(af).

It seems evident that, in order bring about a religious revival in
modern world, more than striving for a theoretical, theological,
jurisprudential, ethical, scholarly or revolutionary revival of
religion, religious reformers and well-wishers must strive for an
elemental and spiritual revival of religion.

There should be no exaggerated nationalism which leads to the concept
of the superiority of race, colour, language and geographic and historic
positions. These are the results as shown by history of efforts to
divide and rule, to sow dispute and to impose the domination of arrogant
political factions.

The creation of a favourable environment for the growth of moral
virtues based on faith and piety and the struggle against all forms of
immorality and corruption. The government must raise the level of public
awareness in all areas through the use of media and public relations
organizations.


