The age of the imam
===================

The study of the age that Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) lived in is no longer
a kind of luxury or decoration to the book, but it is a necessity that
the modern scientific research requires. Studying an age has become from
the methodical studies that a researcher cannot leave aside, because it
reveals the reality of the general life which that certain person lives,
and also it sheds lights on the events that takes place during that age
which naturally have a great influence on the behavior of that person.
Sociologists say that the social life affects and is affected.

Anyhow, we objectively shall offer several sides of the general life of
the age that Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) lived in.

The Economical Life
-------------------

Before we shed lights on the economical life of the age of Imam Abu
Muhammad (a.s.), we would like to show that Islam has paid extreme
attention to the developing of the economy of the nation, the growing of
the individual income, and the prosperity of the general life. Islam has
considered poverty as a destroying disaster which must be removed by all
means. Islam has compared between disbelief and poverty, and as
disbelief must be removed due to the Islamic Sharia, poverty must be
removed from society as well. Islam has ordered Muslim rulers and
leaders to spare no effort in order to save Muslims from the dangers of
poverty and wretchedness which are the reasons behind the intellectual
and moral deviation among people.

From the creative methods that the Islamic economy is based on is that
the Sharia has limited the authorities of rulers and officials. They are
not permitted in any case to play with the treasury of the state,
because it is for all Muslims and not for one person. The wealth of
Muslims must be spent on Muslims, and neither the ruler no any of his
government has the right to extort from the treasury to spend on himself
or his kin, for this is treason against Allah and against Muslims.

The Abbasid rule, during all its ages, followed a special economical
policy that was odd to the true Islamic system, and it was too far from
the laws Islam has legislated to control the wealth of the Islamic
state. We shall discuss here in brief the general economical system in
the Abbasid age.

### Incomes Of The State

###

The most income of the state was collected from land taxes and zakat
which was about millions of dinars. Historians said it was about three
hundred and sixty million dirhams a year,[^367] and it was about five
hundred million dirhams in some years.[^368] In that age a dirham had a
good value. It equaled the price of a sheep, a jar of honey, or a jar of
oil, whereas a dinar equaled the price of a camel.[^369]

Unfortunately, these abundant monies were not spent to develop the
scientific, medical, and economical life as Islam wanted, but they went
to the pockets of rulers who spent them on building high palaces as
al-Mutawakkil did, and on singers, dancers, drinking companions, and
other fields of debauchery and pleasures.

### Violence In Collecting The Land Tax

###

Violence, oppression, and punishments were common methods in collecting
the land taxes during most of the Abbasid ages. People suffered
exhausting kinds of oppression from the publicans who had no bit of
mercy and kindness in their hearts. They imposed taxes according to
their desires and greed, and whoever refused or delay to pay the imposed
taxes his fate would be either to grave or to prison.

Al-Jahshiyari said, ‘The people of kharaj (who did not or could not pay
the land tax) were punished severely with different kinds of torment
like being thrown to beasts of prey and bees.

Muhammad bin Muslim was a close companion to al-Mehdi (the Abbasid
caliph). When al-Mehdi became the caliph and found that the people of
kharaj were tortured severely, he consulted with Muhammad bin Muslim who
said to him, ‘O Ameerul Mo'minin, this is a situation that can be
changed. They are debtors of Muslims and must be treated as debtors.’
Then the caliph ordered to stop punishing them.’[^370]

During the reign of ar-Rashid, people criticized al-Fadhl bin Yahya
al-Barmaki who was the wali of Khurasan. They complained at him too much
until ar-Rashid deposed him and appointed in place of him Ali bin Eessa
who killed many notables from the people of Khurasan and farmed great
monies. Once, he sent to ar-Rashid ten million dirhams in a sack made of
silk.[^371]

The people of Mosul also suffered terrible oppression because of the
farming of the kharaj (land tax). The wali, appointed by ar-Rashid, on
them was Yahya bin Sa’eed. He ordered them to pay him the kharaj of past
years, and he whipped most of them.[^372]

Islam has bound walis to be kind to their subjects and to improve their
economical conditions. People must not meet any pressure from rulers in
farming the kharaj and zakat, but most Abbasid kings paid no attention
to that, and rather, they subjected the nation by violence and
oppression in collecting the kharaj.

### Increasing The Kharaj

###

The officials of the Abbasid governments often asked people to pay more
than the specified taxes and they took the further amounts for
themselves. When Abu Ubaydillah bin Yasar became the vizier of al-Mehdi,
he made the kharaj on date palms and trees, and it continued so after
him.[^373]

Egypt suffered different misfortunes and distresses because of the
kharaj. Its wali Musa bin Mus’ab doubled the kharaj on every acre, and
he imposed taxes on the people of markets and on cattle. He took bribes
in judgment.

People revolted against him because of his oppression.[^374] Ibn Taghri
said, ‘He pressed on people in farming the kharaj. He doubled the tax on
every acre unlike what had been before him. People met distresses from
him. He was bad to people. He took bribes on judgments…soldiers hated
him. They caused him troubles and often opposed him because he was an
oppressive tyrant.’[^375]

These doings were too far from the essence and reality of Islam. Those
men were but a gang of thieves and highwaymen who went far into crimes
and sins. Umar bin Ubayd said to al-Mansur ad-Dawaniqi, the Abbasid
caliph, ‘Behind your door there are fires flaming because of oppression.
Behind your door it is acted due to neither the Book of Allah nor the
Sunna of His messenger.’[^376]

### Appropriating The Wealth Of The State

###

The Abbasids appropriated the wealth of the nation and took for
themselves and for their kin, as they liked. The income of Muhammad bin
Sulayman al-Abbasi a day was about one hundred thousand dirhams.[^377]
When he died, he left a great inheritance which ar-Rashid took sixty
thousand dirhams from. Historians say, ‘Great monies came to
al-Khayzuran (the mother of Harun ar-Rashid) until her wealth became
about one hundred million and sixty thousand dirhams. Some writer says
that this amount equaled the half of the revenue of the state at that
time and two thirds of the revenue of Rockefeller in this century.

It was found with the wife of al-Mutawakkil (an Abbasid king) one
million and eight hundred thousand dinars. The mother of al-Muqtadir (an
Abbasid king) was too wealthy.[^378] Ibn al-Jawzi said about her, ‘She
had a great wealth that was beyond counting. She got from her lands one
million dinars every year.’[^379]

The Abbasid kings gifted their relatives with great monies. Ar-Rashid
distributed among his uncles and relatives monies that no caliph before
him had ever distributed.[^380] Al-Mansur ad-Dawaniqi assigned one
million dirhams to each one of his uncles.[^381] The Abbasid family grew
until they were, at the reign of al-Ma’mun, about thirty-three thousand
persons.[^382] This family that had no any preference to the rest of
Muslims appropriated the wealth of the nation and enjoyed the great
monies, while the rest of Muslim peoples were sunk into poverty,
deprivation, and wretchedness.

### Great Gifts To Bondmaids

###

The Abbasid kings were excessive in gifting the bondmaids and
songstresses. Once, ar-Rashid gave his bondmaid Dananir, at the night of
an eid, a necklace of thirty thousand dinars.[^383] Al-Muqtadir gave to
one of his concubines the three weights Orphan Pearl.[^384] Abul Faraj
al-Isfahani said that Hamwayh hired for his bondmaid some jewels from
some jeweler for twelve million dinars. When ar-Rashid saw the jewels,
he admired them. He bought them and offered them as a present to the
bondmaid.[^385] Al-Muqtadir played with money. He effaced coins and then
gave them to women and bondmaids.[^386] Al-Mutawakkil had a bondmaid
called Fadhl. She sat on a chair and argued with poets in his presence.
He asked her when he bought her, ‘Are you a poet?’

She said, ‘So claims he who bought and sold me.’

Al-Mutawakkil laughed and asked her to recite him some verses of her
poetry. She did, and he admired her poetry and ordered to give her fifty
thousand dirhams.[^387]

Al-Muqtadir had a village-like statue made of silver. It was very
expensive. He donated it to one of his servants just because one of his
bondmaids asked him to do that.

These are just few examples on the wasting of the Abbasid caliphs who
spent the wealth of the nation on their pleasures paying no attention to
the welfare of the society or to the development of the general life.

### Abundant Gifts To Poets

###

Poets were the only media at that age. They supported the Abbasid rule
and spread fabricated virtues ascribed to the Abbasid kings. They
preferred those kings to the Alawids who were the propagandists of
social justice in Islam. The Abbasids endowed poets with abundant monies
and made them extremely wealthy.

Once, Abul Shibl al-Barjami al-Kufi praised al-Mutawakkil with a
thirty-verse-poem and al-Mutawakkil gave him thirty thousand dirhams for
that.[^388]

When al-Mutawakkil held a general meeting for people to pay homage to
his three sons al-Muntasir, al-Mu’tazz, and al-Mu’ayyad as the heir
apparents after him, as-Sawli recited a poem on the occasion and
al-Mutawakkil gave him one hundred dirhams, and so did each one of his
sons.[^389]

Once, Ibrahim bin al-Mudbir recited a poem praising al-Mutawakkil who
was pleased with the poem and gave the poet fifty thousand dirhams and
asked his vizier Ubaydillah bin Yahya to find him a good job.

Marwan bin Abul Janub was one of the poets who got abundant monies from
al-Mutawakkil. He was very interested in praising al-Mutawakkil. Once,
he got from him fifty thousand dirhams after a poem. On the occasion of
the homage to his three sons, al-Mutawakkil gave the poet one hundred
and twenty thousand dirhams, fifty garments, a mule, a horse, and a
donkey.[^390] For another poem, al-Mutawakkil gave him one hundred gold
dinars.

Al-Buhturi, who was the emir of poets at that time, prepared all his
talents to praise al-Mutawakkil who gave to him high titles and good
epithets besides the great wealth.

Al-Mutawakkil gave abundant wealth to Ali bin al-Jahm and approached him
to his meetings after praising him and declared his enmity towards the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s). He dispraised the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) bitterly and
preferred to them the Abbasids who had no virtue save the seizing of the
rule and leading the nation towards dark abysses of oppression.

This wasteful spending on poets scattered an important part from the
wealth of the nation that had to be spent on the public and to satisfy
all needs of the nation.

### Palaces

###

The Abbasids were extensively excessive in building palaces. They spent
incredible amounts on building their palaces and decorating them with
wonderful decorations that no one had ever seen like throughout history.
Al-Mutawakkil built a palace called al-Burj. It was the most beautiful
building of al-Mutawakkil. He made in it big statutes of gold and silver
and a wide pool with plates of gold and silver. Beside the pool there
was a tree of gold with birds that whistled. It was adorned with jewels.
A big throne of gold, with two big lions and a drawer having statues of
beasts and eagles, was made for him there with other things as the
throne of Prophet Solomon (a.s.) had been described. The walls were
covered from inside and outside with mosaic and gilded marble. He spent
on the building and decorating of this palace about one million and
seven hundred thousand dinars. He ordered that no one should enter this
palace except in clothes of embroidered silk. He brought dancers,
singers, musicians, and drinking companions into the palace. When he sat
in this paradise, his vizier Yahya bin Khaqan said to him, ‘O Ameerul
Mo'minin, I hope that Allah will thank you for building this palace and
reward you with the Paradise.’ Al-Mutawakkil asked, ‘What for?’ Yahya
said, ‘You have filled people with desire to the Paradise by this
palace, for this will lead them to do good deeds in order to be in
Paradise.’ Al-Mutawakkil became delighted at hearing that.[^391]

From the other palaces that al-Mutawakkil had built was al-Ja’fari. The
cost of building and decorating this palace was more than two million
dinars. When the palace was completed, he brought singers, dancers, and
clowns and gave each of them two thousand dirhams.[^392]

Anyhow, we have mentioned the great expenses that al-Mutawakkil had
spent on all his palaces in our book “the Life of Imam al-Hadi” which
showed the economical imbalance in that time where the Abbasid family
appropriated the revenue of the state and spent it on their pleasures
and lusts.

### The Luxury Of The Abbasid Women

###

The greater part of the state revenue was spent on the ladies of the
Abbasid palace. They lived in absolute luxury and bliss. Lady Zubayda
(Harun ar-Rashid’s wife) was interested in expensive embroidered clothes
that one dress of hers cost fifty thousand dinars.[^393] This luxury was
not limited to the Abbasid ladies only, but it also included the ladies
of viziers. Utabah, the mother of Ja’far al-Barmaki had one hundred
bondmaids and each one of them put on jewelry and ornaments different
from the other.[^394]

### The Wretchedness Of The Public

###

It was naturally that the majority of the Muslim peoples suffered
poverty and wretchedness after they had been deprived from the state
treasury that was spent on the pleasures of the kings, viziers, and the
media, whereas poverty spread among most of people.

Once, al-Asma’iy saw a poet cling to the curtains of the Kaaba while
reciting,

“O my Lord, I am asking as You see,

wearing two (ragged) clocks as You see,

and my old wife is sitting there as You see,

and my stomach is hungry as You see,

so what do You see about what You see?”[^395]

Many other poets described in their poetry the miserable life of
sufferings they lived. It was very difficult for them (and for most of
people) to find a bit of food and apiece of cloth for their hungry,
naked children.

The miserable life that some poets, who had no relation with the Abbasid
palace, lived, led them to beg through their poetry viziers, judges and
other officials, and made their poetry as a means for gaining. Abu
Fir’own as-Sasi was in utmost need, and when he was unable to bear any
more, he went to al-Hasan bin Sahl the vizier of al-Ma’mun and praised
him in a poem. In the same poem he expressed his bad condition and the
wretchedness of his children.

Poverty stung Abu Fir’own severely and this time he went to one of the
judges of Basra begging his help. It was shame to those kings who had
the treasures of the world in their hands but left their peoples
suffering neediness and deprivation.

From the poets, who suffered poverty, was Abush Shamaqmaq who went to
the king begging him after he saw his children writhe with hunger and
pain.

These poets represented the lives of their peoples and their sufferings
of hunger, pain, and loss. The economical life was not sound and right,
but it was confused and paralyzed. The Abbasid governments did not
achieve ease for people and did not provide a good life for them. The
revenue of the state was spent on the Abbasid family, the viziers, and
the prominent statesmen, whereas the majority of people lived in poverty
and wretchedness and could not obtain even the least necessities of
living.

### The Imam’s Situation

###

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) represented the front of opposition to the
Abbasid rule. He often criticized the rulers for appropriating the
wealth of the nation and extorting the livelihood of people.

From the notable forms of the opposition that Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
followed was that he prohibited himself from communicating or
cooperating with those kings who took the wealth of Allah as theirs and
the people of Allah as their slaves. They spared no effort to join the
imam (a.s.) to their retinues but they could not, and then they treated
him with absolute severity. They fought him in the means of his living
and caused him to be in pressing neediness. They prevented monies to
come to him from his Shia followers, but one of the Shia sent jars of
oil to the imam (a.s.) and he put money inside them[^396] which
decreased the pressure of that blockade.

Anyhow, Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) sided with the poor and the deprived
who were the victims of those kings who robbed the wealth of the nation
and left the state in economical imbalance.

The Political Life
------------------

The political life in the age of Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was very bad
and unstable. Oppression, injustice, and seditions prevailed everywhere,
and many revolts broke out. That, as I think, was because of the
domination of the Turks over the reins of government and their absolute
control over all affairs of the state though they were expert neither in
politics nor in administration. They oppressed people, transgressed in
the rule, and spread terrorism. The other reason behind that was the
ignorance of the Abbasid kings, their indulging in pleasures and lusts,
and their inadvertence to the interests of people which caused many
political crises at that time.

### Oppressing The Alawids

###

The Alawids were terribly tried and extremely burdened during most
periods of the Abbasid rule. The Abbasid kings officially oppressed the
Alawids, chased, and punished them severely. They imposed on them
economical blockade until they were in utmost neediness.

Historians say that during the reign of al-Mutawakkil, the Alawids
suffered neediness and deprivation so bitter and horrible that could not
be described. They had no but one cloak, and whenever an Alawid man or
an Alawid woman wanted to go out, he or she put it on. People refrained
from associating with them for fear of the tyrannical government. One
day, Muhammad bin Salih (bin) al-Husayn asked Ibrahim bin al-Mudbir (to
be as a mediator) to ask Eessa bin Musa al-Jarmi’s daughter’s hand. The
father of the girl refused and said to the mediator, ‘I just tell you
the truth. By Allah, I do not know one nobler or more honorable than
him, but I refused him just because I fear from al-Mutawakkil and his
sons after him for my life and wealth.’[^397]

Muslims refrained from contacting with the Alawids and even from
greeting them, because the Abbasid governments punished severely whoever
showed any kind of respect and regard towards the Alawids.

The worst period the Alawids underwent was the reign of al-Mutawakkil
who poured all his rage and spite on them. They ran away to all towns
and villages[^398] for fear that the government might arrest and lead
them either to graveyards or prisons.

### The Imam’s Amulet

###

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) suffered different kinds of oppression and
cruelty during the reign of al-Mutawakkil and other Abbasid kings whom
the imam was contemporary with. Therefore, he resorted to Allah to
protect him from their plots and save him from their evils. He armed
himself with this du’a:

“I have charmed myself with the charm of Allah; the light by which He
has hidden from eyes, and taken precaution for my self, family,
children, properties, and all that under my charge by the name of Allah,
the Beneficent, the Merciful, and sought refuge for myself and all that
from what I fear and beware of with Allah Who*(there is no god but Him,
the Everliving, the Eternal. Slumber does not overtake Him nor sleep;
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is His, who is
he that can intercede with Him but by His permission? He knows what is
before them and what is behind them, and they cannot comprehend anything
out of His knowledge except what He pleases, His knowledge extends over
the heavens and the earth, and the preservation of them both tires Him
not, and He is the Most High, the Great)* ,[^399] *(And who is more
unjust than he who is reminded of the signs of his Lord, then he turns
away from them and forgets what his two hands have sent before? Surely
We have placed veils over their hearts lest they should understand it
and a heaviness in their ears; and if you call them to the guidance,
they will not ever follow the right course in that case)* ,[^400] *(Have
you seen him who makes his desire his god, and Allah sends him astray
purposely, and seals up his hearing and his heart, and sets on his sight
a covering? Then who will lead him after Allah (has condemned him)? Will
ye not then heed?)* ,[^401] *(These are they on whose hearts and their
hearing and their eyes Allah has set a seal, and these are the heedless
ones)* ,[^402] *(And when you recite the Qur’an, We place between you
and those who do not believe in the hereafter a hidden barrier. And We
have placed coverings on their hearts and a heaviness in their ears lest
they understand it, and when you mention your Lord alone in the Qur’an
they turn their backs in aversion)* ,[^403] and may Allah have blessings
on Muhammad and on his pure progeny…”[^404]

This du’a shows the extent of the fears the imam (a.s.) felt from the
Abbasids, and therefore, he resorted to Allah to save him and his family
from their (the Abbasid’s) oppression and plotting.

He also charmed himself from the Abbasids by this du’a:

“O You, my means at my distress, O You, my succor at my grief, O You, my
relief at my loneliness, guard me by Your eye that does not sleep, and
shield me by Your shelter that is unreachable.’[^405]

### Persecuting The People Of Qum

###

The Abbasids persecuted the people of Qum and treated them with
oppression and terror. They appointed Musa bin Yahya, who was wicked and
unjust, as wali over them. He was impolite, immoral, and inhuman that
people desisted from him. He treated people in a very bad way and
exaggerated in oppressing them until the notables of Qum resorted to
Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) complaining to him at what that tyrant did to
them.

The imam prayed Allah the Almighty to save them from the evil of that
mean, oppressive wali, and taught them this du’a and asked them to
recite it in the qunut of their prayers so that Allah might relieve them
from this calamity:

“Praise be to Allah as gratefulness to his blessings, calling for His
more, imploring His livelihood, being loyal to Him and not to other than
Him, and refraining from disbelieving in Him and denying His might and
exaltedness, a praise of one who knows that all the blessings he has are
from his Lord, and the punishments that afflict him are for the wrongs
his hands have committed, and the blessings of Allah be on Muhammad His
slave and messenger, and the best of His creation, and the means of
believers towards His mercy, and (blessings be) on his pure progeny who
are his guardians.

O Allah, You have called (Your people) for Your favor, and ordered
(them) to supplicate You, and You have insured response to Your people.
You have not disappointed whoever resorted to You with a wish and turned
to You with a need. You have not let any asking hand come back empty
from Your gift or desperate of Your donation. Was there any traveler who
traveled to You and did not find You near, or a comer who came to You
and You put obstacles between You and him?! Was there any insister on
asking You that the flow of Your favor did not include him…?

O Allah, I come to You with my wish, the hand of my request knocks at
the door of Your favor, my heart invokes You with the reverence of
submission, and I found You the best intercessor for me with You. You
know my request before it comes to my mind or gets in my imagination. O
Allah, so complete my du’a by Your response to me and meet my request by
the satisfying of my wish!

O Allah, the aberration of seditions has included us, the haze of
confusion has overcome us, meanness and lowness have fought with us, the
untrustworthy on Your religion have ruled over us, the wicked, who have
annulled Your rule, have extorted our affairs and tried to damage Your
people and corrupt Your land.

O Allah, our wealth is appropriated after it was distributed (among
all), and our rule has become domination after it was shura
(consultation) and monarchy after it was the nation’s option; amusements
and musicals have been bought by the shares of orphans and widows,
non-Muslims rule over the believers, and sinners have been entrusted
with their (people’s) affairs, and no protector protected them from a
danger, and no guardian looked at them with the eye of mercifulness, and
no kind one satisfied the thirsty hearts from a famine, and so they are
weak and hungry in a home of loss, captives of wretchedness, inheritors
of melancholy, meanness…

O Allah, the plant of falseness has come to harvest, reached its full,
its stick has become firm…its branches have gone high and fixed.

O Allah, bring, from the truth, its reaper to reap it, break its stock,
smash its branches, cut off its hump, and amputate its extents, so that
falseness, with its ugly picture, disappears, and truth, with its
beautiful dress, appears.

O Allah, let no pillar of oppression, but You tear it down, no shield,
but You expose it, no unity, but You separate it, no heavy force, but
You slight it, no high rank, but You make it low, no post of a banner,
but You turn it over, and no lively thing, but You perish it.

O Allah, cover his[^406] sun, put out his light, efface his mention,
hit, by the truth, his head, scatter his armies, and frighten the hearts
of his people!

O Allah, do not let a remainder of him, unless it is annihilated, nor a
structure unless it is torn down, nor a unity unless it is broken, nor
an arm unless it is disabled, nor a boundary unless it is violated, nor
a flagpole unless it is overthrown!

O Allah, show us his supporters scattered after affinity, separate after
unity, and disgraced after their domination over the nation!

O Allah, bring us the day of justice, and show it to us eternal with no
darkness in it, and pure light with no mix with it, and make its
goodness fall down on us, and its blessing come down on us, and avenge
on his[^407] opponent, and support him over his enemy!

O Allah, show the truth,[^408] and make it shine in the dusk of
darkness, and ambiguity of confusion!

O Allah, enliven by it the dead hearts, unite by it the separate desires
and different opinions, establish by it the annulled penalties and
neglected rulings, satiate by it the hungry stomachs, relieve by it the
weak and tired bodies, as You made us mention it, and put into our mind
Your supplicating, made us successful in calling for it, and keeping the
people of ignorance away from it, house in our hearts its love, and
eagerness to it, and expecting it to establish its ceremonies!

O Allah, give us best certainty on it, O You, the Achiever of good
wills, the Attainer of delayed hopes. O Allah, refute the fabricators
who fabricate against You in it, and confute the suspicions of the
desperate of Your mercy and desperate of it!

O Allah, make us a means of its means, a figure of its figures, a fort
of its forts, and brighten our faces with its bright, honor us by its
support, and make our intention good…

O Allah, You have made us know our selves, and see our defects that we
fear not to be able to respond to You, while You favor those who do not
deserve, and bestow on requesters before they request, so give us due to
Your generosity and favor, for You do what You like, and determine as
You want, and we have resorted to You, and repented of our sins.

O Allah,…and the caller for You, the doer of justice from Your people,
the poor to Your mercy, and the needy to Your help on Your obedience…You
have given him your blessing, dressed him with the dresses of Your
honor, thrown on him the love of Your obedience, fixed his love in the
hearts, made him successful to do Your command that the people of his
time are indifferent of, made him a resort to the wronged of Your
people, and a support to those who do not find a supporter save You, and
a restorer of what has been annulled of the verdicts of Your Book, and a
builder of what has been ruined of the laws of Your religion, and the
rulings of Your Prophet, Your blessing, peace, and mercy be on him and
on his progeny. O Allah, make him safe from the plotting of enemies…and
take him to the best that You have taken the doers of Your justice from
among the successors of prophets. O Allah, degrade by him whoever does
not turn back to Your love, and whoever bears enmity against him, and
shoot by Your deadly stone whoever incites against Your religion by
degrading him and scattering his power…

O Allah, as he has made himself as a target to the far for the sake of
You, and sacrificed his soul to defend the believers, and resist the
evil of suspicious apostates until he shall remove spread disobediences,
and show what ulama have left behind their backs whereas they have
covenanted to declare it for people and not to conceal it, and he shall
call for the obedience of You alone, without making a partner to You
from Your creation that his command may be over Yours…O Allah, assist
him by Your victory, enable him in what he is unable in, increase his
power from Your assistance…

O Allah, honor him with the doing of Your command to see the standing of
Reckoning as it is, delight Your Prophet (Your blessings be on him) by
seeing him and whoever follows him in his mission, reward him with the
best for doing Your command, take him closer to You in his life, and
pity our wretchedness…O Allah, make him safe from what is feared for
him, drive away from him the arrows of plotting that the people of
grudge throw at him and at the participant in his matter and his
assistants on the obedience of Allah Whom You have made as his fort,
resort, and comfort and who leave their families and children and
country, give up comfortable beds and ease, stop their trades,  harm
their livings…and rejected the transient pleasures of this world. O
Allah, keep them in Your safety and protection, defend them against
whoever has enmity against them from Your people, suffice them and
provide them with Your help, assistance, and victory, defeat, by their
right, the falseness of whoever wants to put out Your light. O Allah,
fill by them every horizon and every country with justice, fairness,
mercifulness, and virtue, and thank them due to Your generosity and
bounty with what You have bestowed on the doers of justice from Your
people, and saved for them from Your reward that might raise in degrees,
You do whatever You like, and determine whatever You want…’[^409]


### Oppression And Tyranny Of Viziers

###

Most viziers of the Abbasid rulers were tyrannical and oppressive. They
disdained people and were excessive in subjugating and harming them. One
day during the reign of al-Muntasir, his vizier Ahmad bin al-Khasib went
out riding on a horse. Some man approached him complaining, and he (the
vizier) took his leg out if the stirrup and kicked the man in his chest
and killed him.[^410]

Muhammad bin Abdul Melik, the vizier of al-Wathiq, made an oven and put
nails into it to torture people in it.[^411]

In addition to that, the viziers embezzled the wealth of the state.
Uthaman bin Imarah, who was the wali of Sajistan during the reign of
Harun ar-Rashid, was put into prison for five thousand dirhams.

Those viziers just imitated their masters the Abbasid kings who extorted
the wealth of Muslims and left them in terrible poverty. Historians say,
‘Al-Mansur took from people until he left nothing with them. What he had
taken from them was about eight hundred million dirhams.’[^412]

### Internal Revolts

###

It was natural for the Muslim peoples to struggle and rebel against the
Abbasid governments that ruled unjustly and appropriated the wealth and
the economical powers of those peoples. Many local revolts took place
aiming at getting rid of enslavement, oppression, and persecution. Here
we mention some of those revolts to prove our saying that the political
life at that age was unstable, confused, and lacking security.

### The Revolt Of Yahya

###

Great martyr Yahya bin Umar at-Talibi rebelled against the Abbasid rule
calling for the achievement of social justice and the distribution of
Muslims’ wealth among the poor and the needy. The deprived and all
classes of people joined him because of his real and true aims of
improving the general life of the nation. He occupied Kufa and set free
all the wronged and oppressed people from its prisons. However, later
on, the Abbasid government could overcome and kill him. His head was
taken to Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Tahir one of the tyrants of that age
who took the head to the tyrant caliph al-Musta’een. The head was hung
in Samarra’ to be as a lesson for whoever might think to rebel.
Opportunists went to Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Tahir congratulating him
on that victory!!! Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari as well went to this emir but
said to him, ‘O emir, you are being congratulated on the killing of a
man that if the messenger of Allah (a.s.) was alive, he would be
consoled on.’

All present people became silent and no one answered him with
anything.[^413] He left angrily while reciting the following:

“O Family of Tahir, eat it harmfully,

for the flesh of the Prophet is not edible.

A revenge that its seeker is Allah,

Definitely will be taken.”

The killing of Yahya was one of the disasters that afflicted Muslims at
that age and caused a great loss. Poets composed many poems elegizing
this great revolutionary leader.

### The Revolt Of The Negroes

###

From the revolts that dazed the Abbasids in that age was the revolt of
the Negroes led by Ali bin Abdurrahim from bani Abdul Qays who claimed
that he was Alawid. He claimed that his lineage belonged to the eternal
martyr Zayd bin Ali bin al-Husayn, so that the public might join him and
support his revolt.

Anyhow, Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) denied the claims of Ali bin Muhammad
the leader of this revolt and said, ‘The man (leader) of the Negroes is
not from us the Ahlul Bayt (a.s).[^414] The details of this revolt have
mentioned in all books of history.

### The Revolt Of Sham[^415]

###

Al-Mutawakkil appointed a wolf from his agents and mercenaries who
turned the life of people there into hell, but then the free rebelled
against him and drove him away. When al-Mutawakkil knew about that, he
sent an army of seven thousand horsemen and three thousand infantry, and
authorized the general leader to violate Damascus for three days as
Yazeed bin Mo’awiya had done to the town of the Prophet (a.s) Medina
before.[^416]

### The Domination Of The Turks On The Rule

###

From the prominent factors of the political and administrational
corruption in the body of the Abbasid government at the age of Imam Abu
Muhammad (a.s.) was the domination of the Turks over the government and
their playing with the destinies of the state. The Abbasid throne was
under their will and desire. They appointed and deposed whomever they
liked. All constitutional authorities were in their hands, and the king
was but in name for he was deprived of all his administrational
authorities and all things else except amusement and lusts.

Al-Mu’tamid was disabled by the Turks to a degree that he was prevented
from spending any money whereas all the world was under his throne. The
Turks had control over everything.

Some poet said about al-Musta’een the Abbasid caliph,

“A caliph in a cage,

between Waseef and Bugha.

He says whatever they say to him,

As a parrot does.”[^417]

When al-Mu’tazz assumed the caliphate, some of his companions sent for a
diviner and asked him how long the caliph would sit on the throne and
how long he would live. A humorous man from among the attendants said,
‘I know that.’ They asked him to tell them and he said, ‘The matter is
in the hands of the Turks. They decide how long he rules and how long he
lives.’ The all burst into laughter.[^418]

The Religious Life
------------------

The religious life at the time of Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was not sound
or straight. It was confused and roiled by some deviants who raised
spurious arguments about the pure Islamic beliefs. Some non-Muslim
jugglers tried to misguide Muslims and corrupt their beliefs. Imam Abu
Muhammad (a.s.) resisted all those attempts and he refuted all those
spuriosities and illusions, and he brought out the pure face of Islam.

There was another phenomenon that appeared in the age of Imam Abu
Muhammad (a.s.). Some quack fabricated lies against Imam Abu Muhammad
and his father (a.s.) before him to corrupt the beliefs of the followers
of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s), but the imam cursed him and ordered his
followers to curse and disavow him.

### Refuting Al-Kindi

###

Isaaq al-Kindi was the philosopher of Iraq. His thoughts tempted him of
some suspicion about the Holy Qur'an, and he spread among scholars that
he had written a book called “The Contradiction of the Qur'an”. He
busied himself with this matter. The news came to Imam Abu Muhammad
(a.s.) who met one of al-Kindi’s disciples and said to him, ‘Is there no
wise man among you to prevent your teacher al-Kindi from that which he
has busied himself with in the Qur'an?’

The disciple said, ‘We are his disciples. How is it possible for us to
object to him whether in this matter or else?’

Imam Abu Muhammad said to him, ‘Do you tell him what I shall say to
you?’

He said, ‘Yes.’

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said to him, ‘Go to him, be courteous with him,
and show him that you will help him in what he is in. when he feels
comfortable with you, you say to him, ‘If someone recites the Qur'an, is
it possible that he means other meanings than what you think you
understand?’ He shall say that it is possible because he is a man who
understands when he listens. If he says that, you say to him, “How do
you know? He might mean other than the meanings that you think, and so
he fabricates other than its (the Qur'an) meanings…’

The disciple went to his teacher al-Kindi and did as the imam told him.
Al-Kindi said to his disciple, ‘I adjure you by Allah to tell where you
have got this from!’

The disciple said, ‘It was something that came to my mind and I
mentioned it to you.’

Al-Kindi said, ‘No, no one like you can get to this. Would you tell me
where you have got this from?’

He said, ‘Imam Abu Muhammad asked me to say that…’

Al-Kindi said, ‘Now you say the truth. Like this would not come out
except from that house (the Ahlul Bayt)…’

After that, al-Kindi burnt his book.[^419]

### Refuting A Monk

###

Once, people suffered rainlessness. Al-Mu’tamid, the Abbasid caliph,
ordered people to go out in the open air for three days in order to
offer the prayer for rain. They did, but no rain fell down. Christians
as well went out with whom there was a monk who whenever stretched his
hand towards the sky it rained. He did that many times and some ignorant
(Muslims) doubted their religion and some others apostatized. This was
hard for al-Mu’tamid. He went to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) who was in
prison then and said to him, ‘Attain to the nation of your grandfather
before they will perish!’

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said to him, ‘Let people go out tomorrow and I
shall remove their doubts inshallah.’

Al-Mu’tamid set the imam free from prison, but the imam asked him to set
free all his companions from prison too, and al-Mu’tamid responded to
him. On the following day, people went out to offer the prayer for rain.
The monk raised his hand towards the sky and it clouded and rained. Imam
Abu Muhammad (a.s.) asked his men to catch the monks hand and take what
there was in it. There was a bone of a human being. The imam took the
bone from the monk and asked him to pray for rain again. The monk raised
his hands towards the sky, but clouds disappeared and the sun shone.
People were astonished.

Al-Mu’tamid asked Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) what that was and the imam
said, ‘This is a bone of one of the prophets that this monk has got in a
way or another from some grave. Whenever a prophet’s bone is exposed
under the sky, it will rain…’

Al-Mu’tamid checked that and it was as the imam said. Then suspicions
and doubts were refuted.[^420]

### Liars And Fabricators

###

Liars and fabricators were not few at that time, and this was another
plague of that age. It was a result of weak faith. From the most famous
fabricators was Urwah bin Yahya ad-Dihqan al-Baghdadi who fabricated
lies against Imam Abul Hasan Ali bin Muhammad al-Hadi (a.s.) and Imam
Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali (a.s.) after him. He embezzled the monies
that came to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) from his followers. The imam
cursed him and ordered his followers to curse and disavow him lest he
would destroy their beliefs.[^421]

### Amusement And Diversion

###

Amusement, singing, dancing, and all kinds of diversion were widespread
in the age of Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.). Baghdad and Samarra’ were full
of debauchery and vices. It was the Abbasid kings who led the society to
this corruption. They submitted to their lusts and desires, and their
red nights were full of all kinds of vices and sins.

Al-Mahdi, the Abbasid king, was the first who opened the door of music,
singing, dancing, and drinking for the other Abbasid kings. He was fond
of a songstress called Jawhar.[^422]

As for Harun ar-Rashid, he was famous for his indulging in amusement and
singing. His nights were full of all kinds of music, singing, dancing,
and drinking. He was fond of a bondmaid called Thatul Khal. Once, he
swore for her that he would carry out everything she asked him for. She
asked him to appoint some man in charge of war and kharaj in Persia for
seven years. He did that and wrote a covenant and made a condition for
the heir apparent to carry out that after him if it could not be done in
his life.[^423]

Al-Ma’mun, who was said to be moderate in conduct, spent many of his
nights in singing and playing. He was fond of a bondmaid called Urayb,
and he often composed poetry on her.

Al-Mutawakkil, who was contemporary with Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.), was
boyish following after his lusts and desires. He was the most dissolute
king among the Abbasids. We shall talk about this and other things when
we shall talk about his life in a coming chapter.
