Introduction
============

In The Name Of Allah, The Beneficent The Merciful

Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali al-Askari (a.s.) is the eleventh imam
of the infallible imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) who carried the banner
of Islam, undertook the goals of the true religion, sacrificed their
lives into its way, and accustomed themselves to face disasters,
difficulties, and hardship to spread the high values and goals of this
religion… and how many favors they had done to Muslims!

This great imam had intellectual, scientific talents and powers that
made him one of the genius men of the human intellect, as he was one of
the heroes of history by his resisting the different events and his
standing against the deviate, oppressive Abbasid rule. He rebelled
against the corruptive regimes and spared no effort in achieving truth
and justice among people.

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was like his fathers in his tendencies and
aims. They all were like each other in reaching the highest ranks of
virtue and perfection.

In his wide knowledge, he was nonesuch at his time. Historians say that
he was the most knowledgeable one in the religious verdicts and affairs
and that all scholars and ulama of his age were in need of him to ladle
from the fount of his knowledge and sciences.

He was the most devoted, pious worshipper of all people of his time. He
preferred the obedience of Allah to everything. He was the most patient
and forbearing one. He suppressed his anger and pardoned whoever did him
wrong. He was the most generous, the kindest to the poor, and the most
charitable to the needy. He appointed agents in many countries of the
Islamic world entrusting them with the distributing of the legal dues,
which came to him, among the poor and the weak of Muslims to get them
out of their poverty and deprivation, whereas he himself lived like the
poor. He paid no attention to the pleasures and desires of this life
like his fathers who turned their backs to this world and turned
completely towards Allah and the afterworld.

Historians mention that all people glorified and honored Imam al-Askari
(a.s.) and acknowledged his virtue and preference to all of the Alawids
and the Abbasids at his time. When the imam (a.s.) came to the Abbasid
royal palace, every one of the attendants stood up and bowed glorifying
him. Viziers, clerks, army leaders, and all statesmen regarded him so
highly. Al-Fat~h bin Khaqan, the prime minister of al-Mutawakkil,
preferred Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) to all eminent scholars and
ulama and acknowledged that no one had the virtues and qualities that
the imam (a.s.) had at that time.

It was natural that the nation, with all classes, regarded and glorified
Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) for they saw his guidance, piety,
righteousness, asceticism, loyalty to the truth, and devotedness to
Allah. They were certain that he was the caliph of Allah in the earth
and the only representative of his grandfather the great Prophet (a.s.).
In addition to that, Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) undertook the fatal
issues of the Islamic nation and defended the rights of Muslims. He
criticized the rulers of his time for wronging people and disregarding
their rights. Therefore, the nation glorified him and acknowledged his
necessary leadership.

The Abbasid kings became displeased when they saw and heard that the
masses glorified Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), and that great numbers
of Muslims believed in his imamate and thought that he was worthier of
the caliphate than the Abbasids who had no quality that might make them
fit for the Islamic caliphate. Spite against the imam (a.s.) filled the
hearts of the Abbasid rulers who took severe procedures against him.
They imposed economical blockade against him, and put him under house
arrest in Samarra’. They surrounded him with policemen and detectives to
watch even his breaths. They subjected every one who contacted with him
to severe punishments. This was-as I think-the reason that made just few
narrators narrate traditions from him, and so not many maxims,
literatures, and religious rulings were transmitted from him.

There was another very sensitive reason that led the Abbasids to watch
Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) strictly. It was that Imam al-Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) was the father of Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi (a.s.) the
awaited savior and reformer who would fill the world with justice, and
would destroy oppressors and oppression. The Prophet (a.s) and his
guardians gave good tidings, and told the nation that this savior would
spread political, social justice in the earth, and all Muslims of
different trends believed in that. Therefore, the Abbasids were afraid
of that and thought that he would remove their rule and authority. They
spread spies on Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) to know his son. They
sent female spies to see which of his wives would give birth to a male
baby to be taken away, but Allah the Almighty made the pregnancy and the
birth of Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) unknown as He had made the birth of
Prophet Moses (a.s.) unknown to the Pharaoh.

This book studies the age of Imam al-Askari (a.s.) and all its events.
The study of the age is necessary because it sheds lights on the
intellectual, social, economical, political life of that age, and
naturally it has direct influence on the life of one who lives in that
very age, besides that it uncovers the dimensions of his life and
personality and the extent of the influence of the events of that age on
him.

The book shows the economical life of that age which was neither sound
nor stable but confused and paralyzed. The Abbasid governments at the
age of Imam al-Askari (a.s.) did not achieve ease for people or the
noble life that Islam wanted for the nation. Excessive wealth was
accumulated in the possession of the members of the Abbasid family,
statesmen, and their agents. They spent lavishly. They appropriated the
treasures of the earth while the majority of the Muslim peoples suffered
poverty and deprivation besides the pains, sufferings, and subjugation
they faced from the government officials in collecting the land tax and
other taxes.

We have also presented a study on the kings of the age of Imam al-Askari
(a.s.). Most of those kings were insignificant and ineffective. They
submitted to their lusts and desires and were fond of maids and
songstresses. Their red nights were full of erring. They were
indifferent to what Allah had ordered the guardians of Muslims to do in
order to better the general life of the nation, to offer the necessary
services for people, and to find equivalent opportunities for all
citizens. However, most Abbasid kings did nothing of that. Rather they
appropriated the wealth of Allah for themselves and took the people of
Allah as slaves. They ran the nation violently and oppressively. They
entrusted the Turks, who were harsh, ignorant, and unaware of
administration and politics, with absolute authority over the nation,
and they sank the nation into seditions and disasters.

Loyalty imposes on a researcher who researches in history to look into
the historical facts with accuracy and scrutiny. Many historical facts
and events were mixed together, distorted, or fabricated because some
historians intended to overlook the errors of some kings and rulers.
They tried to praise them with noble epithets and good qualities that
they did not have, whereas, in fact, those kings and rulers were the
worst tyrants who threw the nation into an abyss of oppression and
corruption, and exploited the economy of the state for their own
pleasures and fancies, and afflicted the public with poverty and
wretchedness. It is neither from fidelity nor from truth to regard those
tyrants with the eye of holiness and sacredness and to trust in them as
ideal personalities. It is too necessary to study the Islamic history
thoughtfully, impartially, and away from any fanaticism. Authors must
write just for the truth and the good of the nation.

Also, in this book, we have mentioned a group of jurisprudents,
scholars, and narrators who narrated traditions from Imam Abu Muhammad
al-Askari (a.s.) and took from his knowledge and sciences. This is
necessary-as I think-because it completes the research on the noble
personality of the imam (a.s.) for it shows the extent of his
association with the men of knowledge and their association with him at
that critical period where the Abbasid government put the imam under
severe watch, and punished whoever associated with him. This confinement
affected the imam (a.s.) and caused him much pain, because nothing would
be more painful to the genius and talented persons more than preventing
them from showing their knowledge and sciences and transmitting their
opinions and ideas after them.

And here, I find it from gratefulness and loyalty to the great efforts
of the grand Allama my brother Sheikh Hadi Sharif al-Qurashi who went
through some reference books concerning the subject of this book besides
his useful directions and valuable instructions. I pray Allah to reward
him with the best of His reward that He rewards His loyal people with.

Holy Najaf
Baqir Sharif al-Qurashi


