Birth and upbringing
====================

The Imam’s Noble Lineage
------------------------

Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) was from the heart of the
prophetic family by which Allah had honored the Arabs and Muslims. It
was the holiest family that had undertaken the issues of truth and
justice among all peoples of the earth. There was, is, and will be no
lineage in this world like this noble lineage which Imam al-Askari
(a.s.) belonged to.

He was the son of Imam al-Hadi bin[^1] Imam Muhammad al-Jawad bin Imam
Ali ar-Redha bin Imam Musa al-Kadhim bin Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq bin Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir bin Imam Ali Zaynol Aabidin (as-Sajjad) bin Imam
al-Husayn bin Imam Ali bin Abu Talib (peace be on them). These were the
infallible imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) whom Allah had kept uncleanness
away from and purified a thorough purifying, and whom the Prophet (a.s)
had made as the boat of rescue and safety for people.

### His Father

###

His father was Imam Ali al-Hadi (a.s.), the tenth imam of the Shia. He
was from the masters of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) and the most knowledgeable,
pious, and virtuous of all people at his time.

### His Mother

###

His mother was the best of women at her time in her chastity, purity,
and piety. Historians say she was from the good knowing women.[^2] Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) praised her by saying, ‘Saleel (her name) was purified
from error, defect, and impurity.’[^3]

She was a bondmaid[^4] from an-Nawbah.[^5] It did not harm her that she
was a bondmaid, for man in the view of Islam is exalted by his guidance,
piety, and propriety, and he is degraded by deviation from the right
path.

Historians disagreed on her name. Some of them said her name was Saleel
which was the most correct according to the previous tradition of Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.). Some said she was called Sawsan.[^6] Others said her
name was Hadithah,[^7] and others said Hareebah.

### The Great Newborn Child

###

The birth of the newborn boy, Abu Muhammad, the descendant of
prophethood and the remainder of imamate, made the world shine and made
Yathrib (Medina) and Samarra’ bloom. This great newborn baby was the
continuity of the life of his infallible fathers who lit the
intellectual life in the world of Islam. Delight and joy filled the
hearts of the Prophetic family for they knew that he would be the imam
after his father as Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) had told them.

Some historians said he was born in Medina,[^8] and some others said in
Samarra’.[^9] Historians also gave different dates for his birth. It was
said that he was born in Rabee’ al-Awwal[^10] 230AH,[^11] or 231,[^12]
or 232,[^13] or 233.[^14]

### Ceremonies Of Birth

###

After the birth of this blessed son, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) recited the
azan in his right ear, and the eqama in his left ear. This was the first
hymn that this blessed newborn baby met life with; “Allah is great,
there is no god but Allah”.

On the seventh day after birth, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) cut the hair of his
newborn child and gave silver or gold as much as the weight of his son’s
hair to the poor as charity.

### His Name And Surname

###

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) named his blessed newborn child as al-Hasan like the
name of his great uncle, the master of the youth of Paradise. He
surnamed him as Abu Muhammad,[^15] and Muhammad was the name of the
awaited Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.), the great reformer and savior of humanity
and the sought hope of the deprived and the disabled in the earth.

### His Epithets

###

His epithets expressed his high and noble qualities. He was called:

1. Al-Khalis (the pure)[^16]

2. Al-Hadi (the guide)[^17]

3. Al-Askari (military);[^18] he was called so because of the country
(Samarra’) he lived in which was a military camp.

4. Az-Zakiy (pure, chaste, righteous)[^19]

5. Al-Khass (peculiar),[^20] that Allah had distinguished him with
virtues and with the responding to his supplications

6. As-Samit (silent),[^21] that he was silent and he spoke just wisdom,
knowledge, and the mention of Allah

7. As-Siraj (lamp),[^22] that he was as a lamp lighting the way and
guiding the deviant to righteousness

8. At-Taqiy (pious)[^23]

### His Mien

###

Ahmad bin Ubaydillah bin Khaqan said about Imam al-Askari (a.s.), ‘He
was brown with big eyes, fine stature, beautiful face, and good body. He
had gravity and solemnity.[^24] And it was said he was between brown and
white.’[^25]

His Upbringing
--------------

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) grew up in the house of guidance and the center
of imamate and general authority of Muslims…that noble house which Allah
had kept uncleanness away from its people and purified them thoroughly.

Ash-Shabrawi says about this exalted house, ‘What an honorable house it
is and what a glorious lineage it is! It is the house of pride and
exaltation. They are all equal in the noble root, in the good inners,
and in glory like the teeth of a comb. How an exalted house it is! It
has competed with the heaven in its highness and nobility, and has gone
higher than the polestars in rank and position. It has all qualities of
perfection that it is not excepted by “other than” or “except”. These
Imams have been ordered in glory like the order of pearls, and
harmonized in honor that the first of them equals the next. Many were
those who strove to degrade this house but Allah exalted and still
exalts it, and many were those who spared no effort to separate the
unity of this house but Allah gathered and gathers it. How many rights
of this house were lost but Allah does not ignore or lose…’[^26]

Educational studies say that house has great influence on the forming of
man’s behaviors and the building of his personality. The good or bad
scenes he sees inside the house are pressed inside him and shall adhere
to him throughout his life. In the light of this fact, Imam Abu Muhammad
(a.s.) got the highest scenes of the purest education. He grew up in a
house that Allah had purified and exalted…that house that raised the
Word of Allah high in the earth and offered dear sacrifices for the sake
of Islam.

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) grew up in the house of the Qur'an and the
heart of Islam. His father Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) fed him with guidance and
ideals to be the continuity of the mission of Islam.

### God-Fearing

###

The distinct aspect in the childhood of Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) was the fear of Allah. He was God-fearing since his
early years. Historians mentioned that one day some man passed by Imam
Abu Muhammad (a.s.) and saw him cry while he was with his fellow
children. The man thought that this child cried for the toys in the
children’s hands and that he could not participate in their playing. The
man told the child that he would buy him what he might play with. The
child said,

‘No! We have not been created for play.’

The man was astonished and said, ‘Then, what for we have been created?’

The child said, ‘For knowledge and worship.’

The man asked the child, ‘Where have you got this from?’

The child said, ‘From this saying of Allah*(What! Did you then think
that We had created you in vain)* [^27] .’

The man was astonished and confused. He said to the child, ‘What has
happened to you while you are guiltless little child?’

The child said, ‘Be away from me! I have seen my mother set fire to big
pieces of firewood but fire is not lit except with small pieces, and I
fear that I shall be from the small pieces of the firewood of the
Hell.’[^28]

The faith in Allah was a part and an element of Imam Abu Muhammad
(a.s.). He did not fear but Allah and this remained in him until the
last moment of his life.

### With His Father

###

Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.) spent a part of his life with his
father Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). He did not part with him even in his
travels. He saw in his father a true picture of the morals of his
grandfather the messenger of Allah (a.s.) who had been preferred to all
prophets, and saw in him the spirits of his fathers the infallible imams
(a.s.). On the other hand, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) saw in his son the
natural continuity of the great imamate and general authority of the
Prophet (a.s) and therefore he cared much for him. He praised him
saying,

“My son Abu Muhammad is the best of the progeny of Muhammad (blessing be
on him and on his progeny) in nature, and the most trustworthy in
authority. He is the eldest of my children, and he is my successor and
to him imamate and our verdicts get.”[^29]

Of course, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was far above flattering or submission to
emotions. He did not praise his son and announce his virtue unless he
saw in him all noble aspects and high qualities. And it was so, because
Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.) had all virtues and nobilities.

Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) kept to his father Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)
and saw what he suffered from the Abbasid kings especially al-Mutawakkil
who spared no effort in oppressing Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). This tyrant was
excessive in harming the Imam. He house-arrested him in Samarra’ and
surrounded his house with policemen and detectives to watch him, and to
prevent the ulama, jurisprudents, and the rest of the Shia from
associating with him. Al-Mutawakkil also oppressed Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)
in his living affairs, and ordered his men to search the house of the
imam from time to time and take him to al-Mutawakkil in whatever state
he was. It was al-Mutawakkil himself who had prevented officially the
visiting to the holy shrine of Imam al-Husayn (a.s.), and ordered the
shrine to be destroyed. All those terrible events took place before the
eyes of Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) while he was yet in the early years of
his youth. His heart was filled with pains and sorrows during the period
he lived with his father.

### The Death Of His Brother

###

Muhammad Abu Ja’far, the brother of Imam al-Askari (a.s.), was a
wonderful example of the infallible imams and a true picture of their
thoughts and principles. He was too intelligent, with high morals and
very wide knowledge until many of the Shia thought that he would be the
imam after his father Imam al-Hadi (a.s.).

Al-Aarif al-Kilani said about Abu Ja’far, ‘I accompanied Abu Ja’far
Muhammad bin Ali since he was young. I saw no one purer, graver, or more
honorable than him. Abul Hasan al-Askari (Imam al-Hadi) left him in
Hijaz while he was a child and then he came to him a young. He kept to
his brother Abu Muhammad (a.s.)[^30] who educated him and fed him with
his knowledge, wisdom, and morals.’

Abu Ja’far became seriously ill that might be because of poison inserted
for him by the Abbasids. He remained some days suffering intolerable
pains while his brother Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.), who loved him too
much, was with him all the time. However, after no long, Abu Ja’far left
to the better world, but Imam Abu Muhammad’s heart was broken and he was
very sorrowful and distressed for the loss of his dear brother.

### With His Brother Al-Husayn

###

Al-Husayn bin Ali al-Hadi was a pure man of wide knowledge and high
morals. He was always with his brother Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) and they were called “as-Sibtayn”[^31] like their two
grandfathers Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn (a.s.). They were famous of this
surname at that time. Abu Hashim said, ‘One day, I rode on my sumpter
and said: ‘*(Glory be to Him Who made this subservient to us and we were
not able to do it)* .[^32] One of as-Sibtayn heard me say that and said
to me, ‘You have not been ordered of this, but you have been ordered to
remember the blessing of your Lord on you when you ride on it (on the
sumpter).’[^33]

### The Loss Of His Father

###

Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) suffered the great loss of his father and
it was the heaviest calamity he had ever faced in his life.

The Abbasid tyrant al-Mu’tamid assassinated Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) by
inserting poison into his food,[^34] when he saw all people talk here
and there about the virtues and vast knowledge and the high position of
the imam. He was very angry and was filled with envy against Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.). Then, he committed his terrible crime against him.

After the poison, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) suffered terrible pains and
retired to bed. The Shia and high statesmen visited him. Some poets
visited him like Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari who composed a sorrowful poem on
him. Abu Du’amah visited him and when he wanted to leave, the imam said
to him,

‘O Abu Du’amah, you have a right on me. Do I tell you a tradition that
shall delight you?’

Abu Du’amah said, ‘I am in utmost need of that O son of the messenger of
Allah.’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘My father Muhammad bin Ali told me from his
father Ali bin Musa bin Ja’far from his father Ja’far bin Muhammad from
his father Muhammad bin Ali from his father Ali bin al-Husayn from his
father al-Husayn bin Ali from his father Ali bin Abu Talib that the
messenger of Allah (a.s.) said to him, ‘Write down!’ Ali said, ‘What
shall I write down?’ The messenger of Allah (a.s.) said, ‘Write down:
“In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. Faith is that which
hearts acknowledge and deeds prove, and Islam is that which tongues
witness and marriage becomes lawful with.’

Abu Du’amah said, ‘O son of the messenger of Allah, I do not know which
of them is better; the tradition or the narrators!’

Ali al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘It is a book written down by the hand of Ali
bin Abu Talib and the dictation of the messenger of Allah (a.s.) that we
inherit one from the other.’[^35]

Before his death, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) announced that the imam after him
would be his son Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.). He appointed
him as the general authority for the Shia and entrusted him to prepare
his corpse (after death), offer the prayer on him, and bury him. He
entrusted him with other affairs too.

### To The Paradise

###

The poison reacted inside the body of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and he grew
weaker and weaker. Death approached him hastily, and when he felt his
end, he turned towards the qiblah and began reciting some suras from the
Qur'an. His pure soul went high to the heaven surrounded by angels while
his lips and heart were busy mentioning Allah. The earth shook for the
terrible disaster. The leader, the instructor, and the father of the
weak and the deprived died! A bondmaid went out of the Imam’s house
crying out, ‘It was terrible that which we have met on Monday before and
now!’[^36]

The women’s eyes were filled with tears after this alarming cry, and
their memories went back to that Monday where the meeting of
as-Saqifah[^37] was held and since then disasters and misfortunes were
poured over the Ahlul Bayt (a.s).

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) washed the pure corpse of his father, and
enshrouded it. Then he offered the prayer on his father while his heart
was full of sorrow and pain for the great loss.

Samarra’ shook for the terrible affliction, and people of all classes
hurried to escort the pure corpse of their imam. Stores, markets, and
state offices were closed. Viziers, ulama, judges, high officials, and
the rest members of the Abbasid family were before the bier while
mentioning the virtues and high qualities of the imam and talking about
the great loss that afflicted the Muslim nation. Historians said that
Samarra’ had never seen such escorting throughout its history.

Under a halo of takbir and before masses of human beings who were like
sea waves, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was put by his son Imam Abu Muhammad
al-Hasan al-Askari, whose tears were flowing over his cheeks, into his
last abode.

When Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) died, Imam al-Askari (a.s.) was twenty[^38] or
twenty-three years old.[^39] He assumed the imamate and the general
religious authority over Muslims while he was too young yet.

All elements of piety and righteousness, all virtues of this world,
manners of prophethood, and qualities of imamate were gathered in Imam
Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) whom there was no any one better
than at his time. Here we talk in brief about his worship:

### His Worship

###

Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.) was the best worshipper among all
people of his time. He spent the night with praying, prostrating, and
reciting the Book. Muhammad ash-Shakiri said, ‘The imam sat in the
mihrab and prostrated. I slept and awoke while he was still in
prostration.’[^40]

### His Prayer

###

In his prayer, he turned with all his heart and feelings towards Allah
the Creator of the universe and the Giver of life. He felt or paid
attention to nothing of the affairs of this life while he was in prayer.
His soul clung to Allah devotedly and totally.

### His Qunut[^41]

###

In his prayer, Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) recited this du’a,

“O You, Whose light covers darkness, O You, by Whose holiness rugged
mountain passes are lit, O You, to Whom all the inhabitants of the earth
and the heavens submit, O You, to Whom every insolent tyrant surrender
with obedience, O You the Aware of hidden consciences, You are Merciful
to everything and Aware of everything, forgive those who repent and
follow Your path, protect them from the torment of Fire, give them soon
Your victory that You have promised them of and You do not fail the
promise! Devastate the people of evil and take them to the worst abode
in the worst punishment and the ugliest retreat.

O Allah, You know the secrets of creatures, and are aware of their
consciences. You are in need of nothing except that You carry out what
You have promised of. You do not uncover the hidden secrets of Your
people. O my Lord, You know what I conceal and what I show of my
behaviors, movements, and all my emotions. O my Lord, You see the
sufferings of the people of Your obedience and what they meet from Your
enemies, and You are generous and not stingy in Your blessings, and the
more efforts require more reward. You have ordered Your people of
supplication if they turn to You sincerely and this requires the more of
Your favors.

These forelocks and necks are submissive to You subserviently
acknowledging Your deity, invoking on You with their hearts, and looking
forward to Your prompt rewarding, and what You willed took place and
what You will shall take place. You are the called upon, the hoped for,
and the asked that no taker whatever great he is shall decrease You(r
favors), and no asker whatever he insists and invokes shall weary You.
Your kingdom shall not come to an end, and Your eternal glory shall
remain forever, and nothing in the ages is out of Your will a bit. You
are Allah, there is no god but You the Merciful, the Mighty. O Allah,
assist us by Your assistance, suffice us with Your protection, and give
us what You give those who hold fast by Your rope, who shade themselves
under Your shade…’[^42]

### His Du’a In The Morning

###

“O You, the greater than every great, Who have no partner and no vizier,
O You, the Creator of the sun and the lighting moon, the shelter to the
resorting fearful, the Liberator of tied captives, the nourisher of
young babies, the setter of broken bones, the Merciful to the old, the
light of light, the Manager of affairs, the Resurrector of those in
graves, the Healer of chests, the Maker of shadow and hot, the Aware of
all in chests, the Revealer of the Book, light, the great Qur'an, and
the Book of Psalms, O You, Whom angels glorify in the morning and night,
O You, the Permanent and Eternal, the Bringer forth of plants in the
early morning and afternoon, the Enlivener of the dead, the Resurrector
of decayed bones, the Hearer of sounds, the Everlasting, the Dresser of
bones that decay after death! O You, Whom nothing distracts from any
other thing, Who do not change from a state to another, Who do not need
to move or advance, Whom no affair prevents from any other affair, Who
cancel for charity and supplication what has been determined and
affirmed in the Heaven of bad judgment, Whom no place can include or
encompass, Who put remedy in what You like of things, Who keep alive
from serious disease with the least of nourishment, Who remove by the
least of remedy the worst of diseases, O You, Who if promise, carry out,
if threaten, pardon, O You, Who possess the needs of requesters, Who
know what is there inside the consciences of the silent, O You, the Most
Magnificent, the Generous in pardoning, O You, Who have a face that does
never become old, Who have infinite sovereignty, Who have
inextinguishable light, Whose throne is over everything, Whose authority
is over the land and the sea, Whose wrath is in the Hell, Whose mercy is
in the Paradise, Whose promises are true, Whose favors are uncountable,
Whose mercy is wide, O You, the Helper of the callers for help, the
Responder to the call of the compelled, O You, Who are in the high view
and Your creation is in the low view, O You, the Lord of the mortal
souls, the Lord of the worn bodies, the most perceptive of seers, the
most hearing of hearers, the promptest of accounters, the wisest of
judges, the Most Merciful of the merciful, the Giver of gifts, the
Releaser of captives, the Lord of glory, the One of piety and
forgiveness, O You, Whose limit cannot be perceived, Whose number cannot
be counted, Whose aid does not cease, I bear witness, and the witness to
me is honor and supply, and from me obedience and submission, and by
which I hope deliverance on the day of sigh and regret, that You are
Allah; there is no god but You alone with no partner, and that Muhammad
is Your slave and messenger, Your blessing be on him and on his progeny,
and that he has informed and carried out on behalf of You what was his
duty to You, and that You always create, provide with livelihood, give,
deny, exalt, humble, enrich, impoverish, disappoint, help, pardon, show
mercy, forgive, overlook what You know, do not wrong, straiten, enlarge,
omit, fix, initiate, reproduce, enliven and make die; have mercy on
Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and guide me from You, give me from
Your favor, spread on me from Your mercy, and send down to me from Your
blessings, for You often have accustomed me to good and favor, given me
too much, and uncovered my ugly deeds.

O Allah, have blessings on Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and
hasten my deliverance, forgive my slips, pity my loneliness, take me to
the best of Your worships, gift me with healthiness from my illness,
plenty of my supplies, inclusive soundness in my body, insight in my
religion, and help me to ask you for forgiveness before death comes and
hoping stops, and help me bear death and its distress, grave and its
loneliness, the scales and their lightness, the sirat[^43] and its slip,
the Day of Resurrection and its terror. I ask You for the acceptance of
deeds before death, and ask You for strength in my hearing and sight for
the doing of the best of that You have taught and made me understand.
You are the lofty Lord, and I am the humble slave, and how great
difference there is between us! O You, Compassionate, Benefactor, of
Glory and Honor, have blessings on Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad
the good, the pure!”[^44]

### His Ideals

###

He was ideal in faith, morals, and psychology. He inherited all the
perfections of his fathers who had been created for virtue and honor. We
refer here to some of his perfections:

### His Knowledge

###

Historians unanimously mentioned that Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.)
was the most knowledgeable and the best of the people of his age, not
only in the religious affairs and laws but in all fields of knowledge.
Bakhtshou’ the Christian physician said to his disciple Batriq about the
imam, ‘…and he is the most knowledgeable of all those under the sky in
our day.’[^45]

If the Abbasid tyrants had given way to the imams of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s) and not subjected them to strict chase and confinement, they would
have filled the world with their knowledge and sciences, and humanity
would have got kinds of knowledge and intellectual development that it
had never got throughout all ages and times.

The Abbasids perceived that if they did not prevent the people of
knowledge and intellect from associating with the infallible imams, they
(the imams) would spread powers of knowledge and culture and open new
horizons not only in the fields of sciences but also in the political
and social fields which would show to people the ignorance of the
Abbasids and their being away from the Islamic values. Of course, this
would shake their thrones, and therefore they tried their best to
separate between the nation and its real leaders.

### His Patience

###

Imam al-Askari (a.s.) was from the most patient people. He always
suppressed his anger and treated whoever did him wrong with kindness and
forgiveness.

The Abbasid government arrested and put him into prison while he was
patient saying nothing. He did not complain to anyone about what he
suffered, but he entrusted his case to Allah the Almighty. This was from
the signs of his patience.

### His Strong Will

###

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was distinguished by his strong will. The
Abbasid rulers tried to involve him into the government body and spared
no effort to subject him to their desires, but they failed. The imam
(a.s.) insisted on his independency and keeping away from them. The
Abbasids considered him as the only representative of the opposition
against their policies that were based on subjugation and oppression.

He resisted all the seductions that the Abbasid government offered to
bring him into its way. He preferred the obedience of Allah and the
satisfaction of his conscience to everything else.

### His Generosity

###

No one was more generous than him among all people of his time. He
appointed agents in most of the Muslim countries, and entrusted them to
receive the legal dues and spend them on the poor and the deprived, to
reconcile between people, and in other ways of the general welfare.

From that which historians mentioned about his generosity was that
Muhammad bin Ali bin Ibrahim bin Imam Musa bin Ja’far al-Kadhim said,
“We were in utmost need. My father said, ‘Let us go to this man (Imam
Abu Muhammad). It is said he is generous.’

I said, ‘Do you know him?’

He said, ‘No, and I have never seen him at all.’

We went to him. On our way, my father said, ‘How much we need that he
may order to give us five hundred dirhams; two hundred for clothes, two
hundred for flour, and one hundred for spending!’

I said with myself, ‘Would that he order to give me three hundred
dirhams; one hundred to buy a donkey, one hundred for spending, and one
hundred for clothes so that I can go to the mountain!’

When we stopped at his (Imam Abu Muhammad’s) door, his servant came out
and said, ‘Let Ali bin Ibrahim and his son Muhammad come in!’

When we came in and greeted him, he said to my father, ‘O Ali, what made
you not visit us all this time?’

My father said, ‘I felt shy to meet you in this case.’

They (Ali and his son) stayed with the imam for some time and then came
out. The servant of the imam came, gave Ali bin Ibrahim a pouch of money
and said, ‘These are five hundred dirhams; two hundred for clothes, two
hundred for flour, and one hundred for spending.’ He gave Muhammad a
pouch of three hundred dirhams and said to him, ‘Make one hundred for
buying a donkey, one hundred for clothes, and one hundred for spending,
and do not go to the mountain but go to Sawra!’ Muhammad went to Sawra
and became one of the wealthy Alawids.[^46]

Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari said, ‘Once, I complained to Abu Muhammad the
distress of imprisonment and the pains of ties. He wrote to me, ‘You
shall offer the Dhuhr (noon) Prayer in your house today.’ I was set free
(from prison) at noon and I offered the prayer in my house as the imam
said. I was in need and I wanted to ask him for help (but I did not) in
the letter I had sent to him. When I arrived in my house, he sent one
hundred dinars to me and wrote to me, ‘If you need something, do not
feel shy or refrain from asking. Ask and you shall get what you like
inshallah.’[^47]

Historians mention many stories on his generosity showing his love and
kindness to the poor and the deprived.

### High Morals

###

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was nonesuch in his very high morals. He met
friends and enemies with his noble character. He inherited this nature
from his great grandfather the Prophet (a.s) whose high morals included
all people.

His high morals affected his enemies and opponents, and they turned to
be his loyal lovers. Historians say that he was imprisoned during the
reign of al-Mutawakkil who was the bitterest enemy to the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s) and the progeny of Imam Ali (a.s.). The caliph ordered the imam to
be punished too severely, but when he communicated with the imam and saw
his high morality and piety, he turned upside down. After that, he did
not raise his eyes before the imam as a kind of respect and glorifying.
When the imam left him, he praised the imam with the best words.[^48]

### Infallibility

###

The Twelver Shia consider infallibility as a condition in their imams.
They mean by infallibility that it is impossible for an imam to mistake
whether intentionally or unintentionally. Because of this, the opponents
of the Shia waged violent attacks against them claiming that there was
no difference between the imams and the rest of people in committing
sins and disobediences. However, this claim has no any bit of reality.
The serious studies on the lives of the imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s)
give us the result that they were infallible and no one of them had ever
erred or committed a mistake since birth until the last breath. Imam Ali
(a.s.) said, ‘By Allah, if I am given the seven districts with all that
under their skies to disobey Allah in a bran of a grain of barley that I
deprive it of a mouth of a locust, I will never do.’ Is this not
infallibility?!

The truth in its brightest pictures and aspects appeared in the lives of
the imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s). Whoever reads their biographies can
find a slip neither in their doings nor in their sayings, but he only
finds true faith, piety, and high morality. And we do not mean by
infallibility except these meanings.

### His Imamate

###

Imamate is the firm base of political and social development in Islam.
It is one of the most important pillars on which the civilization,
safety, and ease of man, and the equality in opportunities among the
members of society are built. It provides the noble life that people can
live at ease under its shade. Under imamate, there are no racial or
natural differences, but the criterion in Islam is as much as the
services man offers to the nation and as much as what takes him closer
to Allah.

Imamate is a kindness from Allah and a gift from His mercy. The Shia
have believed in the imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) and considered that
as a part of their doctrinal life depending on many reasons such as:

First, the Prophetic traditions in which the Prophet (a.s) made it
obligatory on Muslims to follow the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) whom the Prophet
(a.s) had made as the equal to the Holy Book. He said, “I leave to you
what if you keep to, you shall not go astray after me. One of them is
greater than the other; the Book of Allah which is a rope extended from
the heaven to the earth, and my household. They shall not separate until
they shall come to me at the pond (in Paradise). See how you will obey
me through them.”[^49]

This tradition shows clearly that imamate would be limited to the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s) and shows that they were infallible because the Prophet (a.s)
compared them with the Book of Allah, and of course, every error from
them would take them away from the Book whereas the Prophet (a.s)
announced that they would not separate from the Qur'an until they would
come to him at the pond in Paradise.

The Prophet (a.s) also said, ‘The example of my household for you is
like the example of the Noah’s Ark which whoever rode on was rescued and
whoever lagged behind drowned, and the example of my household for you
is like the example of the gate of Hittah (repentance) for the
Israelites that whoever entered through it would be forgiven.’[^50]

Imam Sharafuddeen al-Aamily said when talking about this tradition, ‘You
know that the purpose behind comparing them (the Ahlul Bayt) to the “Ark
of Noah” is that whoever resorts to them in religion and takes its bases
and branches from them shall be safe from the torment of Fire, and
whoever turns his back to them is like one who betook himself (on the
day of the great flood) to some mountain which might save him from the
command of Allah, but he drowned in water and would be in the Hell. The
purpose behind comparing them to the “gate of Hittah” is that Allah the
Almighty has made that gate as a matter of humbleness to Allah and
submission to His commands, and therefore it was a cause for
forgiveness. This is the point of comparison. Ibn Hajar said, after he
mentioned these traditions and others like them, about the cause of
comparing them (the Ahlul Bayt) to the “Ark of Noah” that whoever loved
and glorified them out of gratefulness to the blessing of their honor,
and followed the guidance of their ulama would be safe from the darkness
of disagreements, and whoever lagged behind that would drown in the sea
of ungratefulness to blessings and would perish in the wilderness of
oppression…until he said, ‘and comparing them to the “gate of Hittah” is
that Allah has made the entrance through this gate, which was the Gate
of Ariha or Jerusalem, with humbleness and with asking for forgiveness,
as a cause for forgiveness, and He has made the love to the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s) as a cause for this nation to be forgiven…’[^51]

Second, the Shia believed and followed the imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s)
because the represented honor and dignity that there were and there will
be no likes to them throughout the history of humanity. No one in the
whole Muslim world was like them in their guidance, conducts,
devotedness, and adherence to Islam.

The faith of the Shia in the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) was not out of emotion or
fancy, but it was due to the reality and situations of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s).

Third, the Shia did not believe in the imamate of the Umayyad and the
Abbasid kings because they were naked of moral and humane values. During
their reigns, the nation suffered terrible kinds of oppression and
cruelty. They extorted the wealth of the nation and spent it on their
pleasures and amusement. They encouraged debauchery and corruption among
Muslims. Therefore, the Shia and other than the Shia rose in armed
revolts against those rulers in order to establish justice among people.

### The Traditions On His Imamate

###

The following are some of the traditions that were transmitted from Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) concerning the appointing of his son Abu Muhammad
al-Hasan as the imam after him.

1. Yahya bin Yasar al-Anbari said, ‘Abul Hasan Ali bin Muhammad
(al-Hadi) entrusted his son Abu Muhammad al-Hasan with the matter
(imamate) four months before his death and made me and some of his
mawali (adherents) bear witness to that.’[^52]

2. Ali bin Umar an-Nawfali said, “Once, I was with Abul Hasan (al-Hadi)
(a.s.) in the yard of his house when his son Muhammad (Abu Ja’far)
passed by us. I said to him, ‘May I die for you! Is this our man (the
imam) after you?’ He said to me, ‘Your man after me is al-Hasan.”[^53]

3. Shahwayh bin Abdullah al-Jallab said, “Abul Hasan wrote a letter to
me saying in it: ‘You wanted to ask about the successor after Abu Ja’far
and you were worried about that. Do not worry because*(Allah will not
mislead a people after He has guided them)* .[^54] Your man (the imam)
after me will be my son Muhammad. He has all what you shall need. Allah
advances what He wills and delays what He wills;*(Whatever verse We
abrogate or cause to be forgotten, We bring one better than it or like
it)* .[^55] I have written what has a clear proof for one of an awake
mind.”[^56]

4. Dawud bin al-Qassim said, “I heard Abul Hasan (a.s.) saying, ‘The
successor after me will be al-Hasan. How will you deal with the
successor after this successor?’ I said, ‘Why? May I die for you!’ He
said, ‘You shall not see him and it will be not permissible for you to
mention him by his name.’ I said, ‘How shall we mention him then?’ He
said, ‘You say: al-Hujjah (the authority) from the progeny of Muhammad
(peace be on them).’[^57]

5. Abu Bakr al-Fahfaki said, “Abul Hasan (peace be upon him) wrote to me
saying, ‘My son Abu Muhammad is the best of the progeny of Muhammad in
nature and the most trustworthy in authority. He is the eldest of my
children, and he is my successor and to him imamate and our verdicts
get. Whatever you asked me about, you can ask him about for he has all
that which people need.’[^58]

6. As-Saqr bin Dulaf said, “I heard Ali bin Muhammad bin Ali ar-Redha
(Imam al-Hadi) saying, ‘The imam after me will be al-Hasan and after
al-Hasan will be his son al-Qa’im (Imam al-Mahdi) who will fill the
earth with justice and fairness as it has been filled with injustice and
oppression.’[^59]

7. Abdul Adheem al-Hasani narrated that Imam Ali bin Muhammad al-Hadi
(a.s.) said, ‘The imam after me will be my son al-Hasan, but how will
people deal with the successor after him?!’[^60]

8. Ali bin Mahziyar said, ‘One day, I said to Abul Hasan, ‘If something
happens[^61] -God forbid!-then to whom the imamate will be?’ He said,
‘To the eldest of my sons. (He meant al-Hasan).’[^62]

9. Abdullah bin Muhammad al-Isfahani said, “Abul Hasan said, ‘Your man
after me is the one who will offer the prayer on me (after death).’ We
did not know Abu Muhammad before that, and when Abul Hasan (a.s.) died,
Abu Muhammad came out and offered the prayer (of the dead) on him.’[^63]

These are some traditions narrated by reliable narrators from Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) about the appointing of his son Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
(a.s.) as the next imam besides other traditions transmitted from Imam
al-Jawad (a.s.). As-Saqr bin Dulaf said, “I heard Abu Ja’far Muhammad
bin Ali ar-Redha (Imam al-Jawad) saying, ‘The imam after me is my son
Ali. His command is my command, his saying is my saying, and obedience
to him is obedience to me. And the imam after him will be his son
al-Hasan.’[^64]

There are other traditions that were narrated from the Prophet (a.s)
concerning the appointing of the guardians and caliphs after him among
whom was Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.). These traditions were
mentioned in the famous reference books of Hadith and history.

### From The Signs Of His Imamate

###

Allah had provided the prophets and their guardians with miracles that
ordinary people were unable to do in order to be as true proofs on the
missions of these prophets and guardians, otherwise they would fail in
achieving their missions, and none of people would believe them. Allah
had made them know what there was inside the inners of people and what
events would take place. Allah had granted that to the infallible imams
of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) and one of them was Imam al-Hasan al-Askari
(a.s.). Here we mention some narrations concerning this matter:

1. Al-Hasan an-Naseebi said, ‘It came to my mind that whether the sweat
of a junub[^65] was pure or not. I went to the house of Abu Muhammad
al-Hasan to ask him about that. It was night and so I slept. At dawn, he
came out and found me sleeping. He waked me and said, ‘If it is lawful,
it is pure, and if it is from unlawful thing, it is not.’[^66]

2. Isma’il bin Muhammad al-Abbasi said, ‘One day, I complained to Abu
Muhammad about my neediness and I swore to him that I did not have even
one dirham.’ He said to me, ‘Do you swear by Allah falsely while you
have buried two hundred dinars? My saying to you does not mean that I do
not gift you. O servant, give him what there is with you!’ The servant
gave me one hundred dinars. Then he (the imam) said to me, ‘You make the
dinars that you have buried unlawful while you are in utmost need to
them.’ I searched for the money but I could not find it. I found that
one of my children knew about this money, and so he stole them and ran
away.’

3. Muhammad bin Hujr complained to the imam at the oppression he
received from Abdul Aziz and from Yazid bin Eesa. The imam (a.s.) said
to him, ‘As for Abdul Aziz, I have relieved you from him, but as for
Yazid, you and he shall have a situation before Allah the Almighty.’
After a few days, Abdul Aziz died, but Yazid killed Muhammad bin Hujr
and he shall have a situation (be punished) before Allah (on the Day of
Resurrection).’[^67]

4. Abu Hashim said, ‘Once, I complained to Abu Muhammad of the distress
of imprisonment and the pains of ties. He wrote to me, ‘You shall offer
the Dhuhr (noon) Prayer in your house today.’ I was set free (from
prison) at noon and I offered the prayer in my house as the imam had
said.’[^68]

5. Abu Hashim said, ‘I was in need and I wanted to ask Imam Abu Muhammad
(a.s.) but I felt shy to do that. When I arrived in my house, he sent
one hundred dinars to me and a letter saying, ‘If you need something, do
not feel shy or refrain from asking. Ask and you shall get what you like
inshallah.’[^69]

6. Abu Hashim said, “I heard Abu Muhammad (a.s.) saying, ‘In the
paradise there is a gate called al-Ma’ruf (good deed). No one will come
through it except the people of good deeds.’ I thanked Allah with myself
and felt delighted for I often satisfied the needs of people. Abu
Muhammad looked at me and said, ‘Yes, I knew what you were thinking of.
The people of good deeds in this life will be the people of good deeds
in the afterlife. May Allah make you from them, O Abu Hashim, and have
mercy on you.’”[^70]

7. Muhammad bin Hamza ad-Duri said, ‘I wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
asking him to pray Allah for me to make me rich after I had become poor
and I feared to be exposed. His reply came to me saying: “Be delighted!
Wealth has come to you from Allah the Almighty. Your cousin Yahya bin
Hamza died and left for you one hundred thousand dirhams. He had no
inheritor except you. The money shall come to you soon. Thank Allah, be
economical, and beware of wasting!” The money and the news of the death
of my cousin came to me a few days later. My poverty disappeared. I paid
the rights of Allah, helped my brothers, and became economical after I
had been wasteful.’[^71]

8. Muhammad bin al-Hasan bin Maymun said, ‘I wrote to my master al-Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) complaining of poverty, and then I said to myself: has
Abu Abdullah (Imam as-Sadiq) (a.s.) not said, ‘Poverty with us (the
Ahlul Bayt) is better than wealth with our enemy, and being killed with
us is better than living with our enemy.’? The reply to my letter came
saying, ‘Allah the Almighty tries our followers, when their sins
increase, by poverty, and He may forgive many (of sins). It is as your
self said to you: poverty with us is better than wealth with our enemy.
We are a shelter for whoever resorts to us a light for whoever seeks
light, and preservation for whoever turns to us. Whoever loves us will
be with us in the highest position, and whoever deviates from us will be
in Fire.’[^72]

9. Abu Ja’far al-Hashimi said, ‘I was with some men in prison when Abu
Muhammad and his brother Ja’far were brought to prison. We hurried to
him. I kissed him on the face, and seated him on a mat that was under
me. Ja’far sat near to him. The guard of the prison was Salih bin
Waseef. There was a man with us in the prison claiming that he was
Alawid. Abu Muhammad turned to us and said, ‘If some one, who is not
from you, was not with you, I would tell you when Allah will deliver
you…’ Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) beckoned to that man and said, ‘This man
is not from you. Beware of him! There is a book in his clothes in which
he writes to the ruler all what you say.’ One of the prisoners searched
him and found with him a book in which he accused us of great
accusations and claimed that we wanted to pierce the prison and escape
from it.’[^73]

10. Ahmad bin Muhammad said, “I wrote a letter to Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
when al-Muhtadi, the Abbasid caliph, began killing the Shia and said to
him, ‘O my master, praise be to Allah Who has made him (the caliph) busy
away from you for I have heard that he threatened you and said: ‘by
Allah, I will dispel them again.’ Abu Muhammad wrote with his
handwriting: ‘This makes his life shorter. You count from this day five
days and he shall be killed in the sixth day after meeting meanness and
disgrace.’ And it was as the imam said.’[^74]

11. Abu Hashim narrated, ‘Once, al-Fahfaki asked Imam Abu Muhammad
(a.s.) about the reason that makes man take two shares while woman takes
one share in the inheritance. The imam (a.s.) answered: ‘For neither
jihad, nor expenditure, nor guarding (in castles) are required from
woman.’ It came to my mind that this question was the same question that
ibn Abul Awja’ had asked Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) and Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.)
answered with the same answer. Imam Abu Muhammad turned towards me and
said, ‘Yes, this is the question of ibn Abul Aw’aj and the answer is the
same from us. If the meaning of the question is the same, the answer of
the last one of us will be like the answer of the first one of us. The
first and the last of us are the same in knowledge and imamate, and the
messenger of Allah and Ameerul Mo’mineen (the blessings of Allah be on
them) have the preference to them.’[^75]

12. Abu Hashim narrated, ‘One of the Shia wrote to Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
asking him for some supplication. The imam replied, ‘Pray Allah with
this du’a: “O You the most Hearing of hearers, the most Perceptive of
seers, the best of lookers, the promptest of accounters, the Most
Merciful of the merciful, the Wisest of judges, have blessing on
Muhammad and on the progeny of Muhammad, and increase my livelihood,
prolong my old, favor me with Your mercy, make me from those who defend
Your religion, and do not replace me by other than me…!” I (Abu Hashim)
said with myself: ‘O Allah, make me from Your party and Your group!’ Abu
Muhammad turned to me and said, ‘you are in His party and in His group
if you have faith in Allah and believe His messenger.’[^76]

13. Shahwayh bin Abd Rabbih said, ‘My brother Salih was in prison. I
wrote to my master Abu Muhammad (a.s.) asking him about some things and
he answered by writing to me: ‘Your brother Salih shall be set free from
prison on the day when my this book shall come to you. You wanted to ask
me about him but you had forgotten.’ While I was reading his book, some
one came and told me that my brother was set free. I received him and
read this book to him.’[^77]

14. Abu Hashim narrated, ‘It came to my mind whether the Qur'an was
created or not. Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) looked at me and said, ‘O Abu
Hashim, Allah is the Creator of everything, and everything other than
Him is created.’[^78]

15. Abu Hashim said, ‘Once, I went to Abu Muhammad (a.s.) and wanted to
ask him for a stone that I wanted to make a ring from to bless myself
with it. When I sat with him, I forgot what I had come for. When I said
farewell and wanted to leave, he gave me a ring, smiled, and said, ‘You
wanted a stone and we gave you a ring, and so you won the stone. May
Allah delight you by it!’ I was astonished at that and said, ‘O my
master, you are the guardian of Allah and my imam by whose favor and
obedience I serve Allah.’ He said to me, ‘May Allah pardon you, Abu
Hashim!’[^79]

16. Abu Hashim said, “Once, I heard Abu Muhammad saying, ‘On the Day of
Resurrection, Allah will forgive with forgiveness that cannot be even
imagined by people, until polytheists shall say: by Allah, we were not
polytheists.’ I remembered with myself a tradition narrated to me by a
man from our companions from the people of Mecca that the messenger of
Allah (a.s.) recited:*(Despair not of the Mercy of Allah, for Allah
forgives all sins)* ,[^80] and some man said, ‘even polytheists.’ I
denied that and hid it into my heart. While I was thinking of that with
myself, Abu Muhammad turned to me and recited,*(Surely Allah does not
forgive that anything is associated with Him, and He forgives all save
that to whom He pleases)* .[^81] How bad what that man said was and how
bad what he narrated was!’[^82]

Historians mentioned many examples on the imam’s knowledge of what
people concealed inside themselves, and on his predicting of different
events and occurrences. All those were signs on his imamate, for other
than the imams had no knowledge about that. Abu Hashim, who was one of
the best, reliable scholars, and who was a close companion to Imam Abul
Hasan al-Hadi (a.s.) and Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.), narrated
most of the traditions that talked about the signs of these two imams
(a.s.). He said, ‘Whenever I went to Abul Hasan and Abu Muhammad (peace
be upon them), I saw a proof and evidence (on their imamate).’[^83]
