His letters
===========

Some letters of the imam disclose an important side of the religious
life which was confused at that age. The following are some of his
letters to his adherents:

#### 1. To Isaaq an-Naysaburi

####

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) sent a letter to Isaaq bin Isma’il an-Naysaburi
saying in it,

“May Allah protect us by His protection, and take care of you in all
your affairs by His favor. I understood your letter, may Allah have
mercy on you. We, praise be to Allah and by His blessing, are people of
a house who pity our followers and feel delighted for the succession of
the favors of Allah on them, and feel happy for every blessing that
Allah the Almighty endows them with. O Isaaq, may Allah endow you with
all blessings and endows whoever is like you whom Allah has had mercy on
and given insight like yours…and may He determine the Paradise for you…

And I say: praise be to Allah as the best praise He has ever been
praised with and forever for His mercy on you, His saving you from
perishment, and smoothing your way on the obstacle. By Allah, it is
insurmountable, impassable, difficult obstacle with great distresses
that had been mentioned in the first Books. At the time of the deceased
(Imam al-Hadi), peace be on him, and at my time you had done some things
that neither I was satisfied with you nor were you right in them.

O Isaaq, know well that whoever comes out of this world blind will be
blind in the afterworld and more astray. O Isaaq, it is not the eyes
that become blind but the hearts that are in the chests. Allah says
about the unjust,*(He shall say: My Lord! why hast Thou raised me blind
and I was a seeing one indeed? He will say: Even so, Our revelations
came to you but you neglected them; and thus you shall be forsaken this
day)* .[^102] Is there a sign greater than the excuse of Allah on His
creation, His trustee in His earth, and His witness on His people…after
those who had left from his first fathers the prophets and his last
fathers the guardians (peace and blessings of Allah be on them all). So
where do you go astray and where do you go like beasts? You deviate from
the truth and believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the blessings of
Allah. Are you from those who believe in a part of the Book and
disbelieve in the other? So what is the reward of him who does that from
you and from other than you? It is but meanness in this life and eternal
torment in the afterlife. By Allah, it is the great disgrace! When Allah
imposed on you, by His favor and mercy, the obligations, He did not
impose them on you because He was in need of you, but out of His mercy
on You-there is no god but Him-to distinguish the good from the bad, and
to try what there was in your chests, and test what there was in your
hearts so that you would compete for the mercy of Allah and that your
positions in His paradise would be one better than another. He imposed
on you hajj, umrah (minor hajj), prayer, zakat, fasting, and the
following of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s). He made to you a door by which you
open the doors of the other obligations and as a key to His way. Except
for Muhammad (blessings of Allah be on him), and the guardians from his
progeny you would be confused like beast knowing nothing of the
obligations. Is a town entered except from its gate? When Allah favored
you by appointing the guardians after your prophet, He said,*(This day
have I perfected for you your religion and completed My favor on you and
chosen for you Islam as a religion)* .[^103] He imposed on you rights
for His guardians and ordered you to carry them out so that your wives,
properties, foods, and drinks would be lawful to you. Allah said,*(Say:
I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near relatives)*
,[^104] and know well that*(whoever is niggardly, is niggardly against
his own self; and Allah is Self-sufficient and you are the needy)*
.[^105] There is no god but Allah, and my speech became too long on what
was for you and what was required from you.

Except for that Allah wanted to complete his favor on you, you would
neither see a line from me nor would you hear a word after the leaving
of the deceased (Imam al-Hadi), peace be upon him, while you are in
inadvertence to your end, and after my appointing Ibrahim bin Abdah to
you, and after my book that Muhammad bin Musa an-Naysaburi had brought
to you, and Allah is He whose help is sought in any case. Beware to be
unmindful towards Allah so that you shall be from the losers! Away with
him he who turns his back to the obedience of Allah and does not accept
the advice of His guardians! Allah has ordered you to obey Him, to obey
His messenger, and to obey those in authority among you. May Allah
mercify your weakness and inadvertence, and make you patient with your
affair. What has beguiled man from his Lord?! If mountains understood
some of that which was in this book, they would crack and split because
of the fear of Allah, and turn back to the obedience of Allah.  Do
whatever you like*(so Allah will see your work and (so will) His
Messenger and the believers; and you shall be brought back to the Knower
of the unseen and the seen, then He will inform you of what you did)*
.[^106] Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds, and His blessings be
on Muhammad and all his progeny.”[^107]

#### 2. His letter to the people of Qum and Aabeh

####

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) sent a letter, some parts of which were lost,
to his Shia from the people of Qum and Abeh (Aveh) saying to them,

“Allah the Almighty with His generosity and kindness has favored His
people with His prophet Muhammad (a.s.) as a bearer of good tidings and
a warner, and has made you succeed in accepting His religion, granted
you with His guidance, and planted into the hearts of your past
ancestors (may He have mercy on them) and your living offspring (may He
suffice and make them live long) the love of the pure progeny (of the
Prophet). They, who had left, left on the way of righteousness, and the
path of truth and success, and they went to the place of successors, got
the fruits of what they had sowed, and found the result of what they had
done before…

Our intention is still firm, and our selves are satisfied with your good
thoughts. The fixed relation between us and you are firm. It is a will
that our ancestors and your ancestors had recommended, and a covenant
that had been entrusted to our youth and your old men. They are still on
their faith, and Allah has gathered us in the close relation, and close
kinship. The Alim (peace of Allah be on him) said, ‘A faithful is a
brother of a faithful from his father and mother…”[^108]

#### 3. His letter to Ali bin al-Husayn

####

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) sent a letter to the famous jurisprudent Abul
Hasan Ali bin al-Husayn bin Musa bin Babwayh al-Qummi, the notable of
the Shia and prominent personality in Hadith, jurisprudence, and the
rest of the Islamic sciences. Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said in his
letter,

“Praise be to Allah the Lord of the worlds, and the end is for the
righteous, the Paradise is for the monotheists, the Hell is for the
atheists, and there should be no hostility except against oppressors,
and there is no god but Allah the best of creators, and blessing be on
the best of His creation Muhammad and his pure progeny.

O my sheikh, trustee, jurisprudent Abul Hasan Ali bin al-Husayn
al-Qummi-may Allah be satisfied with you, and make from your progeny
good children- I recommend you to fear Allah, offer prayers, and give
zakat because no prayer is accepted from one who does not give zakat. I
also recommend you to pardon others, suppress anger, continuously
associate with kin, comfort brothers and try to carry out their needs at
difficulty and ease, be patient, learn religion, be certain of things,
undertake the Qur'an, behave with good morals, enjoin the good, and to
forbid the wrong. Allah says,*(There is no good in most of their secret
counsels except (in his) who enjoins charity or goodness or
reconciliation between people)* .[^109] I recommend you to avoid all
sins and vices. You are to keep on offering Night Prayer, for the
Prophet (a.s) had recommended Ali saying to him, ‘O Ali, you are to keep
on the Night Prayer.’ He repeated that three times. Whoever disregards
the Night Prayer is not from us. Act according to my recommendation and
order my Shia to act due to that. Wait for deliverance, for the Prophet
(a.s) said, ‘The best deed of my nation is the waiting for deliverance.’
Our Shia shall be still in sorrow until my son, whom the Prophet (a.s)
brought good news about, shall appear. He will fill the earth with
justice and fairness after it has been filled with injustice and
oppression. O my sheikh, be patient and order all my Shia to be
patient;*(Surely the earth is Allah's. He gives it as inheritance to
whom He will and the end is (best) for the righteous)* .[^110] Peace,
mercy, and blessings of Allah be on you and on all our Shia, and Allah
is sufficient for us; the best Protector is He, the best Patron, and the
best Helper.”[^111]

#### 4. His letter to one of his followers

####

One of the Shia wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) telling him about the
disagreement between the Shia. The imam replied to him in this letter,

“Allah has addressed reasonable people…people concerning me are in
different classes; a discerning one is on the way of deliverance,
keeping to the truth, clinging to the branch of the origin without being
doubtful or suspicious, and finding no resort other than me. There is
another class of people who do not take the truth from its owners; they
are like a traveler in the sea. They wave whenever the sea waves, and
calm whenever the sea calms. Another class of people are those who have
been overcome by Satan. They just resist the people of truth, and fight
truth by falsehood out of envy. So let alone whoever goes right or left,
because when a shepherd wants to gather his sheep, he gathers them with
the least effort. Beware of showoff and panting after authority because
they lead to perishment…’[^112]

#### 5. His letter to another one of his followers

####

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) sent a letter to one of his followers
expressing his grief from some rabble of the Shia who had deviated from
the right path. He said,

“No one of my fathers had been afflicted like what I have been afflicted
with the suspicions of this group…if this matter (imamate) was a matter
that you had believed in and kept on it until a certain time and then
stopped, then suspicion would have certain case, but if it (imamate) is
continuous as long as the affairs of Allah are continuous, then what is
the meaning of this suspicion?...’[^113]

#### 6. His letter to Abdullah al-Bayhaqi

####

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) sent the following letter to Abdullah bin
Hamdwayh al-Bayhaqi:

“I have sent Ibrahim bin Abdah so that the (other) districts and the
people of your district pay my dues on you to him and I made him my
trust and agent before my followers there. Let them fear Allah and pay
the dues and they have no excuse in not doing that or delaying it. May
Allah not distress them for disobeying His guardians and may He have
mercy on them and on you through my mercifulness to them, and Allah is
Ample-giving, Generous.”[^114]

#### 7. His letter about Ibrahim

####

Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.) had appointed Ibrahim bin Abdah as
his agent to receive the legal dues and to spend them on religion and on
the needy, and given him a letter mentioning in it his reliability and
high position. Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was asked whether this letter
was written by him or not, and he replied,

“My book that came to Ibrahim bin Abdah on appointing him as my agent to
receive my rights from our followers there…yes, it was my book written
by my hand to him. I have appointed him to them in their country. It is
true and not false. Let him fear Allah as He should be feared, and let
them take out my rights and give them to him, for I have permitted him
to do with them as required. May Allah give him success and save him
from failure.”[^115]

#### 8. His letter to his followers

####

He sent this letter to some of his followers:

“May Allah gift you with asceticism in this life and success as He
pleases, assistance for His obedience, protection from disobedience,
guidance from deviation, and may He gather for us and for our followers
the good of the two abodes (this life and the afterlife).

I was informed of the disagreement of your hearts, and the separation of
your desires, and the incitement of Satan until he caused separation
among you, disbelief in religion, attempting to destroy what your
ancestors had built in the religion of Allah and proved the rights of
His guardians. He (Satan) took you to the way of deviation, and away
from the path of the truth, and so many of you receded as if you had not
read the Book of Allah and not understood any of His commands and
prohibitions. I swear that if your fools rely on their delusions and
fabricate false traditions, they shall deserve torment, and if you are
satisfied with that from them and do not deny it by your hands, tongues,
hearts, and intentions, you shall be participants with them in what they
have fabricated against Allah, His messenger, and the guardians after
him. If it was not so, the people of az-Zabad would not lie in their
claim, nor al-Mughirah in their disagreement, nor al-Kaysaniyyah on
their man, nor other liars and the deviants who have turned away from
us. Indeed, you are worse than them…and most of them were obliged to
submit to the command of Allah, except some group that if I want, I
shall mention it by the name…Satan has overcome them and made them
forget the mention of Allah, and whoever forgets the mention of
Allah…Allah will throw him into Fire, and it shall be an evil abode.

My this book is an authority on them, and an authority for your absents
on your presents, except one who is informed and carries out his duty. I
pray Allah to gather your hearts on guidance, protect you by piety, and
make you do what pleases Him, and peace, blessing, and mercy of Allah be
on you.’[^116]

#### 9. His letter to one of his adherents

####

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said in this letter to one of his followers:

“Every predestined thing would come true. Rely on Allah the Almighty and
He will suffice you, and trust in Him and He will not disappoint you!
You have complained against your brother. Know well that Allah does not
help in the rapture of relations, and Allah is over any oppression of
every oppressor. Whoever is oppressed surely Allah will help him, and
Allah is Strong, Mighty. You have asked me to pray for you. May Allah
the Almighty keep you safe, and be your helper and protector. I pray
Allah the Generous, Who has made you know His right and the right of His
guardians that others than you were ignorant of, not to remove from you
any blessing He has endowed you with, He is Patron worthy of all
praise.’[^117]

#### 10. His letter to one of his Shia adherents

####

One of the Shia wrote a letter to the imam complaining against an
oppressor who oppressed and did him wrong. Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
replied to him:

“We satisfy ourselves with Allah the Almighty this day against every
oppressor, wrongdoer, and envier. Woe unto whoever says something that
Allah knows its opposite. How terrible is that which he shall meet from
the Master of the Day of Judgment! Surely Allah the Almighty is the
Helper and Assistant to the oppressed. Trust and rely on Him and He will
relieve your distress and save you from the evil of every evildoer. May
Allah do that for you and favor us with you, He is powerful over
everything. May Allah overcome every oppressor this moment! No one, who
wrongs and oppresses, shall be successful. Woe unto whoever is taken by
the fingers of the oppressed! Do not be distressed but trust in Allah
and rely on Him, and He will bring your deliverance soon.  Surely Allah
is with those who are patient and who do good to others.’[^118]
