With the Holy Qur’an
====================

The infallible imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) paid too much attention to
the interpretation (tafsir) of the Holy Qur'an. Each one of them had a
school of tafsir, and definitely they were the most aware of the
contents of the Qur'an and all its sciences. The master of the pure
progeny Imam Ali (a.s.) was, among all the Prophet’s companions, the
most aware of the facts and minute details of the qur’an, its muhkam
(clear) verses and mutashabih (ambiguous) verses, and he knew when and
where each verse was revealed.

As for Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), he was one of the
masters of interpreters. A special tafsir known as “tafsir Imam
al-Askari” was transmitted from him. Here we mention in brief some holy
verses that the imam had interpreted:

1. Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari said, ‘Once, I was with Abu Muhammad (a.s.) and
asked him about this saying of Allah:*(Then We gave the Book for an
inheritance to those whom We chose from among Our servants; but of them
is he who wrongs himself, and of them is he who takes a middle course,
and of them is he who is foremost in deeds of goodness by Allah's
permission)* .[^129] He said, ‘It has been revealed about the progeny of
Muhammad (a.s.). One, who wrongs himself, is the one who does not
acknowledge the imam, and one who takes a middle course is the one who
acknowledges the imam, and one who is foremost in deeds of goodness by
Allah’s permission is the imam.’

My eyes shed tears and I thought with myself of what Allah had given to
the progeny of Muhammad (a.s.). The imam looked at me and said, ‘How
great is that which your self told you about the great importance of the
progeny of Muhammad! Thank Allah for He has made you love them! You
shall be called with them on the Day of Resurrection when every human
being shall be called with his imam. Be delighted Abu Hashim! You are in
good.’[^130]

2. Muhammad bin Salih al-Armani asked Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) about
this verse*(Allah effaces and establishes what He pleases, and with Him
is the basis of the Book)* [^131] and he replied, ‘Does Allah efface but
what has been established, and does He establish but what has been not
existent?...The Almighty is far above all things. He is Aware of all
things before their existence, the Creator when there was no creation,
the Reckoner.’ Muhammad bin Salih said to the imam, ‘I bear witness that
you are the authority of Allah and His guardian, and you are on the true
path of Imam Ameerul Mo'minin.’[^132]

3. Muhammad bin Salih al-Armani asked Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) about
this saying of Allah*(Allah's is the command before and after)* [^133]
and the imam said, ‘The command is His before He issues it, and the
command is His after He commands as He wills.’ I said to myself, ‘This
is the saying of Allah*(Surely His is the creation and the command;
blessed is Allah, the Lord of the worlds)* .[^134] ’ The imam looked at
me, smiled, and then said, ‘*(His is the creation and the command;
blessed is Allah, the Lord of the worlds)* .’[^135]

4. Abu Hashim said, ‘I was with Abu Muhammad (a.s.) when ibn Salih
al-Armani asked him about this verse,*(And when your Lord brought forth
from the children of Adam, from their backs, their descendants, and made
them bear witness against their own souls: Am I not your Lord? They
said: Yes, we bear witness)* .[^136] Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said, ‘The
knowing was proved and they forgot that situation, but they will
remember it, and without that no one would know who his creator and
provider is.’

I was astonished with myself at the great favors Allah had endowed His
guardian (Imam Abu Muhammad) with and the great task He had entrusted
him with. Abu Muhammad turned to me and said, ‘O Abu Hashim, the matter
is greater and more astonishing than what you have been astonished at.
What you think about some people whom whoever acknowledges, acknowledges
Allah, and whoever denies, denies Allah? There is no believer that does
not believe in them and is not certain in knowing them.’[^137]

5. Sufyan bin Muhammad as-Sayfi said, ‘I wrote to Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
asking him about the “waleejah: friend or protector” mentioned in this
saying of Allah,*(and take none for friends and protectors except Allah,
His Messenger, and the believers)* .[^138] I said with myself: ‘Whom
does he think the “believers” are here?’

His reply came to me saying, ‘The “waleejah” is that which is set for
the “guardian”. Your self talked to you that who were meant by the
“believers” in this verse. They are the imams who believe in Allah, and
namely we are those “believers”.’

### The Tafsir Ascribed To Him

###

The tafsir called Tafsir al-Askari was ascribed to Imam Abu Muhammad
al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) but suspicions were aroused about it; some
proved it was his and some others denied that. Here we should have a
stop to ponder on it.

### Those Who Depended On This Tafsir

###

Some of the great ulama of the Twelver Shia depended on this tafsir and
believed certainly it was Imam Abu Muhammad’s tafsir. The following are
the names of some of those ulama:

1. Shaikh as-Saduq[^139]

2. Shaikh at-Tabarsi[^140]

3. Al-Muhaqqiq al-Kurki[^141]

4. The Second Martyr[^142]

5. Muhammad Taqiy al-Majlisi[^143]

6. Ibn Shahrashub[^144]

7. Al-Muhaqqiq Agha Buzurgh[^145]

These great men did not suspect the ascribing of this tafsir to Imam
al-Askari and believed it was really his.

### The Sanad[^146] Of This Tafsir

###

The sand of this tafsir was mentioned in the beginning of the book
(Tafsir al-Askari) as the following:

Muhammad bin Ali bin Muhammad bin Ja’far bin Daqqaq said, “The two
jurisprudent sheikhs Abul Hasan Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Ali bin al-Hasan
bin Shathan and Abu Muhammad Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Ali al-Qummi told
me from Abul Hasan Muhammad bin al-Qassim al-Astrabadi the interpreter
and preacher that Abu Ya’qub Yousuf bin Muhammad bin Ziyad and Abul
Hasan Ali bin Muhammad bin Sayyar, who were from the Twelver Shia, said,
‘Our parents were Twelver Shia. The Zaydites were prevailing in
Astrabad. We were under the rule of al-Hasan bin Zayd al-Alawi called as
ad-Da’iy ilal-Haqq.[^147] He was the imam of the Zaydites. He often
listened to them (the Zaydites) and killed people according to their
slanders. We feared for ourselves , and so we resorted with our families
to Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali bin Muhammad the father of
al-Qa’im (Imam al-Mahdi) (peace be on him). We asked permission to visit
the imam. When he saw us, he said, ‘Welcome to the two comers to us and
resorters to our protection. Allah has accepted your efforts, calmed
your fear, and relieved you from your enemies. Go (back) and feel safe
about yourselves and properties!’ We were astonished at his saying
though we did not doubt the truthfulness of his speech. We said, ‘O
Imam, what do you order us to do on our way until we get to the country
that we had got out of? How shall we enter that country which we had
fled from, and the ruler searched for us and his threatening against us
was severe?’

He (peace be on him) said, ‘Leave your these two sons with me and I will
teach them the knowledge that Allah will honor them with. As for you, do
not pay attention to the slanderers nor to the threat of the ruler,
because Allah the Almighty will end it with happiness and bring them to
your intercession with him whom you had run away from…’

Abu Ya’qub and Abul Hasan said, ‘They (their fathers) obeyed what they
were ordered of and left, but they left us there. We often visited him
(the imam) and he met us with the kindness of fathers and close
relatives. One day, he said to us, ‘If the news of the satisfaction of
your fathers and the disgrace of their enemies by Allah comes to you and
my promise to them comes true, I shall thank Allah by teaching you the
interpretation of the Qur'an and some traditions of Muhammad’s progeny
(a.s.) so that Allah will exalt you.’

We became delighted at that and said, ‘O son of the messenger of Allah,
then we shall learn all sciences and meanings of the Qur'an.’

He said, ‘No! (Imam) as-Sadiq taught some of his companions what I want
to teach you.’

They became delighted and said, ‘O son of the messenger of Allah, you
have had all knowledge of the Qur'an.’

He said, ‘I have had much good, and been granted great virtue, but
nevertheless it is less than the least part of the Qur'an’s knowledge.
Allah the Almighty says,*(Say: Though the sea became ink for the Words
of my Lord, verily the sea would be used up before the words of my Lord
were exhausted, even though We brought the like thereof to help)*
,[^148] *and (And if all the trees in the earth were pens, and the sea,
with seven more seas to help it, (were ink), the words of Allah could
not be exhausted)* .[^149] This is the knowledge and meanings of the
Qur'an and the wonders it has. What amount do you think I have taken
from all this Qur'an?’

We said, ‘But even this amount that you have taken, Allah has preferred
you by it to all those who do not know like your knowledge and do not
understand like your understanding.’

We did not leave him until a messenger came to us from our fathers with
a letter saying that al-Hasan bin Zayd al-Alawi killed some man and
confiscated his properties after the slander of those Zaydites. Then
books came to him from different countries and villages written by the
Zaydites scolding and blaming him and saying that the killed man was the
best one of the Zaydites in the earth and that those some Zaydites
informed against him just because of his virtue and wealth. Al-Hasan bin
Zayd thanked those people and ordered to cut the noses and ears of those
Zaydites, and some of them were mutilated and others ran away. Al-Hasan
bin Zayd felt very sorry and he repented, and paid great monies as
charity after he gave back the properties of the killed man to his heirs
and gave them much more than the specified blood money. He asked them to
pardon him and they said to him, ‘As for the blood money, we exempt you
from it, but as for the blood, it is not ours but it is the killed man’s
blood and Allah is the Judge.’ Al-Hasan bin Zayd vowed for the sake of
Allah that he would not interfere with the beliefs of people.

It was mentioned in the letter of our fathers that al-Hasan bin Zayd
sent to us one of his trusted men with his book that was sealed with his
seal assuring that we would be safe and that our properties would be
given back to us, and that he would recompense the harms and losses we
had met. We shall go back to our country according to his promise.

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said, ‘Allah’s promise is true.’

On the tenth day, a letter came to us from our fathers saying that
al-Hasan bin Zayd had carried out all his promises and permitted us to
keep to the great-blessed imam whose promise was true. When the imam
knew that, he said, ‘This is the time to carry out my promise of
teaching you the interpretation of the Qur'an. I have prepared something
everyday for you to write down. Keep to me and be careful to the good
lucks of happiness Allah has given you.’

The first thing he dictated to us was traditions about the preference of
the Qur'an and of its people, and then he dictated to us the tafsir. We
wrote down throughout the period of our staying with him. It was seven
years, and every day we wrote down as possible as we could…’

### Defects

###

This tafsir was criticized that it had some defects:

First, it was accused that it was weak in its sanad. From the chain of
narrators, there was Muhammad bin al-Qassim al-Mufassir al-Astrabadi who
was weak. Ibn al-Ghadha’iri said, ‘Muhammad bin al-Qassim al-Mufassir
al-Astrabadi was weak and a liar. Abu Ja’far bin Babwayh narrated from
him. A tafsir was transmitted from him that he had narrated from two
unknown men one called Yousuf bin Muhammad bin Ziyad and the other was
Ali bin Muhammad bin Yasar from their father from Abul Hasan the Third
(Imam al-Hadi) (a.s.), and the tafsir was written down by Sahl ad-Dibaji
from his father.[^150]

What was mentioned by al-Ghadha’iri can be refuted in some ways: first,
he mentioned that this tafsir was narrated by Yousuf bin Muhammad bin
Ziyad and Ali bin Muhammad bin Yasar from their father. This is a
mistake because they did not narrate it from their father, but they
narrated it without an intermediary from Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.).
Second, Ibn al-Ghadha’iry ascribed this tafsir to Abul Hasan the Third
(a.s.) whereas it was ascribed to Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.).
Third, He said that this tafsir was authored by Sahl ad-Dibaji from his
father. This is very odd because Sahl was not mentioned among the chain
of narrators of this tafsir. Anyhow, what al-Ghadha’iry mentioned in
weakening this man cannot be depended on.

Sayyid al-Khoei said, ‘No one of the past scholars mentioned the
reliability of Muhammad bin al-Qassim even Sheikh as-Saduq who mentioned
many traditions from him without an intermediary, and also he did not
mention that he was weak…The right thing is that this man was unknown
whose neither reliability nor weakness were proved,[^151] and therefore
one cannot depend on his narrations.

In addition, al-Mufassir al-Astrabadi narrated this tafsir from Yousuf
bin Muhammad bin Ziyad and Ali bin Muhammad bin Yasar who both were
unknown and unreliable in their narrations from Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
as Sayyid al-Khoei says.[^152]

Second, this tafsir is weak and full of defects which means that it is
not true to ascribe it to Imam al-Askari (a.s.), and whoever looks into
it thinks with no doubt that it was falsely ascribed to the imam as
Sayyid al-Khoei says.

Third, Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was surrounded by a big number of
intelligencers, security forces, and policemen of the Abbasid government
that prevented the Shia from associating with him, so how could these
two persons frequented to him throughout seven years without being
prevented from visiting him?

Fourth, the care of the imam for these two men and his asking their
fathers to leave them with him to teach them the knowledge that Allah
would honor them with, as mentioned in the beginning of the book, though
they were unknown, would be doubted somehow. Would it not be better for
the imam to favor the great ulama and jurisprudents of his Shia with
this honor?

Anyhow, it is certain that this tafsir was not Imam Abu Muhammad’s but
it was fabricated and ascribed to him. In addition to the defects it
has, it is not eloquent in many of its chapters, and of course, this
does not fit the imam who had been endowed with wisdom and eloquence,
and he was the most eloquent man in his time. So how could this tafsir,
which had no any feature of eloquence, ascribed to this great imam?
Besides that, it has some traditions that have excessiveness as I think,
and this was too far from the imam (a.s.).


