His traditions and jurisprudence
================================

Historians agreed unanimously on that Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was the
richest scientific personality in his talents and geniuses at his time,
and no one was ever comparable to him in virtue and knowledge.
Historians said, ‘He was the highest authority for jurisprudents in
taking the rulings of the Sharia and the principles of the religion.
They put forward to him books of Hadith and jurisprudence, and if he
permitted these books, they would act according to them. Once, a book
written by Ahmad bin Abdullah bin Khanibah was offered to him. He read
it and then said to his companions, ‘It is true. Act according to
it!’[^153]

### The Interest Of The Ulama In His Traditions

###

Ulama and narrators paid too much attention to his traditions for they
were the truest in his time, and at the same time they were from the
definite Sunna that must be followed according to the belief of the
Twelver Shia. The following are some of the traditions transmitted from
Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.):

1. Al-Hafidh (memorizer) al-Balathari narrated from his companions
saying, ‘Al-Hasan bin Ali bin Muhammad bin Ali bin Muhammad bin Ali bin
Musa, the imam of his age for the Shia, narrated from his father
Muhammad bin Ali al-Mahjub, from his father Ali bin Musa ar-Redha, from
his father Musa bin Ja’far al-Murtadha, from his father Ja’far as-Sadiq,
from his father Muhammad bin Ali al-Baqir, from his father Ali bin
al-Husayn as-Sajjad Zaynol Aabidin (from his father al-Husayn bin Ali),
from his father Ali bin Abu Talib the master of guardians, from Muhammad
bin Abdullah the master of prophets, from Gabriel the chief of the
angels that Allah said, ‘It is Me, Allah that there is no god but Me.
Whoever acknowledges monotheism to Me shall enter into My fort, and
whoever enters into My fort shall be safe from My torment.’[^154]

2. Ibn al-Jawzi said, ‘He (Imam al-Hasan al-Askari) referred this
tradition to his father from his pure fathers. My grandfather showed him
a tradition in his book called Tahrim al-Khamr (prohibition of wine). I
quoted this tradition and I swear by Allah that I heard him saying: I
swear by Allah that I heard Abu Abdullah al-Husayn bin Ali saying: I
swear by Allah that I heard Abdullah bin Ata al-Harawi saying: I swear
by Allah that I heard Abdurrahman bin Ubayd al-Bayhaqi saying: I swear
by Allah that I heard Abu Abdullah al-Husayn bin Muhammad ad-Daynawari
saying: I swear by Allah that I heard Ahmad bin Abdullah ash-Shi’iy
saying: I swear by Allah that I heard Abu Muhammad bin Ali bin Muhammad
saying: I swear by Allah that I heard my father Ali bin Musa ar-Redha
saying: I swear by Allah that I heard my father Ja’far saying: I swear
by Allah that I heard my father Muhammad saying: I swear by Allah that I
heard my father al-Husayn bin Ali saying: I swear by Allah that I heard
Ali bin Abu Talib saying: I swear by Allah that I heard Muhammad (a.s.)
saying: (I swear by Allah that I heard Gabriel saying:) I swear by Allah
that I heard Michael saying: I swear by Allah that I heard Israfel
saying: I swear by Allah…that I heard Allah saying: “A drinker of wine
is like a worshiper of idols.”

Abu Nu’aym al-Fadhl bin Dakeen said, ‘This is a true tradition narrated
by the pure progeny and narrated by some men from the messenger of Allah
(a.s.).’[^155]

### Traditions On Religious Rulings

###

Narrators narrated many traditions on religious questions that Imam Abu
Muhammad (a.s.) was asked about. Worth mentioning is that these
traditions came through letters which showed the great pressure that the
imam was surrounded with by the Abbasid government where ulama could not
associate with him except through correspondence. The following are some
of those questions:

1. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
asking him about the specified quantity (of water) that a dead one
should be washed with. It was narrated that a junub[^156] should wash
with six rotls of water, and a menstruating woman with nine rotls, so
what would be the limit of water for a dead person to be washed with?

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied, ‘A dead should be washed until he
would be pure inshallah.’

Abu Ja’far as-Saduq said, ‘This reply is with me among a collection of
replies by his handwriting (peace be upon him) in a book.’[^157]

This reply shows that there is no limit in the water that a dead person
should be washed with, but he should be washed until he becomes pure.

2. Ibrahim bin Mahziyar wrote to Abu Muhammad al-Hasan (a.s.) asking him
about offering prayer in (clothes dyed with) kermes and saying that his
companions refrained from offering the prayer in it. Imam Abu Muhammad
(a.s.) replied, ‘There is no problem in it at all, and praise be to
Allah.’[^158]

3. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote To Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
bin Ali (a.s.) asking him, ‘Some man died and he had ten days of
qadha’[^159] fasting that he had to perform before his death. He left
two successors (children). Is it possible for each one of his successors
to fast for five days?’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘His elder successor is to fast for ten days,
inshallah.’[^160]

4. Ibrahim bin Mahziyar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.): “O my master,
your mawla[^161] Ali bin Mahziyar had recommended the hajj to be
performed on behalf of him from (the revenue of) a garden…twenty dinars
every years, and since the way of Basra was blocked, costs became
doubled for people that twenty dinars were not enough (for the hajj).
Some others of your mawlas recommended of two (performances of) hajj.’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘You make (the costs of) three seasons of hajj
in two, inshallah the Almighty.’[^162]

5. Ali bin Muhammad al-Hudhayni wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
saying, ‘My cousin has recommended a hajj to be performed on behalf of
him with fifteen dinars every year, and this is not enough. What do you
order me to do?’

The imam (a.s.) replied to him, ‘You make (the costs of) two (seasons
of) hajj in one. Allah is Aware of that.’[^163]

6. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
bin Ali (a.s.), ‘Is the witness of the executer of a dead person
accepted when he claims that the dead person has a debt on some one if
there is another reliable witness?’

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied, ‘If another reliable man witnesses
with him, then the claimer has to take an oath.’

In replying to another letter like this, the imam (a.s.) said, ‘Yes,
after taking an oath.’[^164]

7. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
saying, ‘Some man made a will to his children, some of whom are adults
and some are young children. Is it possible for the adults to execute
their father’s will and pay his debts before the young children come to
age?’

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied, ‘Yes, the adults have to pay their
father’s debt and not to delay it for that (until the others come to
age).’[^165]

8. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar (may Allah be pleased with him) wrote
to Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali (a.s.), ‘Some man guards caravans in
frightening places without the permission of the ruler. They (the men of
the caravans) agree with him to give him a certain amount. Is it
permissible for him to take (wage) from them?’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘If he hires himself for a specified wage, he
can take his right, inshallah.’[^166]

9. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar (may Allah have mercy on him) wrote
to Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali (a.s.), ‘Some one bought a house, and
there was another house (floor) on this house. Would the upper house be
included in the lower house?’

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied, ‘He could not possess except what he
had bought with its limits and conditions, inshallah.’[^167]

The jurisprudents of the Twelver Shia gave a fatwa that if some one sold
a house, its land, upper and lower building would be with it, except if
the upper floor was independent in its entry and exit, because that
might be a reason to exclude it from the sold house. They depended in
this fatwa on this tradition.

10. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar (may Allah have mercy on him) wrote
to the imam, “Some man said to two men: ‘Bear witness that my house in
the so-and–so place with all its limits and all the furniture in it is
(sold) to so-and-so.’ It is not known what furniture there is in the
house.”

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied, ‘It is alright if the buying has
included all that, inshallah.’[^168]

11. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar (may Allah have mercy on him) wrote
to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.), ‘Some man had some pieces of land in a
village. It was time for him to go to Mecca (to perform the hajj). The
village was somehow far from his house and he had no enough time to
define the boundaries of his land. He defined the four boundaries of the
village and said to the witness: ‘Bear witness that I have sold to
so-and-so all the village whose boundaries are so-and-so.’ In fact, he
just had some pieces of land in the village. Would that be right for the
buyer or he would possess just a part from the village though the seller
had acknowledged to him the whole village?’

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied, ‘It is not permissible for one to sell
what he does not own, and the buyer can possess only what the seller
owns.’[^169]

12. Muhammad bin al-Hasan wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) about a man
who asked him to bear witness that he had bought a farm to another but
he did not know the limits of the farm at the time when he asked him to
witness. He said to him, ‘When they tell you the limits, you acknowledge
them.’ Was it permissible for him to bear witness?

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied, ‘Yes, it was, and praise be to
Allah.’[^170]

13. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.),
‘Some one took an oath that he would be free from Allah the Almighty or
from the messenger of Allah, but then he broke his oath. What should his
repentance and penance be?’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘He should feed ten poor people with a mudd of
food (about 750 gr.) for each, and pray Allah to forgive him.’[^171]

15. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.),
‘There is some woman whose husband has divorced her and he does not pay
her the specified expenditure, though she is in need. Is it permissible
for her to go out and spend the night out of her house to work and
satisfy her need?’

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied, ‘There is no objection to that if
Allah knows that she is true (in her going out to work and satisfy her
needs).’[^172]

A woman, who is divorced in revocable divorce, remains as one’s wife as
long as she is still in the iddah.[^173] The husband must pay her
expenditure and she must obey him. It is not permissible for her to get
out of his house without his permission. However, if the husband does
not spend on her, it is permissible for her to go out for work as Imam
Abu Muhammad (a.s.) has said.

16. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.),
‘Some woman undergoes the iddah after the death of her husband. She is
in need and has no one to spend on her. She works for people. Is it
permissible for her, during her iddah, to get out and spend the night
away from her house for work and necessary needs?’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘There is no objection to that,
inshallah.’[^174]

17. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar (may Allah be pleased with him)
wrote to Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali (a.s.), ‘Some man made his will
(to bequeath) for two persons. Is it permissible for one of them to do
alone with a half of the inheritance and the other one with the other
half?’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘They should not contradict the dead one’s will
and they should do as he has ordered them to do.’[^175]

If someone bequeaths to two persons, any of them should not do alone
with the half of the inheritance, but they should discuss the matter
together. Any of them has no right to do with the inheritance according
to his own opinion only and without the permission of the other as the
tradition says.

18. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
bin Ali (a.s.), ‘Some man willed to bequeath the third of his properties
to his children that the share a female would be like the share of a
male. Would the male have the shares of two females from the will?’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘It is permissible for the dead one as he has
willed.’[^176]

This tradition shows that a Muslim is free to do with the third of his
properties as he likes. He can gift it with same shares to his male and
female children, and he can give one more than the other. He can order
the third of his properties to be spent on charitable organizations as
well.

19. Sahl bin Ziyad al-Aadami wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.), ‘Some
man had male and female children. He acknowledged that a farm would be
for his children but he did not mention that it would be divided among
them due to the shares and commands of Allah. Male and female children
were the same in this will.’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘They should execute their father’s will as he
had specified. If he did not specify anything, they would divide the
inheritance according to the Book of Allah the Almighty,
inshallah.’[^177]

20. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar (may Allah be pleased with him)
wrote to Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali (a.s.), ‘Some man was the
executor of someone who died. This executor appointed another one as the
executor instead of him. Would this (second) man be obliged to execute
the will of that man whose executor was that (first) man?’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘He would be obliged to his right if he had
some right with him (with the dead man), inshallah.’[^178]

This tradition shows that an executor is not permitted to ask another
one to execute what he himself has been ordered to execute except when
he has a right with the man of the will, and then he has the right to
appoint another one to take his right back. Jurisprudents say that an
executor has the right to appoint another executor after him if he has
been permitted by the man of the will to do that.

21. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
asking him about entailment and what had been transmitted from his
fathers (a.s.) about it. Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied, ‘Entailments
should be dealt with as their owners have entailed them on,
inshallah.’[^179]

22. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
bin Ali (a.s.), ‘Some man died and left a grandson and a full brother.
To whom would the inheritance be?’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘The inheritance would be for the closest one,
inshallah.’[^180]


