Chapter 8: Allah does not leave the world with no authority (Hujjah)
====================================================================

(1) Some of the famous speech of Imam Ali (as) to Kumayl bin Ziyad
an-Nakh’iy:

Kumayl said: “Amirul Mo'mineen (as) held my hand and took me with him
towards the graveyard. When we reached the desert (went out of the
country), he sighed deeply and said (after a long speech):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا تخلو الأرضُ من حجةٍ قائم لله بحجته إما ظاهر معلوم، وإما خائف
مغمور، لئلا تبطلَ حجج الله وبيناته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The earth does never remain without a Hujjah; either apparent and known
or afraid and unknown lest Allah’s proofs and signs will be
invalid.”[^1]

Does the statement of Imam Ali (as) “apparent and known” not refer to
the known person and the known place and does his statement “afraid and
hidden” not refer to the disappearing person and the unknown place?

> 2 - وأخبرنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد بن عقدة قال: حدثنا محمد بن المفضل
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وسعدان بن إسحاق وأحمد بن الحسين بن عبد الملك ومحمد بن أحمد القطواني
قالوا: حدثنا الحسن بن محبوب، عن هشام بن سلام، عن أبي حمزة الثمالي، عن
أبي إسحاق السبيعى قال: سمعت من يوثق به من أصحاب أمير المؤمنين يقول:
قال أمير المؤمنين في خطبة خطبها بالكوفة طويلة ذكرها:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهمّ فلا بدَّ لك من حجج في أرضك حجة بعد حجة على خلقك، يهدونهم إلى
دينك، ويعلمونهم علمك لكيلا يتفرقَ أتباع أوليائك، ظاهر غير مطاع، أو
مكتتم خائف يترقب، إن غاب عن الناس شخصُهم في حال هدنتهم في دولة الباطل
فلن يغيب عنهم مبثوثُ علمهم، وآدابُهم في قلوب المؤمنين مثبتة، وهم بها
عاملون، يأنسون بما يستوحش منه المكذبون ويأباه المسرفون بالله. كلام
يكال بلا ثمنٍ لو كان مَن يسمعه بعقله فيعرفه ويؤمن به ويتبعه، وينهج
نهجه فيفلح به؟ ثم يقول: فمن هذا؟ ولهذا يأرز العلم إذ لم يوجد حملةً
يحفظونه ويؤدونه كما يسمعونه من العالم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(2) Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed bin Oqda narrated from Muhammad bin
al-Mufadhdhal, Sa’dan bin Iss’haq, Ahmad bin al-Husayn bin Abdul Melik
and Muhammad bin Ahmad al-Qatawani all narrated from al-Hasan bin
Mahboob from Hisham bin Salim from Abu Hamza ath-Thimali that Abu
Iss’haq as-Subay’iy had said: I have heard one of the trusted companions
of Imam Ali (as) saying that Imam Ali (as) has said in a long speech he
made in Kufa:

“O Allah, it must be that You have authorities on Your earth one after
the other over Your people to guide them to Your religion and to teach
them Your knowledge lest the followers of Your guardians separate. They
(the authorities) are either apparent without being obeyed or afraid,
hidden and awaiting. If their persons are absent from people during
their truce in the state of untruth, their knowledge will never be
absent from them (from people). Their principles are fixed in the hearts
of the believers, who act according to these principles. They become
pleasant with what the liars become unpleasant and with what those, who
are indifferent to the obligations of Allah, deny. Speech that is
measured without any price; but is there any one hearing it with his
mind, perceiving it, believing in it and following it as an ideal to
succeed with it? And who is he? Therefore knowledge is lost because
there is no one to bear it, to preserve it and to teach it as it is
heard from the ulama.”

Then he said after a long speech:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم وإني لأعلم أن العلم لا يأرز كله ولا ينقطع مواده فإنك لا تُخلي
أرضك من حجة على خلقك إما ظاهر يطاع أو خائف مغمور ليس بمطاع لكيلا تبطل
حجتك ويضل أولياؤك بعد إذ هديتهم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allah, I know well that knowledge is not lost totally nor its means
disappear because You do not leave the earth without an authority over
Your people; either apparent and obeyed or afraid, absent and disobeyed
lest Your proofs will be vain and Your faithfuls will go astray after
You have guided them.”

The same was narrated by Muhammad bin Ya'qoob al-Kulayni from Ali bin
Muhammad from Sahl bin Ziyad from Muhammad bin Yahya and others from
Ahmad bin Muhammad from Ali bin Ibraheem from his father from al-Hasan
bin Mahboob from Hisham bin Salim from Abu Hamza ath-Thimali from Abu
Iss’haq as-Subay’iy from one of Imam Ali’s trusted companions.[^2]

> 3 - حدثنا محمد بن يعقوب الكليني قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن منصور بن يونس وسعدان بن مسلم، عن إسحاق بن
عمار، عن أبي عبد الله قال: سمعته يقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن الأرض لا تخلو إلاّ وفيها عالِم كيما إن زاد المؤمنون شيئاً ردّهم،
وإن نقصوا شيئا أتمّه لهم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(3) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob al-Kulayni narrated from Ali bin Ibraheem bin
Hashim from his father from ibn Abu Omayr from Mansoor bin Younus and
Sa’dan bin Muslim from Iss’haq bin Ammar that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as)
had said:

“The world will not be empty of a jurisprudent (imam). Whenever the
believers add something (a heresy) to the religion, he prevents them
from that and whenever they omit something of it, he completes it for
them.”[^3]

> 4 - حدثنا محمد بن يعقوب، عن محمد بن يحيى، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن علي بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحكم، عن الربيع بن محمد المسلي، عن عبد الله بن سليمان العامري، عن أبي
عبد الله أنه قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما زالتِ الأرض إلاّ وللهِ فيها حجة يعرف الحلالَ والحرام ويدعو الناسَ
إلى سبيل الله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(4) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob narrated from Muhammad bin Yahya from Ahmad bin
Muhammad from Ali bin al-Hakam from ar-Rabee’ bin Muhammad bin
al-Mussalli from Abdullah bin Sulayman al-Aamiri that Abu Abdullah
as-Sadiq (as) had said:

“The world will still have an authority from Allah knowing the
permissible and impermissible things and inviting people to the way of
Allah.”[^4]

> 5 - حدثنا محمد بن يعقوب، عن بعض رجاله، عن أحمد بن مهران، عن محمد بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي، عن الحسين بن أبي العلاء، عن أبي عبد الله قال: قلت له: تبقى الأرض
بغير إمام؟ قال: لا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(5) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob narrated from some of his companions from Ahmad
bin Mihran from Muhammad bin Ali that al-Husayn bin Abul Ala’ had asked
Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as):

“Is the world left without an imam?”

He replied: “No, it is not.”[^5]

> 6 - حدثنا محمد بن يعقوب، عن علي بن إبراهيم، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن يونس،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابن مسكان، عن أبي بصير، عن أبي عبد الله أنه قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّ الله لم يدعِ الأرض بغير عالِم، ولولا ذلك لم يُعرف الحقّ من الباطل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(6) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob narrated from Ali bin Ibraheem from Muhammad
bin Eessa from Younus from ibn Miskan from Abu Baseer that Abu Abdullah
as-Sadiq (as) had said:

“Allah does not leave the world without a jurisprudent (imam); otherwise
the truth is not distinguished from the untruth.”[^6]

> 7 - وعن علي بن إبراهيم، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن محمد بن الفضيل، عن أبي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حمزة الثمالي، عن أبي جعفر الباقر أنه قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واللهِ، ما ترك الله أرضَه منذ قبض الله آدمَ إلاّ وفيها إمامٌ يُهتدى به
إلى الله، وهو حجته على عباده، ولا تبقى الأرض بغير إمام حجة لله على
عباده.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(7) Ali bin Ibraheem narrated from Muhammad bin Eessa from Muhammad bin
al-Fudhayl from Abu Hamza ath-Thimali that Abu Ja'far al-Baqir (as) had
said:

“By Allah, He has not left the world, since Adam had left to the better
world, without an imam guiding people to the way of Allah and being the
authority of Allah over His people. The world will never be left without
an authority (from Allah) over the people.”[^7]

> 8 - وبه عن أبي حمزة قال: قلت لأبي عبد الله: أتبقى الأرض بغير إمام؟
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لو بقِيتِ الأرضُ بغير إمام لَساختْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(8) The previous series of narrators narrated that Abu Hamza ath-Thimali
had said: I asked Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as): “Is the world left without
an imam?” He said:

“If the world remains without an imam, it will sink.”[^8]

> 9 - وبه عن محمد بن الفضيل، عن الرضا قال:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت له: أتبقى الأرض بغير إمام؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: لا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: فإنا نروي عن أبي عبد الله أنها لا تبقى بغير إمام إلاّ أن يسخط
الله على أهل الأرض (أو قال: على العباد).
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: لا تبقى الأرضُ بغير إمام، ولو بقيت إذاً لساخت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(9) The previous narrators narrated from Muhammad bin al-Fudhayl that he
had said:

I asked Imam ar-Redha (as): “Is the world left without an imam?”

He said: “No, it is not.”

I said: “We narrate from Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) that it is not left
without an imam except if Allah becomes angry with the people.”

He said: “The world is not left without an imam. If it is left without
an imam, it will sink.”[^9]

> 10 - محمد بن يعقوب الكليني، عن علي بن إبراهيم، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن أبي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الله المؤمن، عن أبي هراسة، عن أبي جعفر الباقر أنه قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لو أنّ الإمامَ رُفع من الأرض ساعةً لساخت بأهلها وماجتْ كما يموج البحرُ
بأهله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(10) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob al-Kulayni narrated from Ali bin Ibraheem from
Muhammad bin Eessa from Abu Abdullah al-Mo’min from Abu Hurasa that Abu
Ja'far al-Baqir (as) had said:

“If the imam is removed from on the earth for an hour, it will sink with
its people and will surge like the sea.”[^10]

> 11 - محمد بن يعقوب، عن الحسين بن محمد، عن معلي بن محمد، عن الوشاء قال:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سألت الرضا: هل تبقى الأرض بغير إمام؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: لا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: إنا نروي أنها لا تبقى إلاّ أن يسخط الله على العباد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: لا تبقى، إذاً لَساختْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(11) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob narrated from al-Husayn bin Muhammad from
Mu’alla bin Muhammad that al-Washsha’ had said:

I asked Imam ar-Redha (as): “Is the world left without an imam?” He
said: “No, it is not.”

I said: “We narrate traditions saying that it does not remain without an
imam except if Allah becomes angry with the people.” He said: “It does
not remain without an imam, otherwise it sinks.”[^11]

[^1]: Mo’jam Ahadeeth al-Imam al-Mahdi, vol.3 p.67.

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, vol.23 p.54, Mo’jam Ahadeeth al-Imam al-Mahdi, vol.
3 p.67.

[^3]: Basa’ir ad-Darajat p.332, Al-Kafi, vol.1 p.178, Kamal ad-Deen
p.221, Ilal ash-Shara’i’ p.220.

[^4]: Al-Mahassin p.236, Bassa’ir ad-Darajat p.484, Al-Kafi, vol.1
p.178.

[^5]: Bassa’ir ad-Darajat p.485, Al-Kafi, vol.1 p.178, al-Imama
wet-Tabsira p.27, Kamal ad-Deen p.223.

[^6]: Al-Kafi, vol.1 p.178, Biharul Anwar, vol.23 p.36.

[^7]: Bassa’ir ad-Darajat p.485, Al-Kafi, vol.1 p.178, al-Imama
wet-Tabsira p.29, Ilal ash-Sharayi’ p.197, Mukhtasar Bassa’ir ad-Darajat
p.8, Biharul Anwar, vol.23 p.22.

[^8]: Bassa’ir ad-Darajat p.488, Al-Kafi, vol.1 p.179, al-Imama
wet-Tabsira p.30, Kamal ad-Deen p.201, Ilal ash-Sharayi’ p.198.

[^9]: Biharul Anwar, vol.23 p.33, Mo’jam Ahadeeth al-Imam al-Mahdi, vol.
4 p.177.

[^10]: Bassa’ir ad-Darajat p.488, Al-Kafi, vol.1 p.179, Kamal ad-Deen
p.203, Dala’il al-Imama p.230.

[^11]: Bassa’ir ad-Darajat p.488, Biharul Anwar, vol.23 p.28.


