Chapter 9: Al-Hujjah must appear
================================

> 1 - حدثنا عبد الواحد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا محمد بن جعفر القرشي، قال:
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، قال: حدثنا محمد بن سنان، عن أبي
عمارة حمزة بن الطيار قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله يقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَو لَم يبقَ في الأرض إلاّ اثنانِ لكان الثاني منهما الحجّة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(1) Abdul Wahid bin Abdullah narrated from Muhammad bin Ja'far
al-Qarashi from Muhammad bin al-Hasan bin Abul-Khattab from Muhammad bin
Sinan that Abu Imara Hamza at-Tayyar had heard Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq
(as) saying:

“If there are no people on the earth except two men, one of them must be
al-Hujjah (Imam al-Mahdi).”[^1]

> 2 - حدثنا محمد بن يعقوب الكليني، عن عدة من رجاله وأحمد بن إدريس ومحمد
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بن يحيى جميعاً، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن محمد بن عيسى بن عبيد، عن محمد بن
سنان، عن أبي عمارة حمزة بن الطيار، عن أبي عبد الله قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لو بقيَ في الأرض اثنان لكان أحدهما الحجّة على صاحبه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(2) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob al-Kulayni narrated from some of his companions
from Ahmad bin Idreess and Muhammad bin Yahya from Ahmad bin Muhammad
from Muhammad bin Eessa bin Obayd from Muhammad bin Sinan from Abu Imara
Hamza bin at-Tayyar that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) had said:

“If only two men remain on the earth, one of them will be the Hujjah
over the other.”

The same was narrated by Muhammad bin Ya'qoob from Muhammad bin al-Hasan
from Sahl bin Ziyad from Muhammad bin Eessa.[^2]

> 3 - وأخبرنا محمد بن يعقوب، عن محمد بن يحيى، عمن ذكره، عن الحسن بن موسى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الخشاب، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن كرام قال: قال أبو عبد الله:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لو كان الناسُ رجُلَين لكان أحدهما الإمام.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقال: إنّ آخرَ من يموت الإمام لئلاّ يحتجّ أحدٌ على الله أنه تركه بغير
حجة لله عليه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(3) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob narrated from Muhammad bin Yahya from someone
from al-Hasan bin Musa al-Khashshab from Ja'far bin Muhammad from Karram
that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) had said:

“If people are just two men, one of them will be the imam. The last one
to die is the imam lest someone protests against Allah that He has left
him without an authority from Him.”[^3]

> 4 - محمد بن يعقوب، عن عدة من رجاله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد البرقي، عن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن إسماعيل، عن محمد بن سنان، عن حمزة بن الطيار، قال: سمعت أبا عبد
الله يقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَو لم يبقَ في الأرض إلا اثنان لكان أحدهما الحجّة (أو الثاني الحجّة).
  </p>
</blockquote>

(4) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob narrated from some of his companions from Ahmad
bin Muhammad bin Khalid al-Barqi from Ali bin Issma’eel from Muhammad
bin Sinan that Hamza bin at-Tayyar had heard Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as)
saying:

“If there are no people on the earth except two, one of them will be
al-Hujjah.”[^4]

> 5 - محمد بن يعقوب، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن محمد بن الحسن، عن النهدي، عن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبيه، عن يونس بن يعقوب، عن أبي عبد الله أنه سمعه يقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَو لم يكن في الأرض إلاّ اثنان لكان أحدهما الإمام.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(5) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob narrated from Ahmad bin Muhammad from Muhammad
bin al-Hasan from an-Nahdi from his father that Younus bin Ya'qoob had
heard Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) saying:

“If there are no people on the earth except two, one of them will the
imam.”[^5]

[^1]: Al-Kafi, vol.1 p.180.

[^2]: Al-Kafi, vol.1 p.179, Ithbat al-Hudat, vol.1 p.79, Biharul Anwar,
vol. 23 p.52.

[^3]: Al-Kafi, vol.1 p.180, Ilal ash-Sharayi’ p.196, Biharul Anwar,
vol.23 p.21, vol.53 p.114.

[^4]: Al-Kafi, vol.1 p.180.

[^5]: Al-Kafi, vol.1 p.180, Biharul Anwar, vol.23 p.52.


