Chapter 12: Disagreement among the Shia during the disappearance
================================================================

> 1 - حدثنا محمد بن يعقوب قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محبوب، عن يعقوب السراج وعن علي بن رئاب، عن أبي عبد الله أنه قال: لما
بويع لأمير المؤمنين بعد مقتل عثمان صعد المنبر وخطب خطبة ذكرها يقول
فيها:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا إنّ بليّتكم قد عادت كهيئتِها يوم بعث الله نبيه . والذي بعثه بالحق
لتبلبلُنّ بلبلةً ولتغربلُنَّ غربلة حتى يعود أسفلُكم أعلاكم وأعلاكم
أسفلكم، وليسبقنّ سابقون كانوا قصّروا، وليقصرنّ سبّاقون كانوا سبقوا،
والله ما كتمت وسمة ولا كذبت كذبة، ولقد نُبّئت بهذا المقام وهذا اليوم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(1) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob narrated from Ali bin Ibraheem from his father
from bin Mahboob from Ya'qoob as-Sarraj and Ali bin Ri’ab that Abu
Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) had said: When Amirul Mo'mineen (as) was paid
homage as the caliph after Uthman had been killed, he ascended the
minbar and made a speech. He said:

“Your affliction became as it had been when Allah had sent His messenger
Muhammad (as). I swear by Him, Who has sent His messenger with the
truth, that you will be confused and will be sifted until your notables
become low and your lows become notable. Some of you, who have been
indecent, will be virtuous and some, who have been virtuous, will be
indecent. By Allah I have not hidden a truth nor have I told a lie. I
have been inspired with this position and this day.”[^1]

> 2 - حدثنا محمد بن يعقوب الكليني قال: حدثني عدة من أصحابنا، عن أحمد بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد، عن معمر بن خلاد، قال: سمعت أبا الحسن يقول
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَحَسِبَ النَّاسُ أَنْ يُتْرَكُوا أَنْ يَقُولُوا آمَنَّا وَهُمْ لَا
يُفْتَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم قال لي: ما الفتنة؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقلت: جعلت فداك، الذي عندنا أن الفتنة في الدين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: يفتنون كما يفتن الذهب. ثم قال: يخلصون كما يخلص الذهب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(2) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob al-Kulayni narrated from some of his companions
from Ahmad bin Muhammad that Ma’mar bin Khallad had said: I heard Abul
Hasan (Imam Ali) (as) reciting, ***“Alif Lam Mim. Do men think that they
will be left alone on saying, We believe, and not be tried (with
sedition)?***[^2]***”*** and then he asked: What is sedition?”

I said: “May I die for you! We think that sedition is in religion.”

He said: “People are tried as gold is tried. They are purified as gold
is purified.”[^3]

> 3 - حدثنا محمد بن يعقوب قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يونس، عن سليمان بن صالح رفعه إلى أبي جعفر محمد بن علي الباقر قال: قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّ حديثكم هذا لتشمئز منه قلوب الرجال فانبذوه إليهم نبذاً فمَن أقرّ به
فزيدوه، ومَن أنكر فذروه، إنه لا بدّ من أن تكون فتنةٌ يسقط فيها كلّ
بطانة ووليجة حتى يسقط فيها مَن يشق الشعرة بشعرتين حتى لا يبقى إلاّ نحن
وشيعتنا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(3) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob narrated from Ali bin Ibraheem from Muhammad
bin Eessa from Younus from Sulayman bin Salih that Abu Ja'far al-Baqir
(as) had said:

“Your talk (about al-Qa'im) disgusts the hearts of men. Say it to them
forcefully. Say more to whoever accepts it and leave aside whoever
denies it. There must be a sedition, by which companions, kin and even
those, who split a hair into two (who are so strict and accurate), fall
until no one remains save us and our sincere Shia (followers).”[^4]

> 4 - حدثنا أبو سليمان أحمد بن هوذة الباهلي، قال: حدثنا أبو إسحاق
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إبراهيم بن إسحاق النهاوندي سنة ثلاث وسبعين ومائتين قال: حدثنا عبد الله
بن حماد الأنصاري سنة تسع وعشرين ومائتين، عن رجل، عن أبي عبد الله: أنه
دخل عليه بعض أصحابه فقال له: جعلت فداك، إني والله أحبك وأحب من يحبك،
يا سيدي ما أكثر شيعتكم، فقال له: أذكرهم، فقال: كثير، فقال: تحصيهم؟
فقال: هم أكثر من ذلك. فقال أبو عبد الله:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أما لو كمُلت العدّة الموصوفة ثلاثمائة وبضعة عشر كان الذي تريدون، ولكنّ
شيعتنا مَن لا يعدو صوته سمعه ولا شحناؤه بدنه ولا يمدح بنا معلناً ولا
يخاصم بنا قالياً ولا يجالس لنا عايباً ولا يحدث لنا ثالباً ولا يحب لنا
مبغضاً ولا يبغض لنا محباً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(4) Abu Sulayman Ahmad bin Hawtha al-Bahili narrated from Abu Iss’haq
Ibraheem bin Iss’haq an-Nahawandi from Abdullah bin Hammad al-Ansari
from someone that one of the companions had come to Abu Abdullah
as-Sadiq (as) and said to him:

“May I die for you! By Allah, I love you and love whoever loves you. O
my master, how many your Shia are!”

Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) said: “Would you please mention them?”

The man said: “They are too many.”

He said: “Could you count them?”

The man said: “They are much more than to be counted.”

Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) said: “If the number becomes three hundred
and a little more then what you want will happen. Our Shia are those,
whose voice dose not pass beyond their ears, nor does their zeal go
beyond their body, nor do they praise us openly, nor quarrel with anyone
because of us, nor sit with anyone criticizing us, nor talk with anyone
abusing us, nor love whoever hates us and do not hate whoever loves us.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقلت: فكيف أصنع بهذه الشيعة المختلفة الذين يقولون إنهم يتشيعون؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: فيهم التمييز وفيهم التمحيص وفيهم التبديل، يأتي عليهم سنون
تفنيهم، وسيف يقتلهم، واختلافٌ يبددهم. إنما شيعتنا من لا يهرّ هرير
الكلب ولا يطمع طمع الغراب، ولا يسأل الناس بكفّه وإن مات جوعاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: جعلت فداك، فأين أطلب هؤلاء الموصوفين بهذه الصفة؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: أطلبهم في أطراف الأرض، أولئك الخفيض عيشهم، المنتقلة دارهم، الذين
إن شهدوا لم يعرفوا، وإن غابوا لم يفتقدوا، وإن مرضوا لم يعادوا، وإن
خطبوا لم يزوّجوا، وإن ماتوا لم يشهَدوا، أولئك الذين في أموالهم
يتواسون، وفي قبورهم يتزاورون، ولا تختلف أهواؤهم وإن اختلفت بهم
البلدان.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The man said: “Then how do we deal with these different groups, who
pretend that they are Shia?”

He said: “They will be tried, purified and distinguished. Years come
that will perish them, a sword that will kill them and disagreement that
will scatter them. Our real Shia are those, who do not growl like a dog,
do not covet like a crow and do not ask people for alms even if they die
of hunger.”

The man said: “May I die for you! Where can I find such a kind of
people?”

He said: “You can find them in the far sides of the world. They are
those, whose lives are so simple, whose abodes move from place to
another, who if are seen, will not be known, if absent, will not be
missed, if become ill, will not be visited, if propose to a woman, will
not be married and if die, their funerals will not be attended. It is
they, who divide their monies among them, who visit each other in their
graves and who never disagree even if their countries are
different.”[^5]

The same was narrated by Muhammad bin Hammam from Hameed bin Ziyad
al-Kufi from al-Hasan bin Muhammad bin Suma’a from Ahmad bin al-Hasan
al-Maythami from Ali bin Mansoor from Ibraheem bin Muhzim al-Asadi from
his father from Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) but with an addition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإنْ رأوا مؤمناً أكرموه، وإن رأوا منافقاً هجروه، وعند الموت لا يجزعون،
وفي قبورهم يتزاورون…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If they see a believer, they will honor him and if they see a
hypocrite, they will leave him aside. They do not worry when about to
die and they visit each other in their graves…”[^6]

> 6 - أخبرنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد قال: حدثني أحمد بن يوسف الجعفي، أبو
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحسن من كتابه، قال: حدثنا إسماعيل بن مهران، عن الحسن بن علي بن أبي
حمزة، عن أبيه ووهيب بن حفص عن أبي بصير، عن أبي عبد الله أنه قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مع القائم من العرب شيءٌ يسير.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقيل له: إن من يصف هذا الأمر منهم لكثيراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: لا بد للناس من أن يمحصوا ويميزوا، ويغربلوا، وسيخرج من الغربال
خلقٌ كثير.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(6) Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed narrated from Ahmad bin Yousuf
al-Ju’fi Abul Hasan from Issma'eel bin Mihran from al-Hasan bin Ali bin
Abu Hamza from his father and Wuhayb bin Hafs from Abu Baseer that Abu
Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) had said:

“There will be a very few Arabs with al-Qa'im (as).”

It is said to him: “But those, who talk about this matter among the
Arabs, are so much many.”

He said: “People must be tried, sifted and purified. Much many people
will be thrown away from the sieve.”[^7]

> 7 - وأخبرنا علي بن الحسين قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، قال: حدثنا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن حسان الرازي، قال: حدثنا محمد بن علي الكوفي، عن الحسن بن محبوب
الزراد، عن أبي المغرا، عن عبد الله بن أبي يعفور، عن أبي عبد الله أنه
سمعه يقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويلٌ لطغاة العرب من شرٍّ قد اقترب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: جعلت فداك، كم مع القائم من العرب؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: شيء يسير.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقلت: واللهِ إن من يصف هذا الأمر منهم لكثير.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: لا بد للناس من أن يمحصوا ويميزوا ويغربلوا ويخرج من الغربال خلق
كثير.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(7) Ali bin al-Husayn narrated from Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar from
Muhammad bin Hassaan ar-Razi from Muhammad bin Ali al-Kufi from al-Hasan
bin Mahboob az-Zarrad from Abul Mughra that Abdullah bin Abu Ya’foor had
said: I heard Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) saying:

“Woe unto the arrogants of the Arabs from a soon evil.”

I said: “May I die for you! How many of the Arabs will be with al-Qa'im
(as)?”

He said: “Very few.”

I said: “By Allah, those, who talk about this matter among the Arabs,
are too many!”

He said: “People must be tried, sifted and purified. Much many people
will be thrown away from the sieve.”

The same was narrated by Muhammad bin Ya'qoob al-Kulayni from Muhammad
bin Yahya and al-Hasan bin Muhammad from Ja'far bin Muhammad from
al-Qassim bin Issma'eel al-Anbari from al-Hasan bin Ali from Abul Mughra
from Abu Ya’foor.[^8]

> 8 - وأخبرنا علي بن أحمد، قال: حدثنا عبيد الله بن موسى العلوي العباسي،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أحمد بن محمد عن الحسن بن علي بن زياد، عن علي بن أبي حمزة، عن أبي
بصير قال: سمعت أبا جعفر محمد بن علي يقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والله لتميّزنّ، والله لتمحّصنّ، والله لتغربلنّ كما يغربل الزؤان من
القمح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(8) Ali bin Ahmad narrated from Obaydillah bin Musa al-Alawi al-Abbasi
from Ahmad bin Muhammad from al-Hasan bin Ali bin Ziyad from Ali bin Abu
Hamza that Abu Baseer had said:

“I heard Abu Ja'far al-Baqir (as) saying: “By Allah, you are going to be
tested, clarified and sifted like sifting out the Zu’an[^9] from
wheat.”[^10]

> 9 - أخبرنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد قال: حدثنا القاسم بن محمد بن الحسن بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حازم، قال: حدثنا عبيس بن هشام، عن عبد الله بن جبلة، عن مسكين الرحال عن
علي بن أبي المغيرة، عن عميرة بنت نفيل قالت: سمعت الحسين بن علي يقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يكون الأمر الذي تنتظرونه حتى يبرأ بعضكم من بعض ويتفل بعضكم في وجوه
بعض ويشهد بعضكم على بعض بالكفر، ويلعن بعضكم بعضاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقلت له: ما في ذلك الزمان من خير.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال الحسين: الخير كله في ذلك الزمان، يقوم قائمنا، ويدفع ذلك كله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(9) Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed narrated from al-Qassim bin Muhammad
bin al-Hasan bin Hazim from Obayss bin Hisham from Abdullah bin Jibilla
from Miskeen ar-Rahhal from Ali bin Abul Mugheera that Omayra bint
Nufayl had said:

“I heard al-Husayn bin Ali (as) saying: “The matter that you are
expecting will not occur until a time comes that you disavow each other,
spit at the face of each other, declare unbelief against each other and
curse each other.”

I said to him: “There will be no goodness in that time!”

He said: “All the goodness will be in that time. Our Qa’im will rise and
do away with all of that.”[^11]

> 10 - أخبرنا علي بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا عبيد الله بن موسى العلوي، عن الحسن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بن علي، عن عبد الله بن جبله، عن بعض رجاله، عن أبي عبد الله أنه قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يكون ذلك الأمر حتى يتفل بعضكم في وجوه بعض، وحتى يلعن بعضكم بعضاً،
وحتى يسمي بعضكم بعضا كذابين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(10) Ali bin Ahmad narrated from Obaydillah bin Musa al-Alawi from
al-Hasan bin Ali from Abdullah bin Jibilla from some of his companions
that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) had said:

“That matter (the appearance of al-Qa'im) will not occur until a time
comes that you spit at the face of each other, curse each other and call
each other as liars.”[^12]

> 11 - وأخبرنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسن التيملي،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: حدثنا محمد وأحمد بنا الحسن عن أبيهما، عن ثعلبة بن ميمون، عن أبي
كهمس، عن عمران بن ميثم، عن مالك بن ضمرة قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال أمير المؤمنين: يا مالك بن ضمرة، كيف أنت إذا اختلفت الشيعة هكذا؟
(وشبك أصابعه وأدخل بعضها في بعض)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقلت: يا أمير المؤمنين ما عند ذلك من خير.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: الخير كله عند ذلك، يا مالك، عند ذلك يقوم قائمنا فيقدم سبعين رجلاً
يكذبون على الله وعلى رسوله ، فيقتلهم، ثم يجمعهم الله على أمر واحد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(11) Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed narrated from Ali bin al-Hasan
at-Taymali from Muhammad and Ahmad, the sons of al-Hasan from their
father from Tha’laba bin Maymoon from Abu Kahmas from Imran bin Maytham
that Malik bin Dhamra had said:

“Amirul Mo'mineen (as) said to me: “O Malik bin Dhamra, how about you
when the Shia disagree like this?” He interlaced the fingers of his two
hands.

I said: “O Amirul Mo'mineen, there will be no any goodness then.”

He said: “O Malik, all the goodness will be then! At that time our Qa’im
will appear. He will present seventy men as liars fabricating lies
against Allah and His messenger (as) and he will kill them. Then Allah
will make people agree unanimously upon one thing.”[^13]

> 12 - وأخبرنا علي بن أحمد، قال: أخبرنا عبيد الله بن موسى العلوي، عن علي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بن إسماعيل الأشعري، عن حماد بن عيسى، عن إبراهيم بن عمر اليماني، عن
رجل، عن أبي جعفر أنه قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لتمحصُنّ يا شيعة آل محمد تمحيصَ الكُحل في العين، وإنّ صاحب العين يدري
متى يقع الكحل في عينه ولا يعلم متى يخرج منها، وكذلك يصبح الرجل على
شريعةٍ من أمرنا ويمسي وقد خرج منها، ويمسي على شريعة من أمرنا ويصبح وقد
خرج منها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(12) Ali bin Ahmad narrated from Obaydillah bin Musa al-Alawi from Ali
bin Issma'eel al-Ash’ari from Hammad bin Eessa from Ibraheem bin Umar
al-Yamani from someone that Abu Ja'far al-Baqir (as) had said:

“O Shia of Muhammad’s progeny, you are going to be tested like the kohl
in the eye. One knows when the kohl is put into his eye but he does not
know when it gets out of it. Just in the same way that one believes in
our matter in the morning and recants it in the evening or he believes
in it in the evening and when morning comes he recants it.”[^14]

> 13 - وأخبرنا علي بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا عبيد الله بن موسى، عن رجل، عن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العباس بن عامر، عن الربيع بن محمد المسلي من بني مسلية عن مهزم بن أبي
بردة الأسدي وغيره، عن أبي عبد الله أنه قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والله لتُكسرنّ تكسّر الزجاج، وإن الزجاج ليُعاد فيعود كما كان، والله
لتكسرنّ تكسّر الفخار، فإن الفخار ليتكسر فلا يعود كما كان، ووالله
لتغربلُنّ ووالله لتميّزنّ وواللهِ لتمحصنّ حتى لا يبقى منكم إلاّ
الأقلّ، وصعر كفه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(13) Ali bin Ahmad narrated from Obaydillah bin Musa from someone[^15]
from al-Abbas bin Aamir from ar-Rabee’ bin Muhammad al-Musli from Muhzim
bin Abu Burda al-Asadi and others that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) had
said:

“By Allah, you are going to be broken like glass but glass is remade and
it returns as before. By Allah, you are going to be broken like the
breaking of pottery but pottery is never remade as before. By Allah you
are going to be sifted, to be clarified and to be purified until none of
you remain save the least. (He shrank his hand.)”[^16]

O people of Shia, pay much attention to these traditions narrated from
Amirul Mo'mineen (as) and the infallible imams (as) after him. Ponder on
them too much. They warn strongly of turning away from their Sharia by
saying: “one believes in our matter in the morning and recants it in the
evening or he believes in it in the evening and when morning comes he
recants it.” It is a clear evidence showing neglecting the system of the
imamate with all its concerns that lead to the straight path.

Then Amirul Mo'mineen (as) gives an example when saying: “By Allah, you
are going to be broken like glass but glass is remade and it returns as
before. By Allah, you are going to be broken like the breaking of
pottery but pottery is never remade as before.” Those, who believe in
the doctrine of the infallible imams and then recant it and then they
repent and return to the true belief when the mercy of Allah declares to
them the purity of what they deny and the darkness of what they enter
into, are like broken glass that it can be remade as before but those,
who recant the true belief and remain in their confusion without
repenting until death, are like broken pottery that cannot be remade as
before because there is no repent after death.

> 14 - أخبرنا علي بن أحمد قال: حدثنا عبيد الله بن موسى، قال: حدثنا محمد
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بن موسى، عن أحمد بن أبي أحمد، عن إبراهيم بن هلال قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت لأبي الحسن: جعلت فداك، مات أبي على هذا الأمر، وقد بلغت من السنين
ما قد ترى أموت ولا تخبرني بشيء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: يا أبا إسحاق، أنت تعجل؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقلت: إي والله أعجل وما ليَ لا أعجل وقد كبر سني وبلغت أنا من السن ما
قد ترى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: أما والله يا أبا إسحاق، ما يكون ذلك حتى تميزوا وتمحصوا، وحتى لا
يبقى منكم إلاّ الأقلّ، ثم صعر كفه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(14) Ali bin Ahmad narrated from Obaydillah bin Musa from Muhammad bin
Musa from Ahmad bin Abu Ahmad that Ibraheem bin Hilal had said:

“I said to Abul Hasan (Imam Ali) (as): May I die for you! My father died
while still believing in this matter (the imamate) and I became so old.
Shall I die and you do not tell me of anything?”

He said: “O Abu Iss’haq, you hasten (to hasten the will of Allah).”

I said: “Yes, by Allah, I hasten. Why do I not hasten where I became so
old as you see?”

He said: “O Abu Iss’haq, by Allah that does not occur until you are
tried and clarified until none of you remains save the least. (And he
shrank his hand.)”[^17]

> 15 - وأخبرنا علي بن أحمد قال: حدثنا عبيد الله بن موسى، قال: حدثنا محمد
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بن الحسين، عن صفوان بن يحيى قال: قال أبو الحسن الرضا:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والله لا يكون ما تمدّون إليه أعينكم حتى تمحصوا وتميزوا، وحتى لا يبقى
منكم إلاّ الأندر فالأندر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(15) Ali bin Ahmad narrated from Obaydillah bin Musa from Muhammad bin
al-Husayn from Safwan bin Yahya that Abul Hasan ar-Redha (as) had said:

“By Allah, That, which you look forward to, will not be until you are
tested and clarified and until none of you remains save the least and
the least.”[^18]

> 16 - وأخبرنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد قال: حدثنا أبو عبد الله جعفر بن عبد
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الله المحمدي من كتابه في سنة ثمان وستين ومائتين، قال: حدثنا محمد بن
منصور الصيقل، عن أبيه، قال: دخلت على أبي جعفر الباقر وعنده جماعة فبينا
نحن نتحدث وهو على بعض أصحابه مقبل إذ التفت إلينا وقال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
في أيّ شيء أنتم؟ هيهات هيهاتَ! لا يكون الذي تمدّون إليه أعناقَكم حتى
تمحصوا. هيهات! ولا يكون الذي تمدّون إليه أعناقَكم حتى تميزوا، ولا يكون
الذي تمدون إليه أعناقكم حتى تغربلوا، ولا يكون الذي تمدون إليه أعناقكم
إلاّ بعد إياسٍ، ولا يكون الذي تمدّون إليه أعناقكم حتى يشقى مَن شقيَ
ويسعد من سعد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(16) Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed narrated from Abu Abdullah Ja'far bin
Abdullah al-Muhammadi from Muhammad bin Mansoor as-Sayqal that his
father had said:

“Once I came to Abu Ja'far al-Baqir (as) and there were some people with
him. While we were talking with each other, he turned to us and said:
“What are you talking about? How far! How far! That, which you look
forward to, will not be until you are tested. How far! That, which you
look forward to, will not be until you are clarified. How far! That,
which you look forward to, will not be until you are sifted. That, which
you look forward to, will not be except after despair. That, which you
look forward to, will not be until he, who is to be wretched, becomes
wretched and he, who is to be happy, becomes happy.”

The same was narrated by Muhammad bin Ya'qoob from Muhammad bin al-Hasan
and Ali bin Muhammad from Sahl bin Ziyad from Muhammad bin Sinan from
Muhammad bin Mansoor as-Sayqal from his father but with a little
difference.[^19]

> 17 - أخبرنا أبو سليمان أحمد بن هوذة بن أبي هراسة الباهلي قال: حدثنا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إبراهيم بن إسحاق النهاوندي، قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن حماد الأنصاري، عن
صباح المزني، عن الحارث بن حصيرة، عن الأصبغ بن نباتة، عن أمير المؤمنين
أنه قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كونوا كالنّحل في الطير، ليس شيءٌ من الطير إلاّ وهو يستضعفها، ولو
علِِمت الطير ما في أجوافها من البركة لم تفعل بها ذلك. خالطوا الناسَ
بألسنتكم وأبدانكم وزايلوهم بقلوبكم وأعمالكم، فوَالذي نفسي بيده ما
ترَون ما تحبّون حتى يتفلَ بعضُكم في وجوه بعض وحتى يسمّي بعضكم بعضاً
كذابين، وحتى لا يبقى منكم (أو قال من شيعتي) إلاّ كالكحل في العين،
والملح في الطعام وسأضرب لكم مثلاً، وهو مثل رجل كان له طعام فنقّاه
وطيّبه، ثم أدخله بيتاً وتركه فيه ما شاء الله، ثم عاد إليه فإذا هو قد
أصابه السوس، فأخرجه ونقّاه وطيّبه، ثم أعاده إلى البيت فتركه ما شاء
الله، ثم عاد إليه فإذا هو قد أصابته طائفة من السوس فأخرجه ونقاه وطيبه
وأعاده، ولم يزل كذلك حتى بقيت منه رزمة كرزمة الأندر لا يضره السوس
شيئاً، وكذلك أنتم تميزون حتى لا يبقى منكم إلاّ عصابة لا تضرّها الفتنة
شيئاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(17) Abu Sulayman Ahmad bin Hawtha bin Abu Hurasa al-Bahili narrated
from Ibraheem bin Iss’haq an-Nahawandi from Abdullah bin Hammad
al-Ansari from Sabah al-Muzni from al-Harith bin Haseera from al-Asbugh
bin Nabata that Amirul Mo'mineen (as) had said:

“Be like the bees among the birds. All the birds deem them weak but if
they know what blessing there is inside their (the bees’) interiors,
they will not do that to them. Mix with people with your tongues and
persons and be far away from them with your hearts and deeds. I swear by
Him, in Whose hand my soul is, you will not meet what you like until a
time comes that you spit at the face of each other, call each other as
liars and until none of you remains except like the kohl in an eye and
like the salt in food. I give you an example. It is like a man having
some food (grains). He sifts and purifies it and then he keeps it in a
store for some time. Then he comes back to find that his food has been
worm-eaten. He takes it out, purifies it and puts it back into the store
for some time. After a time he comes to find that his food has been
worm-eaten again. He takes it out, purifies it and puts it back into the
store. He does so again and again until nothing of his food remains
except the least, which will never be harmed by the worms. So are you!
You are going to be clarified until none of you remains save a very few
ones, who will never be affected by seditions.”

The same was narrated by Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed from Ali bin
al-Hasan at-Taymali from Muhammad and Ahmad the sons of al-Hasan from
their father from Tha’laba bin Maymoon from Abu Kahmas and others from
Amirul Mo'mineen (as).[^20] This tradition has been mentioned at the
beginning of this book.

> 18 - حدثنا عبد الواحد بن عبد الله بن يونس قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رباح الزهري الكوفي، قال: حدثنا محمد بن العباس بن عيسى الحسني، عن الحسن
بن علي البطائني، عن أبيه، عن أبي بصير قال: قال أبو جعفر محمد بن علي
الباقر:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنمّا مثل شيعتنا مثل أندر (يعني بيدراً فيه طعام) فأصابه آكلٌ فنقي ثم
أصابه آكل فنقي حتى بقي منه ما لا يضرّه الآكل، وكذلك شيعتنا يميزون
ويمحصون حتى تبقى منهم عصابة لا تضرّها الفتنة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(18) Abdul Wahid bin Abdullah bin Younus narrated from Ahmad bin
Muhammad bin Rabah az-Zuhri al-Kufi from Muhammad bin al-Abbas bin Eessa
al-Hasani from al-Hasan bin Ali al-Bata’ini from his father from Abu
Baseer that Abu Ja'far al-Baqir (as) had said:

“Our Shia (followers) are like a threshing-floor having some grains. The
grains are afflicted with worms. They are purified and then are
afflicted with worms until very little remains that will never be harmed
by the worms. So are our Shia. They are clarified and purified until a
very few of them remain, who will never be affected by seditions.”[^21]

> 19 - حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد بن عقدة قال: حدثنا جعفر بن عبد الله
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المحمدي، قال: حدثني شريف بن سابق التفليسي، عن الفضل بن أبي قرة
التفليسي عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه أنه قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المؤمنون يُبتلون ثم يميّزهم الله عنده. إنّ الله لم يؤمِن المؤمنين من
بلاء الدنيا ومرائرها ولكن أمنَهم فيها من العمى والشقاء في الآخرة. ثم
قال: كان علي بن الحسين بن علي يضع قتلاه بعضَهم إلى بعض ثم يقول: قتلانا
قتلى النبيّين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(19) Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed bin Oqda narrated from Ja'far bin
Abdullah al-Muhammadi from Shareef bin Sabiq at-Tafleesi from al-Fadhl
bin Abu Qurra at-Tafleesi from Ja'far bin Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) that
his father Abu Ja'far al-Baqir (as) had said:

“The believers are tested and purified by Allah. Allah has not assured
the believers from calamities and distresses of this life but He has
assured them from being wretched in the afterlife.”[^22]

> 20 - حدثنا علي بن الحسين قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، قال: حدثنا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن حسان الرازي، عن محمد بن علي الكوفي، عن الحسن بن محبوب، قال:
حدثنا عبد الله بن جبلة، عن علي بن أبي حمزة، عن أبي عبد الله أنه قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لو قد قام القائم لأنكَره الناس لأنّه يرجع إليهم شاباً موفقاً لا يثبت
عليه إلاّ مؤمن قد أخذ الله ميثاقه في الذر الأول.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(20) Ali bin al-Husayn narrated from Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar from
Muhammad bin Hassaan ar-Razi from Muhammad bin Ali al-Kufi from al-Hasan
bin Mahboob from Abdullah bin Jibilla from Ali bin Abu Hamza that Abu
Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) had said:

“When al-Qa'im (as) rises, people will deny him because he comes as a
young man. No one will still keep to him save the true believers, whom
Allah has covenanted since the first Creation.”[^23]

During the disappearance of al-Qa'im (as), people separate, disagree
with each other, become desperate and their faith becomes weak for they
find that the period of the disappearance of the imam has become too
long. Therefore when Imam al-Mahdi (aj) reappears as a young man, they
deny him. The infallible Imams (as) have declared that when saying:
“They (people) separate into different sects, walk in various ways of
seditions and are deceived by the mirage of the infatuates’ speech.

So when he (al-Qa'im) appears to them after these many years, which
definitely make one too old, too weak and with curved back, as a young
man, those, whose hearts are full of diseases, will deny him but the
true believers, whom Allah has favored with His kindness, will still
believe in him and keep to him.” They, who believe in all that the
infallible imams (as) have said and wait for the expected imam
faithfully and with no a bit of doubt or confusion and who are not
deceived by the fabrications of the Satan and his followers, definitely
will win in the afterlife.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, vol.32 p.46.

[^2]: Qur'an, 29:1-2.

[^3]: Biharul Anwar, vol.52 p.115.

[^4]: Biharul Anwar, vol.52 p.115.

[^5]: Biharul Anwar, vol.68 p.164, Mo’jam Ahadeeth al-Imam al-Mahdi,
vol.4 p.10.

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Al-Kafi, vol.1 p.370, Dala’il al-Imama p.242, al-Idad al-Qawiyya
p.74, Ithbat al-Hudat, vol.3 p.537, Biharul Anwar, vol.5 p.219, vol.52
p.114, 348, Bisharatul Islam, vol.2 p.197, Mo’jam Ahadeeth al-Imam
al-Mahdi, vol.4 p.46.

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Unwanted weed that often grows among wheat.

[^10]: Biharul Anwar, vol.52 p.114, Mo’jam Ahadeeth al-Imam al-Mahdi,
vol.3 p.215.

[^11]: Al-Ghayba by at-Toossi p.437, al-Khara’ij wel Jara’ih, vol.3
p.1153, Iqd ad-Durar p.63, Muntakhab al-Anwar al-Mudhee’a p.30, Ithbat
al-Hudat, vol.3 p.726, Biharul Anwar, vol.52 p.211, Bisharatul Islam
p.81, 82, Muntakhab al-Athar p.426, Mo’jam Ahadeeth al-Imam al-Mahdi,
vol.3 p.170.

[^12]: Biharul Anwar, vol.52 p.134.

[^13]: Ithbat al-Hudat, vol.3 p.537, Biharul Anwar, vol.52 p.115, Mo’jam
Ahadeeth al-Imam al-Mahdi, vol.3 p.30.

[^14]: Biharul Anwar, vol.52 p.101.

[^15]: He may be Ayyoob bin Noah bin Darraj.

[^16]: Al-Ghayba by at-Toossi p.340, Biharul Anwar, vol.52 p.101,
Bisharatul Islam p.124, Muntakhab al-Athar p.315, Mo’jam Ahadeeth
al-Imam al-Mahdi, vol.3 p.421.

[^17]: Biharul Anwar, vol.52 p.113, Mo’jam Ahadeeth al-Imam al-Mahdi,
vol.4 p.132.

[^18]: Biharul Anwar, vol.52 p.114.

[^19]: Al-Kafi, vol.1 p.370, Kamal ad-Deen p.346, al-Ghayba by at-Toossi
p.335, Ithbat al-Hudat, vol.3 p.10, Biharul Anwar, vol.52 p.111, 112,
Bisharatul Islam p.96, Muntakhab al-Athar p.314, Mo’jam Ahadeeth al-Imam
al-Mahdi, vol.3 p.216.

[^20]: Biharul Anwar, vol.52 p.115, Bisharatul Islam p.50, Mo’jam
Ahadeeth al-Imam al-Mahdi, vol.3 p.30.

[^21]: Biharul Anwar, vol.52 p.116.

[^22]: Biharul Anwar, vol.45 p.80, vol.52 p.117.

[^23]: This tradition was mentioned in chap.10.


