Chapter 23: The age of al-Qa'im
===============================

> 1 - أخبرنا علي بن أحمد، عن عبيد الله بن موسى، قال: حدثني محمد بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن محمد بن سنان، عن أبي الجارود، عن أبي جعفر
الباقر أنه سمعه يقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأمر في أصغرنا سناً وأخملنا ذكراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(1) Ali bin Ahmad narrated from Obaydillah bin Musa from Muhammad bin
al-Husayn (from) ibn Abul Khattab from Muhammad bin Sinan from Abul
Jarood that Abu Ja'far al-Baqir (as) had said:

“This matter (deliverance) will be carried out by the youngest and
obscurest one of us.”

The same was narrated by Ali bin al-Husayn from Muhammad bin Yahya
al-Attar from Muhammad bin Hassaan ar-Razi from Muhammad bin Ali
as-Sayrafi from Muhammad bin Sinan from Abul Jarood from Abu Ja'far
al-Baqir (as).[^1]

> 2 - حدثنا محمد بن همام قال: حدثنا أحمد بن مابنداذ، قال: حدثنا أحمد بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هلال، عن أبي مالك الحضرمي، عن أبي السفاتج، عن أبي بصير،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: قلت لهما (لأبي عبد الله أو لأبي جعفر ): أيكون أن يفضي هذا الأمر
إلى من لم يبلغ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: سيكون ذلك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: فما يصنع؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: يورثه علماً وكتباً ولا يكله إلى نفسه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(2) Muhammad bin Hammam narrated from Ahmad bin Mabindath from Ahmad bin
Hilal from Abu Malik al-Hadhrami from Abu as-Safatij that Abu Baseer had
said:

“I said to one of them-Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) or Abu Ja'far al-Baqir
(as): “Can this matter (imamate) be entrusted to one, who is not adult
yet?”

He said: “It will be so.”

I said: “How does he (the young imam) act?”

He said: “Allah grants him with knowledge and wisdom and does not make
him follow his fancies.”[^2]

> 3 - حدثنا عبد الواحد بن عبد الله بن يونس قال: حدثنا محمد بن جعفر
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القرشي قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن محمد بن سنان، عن
أبي الجارود قال: قال لي أبو جعفر:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يكون هذا الأمر إلاّ في أخملنا ذكراً وأحدثنا سناً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(3) Abdul Wahid bin Abdullah bin Younus narrated from Muhammad bin
Ja'far al-Qarashi from Muhammad bin al-Husayn bin Abul Khattab from
Muhammad bin Sinan from Abul Jarood that Abu Ja'far al-Baqir (as) had
said:

“This matter (deliverance) is not carried out except by the obscurest
and youngest one of us.”[^3]

> 4 - أخبرنا محمد بن همام قال: حدثنا أحمد بن مابنداذ، قال: حدثنا أحمد بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هلال، عن إسحاق بن صباح، عن أبي الحسن الرضا أنه قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن هذا سيفضي إلى من يكون له الحمل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(4) Muhammad bin Hammam narrated from Ahmad bin Mabindath from Ahmad bin
Hilal from Iss’haq bin Sabah that Imam Abul Hasan ar-Redha (as) had
said:

“The imamate will be entrusted to one, who is so young and obscure.”[^4]

The infallible imams (as) have confirmed that al-Qa'im (as) will be
entrusted with the imamate while he is too young yet and that his
mention is so obscure to the most of people. None of the other imams has
been entrusted with the imamate when he is as young as al-Mahdi (aj).

When they mention that he is the obscurest one among them, they refer to
his disappearance and that his news will be unknown by people. The
traditions about this concern are too many, true and current. Doubting
this matter must be away from the minds of the believers, whom Allah has
guided and lit their hearts.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, vol.51 p.42.

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, vol.51 p.43.

[^3]: Biharul Anwar, vol.51 p.43.

[^4]: Biharul Anwar, vol.51 p.43.


