Chapter 24: Issma'eel, the son of Imam as-Sadiq
===============================================

> 1 - حدثنا أبو العباس أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد بن عقدة قال: حدثنا أبو عبد
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الله جعفر بن عبد الله المحمدي من كتابه في رجب سنة ثمان وستين ومائتين،
قال: حدثني الحسن بن علي بن فضال، قال: حدثنا صفوان بن يحيى، عن إسحاق بن
عمار الصيرفي قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وصف إسماعيل بن عمار أخي لأبي عبد الله دينه واعتقاده، فقال: إني أشهد أن
لا إله إلاّ الله، وأن محمداً رسول الله وأنكم (ووصفهم - يعني الأئمة -
واحداً واحداً) حتى انتهى إلى أبي عبد الله ، ثم قال: وإسماعيل من بعدك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: أما إسماعيل فلا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(1) Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed narrated from Abu Abdullah Ja'far bin
Abdullah al-Muhammadi from al-Hasan bin Ali bin Fadhdhal from Safwan bin
Yahya that Iss’haq bin Ammar as-Sayrafi had said:

“Once my brother Issma'eel bin Ammar described his faith and beliefs to
Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) by saying: “I witness that there is no god
but Allah and that Muhammad is the messenger of Allah…” Then he declared
his faith in the imams, one after the other until he reached Imam Abu
Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) and then he said: “…and I witness that Issma'eel
(Imam as-Sadiq’s son) is the imam after you.”

Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) said: “No, Issma'eel is not the imam after
me.”[^1]

> 2 - حدثنا محمد بن همام قال: حدثنا حميد بن زياد، قال: حدثني الحسن بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن سماعة، عن أحمد بن الحسن الميثمي، قال: حدثنا أبو نجيح المسمعي،
عن الفيض بن المختار، قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت لأبي عبد الله: جعلت فداك، ما تقول في أرض أتقبلها من السلطان ثم
اؤاجرها من أكرتي على أن ما أخرج الله منها من شيء كان لي من ذلك النصف
أو الثلث وأقل من ذلك أو أكثر، هل يصلح ذلك؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: لا بأس به.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال له إسماعيل ابنه: يا أبتاه لم تحفظ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: أوَليس كذلك أعامل أكرتي يا بني؟ أليس من أجل ذلك كثيراً ما أقول لك
إلزمني فلا تفعل!
  </p>
</blockquote>

(2) Muhammad bin Hammam narrated from Hameed bin Ziyad from al-Hasan bin
Muhammad bin Suma’a from Ahmad bin al-Hasan al-Maythami from Abu Nujayh
al-Masma’iy that al-Faydh bin al-Mukhtar had said:

“I said to Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as): “What do you say about a piece of
land that I take from the ruler and then I hire it and take a half or a
third or less or more than that from its products? Is that permissible?”

He said: “Yes, it is.”

His son Issma'eel said: “O father, you have not memorized well.”

Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) said to his son: “Have I dealt with such a
matter differently? O my son, it is for this that I often say to you to
keep to me but you do not do.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقام إسماعيل وخرج، فقلت: جعلت فداك، فما على إسماعيل أن لا يلزمك إذ كنت
متى مضيت أفضيت الأشياء إليه من بعدك كما أُفضيت الأشياءُ إليك من بعد
أبيك؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: يا فيض، إن إسماعيل ليس مني كأنا من أبي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: جعلت فداك، فقد كنتُ لا أشك في أن الرحال تُحط إليه من بعدك، فان
كان ما نخاف، وإنا نسأل الله من ذلك العافية، فإلى من؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأمسك عني، فقبّلت ركبته وقلت: ارحم شيبتي، فإنما هي النار، إني والله لو
طمعت أن أموت قبلك ما باليت ولكني أخاف أن أبقى بعدك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Issma'eel got up and left. I said: “May I die for you! No blame is on
Issma'eel if you are going to inform him of every thing before your
death (to be the imam after you) as you have been informed of every
thing by your father!”

He said: “O Faydh, Issma'eel to me is not as I have been to my father
(concerning the imamate).”

I said: “May I die for you! I have never doubted that he will be the
imam after you. If what we fear (your death) occurs, then to whom we
resort?”

He kept silent and turned aside from me. I kissed his knee and said to
him: “Be merciful to my old age! It is Hell that I fear. By Allah, if I
know that I die before you, I will never mind but I fear that I live
after you.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال لي: مكانك، ثم قام إلى ستر في البيت فرفعه ودخل فمكث قليلاً، ثم صاح
بي: يا فيض، أدخل. فدخلت فإذا هو بمسجده قد صلى وانحرف عن القبلة، فجلست
بين يديه، فدخل عليه أبو الحسن موسى وهو يومئذ غلام في يده درة، فأقعده
على فخذه وقال له: بأبي أنت وأمي، ما هذه المخفقة التي بيدك؟ فقال: مررت
بعلي أخي وهي في يده وهو يضرب بها بهيمة، فانتزعتها من يده.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He said to me: “Stay here!” He went behind a curtain in some place in
the house. He stayed for a while and then called: “O Faydh, come in!” I
went in. I found him in his place of praying. He had offered prayer and
then turned away from the qibla. I sat before him. His son Abul Hasan
Musa (as), who was a young boy then, came in. He had a stick in his
hand. His father seated him on his thigh and said to him: “May I die for
you! What is this stick in your hand?” He said: “I passed by my brother
Ali and found him beating an animal with this stick. I took it out of
his hand.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال لي أبو عبد الله: يا فيض، إن رسول الله أفضيت إليه صحف إبراهيم
وموسى فائتمن عليها علياً، ثم ائتمن عليها عليٌ الحسن، ثم ائتمن عليها
الحسنُ الحسينَ أخاه، وائتمن الحسين عليها عليَّ بن الحسين، ثم ائتمن
عليها علي بن الحسين محمد بن علي، وائتمنني عليها أبي، فكانت عندي وقد
ائتمنت ابني هذا عليها على حداثته وهي عنده.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) said to me: “O Faydh, Prophet Muhammad
(as) has been entrusted with the scriptures of Abraham and Moses (as)
and he has entrusted Ali with them. Then Ali has entrusted al-Hasan with
them, al-Hasan has entrusted al-Husayn with them, al-Husayn has
entrusted his son Ali with them, Ali bin al-Husayn has entrusted his son
Muhammad with them and then my father (Muhammad bin Ali al-Baqir) has
entrusted me with them. They have been with me and I have entrusted my
son, this, with them even though he is still too young. They are with
him now.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فعرفتُ ما أراد فقلت: جعلت فداك، زدني.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: يا فيض، إن أبي كان إذا أراد أن لا ترد له دعوة أجلسني عن يمينه
ودعا، فأمّنتُ، فلا ترَد له دعوة، وكذلك أصنع بابني هذا، وقد ذكرت أمس
بالموقف فذكرتك بخير.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(قال فيض) فبكيت سروراً، ثم قلت له: يا سيدي زدني.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: إن أبي كان إذا أراد سفراً وأنا معه فنعس وكان هو على راحلته أدنيت
راحلتي من راحلته فوسّدته ذراعي الميل والميلين حتى يقضي وطره من النوم،
وكذلك يصنع بي ولدي هذا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I understood what he wanted to say. I said to him: “May I die for you!
Tell me more please!”

He said: “O Faydh, whenever my father wanted Allah to respond to his
praying, he seated me beside him on his right hand. He prayed Allah and
I said: “Amen!” Now I do the same with my son.”

I cried because of delight and said to him: “O my master, tell me more
please!”

He said: “When my father traveled and I was with him, I approached my
sumpter near to his if he felt sleepy to put my arm under his head for a
mile or two until he somehow took his need of sleep. Now my son, this,
does the same to me.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقلت له: زدني جعلت فداك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: يا فيض، إني لأجد بابني هذا ما كان يعقوب يجده بيوسف.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقلت: سيدي زدني.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: هو صاحبك الذي سألتَ عنه، قم فأقرّ له بحقه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقمت حتى قبّلت يده ورأسه ودعوت الله له. فقال أبو عبد الله: أما إنه لم
يؤذن لي في المرة الأولى منك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I said: “Tell me more please! May I die for you!”

He said: “O Faydh, I see in this son as Prophet Jacob (as) has seen in
his son Joseph (as).”

I said: “Tell me more please, O my master!”

He said: “He is your man (the imam after me), whom you have asked about.
Get up and confess his right!”

I got up and kissed his hand and head. I prayed Allah to protect him.

Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) said: “In the first time I was not permitted
to inform you.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقلت: جعلت فداك، أخبر به عنك؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: نعم، أهلك وولدك ورفقاءك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكان معي أهلى وولدي، وكان معي يونس بن ظبيان من رفقائي، فلما أخبرتهم
حمدوا الله على ذلك، وقال يونس: لا والله، حتى أسمع ذلك منه، وكانت به
عجلة، فخرج فأتبعته فلما انتهيت إلى الباب سمعتُ أبا عبد الله يقول - وقد
سبقنا -: يونس! الأمر كما قال لك فيض. اسكت واقبل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: سمعت وأطعت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم دخلت، فقال لي أبو عبد الله حين دخلت: يا فيض زرقه زرقه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: قد فعلت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I said: “May I narrate this from you?”

He said: “Yes, you may narrate it to your wife and children and to your
companions.”

My wife and children were with me and of my companions was Younus bin
Dhabyan. When I told them of that, they praised Allah too much.

Younus said: “By Allah, I shall not be satisfied until I hear this from
him himself.”

He left hastily. I followed after him. When I arrived at the door, I
heard Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) saying to Younus: “It is as Faydh has
told you. Keep silent and accept that from him!”

Younus said: “I listen and obey.”

I came in. Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) said to me: “O Faydh, make him
your companion!”

I said: “I have done.”[^2]

> 3 - أخبرنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد بن عقدة قال: حدثنا القاسم بن محمد بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحسن بن حازم من كتابه قال: حدثنا عبيس بن هشام، عن درست بن أبي منصور،
عن الوليد بن صبيح، قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كان بيني وبين رجل يقال له عبد الجليل كلام في قدم فقال لي: إن أبا عبد
الله أوصى إلى إسماعيل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(قال) فقلت لأبي عبد الله إن عبد الجليل حدثني بأنك أوصيت إلى إسماعيل في
حياته قبل موته بثلاث سنين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: يا وليد، لا والله! فإن كنتُ فعلت فإلى فلان (يعني أبا الحسن موسى
) وسمّاه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(3) Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed narrated from al-Qassim bin Muhammad
bin al-Hasan bin Hazim from Obayss bin Hisham from Durust bin Abu
Mansoor that al-Waleed bin Subayh had said:

“There was an argument between me and a man called Abdul Jaleel. He said
that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) had appointed his son Issma'eel as the
imam after him. I told Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) of that. He said: “O
Waleed, by Allah, it is not so. If I have done, I should have appointed
the proper one.” He mentioned the name of Abul Hasan Musa (al-Kadhim)
(as).”[^3]

> 4 - أخبرنا عبد الواحد بن عبد الله بن يونس قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رباح الزهري الكوفي قال: حدثنا أحمد بن علي الحميري قال: حدثني الحسن بن
أيوب، عن عبد الكريم بن عمرو الخثعمي، عن جماعة الصائغ قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سمعت المفضل بن عمر يسأل أبا عبد الله: هل يفرض الله طاعة عبد ثم يكتمه
خبر السماء؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال له أبو عبد الله: الله أجل وأكرم وأرأف بعباده وأرحم من أن يفرض
طاعة عبد ثم يكتمه خبر السماء صباحاً ومساءً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(4) Abdul Wahid bin Abdullah bin Younus narrated from Ahmad bin Muhammad
bin Rabah az-Zuhri from Ahmad bin Ali al-Himyari from al-Hasan bin
Ayyoob from Abdul Kareem bin Amr al-Khath’ami that Jama’a as-Sa’igh had
said:

“I heard al-Mufadhdhal bin Umar asking Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as): “Does
Allah impose (upon people) to obey someone and then the divine
revelation keeps that secret?”

Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) said: “Allah is more glorified, merciful and
kinder to His people than to impose upon them obeying someone but the
divine revelation keeps that secret day and night.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(قال) ثم طلع أبو الحسن موسى ، فقال له أبو عبد الله: أيسرك أن تنظر إلى
صاحب كتاب علي؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال له المفضل: وأي شيء يسرني إذاً أعظم من ذلك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: هو هذا صاحب كتاب علي؛ الكتاب المكنون الذي قال الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يَمَسُّهُ إِلَّا الْمُطَهَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then his son Abul Hasan Musa (as) appeared. Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as)
said to al-Mufadhdhal: “Would you like to look at the keeper of Imam
Ali’s book?”

Al-Mufadhdhal said: “And is there anything else that makes me more
delighted than this?!”

Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) said: “This is the keeper of Ali’s hidden
book, about which Allah has said, ***‘None shall touch it save the
purified ones.’***[^4]”[^5]

> 5 - حدثنا محمد بن همام قال: حدثنا حميد بن زياد، قال: حدثنا الحسن بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن سماعة، قال: حدثنا أحمد بن الحسن الميثمي، عن محمد بن إسحاق، عن
أبيه قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دخلت علي أبي عبد الله فسألته عن صاحب الأمر من بعده فقال لي: هو صاحب
البهمة. وكان موسى في ناحية الدار صبياً ومعه عناق مكية وهو يقول لها:
اسجدي لله الذي خلقك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(5) Muhammad bin Hammam narrated from Hameed bin Ziyad from al-Hasan bin
Muhammad bin Suma’a from Ahmad bin al-Hasan bin Muhammad al-Maythami
from Muhammad bin Iss’haq that his father had said:

“I came to Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) and asked him who the imam would
be after him.

He said to me: “He is the keeper of the lamb.”

His son Musa (al-Kadhim), who was a little boy then, was in a corner of
the house with a lamb. He said to the lamb: “Prostrate yourself before
Allah, Who has created you!”[^6]

> 6 - حدثنا أبو سليمان أحمد بن هوذة الباهلي قال: حدثنا إبراهيم بن إسحاق
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النهاوندي، عن عبد الله بن حماد الأنصاري، عن معاوية بن وهب قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دخلت على أبي عبد الله ، فرأيت أبا الحسن موسى وله يومئذ ثلاث سنين ومعه
عناق من هذه المكية وهو آخذ بخطام عليها وهو يقول لها: اسجدي لله الذي
خلقك، ففعل ذلك ثلاث مرات، فقال له غلام صغير: يا سيدي، قل لها تموت.
فقال له موسى: ويحك! أنا أحيي وأميت؟ الله يحيي ويميت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(6) Abu Sulayman Ahmad bin Hawtha narrated from Ibraheem bin Iss’haq
an-Nahawandi from Abdullah bin Hammad al-Ansari that Mo’awiya bin Wahab
had said:

“Once I went to Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) and I saw his son Abul Hasan
Musa, who was then three years old. There was a lamb with him. He said
to the lamb: “Prostrate yourself before Allah, Who has created you.” He
repeated that three times. A little boy said to him: “O my master, ask
it to die!”

Musa (as) said: “Woe unto you! Do I give life (to creatures) and make
them die? It is Allah, Who gives life (to His creatures) and makes
(them) die.”[^7]

> 7 - ومن مشهور كلام أبي عبد الله عند وقوفه على قبر إسماعيل: غلبني الحزن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لك على الحزن عليك، اللهم إني وهبت لإسماعيل جميع ما قصر عنه ممّا افترضت
عليه من حقي، فهب لي جميع ما قصّر عنه فيما افترضت عليه من حقك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(7) From among the famous speech of Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) is this
saying that he has said when visiting the grave of his son Issma'eel:

“My pity for you is more than my grief on you. O Allah, I have forgiven
Issma'eel all that he has failed to achieve due to my right upon him. O
Allah, forgive him all that he has failed to achieve due to Your rights
upon him!”[^8]

> 8 - وروي عن زرارة بن أعين أنه قال:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دخلت على أبي عبد الله وعن يمينه سيد ولده موسى وقدامه مرقد مغطى، فقال
لي: يا زرارة، جئني بداود بن كثير الرقي وحمران وأبي بصير، ودخل عليه
المفضل بن عمر، فخرجت فأحضرته من أمرني باحضاره، ولم يزل الناس يدخلون
واحداً إثر واحد حتى صرنا في البيت ثلاثين رجلاً. فلما حشد المجلس قال:
يا داود، إكشف لي عن وجه إسماعيل. فكشف عن وجهه فقال أبو عبد الله: يا
داود، أحيٌّ هو أم ميت؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال داود: يا مولاي، هو ميت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(8) It was narrated that Zurara bin A’yun had said:

“One day I visited Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as). On his right side there
was the master of his sons Musa (al-Kadhim) (as) and before him there
was a covered coffin. He said to me: “O Zurara, send for Dawood bin
Katheer, Hamran and Abu Baseer to come.”

Then al-Mufadhdhal bin Umar came in. I left to bring those persons.
People began to come one after the other until we became about thirty
men inside the house.

When the house became crowded, Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) said: “O
Dawood, uncover the face of Issma'eel!” Dawood uncovered Issma'eel’s
face.

Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) said: “O Dawood, is he alive or dead?”

Dawood said: “O my master, he is dead.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فجعل يعرض ذلك على رجل رجل حتى أتى على آخر من في الملجس وانتهى عليهم
بأسرهم، كلٌ يقول: هو ميت يا مولاي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: اللهم اشهد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم أمر بغسله وحنوطه وإدراجه في أثوابه. فلما فرغ منه قال للمفضل: يا
مفضل، أحسر عن وجهه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فحسر عن وجهه فقال: أحيٌّ هو أم ميت؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: ميتٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) asked everyone in the house the same question
after showing them the dead body of his son and all of them answered
that he was dead.

Then he said: “O Allah, witness!” He ordered to wash the dead (according
to the Islamic rituals) and to put him into his last clothing.

When everything was finished, Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) said to
al-Mufadhdhal: “O Mufadhdhal, uncover his face!”

Al-Mufadhdhal did.

Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) said to him: “Is he alive or dead?”

He said: “He is dead.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: اللهم اشهد عليهم. ثم حمل إلى قبره فلما وضع في لحده قال: يا مفضل،
إكشف عن وجهه، وقال للجماعة: أحيٌّ هو أم ميت؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلنا له: ميت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: اللهم اشهد واشهدوا فإنه سيرتاب المبطلون، يريدون إطفاء نور الله
بأفواههم، - ثم أومأ إلى موسى - والله متمّ نوره ولو كره المشركون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) said: “O Allah, be the witness over them!”

Then Issma'eel was carried to his grave. When he was put into the grave,
Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) said: “O Mufadhdhal, uncover his face!”

He asked the all: “Is he alive or dead?”

We said: “He is dead.”

He said: “O Allah, witness and you, O people witness because those, who
follow falsehood, will doubt. They want to put out the light of Allah
with their mouths-he pointed to his son Musa-and Allah will not consent
save to perfect His light.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم حثونا عليه التراب، ثم أعاد علينا القول فقال: الميت المحنط المكفن
المدفون في هذا اللحد مَن هو؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلنا: إسماعيل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: اللهم اشهد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم أخذ بيد موسى وقال: هو حق والحق منه إلى أن يرث الله الأرض ومن عليها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then we began to pour soil over the dead. He asked us again: “Who is the
dead buried inside this grave?”

We said: “He is Issma'eel.”

He said: “O Allah, witness!”

Then he held the hand of his son Musa and said: “He (al-Qa'im) is a
truth and the truth is from him until Allah inherits the earth and all
there is on it.”[^9]

I have found this tradition with somone of our companions, who said that
he had written it from Abul Murajja bin Muhammad al-Ghamr at-Taghlubi
and he mentioned that Abu Sahl had narrated it to him from Abul Faraj
the clerk of Bundar al-Qommi from Bundar from Muhammad bin Sadaqa and
Muhammad bin Amr from Zurara.

Abu al-Murajja mentioned that he had shown this tradition to some of his
companions, who had said that al-Hasan bin al-Munthir had narrated it to
him from Zurara and added that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) had said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والله ليظهرن عليكم صاحبكم وليس في عنقه لأحد بيعة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“By Allah, your man will appear to you and he will not have had any
homage to anyone at all.”

And he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلا يظهر صاحبكم حتى يشك فيه أهل اليقين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> قُلْ هُوَ نَبَأٌ عَظِيمٌ {67}

> أَنْتُمْ عَنْهُ مُعْرِضُونَ {68}

Your man will not appear until the people of truth will suspect him.
***“Say: It is a message of importance. (And) you are turning aside from
it.”***[^10]

> 9 - حدثنا أبو سليمان أحمد بن هوذة الباهلي قال: حدثنا إبراهيم بن إسحاق
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النهاوندي قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن حماد الأنصاري، عن صفوان بن مهران
الجمال، قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سأل منصور بن حازم وأبو أيوب الخزاز أبا عبد الله وأنا حاضر معهما،
فقالا: جعلنا الله فداك، إن الأنفس يغدى عليها ويراح، فمن لنا بعدك؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: إذا كان ذلك فهذا - فضرب يده إلى العبد الصالح موسى وهو غلام خماسي
بثوبين أبيضين - وقال: هذا، وكان عبد الله بن جعفر حاضراً يومئذ البيت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(9) Abu Sulayman Ahmad bin Hawtha narrated from Ibraheem bin Iss’haq
an-Nahawandi from Abdullah bin Hammad al-Ansari that Safwan bin Mihran
al-Jammal had said:

“Mansoor bin Hazim and Abu Ayyoob al-Khazzaz said to Abu Abdullah
as-Sadiq (as) while I was present with them:

“May Allah make us die for you! One does not know when death comes. Who
is our imam after you?”

He said: “If death comes, your man will be this.” He patted his son
Musa, who was then five years old. Abdullah bin Ja'far was also present
in the house on that day.”[^11]

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, vol.47 p.261.

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, vol.47 p.259, Hilyatul Abrar, vol.2 p.290.

[^3]: Biharul Anwar, vol.48 p.22, Awalim al-Uloom, vol.21 p.43.

[^4]: Qur'an, 56:79.

[^5]: Biharul Anwar, vol.48 p.22.

[^6]: Biharul Anwar, vol.48 p.23, Hilyatul Abrar, vol.2 p.291, Awalim
al-Uloom, vol.21 p.37.

[^7]: Biharul Anwar, vol.48 p.117, Awalim al-Uloom, vol.21 p.316.

[^8]: Biharul Anwar, vol.48 p.23.

[^9]: Biharul Anwar, vol.48 p.21, Awalim al-Uloom, vol.21 p.48.

[^10]: Qur’an, 38:67-68.

[^11]: Hilyatul Abrar, vol.2 p.289.


