Chapter 25: Knowing one’s imam
==============================

> 1 - أخبرنا محمد بن يعقوب  قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن حماد
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بن عيسى، عن حريز، عن زرارة، قال: قال أبو عبد الله:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إعرف إمامك فإنك إذا عرفته لم يضرّك تقدم هذا الأمر أو تأخر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(1) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob narrated from Ali bin Ibraheem from his father
from Hammad bin Eessa from Hurayz from Zurara that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq
(as) had said:

“Know your imam because if you know him, it does not harm you whether
deliverance comes soon or late.”[^1]

> 2 - أخبرنا محمد بن يعقوب قال: حدثني الحسين بن محمد بن عامر، عن معلي بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد، عن محمد بن جمهور، عن صفوان بن يحيى، عن محمد بن مروان، عن الفضيل
بن يسار، قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سألت أبا عبد الله عن قول الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ نَدْعُو كُلَّ أُنَاسٍ بِإِمَامِهِمْ ۖ فَمَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ
بِيَمِينِهِ فَأُولَٰئِكَ يَقْرَءُونَ كِتَابَهُمْ وَلَا يُظْلَمُونَ
فَتِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا فضيل، إعرف إمامك، فإنك إذا عرفت إمامك لم يضرّك تقدم هذا الأمر أو
تأخر، ومن عرف إمامه ثم مات قبل أن يقوم صاحب هذا الأمر كان بمنْزلة من
كان قاعداً في عسكره، لا بل بمنْزلة من قعد تحت لوائه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(قال) ورواه بعض أصحابنا "بمنْزلة من استشهد مع رسول الله ."
  </p>
</blockquote>

(2) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob narrated from al-Husayn bin Muhammad bin Aamir
from Mu’alla bin Muhammad from Muhammad bin Jumhoor from Safwan bin
Yahya from Muhammad bin Marwan that al-Fudhayl bin Yasar had said:

“I asked Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) about the Qur’anic verse
((***Remember) the day when We will call every people with their
Imam)***[^2] and he said:

“O Fudhayl, know your imam because if you know your imam, it does not
harm you whether this matter (the appearance of al-Qa'im) comes soon or
late. He, who knows his imam and dies before the appearance of al-Qa'im,
is like one, who will be in the camp of al-Qa'im or like one, who will
be under the banner of al-Qa'im.”

Some of our companions narrated the tradition with this addition “…like
one, who has been martyred (while fighting) with the Prophet (S).”[^3]

> 3 - أخبرنا محمد بن يعقوب، عن علي بن محمد رفعه إلى علي بن أبي حمزة، عن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبي بصير، قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت لأبي عبد الله: جعلت فداك، متى الفرج؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: يا أبا بصير، وأنت ممن يريد الدنيا؟ من عرف هذا الأمر فقد فرج عنه
بانتظاره.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(3) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob narrated from Ali bin Muhammad from Ali bin Abu
Hamza that Abu Baseer had said:

“I said to Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as): May I die for you! When does
deliverance come?”

He said: “O Abu Baseer, are you from those, who love this life? Whoever
believes in this matter is delivered for his waiting for it.”[^4]

> 4 - أخبرنا محمد بن يعقوب، عن علي بن إبراهيم، عن صالح بن السندي، عن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جعفر بن بشير، عن إسماعيل بن محمد الخزاعي، قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سأل أبو بصير أبا عبد الله وأنا أسمع، فقال: تراني أدرك القائم ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: يا أبا بصير، ألست تعرف إمامك؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: إي والله وأنت هو - وتناول يده -.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: والله ما تبالي يا أبا بصير إلاّ تكون محتبياً بسيفك في ظل رواق
القائم .
  </p>
</blockquote>

(4) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob narrated from Ali bin Ibraheem from Salih
as-Sindi from Ja'far bin Basheer that Issma'eel bin Muhammad al-Khuza’iy
had said:

“Once I heard Abu Baseer asking Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as): “Do you
think that I live until al-Qa'im appears?”

Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) said to him: “O Abu Baseer, Do you not know
your imam?”

Abu Baseer said: “I know him. By Allah, it is you.”

Abu Abdullah (as) took Abu Baseer’s hand and said: “O Abu Baseer, by
Allah, never mind if you are not under the shadow of al-Qa'im’s tent
with your sword!”[^5]

> 5 - أخبرنا محمد بن يعقوب قال: حدثنا عدة من أصحابنا، عن أحمد بن محمد،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن علي بن النعمان، عن محمد بن مروان، عن الفضيل بن يسار، قال: سمعت أبا
جعفر يقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من مات وليس له إمام فميتته ميتة جاهيلة، ومن مات وهو عارف لإمامه لم
يضرّه تقدم هذا الأمر أو تأخر، ومن مات وهو عارف لإمامه كان كمن هو قائم
مع القائم في فسطاطه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(5) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob narrated from some of his companions from Ahmad
bin Muhammad from Ali bin an-Nu’man from Muhammad bin Marwan from
al-Fudhayl bin Yasar that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) had said:

“Whoever dies and has not had an imam he dies as unbeliever and whoever
dies while believing in his imam, it does not harm him whether the
appearance of al-Qa'im occurs soon or late. He, who dies while believing
in his imam, is like one, who will be with al-Qa'im in his
pavilion.”[^6]

> 6 - أخبرنا محمد بن يعقوب، عن علي بن محمد، عن سهل بن زياد، عن الحسن بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سعيد، عن فضالة بن أيوب، عن عمر بن أبان قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله يقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إعرف العلامة، فإذا عرفته لم يضرك تقدم هذا الأمر أو تأخر. إن الله تعالى
يقول
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ نَدْعُو كُلَّ أُنَاسٍ بِإِمَامِهِمْ ۖ فَمَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ
بِيَمِينِهِ فَأُولَٰئِكَ يَقْرَءُونَ كِتَابَهُمْ وَلَا يُظْلَمُونَ
فَتِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فمن عرف إمامه كان كمن هو في فسطاط المنتظر .
  </p>
</blockquote>

(6) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob narrated from Ali bin Muhammad from Sahl bin
Ziyad from al-Hasan bin Sa'eed from Fudhala bin Ayyoob from Umar bin
Abban that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) had said:

“Know (the sign of your) imam. If you know him, it does not harm you
whether this matter comes soon or late. Allah has said***, ‘Remember the
day when We will call every people with their Imam.’*** He, who knows
his imam, is like one, who will be with al-Mahdi (aj) in his
pavilion.”[^7]

> 7 - حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد قال: حدثني يحيى بن زكريا بن شيبان قال:
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا علي بن سيف بن عميرة، عن أبيه، عن حمران بن أعين، عن أبي عبد الله
أنه قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إعرف إمامك فإذا عرفته لم يضرك تقدم هذا الأمر أم تأخر فإن الله يقول
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ نَدْعُو كُلَّ أُنَاسٍ بِإِمَامِهِمْ ۖ فَمَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ
بِيَمِينِهِ فَأُولَٰئِكَ يَقْرَءُونَ كِتَابَهُمْ وَلَا يُظْلَمُونَ
فَتِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فمن عرف إمامه كان كمن هو في فسطاط القائم .
  </p>
</blockquote>

(7) Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed narrated from Yahya bin Zakariyya bin
Shayban from Ali bin Sayf bin Omayra from his father from Hamran bin
A’yun that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) had said:

“Know your imam. If you know him, it does not harm you whether this
matter comes soon or late because Allah has said, ***‘Remember the day
when We will call every people with their Imam.’*** Whoever knows his
imam is as if he is with al-Qa'im (as) in his pavilion.”[^8]

[^1]: Al-Kafi, vol.1 p.371, 372, al-Ghayba by at-Toossi p.459, Ithbat
al-Hudat, vol.3 p.515, Ghayatul Maram p.273, Tafseer al-Burhan, vol.2
p.429, Biharul Anwar, vol.52 p.131, 141, 142, Mo’jam Ahadeeth al-Imam
al-Mahdi, vol.5 p.231.

[^2]: Qur'an, 17:71.

[^3]: Refer to the same references of the previous tradition.

[^4]: Al-Kafi, vol.1 p.371, Biharul Anwar, vol.52 p.142, Mo’jam Ahadeeth
al-Imam al-Mahdi, vol.3 p.416.

[^5]: Al-Kafi, vol.1 p.371, Biharul Anwar, vol.52 p.142, Mo’jam Ahadeeth
al-Imam al-Mahdi, vol.3 p.405.

[^6]: Al-Mahassin by al-Barqi p.155, Al-Kafi, vol.1 p.371, Ithbat
al-Hudat, vol.1 p.86, Biharul Anwar, vol.23 p.77, vol.52 p.142,
Muntakhab al-Athar p.516, Mo’jam Ahadeeth al-Imam al-Mahdi, vol.3 p.344.

[^7]: Refer to references of the first tradition.

[^8]: Ibid.


