Chapter 1: Preserving the secret of the Prophet’s Family
========================================================

> 1 - أخبرنا أبو العباس أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد ابن عقدة الكوفي قال: حدثنا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القاسم بن محمد بن الحسن بن حازم، قال حدثنا عبيس بن هشام الناشري، قال:
حدثنا عبدالله بن جبلة، عن سلام بن أبي عمرة، عن معروف بن خربوذ، عن أبي
الطفيل عامر بن وائلة قال: قال أمير المؤمنين:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أتحِبّونَ أن يُكذَّبَ اللهُ وَرسُولُه؟ حَدّثوا النّاسَ بما يَعِرفون،
وأمْسِكوا عمّا يُنكِرونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(1) Abul Abbas Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed bin Oqda al-Kufi narrated
from al-Qassim bin Muhammad bin al-Hasan bin Hazim from Obayss bin
Hisham an-Nashiri from Abdullah bin Jibilla from Salam bin Abu Omayra
from Ma’roof bin Kharrabooth from Abut-Tufayl Aamir bin Wathila that
Amirul Mo’mineen (as) had said:

“Do you like Allah and His messenger to be considered as liars? Talk to
people with what they know and do not tell them what they deny.”[^1]

> 2 - وحدثني أبو القاسم الحسين بن محمد الباوري قال: حدثنا يوسف بن يعقوب
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المقرئ السقطي بواسط، قال: حدثني خلف البزار، عن يزيد بن هارون، عن حميد
الطويل قال: سمعت أنس بن مالك قال: سمعت رسول الله يقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تحَدّثوا النّاسَ بما لا يَعرِفونَ، أتحِبُّونَ أنْ يُكَذَّبَ اللهُ
وَرَسولُهُ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

(2) Abul Qassim al-Husayn bin Muhammad al-Bawari narrated from Yousuf
bin Ya’qoob al-Muqri’ as-Saqti from Khalaf al-Bazzaz from Yazeed bin
Haroon from Hameed at-Taweel that Anass bin Malik had said: “I heard the
Prophet (S) saying:

“Do not tell people of what they do not know. Do you like Allah and His
messenger to be considered as liars?”[^2]

> 3 - وحدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد ابن عقدة قال: حدثنا أحمد بن يوسف بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يعقوب الجعفي أبو الحسن قال: حدثنا إسماعيل بن مهران قال: حدثنا الحسن بن
علي بن أبي حمزة، عن عبد الأعلى بن أعين قال: قال لي أبو عبد الله جعفر
بن محمد:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا عَبدَ الأعلى، إنّ احتِمالَ أمْرِنا لَيسَ مَعرِفَتَه وَقبولَه. إنّ
احتمالَ أمرِنا هُو صَونُه وسِتْرُه عَمَّن لَيسَ مِن أهْلِه،
فَأقْرِئهُم السّلام وَرحمَةَ اللهِ - يَعني الشّيعَةَ - وقُل: قَال
لَكم: رَحِمَ اللهُ عَبداً استَجرَّ مودَّةَ النّاسِ إلى نفسِه وإلَينا
بأنْ يُظهِرَ لهم ما يَعرفونَ ويكُفّ عَنهم ما يُنكرِون. (ثمّ قال) ما
النّاصِب لنا حَربا بأشَدَّ مَؤونةً مِن النّاطق عَلينا بما نَكرَهُه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(3) Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed bin Oqda narrated from Ahmad bin
Younus bin Ya’qoob al-Ju’fi Abul Hasan from Isma’eel bin Mihran from
al-Hasan bin Ali bin Abu Hamza that Abdul A’la bin A’yun had said: “Abu
Abdullah Ja’far bin Muhammad (Imam as-Sadiq) said to me:

“O Abdul A’la, undertaking our matter[^3] is not by knowing and
accepting it. It is by preserving and keeping it secret from those, who
are not reliable. Deliver to them (the Shia) my greeting and tell them
that he (Imam as-Sadiq) says to you: May Allah have mercy upon one, who
brings himself and us people’s love by showing them what they know and
refrain from telling them what they deny. He, who makes war against us,
is not worse than one, who fabricates against us what we hate.”[^4]

> 4 - وحدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد، قال: حدثنا أبو عبد الله جعفر بن عبد
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الله من كتابه في رجب سنة ثمان ومائتين قال: حدثنا الحسن بن علي بن فضال
قال: حدثني صفوان بن يحيى، عن إسحاق بن عمار الصيرفي، عن عبد الأعلى بن
أعين عن أبي عبد الله جعفر بن محمد أنه قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيسَ هذا الأمرُ مَعرِفتَهُ وَولايتَهُ فقَط حَتىّ تَستُرَه عمّن ليسَ
مِن أهلِه، وبِحَسبِكم أن تقولوا ما قُلنا وتَصمِتوا عمّا صَمتْنا،
فإنّكم إذا قُلتم ما نَقول وسَلّمتُم لنا فيما سَكَتنا عنهُ فقَد آمنتُم
بمِثلِ ما آمنّا بهِ. قالَ اللهُ تعالى:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ آمَنُوا بِمِثْلِ مَا آمَنْتُمْ بِهِ فَقَدِ اهْتَدَوْا ۖ وَإِنْ
تَوَلَّوْا فَإِنَّمَا هُمْ فِي شِقَاقٍ ۖ فَسَيَكْفِيكَهُمُ اللَّهُ ۚ
وَهُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ علِيّ بن الحُسينِ: حدِّثوا النّاسَ بما يَعرفونَ، ولا تُحَمِّلوهُم
ما لا يُطيقونَ فتُغرونهُم بنا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(4) Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed narrated from Abu Abdullah Ja’far bin
Abdullah from al-Hasan bin Ali bin Fadhdhal from Safwan bin Yahya from
Iss’haq bin Ammar as-Sayrafi from Abdul A’la that Imam Abu Abdullah
Ja'far bin Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) had said:

“Knowing this matter is not enough to prove your loyalty unless you keep
it secret from those, who are not reliable. It suffices you to say what
we have said and to be silent on what we have been silent on. If you
tell of what we have said and submit to what we have kept silent, then
you have believed in what we have believed in. Allah says***: (And if
they believe*** ***in the like of that which ye believe, then they are
rightly guided).***[^5] Ali bin al-Husayn has said: “Tell people of what
they know and do not burden them with that they cannot bear then you
will lead them to avoid us.”[^6]

> 5 - وأخبرنا عبد الواحد بن عبد الله بن يونس الموصلي قال: حدثنا محمد بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جعفر القرشي قال: حدثني محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب قال: حدثنا محمد بن
غياث عن عبد الأعلى بن أعين قال: قال أبو عبد الله جعفر بن محمد:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ احتِمالَ أمرِنا ليسَ هو التّصديقَ بهِ والقَبولَ له فقَط، إنّ مِن
احتِمالِ أمرِنا سِترَهُ وصِيانَتَه عَن غيرِ أهلِه، فأقرئْهُم السّلامَ
ورَحمةَ اللهِ - يعنى الشيعة - وقُل لهُم: يَقولُ لكُم: رحِمَ اللهُ
عَبداً اجتَرَّ مَودَّةَ النّاسِ إلَيَّ وإلى نَفسِه، يُحدّثُهم بما
يعرِفون ويستُرُ عنهُم ما يُنكِرون. ثم قال لي: واللهِ ما النّاصِبُ لنا
حَرباً أشَدُّ مَؤونَةً علَينا مِن النّاطقِ عَلينا بما نَكرَهُه - وذكر
الحديث بطوله -.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(5) Abdul Wahid bin Abdullah bin Younus al-Moossily narrated from
Muhammad bin Ja'far al-Qarashi from Muhammad bin al-Husayn bin Abul
Khattab from Muhammad bin Ghiyath from Abdul A’la that Imam as-Sadiq
(as) had said to him:

“Undertaking our matter is not by believing and accepting it only.
Undertaking our matter is by preserving and keeping it secret from
those, who are not qualified for it. Deliver my greeting to them (the
Shia) and tell them that he (Imam as-Sadiq) says to you: May Allah have
mercy upon one, who brings me and himself people’s love by telling them
of what they know and concealing what they deny. By Allah, he, who makes
war against us, is not more harmful to us than one, who accuses us of
what we hate.”[^7]

> 6 - وأخبرنا عبد الواحد بن عبد الله قال: أخبرنا أحمد بن محمد بن رباح
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزهري عن محمد بن العباس الحسني عن الحسن بن علي بن أبي حمزة البطائني
عن محمد الخزاز قال: قال أبو عبد الله:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن أذاعَ علينا حَديثنا هو بِمنُزِلةِ مَن جَحدنا حقَّنا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(6) Abdul Wahid bin Abdullah narrated from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Rabah
az-Zuhri from Muhammad bin al-Abbas al-Hasani from al-Hasan bin Ali bin
Abu Hamza al-Bata’ini from Muhammad al-Kharraz that Abu Abdullah (Imam
as-Sadiq) had said:

“He, who spreads our (secret) traditions, is like one, who denies our
right.”[^8]

> 7 - وبهذا الإسناد، عن الحسن بن علي بن أبي حمزة، عن الحسن بن السري قال:
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال أبو عبد الله:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنيّ لأُحدّث الرجُلّ الحديثَ فينطَلقُ فيُحدّثُ به عَني كما سمعَهُ
فأَستَحلُّ به لَعنَهُ والبراءَةَ منه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(7) The same previous series of narrators from al-Hasan bin Ali bin Abu
Hamza from al-Hasan as-Sariy that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) had said:

“When I tell someone a tradition and he spreads it as he hears it from
me, he will deserve to be cursed and repudiated.”[^9]

He meant that if that someone would spread the tradition among those who
were not reliable or qualified. Imam as-Sadiq’s saying showed that he
wanted some of the traditions to be kept secret and not to be spread.

> 8 - وبه عن الحسن بن علي بن أبي حمزة، عن القاسم الصيرفي، ابن مسكان قال:
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سمعت أبا عبد الله يقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قومٌ يزعُمون إنيّ إمامُهم. واللهِ ما أنا لهم بإمامٍ! لَعنهُمُ اللهُ
كلَّما سَترتُ سِتراً هَتكوهُ. أقولُ كذا وكذا، فَيقولونَ إنمّا يعني كذا
وكذا. إنمّا أنا إمامُ مَن أطاعَني.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(8) The previous series of narrators from al-Hasan bin Ali bin Abu Hamza
from al-Qassim as-Sayrafi that ibn Miskan had said: I heard Abu Abdullah
as-Sadiq (as) saying:

Some people pretend that I am their imam. By Allah, I am not their imam.
May Allah curse them. Whenever I put a curtain they tore it! I say so
and so and they say: he means so and so. Definitely I am the imam of
whoever obeys me.”[^10]

> 9 - وبه عن الحسن، عن كرام الخثعمي قال: قال أبو عبد الله:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أما واللهِ لو كانتْ على أفواهِكم أوكِيَةً لحدَّثتُ كُلَّ امرئٍ منكُم
بما لهُ، واللهِ لَو وَجَدتُ أتقِياءَ لتَكَلّمتُ، واللهُ المُستَعانُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(9) The previous series from al-Hasan from Karram al-Khath’ami that Abu
Abdullah (as) had said:

“By Allah, if your mouths were bound with bands, I would tell every one
of you something. By Allah, if I found *(atqiya’)*[^11] among you, I
would talk. Allah is the Assistant!”[^12]

> 10 - وبه عن الحسن، عن أبيه، عن أبى بصير قال: سمعت أبا جعفر يقول:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سِرٌّ أسَرَّهُ اللهُ إلى جِبرَئيلَ وأسَرَّهُ جِبرئيلُ إلى محَمَّدٍ
وأسَرَّه محَمّدٌ إلى عَليٍّ وأَسَرّهُ عَليٌّ إلى مَن شاءَ اللهُ
واحِداً بَعدَ واحِدٍ، وأنتُم تَتكلّمونَ بِه في الطّرُقِ!
  </p>
</blockquote>

(10) The previous series from al-Hasan from his father that Abu Baseer
had said: I heard Abu Ja'far (Imam al-Baqir) saying:

“It is a secret that Allah has revealed to Gabriel, Gabriel revealed to
Muhammad, Muhammad revealed to Ali and Ali revealed to those, whom Allah
willed, one after the other but you are spreading it in the
streets!”[^13]

> 11 - وحدثنا محمد بن همام بن سهيل قال حدثنا عبد الله بن العلاء المذاري
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال حدثنا إدريس بن زياد الكوفي قال: حدثنا بعض شيوخنا قال: قال المفضل:
أخذت بيدك كما أخذ أبو عبد الله بيدي وقال لي:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا مُفَضّلُ! إنّ هذا الأمر ليسَ بالقَولِ فقَط، لا واللهِ حتىّ يَصونَهُ
كَما صانهُ اللهُ ويُشَرّفهُ كما شَرّفهُ اللهُ ويُؤدّي حقَّه كمَا أمرَ
اللهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(11) Muhammad bin Hammam bin Suhayl narrated from Abdullah bin al-Ala’
al-Mathari from Idreess bin Ziyad al-Kufi from one of his sheikhs that
al-Mufadhdhal had said to him: “I hold your hand as Abu Abdullah (as)
has held my hand and said to me:

“O Mufadhdhal, this matter is not achieved by saying only. No, by Allah,
it is not so until (our companions) preserve it as Allah has preserved
it, honor it as Allah has honored it and care for it deservingly as
Allah has ordered.”[^14]

> 12 - وأخبرنا عبد الواحد بإسناده، عن الحسن، عن حفص بن نسيب فرعان قال:
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دخلتُ على أبي عبد الله أيام قتْلِ المعلّي بن خُنيس مولاه فقال لي:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا حَفصُ! حدَّثتُ المُعلّى بأشياءَ فأذاعَها فابتُلِيَ بِالحَديدِ. إنيّ
قُلتُ لهُ: إنّ لنا حديثاً مَن حَفِظَهُ عَلينا حَفِظهُ اللهُ وحَفِظَ
عَليه دينَهُ ودُنياهُ، وَمَن أذاعَهُ عَلينا سَلبَهُ اللهُ دينَهُ
ودُنياهُ. يا مُعَلّى! إنّهُ مَن كتَم الصَّعبَ مِن حديثِنا جَعلَهُ
اللهُ نوراً بَينَ عَينَيهِ ورَزقَهُ العِزَّ في النّاسِ، وَمَن أذاعَ
الصّعبَ مِن حديثِنا لم يمُتْ حَتىّ يعضَّهُ السّلاحُ أو يموتَ
متَحَيّراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(12) Abdul Wahid narrated from al-Hasan that Hafs bin Naseeb Far’an had
said: “I came to Abu Abdullah (as) when his mawla[^15] al-Mu’alla bin
Khunays was killed. He said to me:

“O Hafs, I have told al-Mu’alla of some things but he spread them then
he was afflicted with (iron).[^16] I have said to him: We have some
traditions, which if someone keeps secret Allah will save his religion
and life and if he spreads, Allah will deprive him of his religion and
life. O Mu’alla, if one hides the serious traditions of ours, Allah will
make that as light between his eyes and grant him with glory among
people and if one spreads the serious traditions of ours, he will not
die until he is bitten by weapon or he dies confusedly.”[^17]

[^1]: Awalim al-Uloom, vol.3 p.312.

[^2]: Awalim al-Uloom, vol.3 p.312.

[^3]: It is the matter of the disappearance and the reappearance of Imam
al-Mahdi (aj).

[^4]: Awalim al-Uloom, vol.3 p.315.

[^5]: Qur'an, 2:137.

[^6]: Awalim al-Uloom, vol.3 p.315.

[^7]: Awalim al-Uloom, vol.3 p.315.

[^8]: Awalim al-Uloom, vol.3 p.315.

[^9]: Awalim al-Uloom, vol.3 p.315.

[^10]: Awalim al-Uloom, vol.3 p.311.

[^11]: Atqiya’: those who use Taqiyya, which means “self-protection”,
the practice of concealing one's belief and forgoing ordinary religious
duties when under threat of death or injury to oneself or one's fellow
Muslims.

[^12]: Awalim al-Uloom, vol.3 p.531.

[^13]: Awalim al-Uloom, vol.3 p.531.

[^14]: Awalim al-Uloom, vol.3 p.531.

[^15]: Freed slave.

[^16]: “Afflicted with iron” means that he was killed by a sword.

[^17]: Awalim al-Uloom, vol.3 p.311.


