Chapter 2: Keeping to the “Rope” Of Allah
=========================================

> 1 - حدثنا محمد بن عبد الله بن المعمر الطبراني بطبرية سنة ثلاث وثلاثين
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وثلاثمائة - وكان هذا الرجل من موالي يزيد بن معاوية ومن النصاب - قال:
حدثني أبي، قال: حدثني علي بن هاشم والحسين بن السكن معا قالا: حدثنا عبد
الرزاق بن همام قال: أخبرني أبي، عن مينا مولى عبد الرحمن بن عوف، عن
جابر بن عبد الله الأنصاري قال: وفد على رسول الله أهل اليمن فقال النبي:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جاءَكُم أهلُ اليمَنِ يبُسّونَ بَسيساً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(1) Muhammad bin Abdullah bin al-Mu’ammar at-Tabarani, who was a freed
slave of Yazeed bin Mo’awiya and was one of the opponents of Ahlul
Bayt,[^1] narrated in Tabariya in 333 AH. from his father from Ali bin
Hashim and al-Husayn bin as-Sakan together from Abdur-Razak bin Hammam
from his father from Meena, the freed slave of Abdurrahman bin Ouff,
that Jabir bin Abdullah al-Ansari had said: “Once, some people of Yemen
came to Medina. The Prophet (S) said:

“They come to you gently.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلما دخلوا على رسول الله قال: قَومٌ رقيقَةٌ قلوبُهُم، راسِخٌ
إيمانُهُم. وَمِنهُم المَنصورُ؛ يخرُجُ في سَبعينَ ألفاً يَنصُر خَلَفي
وَخَلَف وَصِيّي. حمَائِلُ سُيوفِهمُ المِسكُ. فقالوا: يا رسول الله ومن
وصيك؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: هُو الّذي أمَرَكمُ اللهُ بالاعتِصامِ به فقَالَ: وَاعْتَصِمُوا
بِحَبْلِ اللَّهِ جَمِيعًا وَلَا تَفَرَّقُوا ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقالوا: يا رسول الله بيّن لنا ما هذا الحبل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

When they came to the Prophet (S), he said:

“They are people of gentle hearts and deep-rooted faith. From among them
there will be al-Mansoor. He will come with seventy thousand soldiers.
He will support my descendant and my guardian’s descendant. The sheaths
of their swords are from musk.”

They said: “O messenger of Allah, who is your guardian?” The Prophet (S)
said:

“It is he, whom Allah has ordered you to keep to when He has said:
***(And hold fast by the covenant (rope) of Allah all together and be
not disunited).”***

They said: “O messenger of Allah, will you declare to us what this rope
is?”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: هوَ قولُ اللهِ: ضُرِبَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ الذِّلَّةُ أَيْنَ مَا
ثُقِفُوا إِلَّا بِحَبْلٍ مِنَ اللَّهِ وَحَبْلٍ مِنَ النَّاسِ وَبَاءُوا
بِغَضَبٍ مِنَ اللَّهِ وَضُرِبَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ الْمَسْكَنَةُ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ
بِأَنَّهُمْ كَانُوا يَكْفُرُونَ بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ وَيَقْتُلُونَ
الْأَنْبِيَاءَ بِغَيْرِ حَقٍّ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ بِمَا عَصَوْا وَكَانُوا
يَعْتَدُونَ فالحَبلُ مِن اللهِ كِتابُه، والحَبلُ مِن النّاسِ وَصِيّي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقالوا: يا رسول الله من وصيك؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: هُو الّذي أنزَلَ اللهُ فيهِ: أَنْ تَقُولَ نَفْسٌ يَا حَسْرَتَا
عَلَىٰ مَا فَرَّطْتُ فِي جَنْبِ اللَّهِ وَإِنْ كُنْتُ لَمِنَ
السَّاخِرِينَ فقالوا: يا رسول الله وما جنب الله هذا؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

He said: ***“It is the saying of Allah, ‘save (where they grasp) a rope
from Allah and a rope from men.’***[^2] The rope from Allah is His Book
and the rope from people is my guardian.”

They asked: “O messenger of Allah, who is your guardian?” He said:

“It is he about whom Allah has revealed, ***‘Lest a soul should say: O
woe to me! For what I fell short of my duty to Allah.’***[^3]***”***

They asked: “O messenger of Allah, what is this duty to Allah?”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: هوَ الّذي يقولُ اللهُ فيه: ﴿وَيَوْمَ يَعَضُّ الظَّالِمُ عَلَىٰ
يَدَيْهِ يَقُولُ يَا لَيْتَنِي اتَّخَذْتُ مَعَ الرَّسُولِ سَبِيلًا( هو
وصِيّي والسّبيلُ إليَّ مِن بَعدي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقالوا: يا رسول الله بالذي بعثك بالحق نبياً أرناه فقد اشتقنا إليه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: هو الّذي جَعلَهُ اللهُ آيَةً لِلمؤمِنين المُتوسّمينَ، فإنْ
نَظرتُم إلَيه نَظَرَ مَن كانَ لهُ قَلبٌ أو ألْقَى السّمعَ وهوَ شَهيدٌ
عَرفتُم أنّه وصِيّي كمَا عرفتُم أنيّ نَبيُّكم، فَتخلّلوا الصّفوفَ
وتَصَفّحوا الوجوهَ فمَن أهوَتْ إليهِ قُلوبُكم فإنّه هوَ، لأنَّ الله
يَقول في كِتابِه: رَبَّنَا إِنِّي أَسْكَنْتُ مِنْ ذُرِّيَّتِي بِوَادٍ
غَيْرِ ذِي زَرْعٍ عِنْدَ بَيْتِكَ الْمُحَرَّمِ رَبَّنَا لِيُقِيمُوا
الصَّلَاةَ فَاجْعَلْ أَفْئِدَةً مِنَ النَّاسِ تَهْوِي إِلَيْهِمْ
وَارْزُقْهُمْ مِنَ الثَّمَرَاتِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَشْكُرُونَ أي إلَيه وإلى
ذُرّيّتهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He said: “It is what Allah has said about, ‘***And the day when the
unjust one shall bite his hands saying: O! would that I had taken a way
with the Messenger.’***[^4] It is my guardian and the way that leads to
me.”

They said: “O messenger of Allah! By Him, Who has sent you with the
truth, declare him to us. We are so eager to know who he is.” He said:

“It is he, whom Allah has made as a sign for the true believers. If you
look at him with a look of (him who has a heart, or gives ear with full
intelligence), you will know that he is my guardian as you have known
that I am your prophet. Go through the rows and stare at the faces then
see towards whom your hearts incline. It will be him because Allah has
said: (***therefore make the hearts of some people yearn towards
them).***[^5] It means towards him and his progeny (as).”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم قال: فقام أبو عامر الاشعري في الاشعريين، وأبو غرة الخولاني في
الخولانيين، وظبيان، وعثمان بن قيس في بني قيس، وعرنة الدوسي في
الدوسيين، ولاحق بن علاقة، فتخللوا الصفوف وتصفحوا الوجوه وأخذوا بيد
الأنزع الأصلع البطين وقالوا: إلى هذا أهوت أفئدتنا يا رسول الله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال النبي: أنتُم نجَبَةُ اللهِ حينَ عرفتُم وصِيَّ رَسولِ اللهِ قَبلَ
أن تَعرفوهُ، فَبِمَ عَرفتُم أنّهُ هوَ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then Abu Aamir al-Ash’ari, Abu Ghurra al-Khawlani, Dhabyan, Uthman bin
Qays, Arana ad-Dousi and Lahiq Bin Alaqa from among their tribes went
through the rows, stared at the faces and held the hand of (the bald,
potbellied man)[^6] and said: “O messenger of Allah, towards this man
our hearts yearned.” The Prophet (S) said:

“You are the elite of Allah where you recognized the Prophet’s guardian
before you have been told about him. How did you know that he was him?”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فرفعوا أصواتهم يبكون ويقولون: يا رسول الله نظرنا إلى القوم فلم تحن لهم
قلوبنا ولما رأيناه رجفت قلوبنا ثم اطمأنت نفوسنا، وانجاشت أكبادنا،
وهملت أعيننا، وانثلجت صدورنا حتى كأنه لنا أب ونحن له بنون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال النبي: )هُوَ الَّذِي أَنْزَلَ عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ مِنْهُ آيَاتٌ
مُحْكَمَاتٌ هُنَّ أُمُّ الْكِتَابِ وَأُخَرُ مُتَشَابِهَاتٌ ۖ فَأَمَّا
الَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ زَيْغٌ فَيَتَّبِعُونَ مَا تَشَابَهَ مِنْهُ
ابْتِغَاءَ الْفِتْنَةِ وَابْتِغَاءَ تَأْوِيلِهِ ۗ وَمَا يَعْلَمُ
تَأْوِيلَهُ إِلَّا اللَّهُ ۗ وَالرَّاسِخُونَ فِي الْعِلْمِ يَقُولُونَ
آمَنَّا بِهِ كُلٌّ مِنْ عِنْدِ رَبِّنَا ۗ وَمَا يَذَّكَّرُ إِلَّا
أُولُو الْأَلْبَابِ( أنتُم منهُم بالمَنْزلَةِ الّتي سبَقتْ لكُم بها
الحُسنى، وأنتُم عَن النّار مُبعَدونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

They began crying and said: “O messenger of Allah, we looked at the
people but our hearts did not incline to any of them. When we saw this
man our hearts trembled and then our souls felt assured, our eyes shed
tears and our chests became pleased as if he was our father and we were
his children.” The Prophet (S) recited:

***“But none knows its interpretation except Allah and those who are
firmly rooted in knowledge.”***[^7] You are near them in your good
position and you are far away from Hell.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: فبقي هؤلاء القوم المسمون حتى شهدوا مع أمير المؤمنين الجمل وصفين
فقتلوا بصفين رحمهم الله، وكان النبي بشرهم بالجنة وأخبرهم أنهم يستشهدون
مع علي بن أبي طالب .
  </p>
</blockquote>

These men remained loyal until they fought with Imam Ali (as) in the
battles of al-Jamal (the camel) and Siffeen, in which they were
martyred. May Allah have mercy upon them. The Prophet (S) had brought
them good news to be in Paradise and had predicted that they would have
been martyred with Imam Ali (as).”[^8]

> 2 - أخبرنا محمد بن همام بن سهيل قال: حدثنا أبو عبد الله جعفر بن محمد
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحسني قال: حدثنا أبو إسحاق إبراهيم بن إسحاق الحميري، قال: حدثنا محمد
بن يزيد بن عبد الرحمن التيمي، عن الحسن بن الحسين الأنصاري، عن محمد بن
الحسين، عن أبيه، عن جده قال: قال علي بن الحسين: كانَ رسولُ اللهِ ذاتَ
يَومٍ جالِساً ومعَهُ أصحابُه في المَسجِدِ فقالَ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَطلُعُ عَليكُم مِن هذا البابِ رجُلٌ مِن أهلِ الجنَّةِ يسألُ عمّا
يَعنيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(2) Muhammad bin Hammam bin Suhayl narrated from Abu Abdullah Ja'far bin
Muhammad al-Hasani from Abu Iss’haq Ibraheem bin Iss’haq al-Khaybari[^9]
from Muhammad bin Yazeed bin Abdurrahman at-Taymi from al-Hasan bin
al-Husayn al-Ansari from Muhammad bin al-Husayn al-Ansari from his
father from his grandfather that Ali bin al-Husayn (Imam as-Sajjad[^10]
(as)) had said: “One day the Prophet (S) was sitting with his companions
in the mosque. He said:

“A man will come to you from this gate. He will be one of the people of
Paradise. He asks about what concerns him.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فطَلعَ رجُلٌ طَويلٌ يٌشبِهُ برِجالِ مُضرَ. فتقَدّمَ فسَلَّمَ عَلى
رسولِ الله وجلَس، فقالَ: يا رسولَ الله إنيّ سَمِعتُ اللهَ يقولُ فيما
أنزَلَ: )وَاعْتَصِمُوا بِحَبْلِ اللَّهِ جَمِيعًا وَلَا تَفَرَّقُوا ﴾
فَما هذا الحَبلُ الّذي أمرَنا اللهُ بالاعتِصامِ بهِ وألاّ نتَفَرَّقَ
عنهُ؟ فأطْرقَ رسولُ الله مَليّاً، ثمّ رفعَ رأسَه وأشارَ بيدِه إلى
عَليّ بنِ أبي طالبٍ وقالَ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حَبلُ اللهِ الّذي مَن تمَسّكَ به عُصِمَ بهِ في دُنياهُ ولم يَضِلَّ
بهِ في آخِرتِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then a tall man looking like the people of Mudhar[^11] came in. He
advanced, greeted the Prophet (S) and sat down. He said: “O messenger of
Allah, I have heard Allah saying in His Book: (***And hold fast by the
covenant (rope) of Allah all together and be not disunited***). Then
what is this “rope” that Allah has ordered us to keep to and not to
separate from?” The Prophet (S) pondered long and then raised his head
and pointed with his hand to Ali bin Abu Talib (as) saying:

“This is the “rope” of Allah. He, who keeps to him, will be saved in his
life and will not be deviant in his afterlife.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فوَثبَ الرّجلُ إلى عَليٍّ فاحتَضَنهُ مِن وَراءِ ظَهرِه وهو يقولُ:
اِعتَصَمْتُ بحَبلِ اللهِ وَحبلِ رسولِه، ثمّ قامَ فَولىّ وخَرجَ، فقامَ
رجُلٌ مِن النّاسِ فقالَ: يا رسولَ اللهِ، ألحَقُهُ فأسألُه أن يَستغفِرَ
لي؟ فقالَ رسولُ اللهِ: إذاً تجِدُه مُوفّقاً. فقال: فلحِقَه الرّجلُ
فسأله أن يَستغفِر اللهُ لهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The man jumped and embraced Imam Ali (as). He said: “I have kept to the
rope of Allah and the rope of His messenger.” Then he left. A man from
among the people got up and said: “O messenger of Allah, do I follow
after him and ask him to pray Allah to forgive me?” The Prophet (S)
said:

“Then you find him pleased.”

He followed him and asked him to pray Allah for him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقالَ له: أفهِمتَ ما قالَ لي رسولُ الله وما قلتُ لهُ؟ قال: نعم. قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإن كُنتَ مُتمسّكاً بذلِك الحبلِ يغفرِ اللهُ لكَ وإلاّ فلا يَغفرِ
اللهُ لكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He said to him: “Did you understand what the Prophet (S) said to me and
what I said to him?”

He said: “Yes, I did.” He said:

“If you keep to that rope, then Allah will forgive you; otherwise He
will not forgive you.”[^12]

If the Prophet (S) had not declared for us the rope of Allah that He had
ordered us in His Book to keep to and not to separate from, then the
opponents would have interpreted it according to their fancies and
turned it away to other than what Allah and his messenger had meant. But
the Prophet (S) had said in his speech he made in the mosque of al-Khayf
during the last hajj (farewell hajj):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنيّ فَرطُكم وإنّكم وارِدونَ عليَّ الحوضَ، حَوضاً عرضُه ما بَين بُصرى
إلى صَنعاء، فيهِ قِدحان عدَدَ نجُومِ السّماء. ألا وإنيّ مُخَلّفٌ فيكُم
الثّقَلينِ، الثّقلُ الأكبرُ القُرآنُ، والثّقلُ الأصغَرُ عِترتي أهلَ
بَيتي، هما حَبلُ اللهِ ممَدودٌ بينَكم وبينَ الله ، ما إنْ تمسّكتُم به
لنْ تضِلوا، سَببٌ مِنه بِيدِ اللهِ وسَببٌ بأيديكُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I shall precede you (to Paradise) and you will come to me at the pond,
whose width is as between Busra and San’aa.[^13] It has cups as much as
the stars of the sky. I have left to you the two weighty things; the
great one is the Qur'an and the minor one is my family. They both are
the rope of Allah. It is extended between you and Almighty Allah. If you
keep to it, you will never go astray at all. One of its ends is in the
hand of Allah and the other is in your hands.”

It has this addition according to another tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّ اللّطيفَ الخبيرَ قَد نبّأني أنهّما لَن يفترِقا حتىّ يرِدا عليَّ
الحوضَ كإصبِعَيَّ هاتَين -وجمَع بين سبّابَتيهِ- ولا أقولُ كَهاتَينِ -
وجمَع بَين سبّابتِه والوُسطى- فَتفضُلَ هذِه على هَذه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Most Kind has told me that they will not separate until they come
to me at the pond (of Paradise) together like these two forefingers. (He
gathered his two fingers).”[^14]

The same was narrated by Abdul Wahid bin Abdullah bin Younus al-Moossili
from Muhammad bin Ali bin Ibraheem bin Hashim from his father from his
grandfather from Muhammad bin Abu Omayr from Hammad bin Eessa from
Hurayz from Abu Abdullah Ja'far bin Muhammad bin Ali (as-Sadiq) from his
father from his forefathers from Imam Ali (as).

Also it was narrated by Abdul Wahid bin Abdullah from Muhammad bin Ali
from his father from his grandfather from al-Hasan bin Mahboob and
al-Hasan bin Ali bin Fadhdhal from Ali bin Aqaba from Abu Abdullah (Imam
as-Sadiq).

And the same was narrated by Abdul Wahid bin Muhammad bin Ali from his
father from his grandfather from al-Hasan bin Mahboob from Ali bin Ri’ab
from Abu Hamza ath-Thimali from Abu Ja'far Muhammad bin Ali al-Baqir
(as).

The holy Qur'an always has been with Ahlul Bayt and they always have
been with the holy Qur'an. They both are the rope of Allah. They never
separate as the Prophet (S) has told. This is an evidence for any one,
whom Allah has guided to His true religion, showing that whoever resorts
to other than the holy Qur'an and Ahlul Bayt, whom Allah has made the
guardians after the Prophet (S) and made obeying them as one of the
necessary obligations of religion, in looking for knowledge and orders
of the Qur'an and all the religious affairs, definitely will go astray
and perish and cause others to perish.

Ahlul Bayt were those, whom the Prophet (S) had offered as the highest
examples to his umma. He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَثَلُ أهلِ بَيتي فيكُم كَمثَلِ سَفينَةِ نوحٍ مَن رَكِبها نجَا ومَن
تخَلّفَ عَنها غَرِقَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“My family to you is like the Ark of Noah. Whoever rides on it will be
safe and whoever lags behind it will drown.”

He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَثَلُ أهلِ بَيتي فيكُم كَمثَلِ بابِ حِطّة في بَني إسرائِيلَ الّذي مَن
دخَلهُ غُفرَت ذُنوبُه واستَحَقّ الرّحمةَ والزّيادَة مِن خالِقِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The example of my family to you is like the Gate of Forgiveness of the
Israelites. Whoever enters it his sins will be forgiven and will deserve
mercy and blessing of Allah.”

Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قُلْنَا ادْخُلُوا هَٰذِهِ الْقَرْيَةَ فَكُلُوا مِنْهَا حَيْثُ
شِئْتُمْ رَغَدًا وَادْخُلُوا الْبَابَ سُجَّدًا وَقُولُوا حِطَّةٌ
نَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ خَطَايَاكُمْ ۚ وَسَنَزِيدُ الْمُحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And enter the gate making obeisance, and say, forgiveness. We will
forgive you your wrongs and give more to those who do good (to
others).”***[^15]

Imam Ali (as) said in one of his speeches:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا إنّ العِلمَ الّذي هَبطَ بهِ آدَمُ مِن السّماءِ إلى الأرضِ وجمِيع
ما فُضّلَت بهِ النّبيّونَ إلى خَاتم النَّبِيّينَ في عِترَة خاتمِ
النّبِيّينَ. فأينَ يُتاهُ بِكم؟ بَل أينَ تَذهَبونَ؟ يا مَن نَسخَ مِن
أصلابِ أصْحابِ السّفينَةِ هذا مِثلها فِيكُم. فَكما نجَا في هاتَيكَ مَن
نجَا فَكذلِكَ يَنجو مِن هذِه مَن يَنجو. وَيلٌ لمَِن تخَلّف عَنهُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The knowledge that Adam has brought from the Heaven to the earth and
all the virtues of the prophets until the last of them, Prophet
Muhammad, have been granted to Ahlul Bayt. So whereto do you go astray?
Where do you go, O you, who have been derived from the people of the
Ark? As some only had been saved there, here also some only will be
saved. Woe to one, who opposes them (the infallible imams).”

He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّ مَثلَنا فيكُم كَمَثلِ الكَهفِ لأصحابِ الكَهفِ، وَكبابِ حِطّة وهُو
بابُ السِّلْم، فادخُلوا في السّلمِ كافّةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“We, to you, are like the cave to the People of the Cave and like the
Gate of Forgiveness, which is the gate of peace. So be in peace all of
you.”

He also said through his speech:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولَقَد علِمَ المُستَحفَظونَ مِن أصْحابِ محَمَّدٍ أنّه قالَ: إنيّ
وأهْلَ بَيتي مُطَهّرون؛ فلا تَسبِقوهُم فَتضِلّوا، ولا تَخَلّفوا عَنهُم
فَتزِلّوا، ولا تُخالِفوهُم فَتجهَلوا، ولا تُعَلّموهُم فإنهُم أعلَمُ
مِنكُم. هُم أعلَمُ النّاسِ صِغاراً، وَأعلَمُ النّاسِ كِباراً،
فاتّبِعوا الحَقَّ وأهْلَه حَيثُما كانَ، وزايِلوا الباطِلَ وأهْلَهُ
حَيثُما كانَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The loyal companions of Muhammad are certain that he has said: “I and
my family are infallible. Do not precede them in order not to go astray,
do not lag behind them in order not to fall in mistakes, do not object
to them in order not to be ignorant and do not teach them because they
are much more aware than you. They are the most aware when young and the
most aware when old. Follow the truth and its people wherever they are
and be far away from the untruth and its people wherever they are.”

But unfortunately people brushed all that aside. They considered the
orders of the Prophet (S) as ridiculous and raving. They refused to
follow those, whom Allah and His messengers had ordered to be obeyed.
Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا قَبْلَكَ إِلَّا رِجَالًا نُوحِي إِلَيْهِمْ ۖ
فَاسْأَلُوا أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So, ask the followers of the reminder if you do not know.”***[^16]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا
الرَّسُولَ وَأُولِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ ۖ فَإِنْ تَنَازَعْتُمْ فِي
شَيْءٍ فَرُدُّوهُ إِلَى اللَّهِ وَالرَّسُولِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تُؤْمِنُونَ
بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ خَيْرٌ وَأَحْسَنُ تَأْوِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and those in authority from among
you.”***[^17]

The Prophet (S) confirmed many times that safety was bound by keeping to
Ahlul Bayt, doing according to their sayings, submitting to their
orders, learning from them and walking in their path; nevertheless
people resorted to others than them and ascribed their virtues to those
others. They became pleased with those others and so Allah deprived them
from the true knowledge. They began to interpret according to their
fancies and analogies and they became satisfied with their own minds
away from the guidance of Allah, His messenger and the infallible imams,
whom Allah had appointed to be the guides for His people. When they
brushed all that aside and depended on their own opinions, Allah left
them to stray in confusion and deviation and consequently they perished
and caused others to perish. Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هَلْ نُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِالْأَخْسَرِينَ أَعْمَالًا الَّذِينَ ضَلَّ
سَعْيُهُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَهُمْ يَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّهُمْ
يُحْسِنُونَ صُنْعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Shall We inform you of the greatest losers in (their) deeds.
(These are) they whose labor is lost in this world's life and they think
that they are well versed in skill of the work of hands.”***[^18]

As if people had not heard the saying of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ يَعَضُّ الظَّالِمُ عَلَىٰ يَدَيْهِ يَقُولُ يَا لَيْتَنِي
اتَّخَذْتُ مَعَ الرَّسُولِ سَبِيلًا يَا وَيْلَتَىٰ لَيْتَنِي لَمْ
أَتَّخِذْ فُلَانًا خَلِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“***And the day when the unjust one shall bite his hands saying: O!
would that I had taken a way with the Messenger. O woe is me! would that
I had not taken such a one for a friend.”***[^19]

So was that “messenger” but Muhammad (as)? And who was that “one”
mentioned in the verse? Immediately after that Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ أَضَلَّنِي عَنِ الذِّكْرِ بَعْدَ إِذْ جَاءَنِي ۗ وَكَانَ
الشَّيْطَانُ لِلْإِنْسَانِ خَذُولًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly he led me astray from the reminder after it had come to
me.”***[^20]

It meant after acknowledging Islam and becoming a Muslim. Then what was
that “reminder” which that one’s friend had led him astray from? Was it
not the holy Qur'an and Ahlul Bayt? Allah had called the Prophet (S) as
“reminder” when He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَعَدَّ اللَّهُ لَهُمْ عَذَابًا شَدِيدًا ۖ فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ يَا
أُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا ۚ قَدْ أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ
إِلَيْكُمْ ذِكْرًا رَسُولًا يَتْلُو عَلَيْكُمْ آيَاتِ اللَّهِ
مُبَيِّنَاتٍ لِيُخْرِجَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
مِنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى النُّورِ ۚ وَمَنْ يُؤْمِنْ بِاللَّهِ
وَيَعْمَلْ صَالِحًا يُدْخِلْهُ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا
الْأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا ۖ قَدْ أَحْسَنَ اللَّهُ لَهُ
رِزْقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah has indeed revealed to you a reminder; a messenger.”***[^21]

And when He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا قَبْلَكَ إِلَّا رِجَالًا نُوحِي إِلَيْهِمْ ۖ
فَاسْأَلُوا أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ إِلَّا رِجَالًا نُوحِي إِلَيْهِمْ ۚ
فَاسْأَلُوا أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So, ask the followers of the reminder if you do not know.”***[^22]

Was the “reminder” mentioned in the verse but the Prophet (S)? And who
were the “followers of the reminder” save the Prophet’s family?

Then Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ أَضَلَّنِي عَنِ الذِّكْرِ بَعْدَ إِذْ جَاءَنِي ۗ وَكَانَ
الشَّيْطَانُ لِلْإِنْسَانِ خَذُولًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And the Satan fails to aid man.”***[^23]

Definitely the Satan would lead his followers away from the “reminder”
and then they would lose in this life and the afterlife. Allah said
expressing the Prophet’s situation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الرَّسُولُ يَا رَبِّ إِنَّ قَوْمِي اتَّخَذُوا هَٰذَا
الْقُرْآنَ مَهْجُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the Messenger cried out: O my Lord! surely my people have
treated this Qur’an as a forsaken thing.”***[^24]

They became indifferent to the Qur’an, to which and to Ahlul Bayt Allah
had ordered them to keep.

Did this blame not concern the people, to whom the Qur'an had been
revealed? Did it not concern the people of this umma, who had wronged
their Prophet’s family and left the Qur'an aside? It was they, whom the
Prophet (S) would witness against on the Day of Resurrection for they
had preferred the pleasures of this life to their religion out of
doubting Muhammad (as) and envying his family because Allah had favored
them with great excellences.

The Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّ قَوماً مِن أصْحابي يختَلِجونَ دوني يَومَ القيامَة مِن ذاتِ
اليَمينِ إلى ذاتِ الشّمالِ فأقولُ: يا ربِّ أُصَيحابي أصَيحابي - وفي
بعضِ الحديثِ أصحابي أصحابي - فيُقالُ: يا محَمّدُ إنّكَ لا تَدري ما
أحدَثوا بعدَكَ. فأقولُ: بُعداً بُعداً، سُحقاً سُحقاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“On the Day of Resurrection, some of my companions will quiver right and
left. I will say: O my God, they are my companions. It will be said: O
Muhammad, you do not know what they have committed after you. Then I
will say: Away with them! Away with them!”

Allah confirmed this by saying:

> وَمَا مُحَمَّدٌ إِلَّا رَسُولٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِنْ قَبْلِهِ الرُّسُلُ ۚ
> أَفَإِنْ مَاتَ أَوْ قُتِلَ انْقَلَبْتُمْ عَلَىٰ أَعْقَابِكُمْ ۚ وَمَنْ
> يَنْقَلِبْ عَلَىٰ عَقِبَيْهِ فَلَنْ يَضُرَّ اللَّهَ شَيْئًا ۗ
> وَسَيَجْزِي اللَّهُ الشَّاكِرِينَ {144}

***“And Muhammad is no more than a messenger; the messengers have
already passed away before him; if then he dies or is killed will you
turn back upon your heels? And whoever turns back upon his heels will by
no means do harm to Allah in the least and Allah will reward the
grateful.”***[^25]

This verse had a certain evidence that there would be some people, who
would turn back on their heels after the death of the Prophet (S) and
who would deny the orders of Allah and His messenger. Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا تَجْعَلُوا دُعَاءَ الرَّسُولِ بَيْنَكُمْ كَدُعَاءِ بَعْضِكُمْ
بَعْضًا ۚ قَدْ يَعْلَمُ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ يَتَسَلَّلُونَ مِنْكُمْ
لِوَاذًا ۚ فَلْيَحْذَرِ الَّذِينَ يُخَالِفُونَ عَنْ أَمْرِهِ أَنْ
تُصِيبَهُمْ فِتْنَةٌ أَوْ يُصِيبَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Then let those beware who withstand the Messenger’s order, lest
some trial befall them, or a grievous penalty be inflicted on
them.”***[^26]

Allah would double torment and disgrace for those, who wronged the
Prophet’s family and deprived them of their rights and who changed the
orders of Allah when He ordered that they (the Prophet’s family) were to
be obeyed, loved and taken as guides. Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَٰلِكَ الَّذِي يُبَشِّرُ اللَّهُ عِبَادَهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ ۗ قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا
إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي الْقُرْبَىٰ ۗ وَمَنْ يَقْتَرِفْ حَسَنَةً
نَزِدْ لَهُ فِيهَا حُسْنًا ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ شَكُورٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: No reward do I ask of you for this except the love of those
near of kin.”***[^27]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هَلْ مِنْ شُرَكَائِكُمْ مَنْ يَهْدِي إِلَى الْحَقِّ ۚ قُلِ
اللَّهُ يَهْدِي لِلْحَقِّ ۗ أَفَمَنْ يَهْدِي إِلَى الْحَقِّ أَحَقُّ
أَنْ يُتَّبَعَ أَمَّنْ لَا يَهِدِّي إِلَّا أَنْ يُهْدَىٰ ۖ فَمَا
لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… Is then He Who gives guidance to truth more worthy to be followed,
or he who finds not guidance (himself) unless he is guided? What then is
the matter with you? How judge ye?”***[^28]

The true believers of the umma had agreed upon that Imam Ali (as) was
the guardian of the Prophet (S). He guided the companions to the truth
often and always and none of them ever guided him. They all were in need
of him but he was not in need of any of them. He knew and taught all
kinds of knowledge but none of them ever taught him a bit.

They did wrong to Fatima, the infallible Prophet’s daughter, to a degree
that she (as) recommended in her will to be buried secretly at night and
that none of her father’s umma was to offer the prayer (prayer for the
dead) for her except those few ones she had mentioned.

If there was no calamity in the history of Islam bringing shame and
disgrace other than the calamity of Fatima (as) until she left to the
better world angry with her father’s umma leaving her bitter will that
no one was to attend her burial except very few loyal companions, it
would be sufficient evidence for the ignorant and for those, whose
hearts were sealed, to see what a great sin they had committed when they
wronged Fatima, her husband and her sons (peace be upon them) and when
they preferred the oppressors to the Prophet’s family, who were the
elite of Allah. Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَلَمْ يَسِيرُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ فَتَكُونَ لَهُمْ قُلُوبٌ يَعْقِلُونَ
بِهَا أَوْ آذَانٌ يَسْمَعُونَ بِهَا ۖ فَإِنَّهَا لَا تَعْمَى
الْأَبْصَارُ وَلَٰكِنْ تَعْمَى الْقُلُوبُ الَّتِي فِي الصُّدُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“For surely it is not the eyes that are blind, but blind are the
hearts which are in the breasts.”***[^29]

This blindness will cling to the enemies of the Prophet’s family until
the Day of Resurrection. Allah said:

> لَقَدْ كُنْتَ فِي غَفْلَةٍ مِنْ هَٰذَا فَكَشَفْنَا عَنْكَ غِطَاءَكَ
> فَبَصَرُكَ الْيَوْمَ حَدِيدٌ {22}

***“Certainly you were heedless of it, but now We have removed from you
your veil, so your sight today is sharp.”***[^30]

> يَوْمَ لَا يَنْفَعُ الظَّالِمِينَ مَعْذِرَتُهُمْ ۖ وَلَهُمُ
> اللَّعْنَةُ وَلَهُمْ سُوءُ الدَّارِ {52}

***“The day on which their excuse shall not benefit the unjust, and for
them is curse and for them is the evil abode.”***[^31]

Then how odd it was when those blind and deaf people pretended that the
holy Qur'an had not had all things about the obligations and the laws
needed by people; therefore when they did not find all things, they used
their analogies in deriving the laws and they fabricated lies and
ascribed them to the Prophet (S) that he had permitted them to do
according to their own derivations whereas Allah had said in His Book:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ نَبْعَثُ فِي كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ شَهِيدًا عَلَيْهِمْ مِنْ
أَنْفُسِهِمْ ۖ وَجِئْنَا بِكَ شَهِيدًا عَلَىٰ هَٰؤُلَاءِ ۚ
وَنَزَّلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ تِبْيَانًا لِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَهُدًى
وَرَحْمَةً وَبُشْرَىٰ لِلْمُسْلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… And We have revealed the Book to you explaining clearly
everything.”***[^32]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا مِنْ دَابَّةٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَا طَائِرٍ يَطِيرُ بِجَنَاحَيْهِ
إِلَّا أُمَمٌ أَمْثَالُكُمْ ۚ مَا فَرَّطْنَا فِي الْكِتَابِ مِنْ
شَيْءٍ ۚ ثُمَّ إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِمْ يُحْشَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We have not neglected anything in the Book.”***[^33]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا نَحْنُ نُحْيِي الْمَوْتَىٰ وَنَكْتُبُ مَا قَدَّمُوا
وَآثَارَهُمْ ۚ وَكُلَّ شَيْءٍ أَحْصَيْنَاهُ فِي إِمَامٍ مُبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We have recorded everything in a clear writing.”***[^34]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكُلَّ شَيْءٍ أَحْصَيْنَاهُ كِتَابًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We have recorded everything in a book.”***[^35]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَا أَقُولُ لَكُمْ عِنْدِي خَزَائِنُ اللَّهِ وَلَا أَعْلَمُ
الْغَيْبَ وَلَا أَقُولُ لَكُمْ إِنِّي مَلَكٌ ۖ إِنْ أَتَّبِعُ إِلَّا
مَا يُوحَىٰ إِلَيَّ ۚ قُلْ هَلْ يَسْتَوِي الْأَعْمَىٰ وَالْبَصِيرُ ۚ
أَفَلَا تَتَفَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I do not follow aught save that which is revealed to me.”***[^36]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنِ احْكُمْ بَيْنَهُمْ بِمَا أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ وَلَا تَتَّبِعْ
أَهْوَاءَهُمْ وَاحْذَرْهُمْ أَنْ يَفْتِنُوكَ عَنْ بَعْضِ مَا أَنْزَلَ
اللَّهُ إِلَيْكَ ۖ فَإِنْ تَوَلَّوْا فَاعْلَمْ أَنَّمَا يُرِيدُ
اللَّهُ أَنْ يُصِيبَهُمْ بِبَعْضِ ذُنُوبِهِمْ ۗ وَإِنَّ كَثِيرًا مِنَ
النَّاسِ لَفَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And that you should judge between them by what Allah has
revealed.”***[^37]

One, who says that something of the affairs of this life and the
afterlife, the laws of religion, the obligations and everything that
people need is not available in the Qur'an, about which Allah has said,
“… and We have revealed the Book to you explaining clearly everything,”
refutes the saying of Allah, ascribes lying to Allah and does not
believe in His Book.

By Allah, they showed the reality of themselves and of the imams, whom
they imitated, when they said that they had not found everything in the
Qur'an because they were not among the people of the Qur'an nor among
those, who had been given the knowledge of the Qur'an nor had Allah and
His messenger given them a share of that because Allah had granted all
the knowledge of the Qur'an to the Prophet’s family, who were the
trustees, the heirs and the interpreters of the Qur'an.

If they submitted to the order of Allah when saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا جَاءَهُمْ أَمْرٌ مِنَ الْأَمْنِ أَوِ الْخَوْفِ أَذَاعُوا بِهِ
ۖ وَلَوْ رَدُّوهُ إِلَى الرَّسُولِ وَإِلَىٰ أُولِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْهُمْ
لَعَلِمَهُ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَنْبِطُونَهُ مِنْهُمْ ۗ وَلَوْلَا فَضْلُ
اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ وَرَحْمَتُهُ لَاتَّبَعْتُمُ الشَّيْطَانَ إِلَّا
قَلِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And if they had referred it to the Messenger and to those in
authority among them,*** ***those among them who can search out the
knowledge of it would have known it.”***[^38]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ إِلَّا رِجَالًا نُوحِي إِلَيْهِمْ ۚ
فَاسْأَلُوا أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا قَبْلَكَ إِلَّا رِجَالًا نُوحِي إِلَيْهِمْ ۖ
فَاسْأَلُوا أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So ask the followers of the reminder if you do not know.”***[^39]

Allah would get them to the light of guidance, would teach them what
they had not known and would make them not need analogy or derivation
according to their own opinions and then the differences between the
laws of religion would disappear and they would not need to ascribe
fabricated traditions to the Prophet (S) claiming that the Prophet (S)
had permitted it (deciding according to one’s analogy) whereas the
Qur'an had prohibited it when saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَلَا يَتَدَبَّرُونَ الْقُرْآنَ ۚ وَلَوْ كَانَ مِنْ عِنْدِ غَيْرِ
اللَّهِ لَوَجَدُوا فِيهِ اخْتِلَافًا كَثِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if it were from any other than Allah, they would have found in
it many a discrepancy.”***[^40]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَكُونُوا كَالَّذِينَ تَفَرَّقُوا وَاخْتَلَفُوا مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا
جَاءَهُمُ الْبَيِّنَاتُ ۚ وَأُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“And be not like those who separated and disputed after clear
arguments had come to them.”**[^41]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْتَصِمُوا بِحَبْلِ اللَّهِ جَمِيعًا وَلَا تَفَرَّقُوا ۚ
وَاذْكُرُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ إِذْ كُنْتُمْ أَعْدَاءً
فَأَلَّفَ بَيْنَ قُلُوبِكُمْ فَأَصْبَحْتُمْ بِنِعْمَتِهِ إِخْوَانًا
وَكُنْتُمْ عَلَىٰ شَفَا حُفْرَةٍ مِنَ النَّارِ فَأَنْقَذَكُمْ مِنْهَا
ۗ كَذَٰلِكَ يُبَيِّنُ اللَّهُ لَكُمْ آيَاتِهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“And hold fast by the covenant (rope) of Allah all together and be not
disunited.”**[^42]

The Qur’anic verses talking about disagreement and separation are
innumerable. Disagreement and separation in religion lead to deviation.
Nevertheless they permitted that and claimed that the Prophet (S) had
permitted it whereas Allah had prohibited it by saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَكُونُوا كَالَّذِينَ تَفَرَّقُوا وَاخْتَلَفُوا مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا
جَاءَهُمُ الْبَيِّنَاتُ ۚ وَأُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And be not like those who separated and disputed after clear
arguments had come to*** ***them.”***[^43]

Is there something clearer than this? Do people have any excuse before
Allah after that?

We pray Allah not to let us go astray and not to let us submit to our
minds and fancies in deciding the matters of our religion. We pray Him
to firm our guidance and faith, to keep to His guardians, to do
according to what they have ordered and to refrain from what they have
prohibited in order to meet Him with our faith and loyalty. We pray Him
not to let us precede His guardians nor lag behind them for he, who
precedes them, will apostatize, who lags behind them will drown, who
opposes them will perish and who keeps to them will succeed as the
Prophet (S) has said.

[^1]: The Prophet’s progeny.

[^2]: Qur'an, 3:112.

[^3]: Qur'an, 39:56.

[^4]: Qur'an, 25:27.

[^5]: Qur'an, 14:37.

[^6]: Imam Ali (as).

[^7]: Qur'an, 3:7.

[^8]: Biharul Anwar, vol.34 p.17, 112, Mo’jam Ahadeeth al-Imam al-Mahdi
vol.1 p.293.

[^9]: or al-Himyari but the most correct is al-Ahmary.

[^10]: He is the fourth imam of the Shia.

[^11]: Mudhar was one of the great tribes in Arabia.

[^12]: Biharul Anwar, vol.36 p.16.

[^13]: Busra is a town in Syria and San’aa is the capital of Yemen.

[^14]: Biharul Anwar, vol.92 p.102.

[^15]: Qur'an, 2:58.

[^16]: Qur'an, 21:7.

[^17]: Qur'an, 4:59.

[^18]: Qur'an, 18:103-104.

[^19]: Qur'an, 25:27-28.

[^20]: Qur'an, 25:29.

[^21]: Qur'an, 65:10-11.

[^22]: Qur'an, 21:7, 16:43.

[^23]: Qur'an, 25:29.

[^24]: Qur'an, 25:30.

[^25]: Qur'an, 3:144.

[^26]: Qur'an, 24:63.

[^27]: Qur'an, 42:23.

[^28]: Qur'an, 10:35.

[^29]: Qur'an, 22:46.

[^30]: Qur'an, 50:22.

[^31]: Qur'an, 40:52.

[^32]: Qur'an, 16:89.

[^33]: Qur'an, 6:38.

[^34]: Qur'an, 36:12.

[^35]: Qur'an, 78:29.

[^36]: Qur'an, 6:50.

[^37]: Qur'an, 5:49.

[^38]: Qur'an, 4:83.

[^39]: Qur'an, 16:43, 21:7.

[^40]: Qur'an, 4:82.

[^41]: Qur'an, 3:105.

[^42]: Qur'an, 3:103.

[^43]: Qur'an, 3:105.


