Chapter 5: Pretenders of being imams
====================================

> 1 - أخبرنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد بن عقدة قال: حدثنا حميد بن زياد، قال:
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا جعفر بن إسماعيل المنقري، قال: أخبرني شيخ بمصر يقال له: الحسين بن
أحمد المقرئ، عن يونس بن ظبيان قال: قال أبو عبد الله في قول الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ تَرَى الَّذِينَ كَذَبُوا عَلَى اللَّهِ
وُجُوهُهُمْ مُسْوَدَّةٌ ۚ أَلَيْسَ فِي جَهَنَّمَ مَثْوًى
لِلْمُتَكَبِّرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن زعم أنه إمام وليس بإمامٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(1) Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed bin Oqda narrated from Hameed bin
Ziyad from Ja'far bin Issma’eel al-Minqari from al-Husayn bin Ahmad
al-Muqri’ from Younus bin Dhabyan that Imam Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as)
had said when talking about the Qur’anic verse, ***“And on the day of
resurrection you shall see those who lied against Allah; their faces
shall be blackened. Is there not in hell an abode for the proud:”***[^1]

“It talks about those, who pretend to be imams but they are not.”[^2]

> 2 - وأخبرنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد قال: حدثنا محمد بن المفضل بن إبراهيم
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأشعري، قال: حدثني محمد بن عبد الله بن زرارة، عن مرزبان القمي، عن
عمران الأشعري، عن جعفر بن محمد أنه قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثلاثةٌ لا ينظر الله إليهم يوم القيامة ولا يزكّيهم ولهم عذاب أليم: مَن
زعم أنه إمامٌ وليس بإمام، ومن زعم في أمام حقٍ أنه ليس بإمام وهو إمام،
ومَن زعم أن لهما في الإسلام نصيباً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(2) Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed narrated from Muhammad bin
al-Mufadhdhal bin Ibraheem al-Ash’ari from Muhammad bin Abdullah bin
Zurara from Marzban al-Qummi from Imran al-Ash’ari that Imam Ja'far
as-Sadiq (as) had said:

“There are three persons, whom Allah will not speak to on the Day of
Resurrection, nor will He look upon nor will He purify and shall have a
painful chastisement; one, who pretends that he is an imam but he is
not, the other one is he, who claims that the real imam is not an imam
and the third one is he, who claims that these two persons are faithful
Muslims.”[^3]

> 3 - وحدثنا محمد بن يعقوب، عن الحسين بن محمد، عن معلي بن محمد، عن أبي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
داود المسترق، عن علي بن ميمون الصائغ، عن ابن أبي يعفور قال: سمعت أبا
عبد الله يقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثلاثةٌ لا يكلمهم الله يوم القيامة ولا يزكيهم ولهم عذاب أليم: مَن ادعى
مِن الله إمامةً ليست له، ومن جحد إماماً من الله، ومن زعم أنّ لهما في
الإسلام نصيباً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(3) Muhammad bin Ya'qoob narrated from al-Husayn bin Muhammad from
Mu’alla bin Muhammad from Abu Dawood al-Mustaraqq from Ali bin Maymoon
as-Sa’igh from Abu Ya’foor that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) had said:

“There are three persons, whom Allah will not speak to on the Day of
Resurrection nor will He purify and shall have a painful chastisement;
one, who pretends the divine imamate while he is not an imam, one, who
denies an imam appointed by Allah and the third one is he, who claims
that these two ones are faithful Muslims.”[^4]

> 4 - وأخبرنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد قال: حدثنا أبو محمد القاسم بن محمد بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحسن بن حازم، قال: حدثنا عبيس بن هشام، قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جبلة،
عن الحكم بن أيمن، عن محمد بن تمام قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت لأبي عبد الله: إن فلاناً يقرئك السلام ويقول لك: اضمن لي الشفاعةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال: أمِن موالينا؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: نعم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: أمرُه أرفعُ من ذلك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: قلت: إنه رجلٌ يوالي علياً ولم يعرف مَن بعده من الأوصياء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: ضالٌّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: أقرَّ بالأئمّة جميعاً وجحد الآخرَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: هو كَمَنْ أقرّ بعيسى وجحد بمحمّد أو أقرّ بمحمد وجحد بعيسى، نعوذ
بالله مِن جَحدِ حجّة من حججه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(4) Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed narrated from Abu Muhammad al-Qassim
bin Muhammad bin al-Hasan bin Hazim from Obayss bin Hisham from Abdullah
bin Jibilla form al-Hakam bin Aymen that Muhammad bin Tamam had said:

“I said to Imam Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as): “Someone has sent you his
regards and requested you to intercede for him (on the Day of
Resurrection).”

Imam as-Sadiq (as) said: “Is he from our followers?”

I said: “Yes, he is.”

He said: “His matter is more important than that.”

I said: “He has believed in Ali but he does not know any of the
guardians after him.”

He said: “He is astray.”

I said: “He has believed in the imams but he has denied the last one of
them.”

He said: “He is like that who believes in Jesus Christ and denies
Muhammad or believes in Muhammad and denies Jesus Christ. We pray Allah
to protect us from denying any of His authorities.”[^5]

Let one, who reads this tradition, be careful not to deny any one of the
imams lest he will perish as if he has denied Muhammad or Jesus Christ
(peace be upon them).

> 5 - أخبرنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد بن عقدة قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسن بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فضال من كتابه، قال: حدثنا العباس بن عامر بن رباح الثقفي، عن أبي المغرا
عن أبي سلام، عن سورة بن كليب، عن أبي جعفر محمد بن علي الباقر أنه قال:
قول الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ تَرَى الَّذِينَ كَذَبُوا عَلَى اللَّهِ
وُجُوهُهُمْ مُسْوَدَّةٌ ۚ أَلَيْسَ فِي جَهَنَّمَ مَثْوًى
لِلْمُتَكَبِّرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن زعم أنه إمامٌ وليس بإمام.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: وإن كان علوياً فاطمياً؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: وإن كان علوياً فاطمياً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(5) Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed bin Oqda narrated from Ali bin
al-Hasan bin Fadhdhal from al-Abbas bin Aamir bin Rabah ath-Thaqafi from
Abul-Mughra from Abu Salam from Sawra bin Kilab that Imam al-Baqir (as)
had said when talking about the Qur’anic verse (And on the day of
resurrection you shall see those who lied against Allah; their faces
shall be blackened. Is there not in hell an abode for the proud:)

“It is he, who pretends that he is an imam but he is not.”

Sawra said: “Even if he is an Alawite and Fatimite?”[^6]

Imam al-Baqir said: “Yes, even if he is an Alawite and Fatimite.”[^7]

> 6 - وأخبرنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد قال: حدثنا القاسم بن محمد بن الحسن بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حازم، قال: حدثنا عبيس بن هشام الناشري، قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جبلة، عن
عمران بن قطر، عن زيد الشحام قال: سألت أبا عبد الله هل كان رسول الله
يعرف الأئمة ؟ قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قد كان نوح يعرفهم؛ الشاهدُ على ذلك قول الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَرَعَ لَكُمْ مِنَ الدِّينِ مَا وَصَّىٰ بِهِ نُوحًا وَالَّذِي
أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ وَمَا وَصَّيْنَا بِهِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَمُوسَىٰ
وَعِيسَىٰ ۖ أَنْ أَقِيمُوا الدِّينَ وَلَا تَتَفَرَّقُوا فِيهِ ۚ كَبُرَ
عَلَى الْمُشْرِكِينَ مَا تَدْعُوهُمْ إِلَيْهِ ۚ اللَّهُ يَجْتَبِي
إِلَيْهِ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي إِلَيْهِ مَنْ يُنِيبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَرع لكم من الدين يا معشرَ الشيعة ما وصّى به نوحاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(6) Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed narrated from al-Qassim bin Muhammad
bin al-Hasan bin Hazim from Obayss bin Hashim an-Nashiri from Abdullah
bin Jibilla from Imran bin Fitr that Zayd ash-Shahham had said:

“I asked Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) if the Prophet (S) had known the
imams (as). He said: “Prophet Noah (as) has known them. The evidence is
the saying of Allah, ***“He has made plain to you of the religion what
He enjoined upon Noah and that which We have revealed to you and that
which We enjoined upon Abraham, Moses and Jesus.”***[^8] He has made
plain to you-O people of Shia-what He enjoined upon Noah.”[^9]

> 7 - أخبرنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد بن عقدة قال: حدثنا القاسم بن محمد بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحسن بن حازم، قال: حدثنا عبيس بن هشام، عن عبد الله بن جبلة، عن أبى
خالد المكفوف عن بعض أصحابه قال: قال أبو عبد الله:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ينبغي لمَن ادّعى هذا الأمرَ في السر أن يأتيَ عليه ببرهان في العلانية.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: وما هذا البرهان الذي يأتي في العلانية؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: يحلّ حلالَ الله ويحرم حرام الله، ويكون له ظاهرٌ يصدق باطنه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(7) Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Sa'eed bin Oqda narrated from al-Qassim bin
Muhammad bin al-Hasan bin Hazim from Obayss bin Hisham[^10] from Abu
Khalid al-Makfoof from some of his companions that Imam as-Sadiq (as)
had said:

“He, who pretends this thing (being an imam) secretly, has to show the
evidence openly.”

The narrator asked: “What evidence that is to be shown openly?”

He said: “To permit what Allah has permitted, to prohibit what Allah has
prohibited and to be truthful apparently and internally.”[^11]

> 8 - وأخبرنا عبد الواحد بن عبد الله بن يونس الموصلي قال: حدثني محمد بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جعفر القرشي المعروف بالرزاز الكوفي قال: حدثني محمد بن الحسين بن أبي
الخطاب، عن محمد بن سنان، عن أبي سلام، عن سورة بن كليب، عن أبي جعفر
الباقر في قوله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ تَرَى الَّذِينَ كَذَبُوا عَلَى اللَّهِ
وُجُوهُهُمْ مُسْوَدَّةٌ ۚ أَلَيْسَ فِي جَهَنَّمَ مَثْوًى
لِلْمُتَكَبِّرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن قال إني إمام وليس بإمام.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: وإن كان علوياً فاطمياً؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: وإن كان علوياً فاطمياً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: وإن كان من ولد علي بن أبي طالب ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: وإن كان من ولد علي بن أبي طالب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وحدثنا محمد بن يعقوب، عن محمد بن يحيى، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن محمد بن
سنان، عن أبي سلام، عن سورة بن كليب، عن أبي جعفر مثله سواء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(8) Abdul Wahid bin Abdullah bin Younus al-Moossili narrated from
Muhammad bin Ja'far al-Qarashi ar-Razzaz al-Kufi from Muhammad bin
al-Husayn bin Abul Khattab from Muhammad bin Sinan from Abu Salam from
Sawra bin Kulayb that Imam Abu Ja'far al-Baqir had said when talking
about the verse (***And on the day of resurrection you shall see those
who lied against Allah; their faces shall be blackened. Is there not in
hell an abode for the proud):***

It is he, who pretends that he is an imam but he is not.”

The narrator asked: “Even if he is an Alawite and Fatimite?”

Imam al-Baqir (as) said: “Yes, even if he is an Alawite and Fatimite.”

The narrator asked: “Even if he is one of Ali bin Abu Talib’s
sons?”[^12]

Imam al-Baqir said: “Yes, even if he is one of Ali bin Abu Talib’s
sons.”[^13]

The same tradition had been narrated by Muhammad bin Ya'qoob from
Muhammad bin Yahya from Ahmad bin Muhammad from Muhammad bin Sinan from
Abu Salam from Sawra bin Kulayb from Imam Abu Ja'far al-Baqir (as).

> 9 - وأخبرنا عبد الواحد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن رباح
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزهري، قال: حدثنا محمد بن العباس بن عيسى الحسينى، عن الحسن بن علي بن
أبي حمزة، عن أبيه، عن مالك بن أعين الجهني، عن أبي جعفر الباقر أنه قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كلُّ رايةٍ تُرفع قبل رايةِ القائمِ صاحبُها طاغوتٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(9) Abdul Wahid bin Abdullah narrated from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Rabah
az-Zuhri from Muhammad bin al-Abbas bin Eessa al-Husayni from al-Hasan
bin Ali bin Abu Hamza from his father from Malik bin A’yun al-Juhani
that Imam Abu Ja'far al-Baqir (as) had said:

“Every banner that is raised before the banner of al-Qa’im will be of an
oppressive arrogant.”[^14]

> 10 - وأخبرنا عبد الواحد، عن ابن رباح قال: حدثنا أحمد بن علي الحميري،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: حدثني الحسن بن أيوب، عن عبد الكريم بن عمرو الخثعمي، عن أبان، عن
الفضيل قال: قال أبو عبد الله جعفر:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن ادّعى مقامَنا - يعني الإمامةَ - فهو كافرٌ (أو قال) مشركٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(10) Abdul Wahid narrated from ibn Rabah from Ahmad bin Ali al-Himyari
from al-Hasan bin Ayyoob from Abdul-Kareem bin Amr al-Khath’ami from
Abban from al-Fadhl that Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (as) had said:

“He, who pretends our position (the imamate), is an unbeliever-or he
said: a polytheist.”[^15]

> 11 - وأخبرنا علي بن الحسين، قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار بقم، قال:
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا محمد بن حسان الرازي، قال: حدثنا محمد بن علي الكوفي، عن علي بن
الحسين، عن ابن مسكان، عن مالك بن أعين الجهني، قال: سمعت أبا جعفر
الباقر يقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كلُّ راية تُرفع قبل قيام القائم صاحبُها طاغوت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(11) Ali bin al-Husayn narrated from Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar from
Muhammad bin Hassaan ar-Razi from Muhammad bin Ali al-Kufi from Ali bin
al-Husayn from ibn Miskan from Malik bin A’yun al-Juhani that Imam Abu
Ja'far al-Baqir (as) had said:

“Every banner that is raised before the appearance of al-Qa’im will be
of an oppressive arrogant.”[^16]

> 12 - وأخبرنا علي بن أحمد البندنيجي، عن عبيد الله بن موسى العلوي، عن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن عبد الله
بن مسكان، عن مالك بن أعين الجهني قال: سمعت أبا جعفر الباقر يقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل راية ترفع - أو قال: تخرج - قبل قيام القائم صاحبها طاغوت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(12) Ali bin Ahmad al-Bandaneeji narrated from Obaydillah bin Musa
al-Alawi from Ali bin Ibraheem bin Hisham from his father from Abdullah
bin al-Mugheera from Abdullah bin Miskan that Malik bin A’yun al-Juhani
had said: “I heard Abu Ja'far al-Baqir (as) saying:

Every banner that is raised-or comes out-before the appearance of
al-Qa’im (as) will be of an oppressive arrogant.”[^17]

> 13 - وأخبرنا علي بن أحمد، عن عبيد الله بن موسى، عن أحمد بن محمد بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خالد، عن علي بن الحكم، عن أبان بن عثمان، عن الفضيل بن يسار قال: سمعت
أبا عبد الله جعفر بن محمد يقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن خرج يدعو الناس وفيهم مَن هو أفضل منه فهو ضالٌّ مبتدعٌ. ومَن ادّعى
الإمامة من الله وليس بإمامٍ فهو كافر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(13) Ali bin Ahmad narrated from Obaydillah bin Musa from Ahmad bin
Muhammad bin Khalid from Ali bin al-Hakam from Abban bin Uthman from
al-Fudhayl bin Yasar that Abu Abdullah Ja'far bin Muhammad as-Sadiq (as)
had said:

“Whoever invites people to follow him and there is someone better than
him among people, is a deviate and heretic and whoever pretends that he
is an imam inspired by Allah, is an unbeliever.”[^18]

After all, what about those, who have pretended to be imams whereas, in
fact, they are not, who have denied one of the inspired imams and who
have claimed that they, who have done so, are still faithful Muslims?
Have they not been among those, whom Allah will never speak to, will
never look on and will prepare the painful torment for on the Day of
Resurrection? Have they not been among the unbelievers and the
polytheists?

[^1]: Qur'an, 39:60.

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, vol.25 p.113.

[^3]: Biharul Anwar, vol.25 p.113.

[^4]: Biharul Anwar, vol.25 p.113.

[^5]: Biharul Anwar, vol.23 p.97.

[^6]: Alawite and Fatimite: a descendant of Ali and Fatima (as).

[^7]: Biharul Anwar, vol.25 p.112.

[^8]: Qur'an, 42:13

[^9]: Biharul Anwar, vol.26 p.291.

[^10]: May be Hashim!

[^11]: Biharul Anwar, vol.68 p.164.

[^12]: He repeated the (same meaning) question that he might have meant
by “Alawite” one of the Shia or the followers of Ali (as).

[^13]: Biharul Anwar, vol.25 p.113.

[^14]: Biharul Anwar, vol.25 p.114.

[^15]: Biharul Anwar, vol.25 p.114.

[^16]: Biharul Anwar, vol.25 p.114.

[^17]: Biharul Anwar, vol.25 p.114.

[^18]: Biharul Anwar, vol.25 p.115.


