Section 3
=========

**Section 3**

THE THREE TYPES OF AFFAIRS
--------------------------

3-189 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Ishaq al-Tajir, on the authority of Ali
ibn Mahzyar, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Sa’id, on the authority
of Al-Harith ibn Al-Ahval Sahib al-Taq**[[252]](footnotes_1.htm#b0252)**
Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-No’man), on the authority of Jamil ibn Salih, on
the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said as part of a long narration, “There are three types of affairs:
ones that are clearly right and you can follow; ones that are clearly
wrong and you should avoid; and ones that are doubtful which you must
leave up to God.”

THE THREE THIEVES
-----------------

3-190 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Ahmad, on the authority of Abu Abdullah al-Razi, on the authority of Ali
ibn Suleiman ibn Rashid, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn
Yaqtayn, on the authority of Yunus ibn Abdul-Rahman, on the authority of
Isma’il ibn Kasir ibn Basam that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said,
“There are three groups of thieves: those that block the payment of the
alms-tax; those who consider it right to devour their wife’s nuptial
gift; and those who borrow money and plan not to return it.”

THERE ARE THREE GROUPS OF ANGELS
--------------------------------

3-191 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Talha who linked it up through a chain of
narrators to the Prophet (MGB), “There are three groups of angels. One
group of angels has two wings. Another group of angels has three wings.
And a third group of angels has four wings.”

THREE GROUPS OF JINN AND THREE GROUPS OF MEN
--------------------------------------------

3-192 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted on Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of someone who narrated on the authority of Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB), “There are three groups of genies: those with the
angels; those with the birds flying in the sky; and those with dogs and
snakes. There are three groups of men: those who will be in the Shade of
the Throne on the Day in which there is no shade except for His Shade;
those for whom there shall be a Reckoning and punishment; and those
whose faces are that of the people, but their hearts are that of the
Satans.”

##### الامور ثلاثة

#### 3-189 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار قال: حدثني الحسين بن إسحاق التاجر، عن علي بن مهزيار، عن الحسن بن سعيد، عن الحارث بن الاحول صاحب الطاق، عن جميل بن صالح، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله في حديث طويل:الامور ثلاثة أمر تبين لك رشده فاتبعه، وأمر تبين لك غيه فاجتنبه، وأمر اختلف فيه فرده إلى الله عز وجل.

##### السراق ثلاثة

#### 3-190 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد قال: حدثني أبوعبد الله الرازي، عن علي بن سليمان بن رشيد، عن الحسن بن علي بن يقطين، عن يونس بن عبدالرحمن، عن إسماعيل بن كثير بن بسام قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: السراق ثلاثة: مانع الزكاة، ومستحل مهور النساء، وكذلك من استدان دينا ولم ينو قضاء‌ه.

##### الملائكة على ثلاثة أصناف

#### 3-191 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن محمد بن طلحة بإسناده يرفعه إلى النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال:الملائكة على ثلاثة أجزاء، فجزء لهم جناحان، وجزء لهم ثلاثة أجنحة، وجزء لهم أربعة أجنحة

##### الجن على ثلاثة أجزاء، والانس على ثلاثة أجزاء

#### 3-192 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عمن ذكره، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال:الجن على ثلاثة أجزاء، فجزء مع الملائكة، وجزء يطيرون في الهواء، وجزء كلاب وحيات، والانس على ثلاثة أجزاء، فجزء تحت ظل العرش يوم لا ظل إلا ظله، وجزء عليهم الحساب والعذاب، وجزء وجوههم وجوه الآدميين وقلوبهم قلوب الشياطين.

YOU SHOULD NOT STAND TO PRAY BEHIND THREE PEOPLE
------------------------------------------------

3-193 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
Isa ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Yaqtayn, on the
authority of Amr ibn Ibrahim, on the authority of Khalaf ibn Himmad, on
the authority of one of our companions called al-Hassan ibn Ali, on the
authority of Abi As-Sadiq Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “You should not stand
to pray behind three people: an unfamiliar person; someone who ascribes
certain boastful attributes to the Divine Leaders, even if he expresses
the same beliefs as you do; and one who is corrupt even if he is not
boastful about the Divine Leaders.”

THREE THINGS MAKE YOU OBESE AND THREE THINGS MAKE YOU THIN
----------------------------------------------------------

3-194 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Musa ibn Umar, on the authority
of Ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Muawiyah ibn Ammar, on the
authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “Three things will make you
obese and three things will make you skinny. The three things which will
make you obese are: taking a bath often, smelling good scents and
wearing soft robes. The three things that will make you thin are eating
a lot of eggs, fish and fresh dates.”

The compiler of the book said, “What is meant by ‘taking a bath often’
is taking a bath every other day. Should you take a bath every day you
would lose weight.”

THREE WAYS BY WHICH ALL MUSLIM DECREES ARE PUT INTO EFFECT
----------------------------------------------------------

3-195 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr
al-Bazanty, on the authority of Abi Jamileh, on the authority of Ishmael
ibn Abi Oways, on the authority of Zamrat ibn Abi Zamrat, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of his grandfather that the
Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, “All Muslim decrees are put into
effect in either one of the three ways: a just testimony, a definite
oath, or the current practice of leaders to guidance.”

THREE THINGS ALONG WITH THREE OTHER THINGS
------------------------------------------

3-196 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that his father quoted on the authority of Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah Al-Barqy, on the authority of Al-Sayyari, on the authority of
Al-Harith ibn al-Dalhath, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of

##### ثلاثة لا يصلى خلفهم

#### 3-193 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن عيسى ابن عبيد، عن الحسن علي بن يقطين، عن عمرو بن إبراهيم، عن خلف بن حماد، عن رجل من أصحابنا نسي الحسن بن علي اسمه عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال:ثلاثة لا يصلى خلفهم: المجهول، والغالي وإن كان يقول بقولك، والمجاهر بالفسق وإن كان مقتصدا.

##### ثلاثة لا يؤكلن فيسمن وثلاثة يؤكلن فيهزلن

#### 3-194 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد ابن أحمد، عن موسى بن عمر، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن معاوية بن عمار، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال:ثلاثة يسمن، وثلاثة يهزلن، فأما التي يسمن فادمان الحمام، وشم الرائحة الطيبة، ولبس الثياب اللينة، وأما التي يهزلن فإدمان أكل البيض والسمك والطلع.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: يعني بادمان الحمام أن يدخله يوم ويوم لا، فانه إن دخله كل يوم نقص من لحمه.

##### جميع احكام المسلمين تجرى على ثلاثة أوجه

#### 3-195 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي، عن أبي جميلة، عن إسماعيل بن أبي أويس، عن ضمرة بن أبي ضمرة، عن أبيه، عن جده قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: جميع أحكام المسلمين تجري على ثلاثة أوجه: شهادة عادلة، أو يمين قاطعة، أو سنة جارية مع أئمة الهدى.

##### ثلاثة مقرون بها ثلاثة

#### 3-196 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني أبي، عن أحمد ابن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن السياري، عن الحارث بن دلهاث، عن أبيـه، عن أبـي

Abil Hassan al-Reza (MGB), “Indeed the Honorable the Exalted God has
decreed three things which are accompanied by three other things. He has
ordered us to pray and give alms.**[[253]](footnotes_1.htm#b0253)** The
prayers of whoever prays, but doesn’t give alms is not accepted of him.
He also ordered us to thank Him and our
parents**[[254]](footnotes_1.htm#b0254)**. Whoever thanks God, but
doesn’t thank his parents has not indeed thanked God. God has ordered us
to fear God and to visit the relations of
kin.**[[255]](footnotes_1.htm#b0255)** Whoever doesn’t visit his
relations of kin has indeed not feared God.”

THREE INTERCEDE WITH GOD AND THEIR INTERCESSION ACCEPTED
--------------------------------------------------------

3-197 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry, on the
authority of Harun ibn Muslim, on the authority of Mus’adat ibn Sadaqah,
on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the authority of his
father (MGB), on the authority of his forefathers (MGB), on the
authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There are three
groups who intercede on behalf of someone with the Honorable the Exalted
God and their intercession will be accepted: the Prophets, then the
scholars; and then the martyrs.”

THE THREE IN WHOSE NAME THE FIRST LOT WAS CAST
----------------------------------------------

3-198 Ahmad ibn Harun al-Fami and Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Masroor - may
God be pleased with them - narrated that Muhammad ibn Ja’far ibn Bat’tat
quoted Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saf’far, on the authority of Al-Abbas
ibn Ma’ruf, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority of
Hurayz who linked it up through some narrators to Abi Ja’far al-Baqir
(MGB), “The first of the three in whose name the first lot was cast is
Mary, the daughter of Imran, as we read in the following words of the
Honorable the Exalted God, ‘Thou wast not with them when they cast lots
with arrows, as to which of them should be charged with the care of
Mary…’**[[256]](footnotes_1.htm#b0256)** There were six arrows in this
casting. Then it is the lots cast for Jonah (MGB) when he was riding the
ship with the people and the ship stopped in the tumult. They cast lots
for Jonah three times. Then Jonah went to the front of the ship.
Suddenly a large whale opened his mouth and Jonah jumped into his mouth.
The next case is regarding Abdul Mutalib to whom God had granted nine
sons. Abdul Mutalib bet with God that he would offer one of them for
sacrifice if he was granted another son. When the number of his sons
became ten with the birth of Abdullah - the father of God’s Prophet
Muhammad (MGB) - it was hard for Abdul Mutalib to offer Abdullah as a
sacrifice. Then he brought ten camels and cast lots for either them or
Abdullah. The lot fell to Abdullah's name. He increased the number

#### الحسن الرضا عليه السلام قال: إن الله عز وجل أمر بثلاثة مقرون بها ثلاثة اخرى: أمر بالصلاة والزكاة فمن صلى ولم يزك لم تقبل منه صلاته، وأمر بالشكر له وللوالدين، فمن لم يشكر والديه لم يشكر الله، و أمر باتقاء الله و صلة الرحم، فمن لم يصل رحمه لم يتق الله عز وجل.

###### ثلاثة يشفعون إلى الله عز وجل فيشفعون

#### 3-197 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري، عن هارون بن مسلم، عن مسعدة بن صدقة، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ثلاثة يشفعون إلى الله عز وجل فيشفعون: الانبياء، ثم العلماء، ثم الشهداء.

##### أول من سوهم عليه ثلاثة

#### 3-198 حدثنا أحمد بن هارون الفامي، وجعفر بن محمد بن مسرور رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا محمد بن جعفر بن بطة، عن محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن العباس بن معروف عن حماد بن عيسى، عن حريز، عمن أخبره، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام: قال: أول من سوهم عليه مريم بنت عمران وهو قول الله عز وجل "وَمَا كُنْتَ لَدَيْهِمْ إِذْ يُلْقُونَ أَقْلاَمَهُمْ أَيُّهُمْ يَكْفُلُ مَرْيَمَ" والسهام ستة، ثم استهموا في يونس لما ركب مع القوم فوقفت السفينة في اللجة، فاستهموا فوقع السهم على يونس ثلاث مرات قال: فمضى يونس إلى صدر السفينة فاذا الحوت فاتح فاه فرمى بنفسه، ثم كان عبدالمطلب ولد له تسعة فنذر في العاشر إن يرزقه الله غلاما أن يذبحه قال: فلما ولد عبد الله لم يكن يقدر أن يذبحه ورسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله في صلبه، فجاء بعشر من الابل وساهم عليها وعلى عبـد الله فـخرج السـهام

of the camels to be offered ten by ten and repeated the casting of lots.
However, every time the lot fell to Abdullah’s name. When the number of
camels he offered reached one-hundred, the lot fell in the name of the
camels. Abdul Mutalib said, ‘O My Lord! No. It would not be fair to
suffice for this. I must draw lots three more times.’ He drew lots three
more times. The lot fell to the name of the camels all three times. At
this time Abdul Mutalib said, ‘Now I know that my Lord is pleased with
this.” And he had their throats cut. **[[257]](footnotes_1.htm#b0257)**

THERE ARE THREE BENEFITS IN QUINCES
-----------------------------------

3-199 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Ali al-Basry, on the authority of Fuzalat ibn
Ayoob and Wahab ibn Hafs, on the authority of Shahab ibn Abdeh Rab’beh
that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Zubayr had a quince in his hand
and went to see God’s Prophet (MGB). The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘O Zubayr!
What is this in your hand?’ Then he replied, ‘O Prophet of God! This is
a quince.’ Then the Prophet (MGB) said, ‘O Zubayr! Eat quinces since
they have three good characteristics.’ Zubayr said, ‘O Prophet of God !
What are they?’

The Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘They will warm up the heart, make a miser
benevolent and turn a coward into a bold person.’

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - says, “I heard
my elder Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrate
that As-Sadiq (MGB) said, ‘Zubayr was one of us until his son Abdullah
grew up and turned him against us.’”

THERE ARE THREE CHARACTERISTICS IN ONIONS
-----------------------------------------

3-200 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn
Ali al-Hamedany, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali
al-Kasa’ee**[[258]](footnotes_1.htm#b0258)** , on the authority of
Maysar (ibn Abdul Aziz)**[[259]](footnotes_1.htm#b0259)** - the seller
of black slaves - in the presence of Khalid that I heard Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) say, “Eat onions since they have three characteristics:
they make your mouth smell fresh; they strengthen your gums; and they
increase your sperm and sex drive.”

3-201 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ibrahim
ibn Hashim, on the authority of Al-Nawfaly, on the authority of
Al-Sakoony, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on
the authority of his father (MGB) that the Prophet (MGB) said, “Using
charms is not effective except on three occasions: for biting bugs, sore
eyes or blood that will not flow (due to phlebotomy).”

#### 

#### على عبد الله فزاد عشرا، فلم تزل السهام تخرج على عبد الله، ويزيد عشرا، فلما [أن] بلغت مائة خرجت السهام على الابل، فقال عبدالمطلب: ما أنصفت ربي، فأعاد السهام ثلاثا فخرجت على الابل، فقال: الآن علمت أن ربي قد رضي فنحرها. {.t0}

##### السفرجل فيه ثلاث خصال

#### 3-199 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن محمد بن علي البصري، عن فضالة بن أيوب، ووهب بن حفص، عن شهاب بن عبد ربه قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: إن الزبير دخل على رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وبيده سفرجلة، فقال له رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: يا زبير ما هذه بيدك؟ فقال له: يا رسول الله هذه سفرجلة، فقال: يا زبير كل السفرجل فان فيه ثلاث خصال، قال: وما هي يا رسول الله؟ قال: يجم الفؤاد، ويسخي البخيل، ويشجع الجبان.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: سمعت شيخنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه يروي أن الصادق عليه السلام قال: ما زال الزبير منا أهل البيت حتى أدرك فرخه فنهاه عن رأيه.

##### في البصل ثلاث خصال

#### 3-200 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد بن علي الهمداني، عن الحسن بن علي الكسائي عن ميسر بياع الزطي وكان خالد قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: كلوا البصل فان فيه ثلاث خصال: يطيب النكهة، ويشد اللثة، ويزيد في الماء والجماع.

##### لا رقى الا في ثلاثة

#### 3-201 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن النوفلي، عن السكوني، عن جعفر ابن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام أن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال:لا رقى إلا في ثلاثة: في حمة أو عين أو دم لا يرقأ.

ON THREE TRAITS THAT ARE SIGNS OF THE JURISPRUDENT
--------------------------------------------------

3-202 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Musa ibn Abi Ja’far
al-Kumaydany quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr al-Bazanty that Abul Hassan Al-Reza
(MGB) said, “Patience, knowledge and silence are among the signs of the
jurisprudent. Silence is one of the gates of wisdom. Silence attracts
affection and is a guide for any good affair.”

BLOWING AT THREE PLACES IS DETESTABLE
-------------------------------------

3-203 Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Haysam al-Ajali - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Zakaria al-Qat’tan quoted Ahmad
ibn Yahya ibn Zakaria al-Qat’tan quoted Bakr ibn Abdullah ibn Habib, on
the authority of Tamim ibn Buhlool, on the authority of his father, on
the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Mus’ab that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
said, “Blowing at three things is detestable: blowing at a talisman,
blowing at food, and blowing at the place of prostration.”

ANYONE POSSESSING THREE CHARACTERISTICS SHALL GO TO HELL
--------------------------------------------------------

3-204 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Khalid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Al-Ala’ ibn Fuzayl that Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Should anyone possess the following three
characteristics, do not hesitate to say that he would go to hell:
oppressiveness, cowardliness and miserliness. Should a woman possess the
following three characteristics, do not hesitate to say that she would
go to hell: scurrility, haughtiness and
corruption.**[[260]](footnotes_1.htm#b0260)**”

GOD WILL MAKE THREE THINGS RULE OVER WHOEVER GAINS ILLEGITIMATE PROPERTY
------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-205 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn al-Hussein al-Sa’ed Abady
quoted on the authority of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on
the authority of Hisham ibn al-Hakam that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
said, “God will make a building, water and clay rule over whoever gains
property through illegitimate means.”

THREE SOURCES OF COMFORT FOR A BELIEVER
---------------------------------------

3-206 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Salt quoted on
the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Khalid, on the authority

##### ثلاث خصال من علامات الفقه

#### 3-202 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن موسى بن جعفر بن أبي جعفر الكميداني، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي قال: قال أبوالحسن عليه السلام: من علامات الفقه الحلم والعلم والصمت، إن الصمت باب من أبواب الحكمة، وإن الصمت يكسب المحبة، [و] إنه دليل على كل خير.

##### يكره النفخ في ثلاثة أشياء

#### 3-203 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن الهيثم العجلي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن يحيى بن زكريا القطان قال: حدثنا بكر بن عبد الله بن حبيب، عن تميم بن بهلول، عن أبيه، عن الحسين بن مصعب قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: يكره النفخ في الرقى، والطعام، وموضع السجود.

##### ثلاث خصال من كن فيه فهو في جهنم

#### 3-204 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن محمد بن سنان، عن العلاء بن فضيل، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ثلاث إذا كن في الرجل فلا تحرج أن تقول: إنه في جهنم: الجفاء والجبن والبخل، وثلاث إذا كن في المرأة فلا تحرج أن تقول: إنها في جهنم البذاء والخيلاء والفجر.

##### من كسب مالا من غير حله سلط الله عليه ثلاثة أشياء

#### 3-205 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين السعد آبادي، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن هشام بن الحكم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من كسب مالا من غير حل سلط الله عليه البناء والماء والطين.

##### ثلاثة للمؤمن فيهن راحة

#### 3-206 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني محمد بن علي بن الصلت، عن أحمد بن محمد بن علي بن خالد، عن منصور بن العباس، عن سعيد بن جناح عن مطرف

of Mansoor ibn al-Ab’bas, on the authority of Sa’id ibn Jinah, on the
authority of Motrif - a servant of Ma’an, that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB) said, “There are three things which comfort a believer: a big
house in which he guards his privacy and his bad states of health from
the people; a good wife who assists him in the affairs of this life and
the Hereafter; and a daughter or a sister who leaves his house either by
death or because of marriage.”

A MAN’S PROSPERITY DEPENDS ON THREE THINGS
------------------------------------------

3-207 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn al-Hussein al-Sa’ed Abady
quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Barqy, on the authority of
Uthman ibn Isa, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Miskan who linked it up
through a chain of narrators to Ali ibn al-Hussein as-Sajjad (MGB)
saying, “A man is prosperous if his business is in his own town; his
friends are good; and he has children who assist him.”

THREE WHOSE PRAYERS WILL NOT BE ANSWERED
----------------------------------------

3-208 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr al-Bazanty, on the authority of Abdullah ibn
Sin’an, on the authority of Al-Walid ibn Sabih who said, “I was with Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB). A tray of dates was in front of him (MGB). A
beggar came and the Imam (MGB) gave him some dates. Another one came and
the Imam (MGB) gave him some dates. A third beggar came, but the Imam
(MGB) said, ‘May God grant you an increase of sustenance!’ Then the Imam
(MGB) told me, ‘If a man has more than thirty or forty-thousand (Dinars)
and wishes to give it all away in charity, he can do so, but he will
become poor and will be amongst those whose prayers are returned to
themselves.’ I asked the Imam (MGB), ‘May I be your ransom! Who are
these people?’ The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘They include men to whom God has
granted what they prayed for, but spend it all for God’s sake and again
say, ‘O God! Please give me more sustenance!’ They also include men who
curse their wives while having treated their wives oppressively. They
are told, ‘Have We not entrusted her affairs with you?’ They also
include men who sit in their house, pray to seek their sustenance and
say, ‘O God! Please deliver my sustenance to me! The Honorable the
Exalted God tells them, ‘Have I not established a way for you to obtain
your daily sustenance?’”

FASTING FOR THREE DAYS IN THE MONTH EQUALS FASTING THE WHOLE YEAR
-----------------------------------------------------------------

3-209 Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Musa - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Kufy quoted Musa ibn Imran
al-Nakha’ee, on the authority of his uncle Al-Hussein ibn Yazid
al-Nawfaly, on the authority of Ali ibn Abi Hamzih on the authority of
his father, “I asked

#### مولى معن، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ثلاثة للمؤمن فيهن راحة: دار واسعة تواري عورته وسوء حاله من الناس. وامرأة صالحة تعينه على أمر الدنيا والآخرة، وابنة أو اخت يخرجها من منزله بموت أو بتزويج. {.t0}

##### من سعادة المرء أن يكون له ثلاثة أشياء

#### 3-207 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين السعد آبادي، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد البرقي، عن عثمان بن عيسى، عن عبد الله بن مسكان يرفعه إلى علي بن الحسين عليهما السلام أنه قال: من سعادة المرء أن يكون متجره في بلاده، ويكون خلطاؤه صالحين، ويكون له ولد يستعين بهم.

##### ثلاثة لا يستجاب لهم دعوة

#### 3-208 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي، عن عبد الله بن سنان، عن الوليد ابن صبيح، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: كنت عنده وعنده جفنة من رطب فجاء سائل فأعطاه ثم جاء سائل آخر فأعطاه، ثم جاء آخر فأعطاه، ثم جاء آخر فقال: وسع الله عليك، ثم قال: إن رجلا لو كان له مال يبلغ ثلاثين أو أربعين ألفا، ثم شاء أن لا يبقى منه شيء إلا قسمه في حق فعل فيبقى لا مال له، فيكون من الثلاثة الذين يرد دعاؤهم عليهم، قال: قلت: جعلت فداك من هم؟ قال: رجل رزقه الله عز وجل مالا فأنفقه في وجوهه ثم قال: يا رب ارزقني [فيقول الله عز وجل أولم أرزقك] ورجل دعا على امرأته وهو ظالم لها فيقال له: ألم أجعل أمرها بيدك، ورجل جلس في بيته وترك الطلب، ثم يقول: يا رب ارزقني فيقول [الله] عز وجل ألم أجعل لك السبيل إلى الطلب للرزق.

##### صيام السنة ثلاثة أيام من كل شهر

#### 3-209 حدثنا علي بن أحمد بن موسى رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن أبي عبد الله الكوفي، عن موسى بن عمران النخعي، عن عمه الحسين بن يزيد النوفلي،

Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) about the reward for fasting based on the
tradition of God’s Prophet (MGB). The Imam (MGB) replied, “All together
there are three days in the whole month fasting on which equals fasting
the whole year long: the Thursday in the first ten days of the month;
the Wednesday in the second ten days and the Thursday in the last ten
days. The Honorable the Exalted God said, ‘He that doeth good shall have
ten times as much to his credit:…’**[[261]](footnotes_1.htm#b0261)**
Whoever is too weak to fast on these three days can pay one Dirham in
charity for each day.”.

A BELIEVER’S AMUSEMENT IS IN THREE THINGS
-----------------------------------------

3-210 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Hammad ibn
Ya’la ibn Himad, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Hammad ibn Isa al-Jahani, on the authority of Hurayz ibn Abdullah, on
the authority of Zurarah ibn A’ayan that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said,
“A believer’s amusement is in three things: enjoying his women; joking
around with his brethren; and praying at night.”

WHOEVER HAS THREE CHARACTERISTICS HAS THE WHOLE GOOD
----------------------------------------------------

3-211 Abul-Hassan Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ali Asad Al-Asady narrated that
Abdullah ibn Suleiman, Abdullah ibn Muhammad al-Vahby, Ahmad ibn Umayr
and Muhammad ibn Abi Ayoob quoted Muhammad ibn Bashr ibn Hani ibn Abdul
Rahman, on the authority of his father, on the authority of his uncle
Ibrahim ibn Aba Ablat, on the authority of Ummal-Derda, on the authority
of Abil-Derda that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Whoever wakes up in the
morning with a healthy body, peace of mind and availability of that
day’s share of food it is as if he has been given the whole good of this
world.

O Ibn Khas’am! It suffices to have enough to feed yourself so that you
are not hungry, and enough to cover yourself. It would even be better if
you have a place to live and a means of transportation, a piece of bread
and some water to drink. Whatever goes beyond this, there will be a
Reckoning for it or a punishment for you.”

THE PROPHET HIT THE ROCK WITH A PICKAXE THREE TIMES AND SAID ‘GOD IS GREAT’ THREE TIMES
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-212 Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ahmad ibn Yunus al-Laysee narrated that
Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn al-Faraj al-Sharooty quoted Abu Abdullah
Muhammad ibn Yazid ibn al-Molheb, on the authority of Abu Sufyan, on the
authority of Oaf, on the authority of Maymun, on the authority of
Al-Bara ibn Azib, “When God’s Prophet (MGB) ordered that a ditch be dug,
a big boulder appeared across the ditch which could not be

#### عن علي بن أبي حمزة، عن أبيه قال:سألت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام عما جرت به السنة في الصوم من رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله قال: ثلاثة أيام في كل شهر: خميس في العشر الاول، وأربعاء في العشر الاوسط، وخميس في العشر الاخير، يعدل صيامهن صيام الدهر لقول الله عز وجل "من جاء بالحسنة فله عشر أمثالها" فمن لم يقدر عليها لضعف فصدقة درهم أفضل له من صيام يوم. {.t0}

##### لهو المؤمن في ثلاثة أشياء

#### 3-210 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني حماد بن يعلى بن حماد، عن أبيه، عن حماد بن عيسى الجهني، عن حريز بن عبد الله، عن زرارة بن أعين، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال:لهو المؤمن في ثلاثة أشياء: التمتع بالنساء ومفاكهة الاخوان والصلاة بالليل.

##### من اجتمعت له ثلاث خصال فكأنما حيزت له الدنيا

#### 3-211 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن أحمد بن علي بن أسد الاسدي قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن سليمان، وعبد الله بن محمد الوهبي، وأحمد بن عمير، ومحمد بن أبي أيوب قالوا: حدثنا محمد بن بشر بن هانئ بن عبدالرحمن قال: حدثنا أبي، عن عمه إبراهيم ابن أبي عبلة عن أم الدرداء، عن أبي الدرداء قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: من أصبح معافى في جسده، آمنا في سربه، عنده قوت يومه، فكأنما حيزت له الدنيا. يا ابن خثعم يكفيك منها ما سد جوعتك ووارى عورتك فإن يكن بيت يكنك فذاك وإن تكن دابة تركبها فبخ، فلق الخبز وماء الجر وما بعد ذلك حساب عليك أو عذاب.

##### ضرب النبي صلى الله عليه وآله في الخندق بالمعول ثلاث مرات وكبر ثلاث مرات

#### 3-212 حدثنا محمد بن إبراهيم بن أحمد بن يونس الليثي قال: حدثنا أبوعبد الله محمد بن الفرج الشروطي قال: حدثنا أبوعبد الله محمد بن يزيد بن المهلب قال: حدثنا أبوسفيان قال: حدثني عوف، عن ميمون قال: أخبرني البراء بن عازب قال: لما أمر رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله بحفر الـخندق عرضـت له صـخرة عظيـمة

broken with a pickaxe. When the Prophet of God (MGB) came and saw it, he
(MGB) took off his shirt, picked up the pickaxe, said God’s name and
struck the boulder. One third of it broke up. The Prophet (MGB) said,
‘In the Name of God’ and hit it once. One third of it broke up into
pieces. Then the Prophet (MGB) said, ‘God is Great. I have been given
the keys to Syria. It is as if I can now see its red palaces’ and hit it
a second time. Then the Prophet (MGB) said, ‘God is Great. It is as if I
have been given the keys to Persia. I swear by God that I can see the
White Palaces in Al-Madaen’ and hit it for the third time. Then the
third part of the boulder broke into pieces. Then the Prophet (MGB)
said, ‘God is Great. I have been given the keys to Yemen. It is as if I
can see San’a - the capital from here.’”

THE THREE DEEDS MOST LOVED BY GOD
---------------------------------

3-213 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Sejezy narrated that Abul Qasim al-Boqavy
quoted Ali - that is ibn al-Ja’ed, on the authority of Shu’bat, on the
authority of Al-Walid ibn Alizar ibn Hareeth that he had heard Aba Amr
al-Sheibany while he was pointing to the house of Abdullah ibn Mas’ood
say, “The owner of this house narrated that he asked God’s Prophet
(MGB), ‘What are the deeds loved by the Honorable the Exalted God?’ The
Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘Praying on time.’ Then he asked, ‘What else?’
The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Being kind to your parents.’ Then he asked,
‘What else?’ The Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘Engaging in a holy war for the
sake of the Honorable the Exalted God.’ He added, ‘This is what he told
me. He would have told me more if I had asked more.’”

THE THREE THINGS I FEAR THE MOST FOR MY NATION
----------------------------------------------

3-214 Abu Ahmad Al-Hassan ibn Abdullah ibn Sa’id al-Askari narrated that
Abu Asid Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Asid al-Isbahany quoted Ahmad ibn Yahya
al-Soofi, on the authority of Abu Qisan, on the authority of Mas’ood ibn
Sa’ed al-Jo’afy, on the authority of Yazid ibn Abi Zyad, on the
authority of Mujahid, on the authority of Ibn Umar that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “What I fear the most for my nation includes the following
three things: making errors by the scholars; attempts to prove what is
wrong by using the Quran by the hypocrites; and the world that cuts your
necks into pieces. Thus, be pessimistic about the world.”

WHOEVER BELIEVES IN GOD AND THE HEREAFTER WILL NOT DO THREE THINGS
------------------------------------------------------------------

3-215 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Muhammad ibn Mu’az quoted Ali
ibn Khashram, on the authority of Isa ibn Yunis, on the authority of Abi
Mu’amir, on the authority of Sa’id
al-Moqbery**[[262]](footnotes_1.htm#b0262)**, on the authority of Abi
Hurayrih that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Whoever believes in God and

#### شديدة في عرض الخندق لا تأخذ فيها المعاول فجاء رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله فلما رآها وضع ثوبه فأخذ المعول، وقال: بسم الله وضرب ضربة فكسر ثلثها، فقال: الله أكبر اعطيت مفاتيح الشام، والله إني لابصر قصورها الحمر الساعة، ثم ضرب الثانية فقال: بسم الله، ففلق ثلثا آخر، فقال: الله أكبر اعطيت مفاتيح فارس، والله إني لابصر قصر المدائن الابيض، ثم ضرب الثالثة ففلق بقية الحجر، فقال: الله أكبر اعطيت مفاتيح اليمن، والله إني لابصر أبواب صنعاء من مكاني هذا. {.t0}

##### أحب الاعمال إلى الله عز وجل ثلاثة

#### 3-213 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد السجزي قال: أخبرنا أبوالقاسم البغوي قال: حدثنا علي يعني ابن الجعد قال: أخبرنا شعبة قال: أخبرني الوليد بن العيزار ابن حريثقال: سمعت أبا عمرو الشيباني قال: حدثني صاحب هذه الدار وأشار بيده إلى دار عبد الله بن مسعود قال: سألت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أي الاعمال أحب إلى الله عز وجل؟ قال: الصلاة لوقتها، قلت: ثم أي شيء؟ قال: بر الوالدين، قلت: ثم أي شيء؟ قال: الجهاد في سبيل الله عز وجل، قال: فحدثني بهذا ولو استزدته لزادني.

##### أشد ما يتخوف على امتي ثلاثة أشياء

#### 3-214 حدثنا أبوأحمد الحسن بن عبد الله بن سعيد العسكري قال: أخبرنا أبواسيد أحمد بن محمد بن اسيد الاصبهاني قال: حدثنا أحمد بن يحيى الصوفي قال: حدثنا أبوغسان قال: حدثنا مسعود بن سعد الجعفي - وكان من خيار من أدركنا - عن يزيد بن أبي زياد، عن مجاهد، عن ابن عمر قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أشد ما يتخوف على أمتي ثلاثة: زلة عالم، أو جدال منافق بالقرآن أو دنيا تقطع رقابكم، فاتهموها على أنفسكم.

##### من كان يؤمن بالله واليوم الاخر فلا يفعل ثلاثة اشياء

#### 3-215 حدثنا الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا محمد بن معاذ قال: حدثنا علي بن خشرم قال: حدثنا عيسى بن يونس، عن أبي معمر، عن سـعيد المقبـري عن أبـي

the Hereafter will not sit at a table where wine is being drunk. Whoever
believes in God and the Hereafter will not enter a bath without any
clothes**[[263]](footnotes_1.htm#b0263)** . And whoever believes in God
and the Hereafter will not let his wife go to the bath outside of their
house.”

I AM AFRAID OF THREE CHARACTERISTICS IN MY NATION
-------------------------------------------------

3-216 Abul Hassan Ali ibn Abdullah ibn Ahmad al-Aswari al-Mozak’kar
narrated that Abu Yusuf Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Qays
al-Sejezi**[[264]](footnotes_1.htm#b0264)** al-Mozakar quoted Abu
Yaqoob, on the authority of Ali ibn Khashram, on the authority of
Isa**[[265]](footnotes_1.htm#b0265)**, on the authority of Abi
Ubaydat**[[266]](footnotes_1.htm#b0266)** , on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Ka’ab that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “I am worried about three
things for my nation after me: to interpret the Quran in a way other
than its true meaning**[[267]](footnotes_1.htm#b0267)**; to follow the
errors of a religious scholar; and become disobedient due to gaining
some wealth. You should act according to what is clearly stated in the
Quran and believe in what is doubtful in it. You should expect a harsh
trial for a religious scholar who has made mistakes and should not
follow his errors. You should be grateful for wealth in this world and
pay it its right dues.”

THE THREE THINGS THE PROPHET LIKED THE MOST IN THIS WORLD
---------------------------------------------------------

3-217 Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bandar al-Shafe’ee in Furqan
narrated that Abul Abbas al-Himady quoted Salih ibn Muhammad
al-Baghdady, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Ja’ed, on the authority of
Salam ibn al-Monzar**[[268]](footnotes_1.htm#b0268)** who narrated that
he had heard Sabet al-Banany, and had not heard it from anyone else, on
the authority of Anas ibn Malik**[[269]](footnotes_1.htm#b0269)** that
God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “What I love the most in this world are women
and perfume. And praying lights up my eyes.”

3-218 Abu Ali al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Muhammad ibn (Ali ibn) Umar and
al-Attar in Balkh narrated that Abu Mus’ab Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Ishaq al-Salmy at Tormoz quoted Abu Muhammad Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Ishaq ibn Amoli in Amol, on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Qalib al-Basry az-Zahed in Baghdad, on the authority of
Yasar - the servant of Anas ibn Malik**[[270]](footnotes_1.htm#b0270)**
, on the authority of Anas ibn Malik that the Prophet (MGB) said, “What
I love the most in this world are women and perfume. And praying lights
up my eyes**[[271]](footnotes_1.htm#b0271)**.”

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “The
atheists strongly rely on this narration and say that when the Prophet
(MGB) said ‘What I love the most in this world are women and perfume,’
he wanted to go on and say something else for the third, but he became
sorry and continued it by saying, ‘And praying lights up my eyes.’
However, these people lie and the Prophet (MGB) had no intentions but to
stress just

#### هريرة قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: من كان يؤمن بالله واليوم الآخر فلا يجلس على مائدة يشرب عليها الخمر ومن كان يؤمن بالله واليوم الآخر فلا يدخل الحمام إلا بمئزر، ومن كان يؤمن بالله واليوم الآخر فلا يدع حليلته تخرج إلى الحمام. {.t0}

##### التخوف على الامة من ثلاث خصال

#### 3-216 حدثنا أبوالحسن علي بن عبد الله الاسواري المذكر قال: حدثنا أبويوسف أحمد بن محمد بن قيس السجزي المذكر قال: حدثنا أبويعقوب قال: حدثنا علي بن خشرم قال: أخبرنا عيسى، عن أبي عبيدة عن محمد بن كعب قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:إنما أتخوف على امتي من بعدي ثلاث خصال:أن يتأولوا القرآن على غير تأويله أو يتبعوا زلة العالم، أو يظهر فيهم المال حتى يطغوا ويبطروا، وسانبئكم المخرج من ذلك: أما القرآن فاعملوا بمحكمه وآمنوا بمتشابهه، وأما العالم فانتظروا فيئته ولا تتبعوا زلته، وأما المال فان المخرج منه شكر النعمة وأداء حقه.

##### حبب إلى النبي صلى الله عليه وآله من الدنيا ثلاث

#### 3-217 حدثنا أبوأحمد محمد بن جعفر البندار الشافعي بفرغانة قال: حدثنا أبوالعباس الحمادي قال: حدثنا صالح بن محمد البغدادي قال: حدثنا علي بن الجعد، قال: أخبرنا سلام أبوالمنذر قال: سمعت ثابت البناني ولم أسمع من غيره يحدث عن أنس بن مالك، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: حبب إلي من الدنيا النساء. والطيب، وقرة عيني في الصلاة.

#### 3-218 حدثنا أبوعلي الحسن بن علي بن محمد بن [علي بن] عمر [و] العطار ببلخ قال: حدثنا أبومصعب محمد بن أحمد بن مصعب بن القاسم السلمي بترمذ قال: حدثنا أبومحمد أحمد بن محمد بن إسحاق بن هارون الآملي بآمل قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن غالب البصري الزاهد ببغداد قال: حدثنا يسار مولى أخا أنس بن مالك، عن أنس، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: قال: حبب إلي من دنياكم النساء والطيب، وجعل قرة عيني في الصلاة.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: إن الملحدين يتعلقون بهذا الخبر ويقولون: إن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: حبب إلي من دنياكم النساء والطيب، وأراد أن يقول الثالث فندم وقال: "وجعل قرة عيني في الصلاة" وكذبوا لانه صـلى الله عليه

the importance of marriage in this narration, since he (MGB) has said,
‘Two units of prayers said by a married person is nobler in the Opinion
of God than seventy units of prayers said by an unmarried person.’

He (MGB) also said, ‘Two units of prayers said by a person wearing a
good perfume is nobler in the Opinion of God than seventy units of
prayers said by a person not wearing good perfume.’ God likes one to
wear perfume when he wants to pray.”

Then the Prophet (MGB) added, ‘‘And praying lights up my eyes. Whoever
wears perfume and has a wife but doesn’t pray will not get any divine
reward from putting on perfume or making love with his wife.”

AS-SADIQ (MGB) WAS ALWAYS BUSY DOING ONE OF THREE THINGS
--------------------------------------------------------

3-219 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn al-Hussein al-Sa’ed Abady quoted on the authority
of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Zyad al-Azodi that he had heard the
jurisprudent in Medina Malik ibn Anas say, “I went to see Ja’far ibn
Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB) often. He (MGB) put down a cushion for me to
rest on and respected me and said, ‘O Malik! I like you.’ I became happy
that he (MGB) was so kind to me and praised God so much that he (MGB)
was always either fasting, praying or busy mentioning God. He was one of
the greatest worshippers and one of the greatest abstainers who feared
the Honorable the Exalted God. Ja’far (MGB) knew a lot of traditions. He
(MGB) was very pleasant. A lot of people attended his meetings and
benefitted a lot from his presence. Whenever he (MGB) mentioned the name
of God’s Prophet (MGB), he (MGB) turned so blue or yellow that even
those who knew him could not recognize him. Once I attended the Hajj
pilgrimage along with him (MGB). He (MGB) was riding on a camel and
while trying to say ‘Labayk. Allahuma
Labayk’**[[272]](footnotes_1.htm#b0272)** he could not utter it and
dismounted. Then I said, ‘O (grand)son of God’s Prophet! Do you have to
say it?’ Then the Imam (MGB) said, “O Ibn Abi Amer! I am afraid of
saying ‘Labayk. Allahuma Labayk’**[[273]](footnotes_1.htm#b0273)** since
I fear that the Honorable the Exalted God might respond in the negative
and say ‘La Labayk and la Sa’edayk!.’”**[[274]](footnotes_1.htm#b0274)**

AL-REZA’S (MGB) PILGRIMS WILL BENEFIT ON THREE OCCASIONS
--------------------------------------------------------

3-220 Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Musa - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Kufy quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Salih al-Razi, on the authority of Himdan
al-Divani**[[275]](footnotes_1.htm#b0275)** that Al-Reza (MGB) said, “On
the Resurrection Day, I will come to save whoever visits me despite the
far distance to my tomb, until I liberate him from his terrors: 1- When
the Letters of Deeds are handed to his right and left hands, 2- At the
moment of crossing the Bridge over
Hell**[[276]](footnotes_1.htm#b0276)** , and 3- At the time when the
Scale of Deeds (measuring the amount of good vs. bad deeds) is set up.”

#### وآله لم يكن مراده بهذا الخبر إلا الصلاة وحدها لانه صلى الله عليه وآله قال: ركعتين يصليهما المتزوج أفضل عند الله من سبعين ركعة يصليها غير متزوج، وإنما حبب الله إليه النساء لاجل الصلاة وهكذا قال: ركعتين يصليهما متعطر أفضل من سبعين ركعة يصليها غير متعطر، وإنما حبب الله إليه الطيب أيضا لاجل الصلاة، ثم قال عليه السلام "وجعل قرة عيني في الصلاة " لان الرجل لو تطيب وتزوج، ثم لم يصل لم يكن له في التزويج والطيب فضل ولا ثواب. {.t0}

##### كان الصادق لا يخلو من احدى ثلاث خصال

#### 3-219 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين السعد آبادي، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد، عن أبيه قال: حدثنا أبوأحمد محمد بن زياد الازدي قال: سمعت مالك بن أنس فقيه المدينة يقول: كنت أدخل على الصادق جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام فيقدم لي مخدة ويعرف لي قدرا ويقول: يا مالك إني احبك فكنت أسر بذلك وأحمد الله عليه، وكان عليه السلام لا يخلو من إحدى ثلاث خصال: إما صائما وإما قائما وإما ذاكرا، وكان من عظماء العباد وأكابر الزهاد الذين يخشون الله عز وجل، وكان كثير الحديث، طيب المجالسة، كثير الفوائد فاذا قال:"قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله" اخضر مرة واصفر اخرى حتى ينكره من يعرفه، ولقد حججت معه سنة فلما استوت به راحلته عند الاحرام كان كلما هم بالتلبية انقطع الصوت في حلقه وكاد يخر من راحلته، فقلت: قل يا ابن رسول الله فلابد لك من أن تقول، فقال عليه السلام: يا ابن أبي عامر كيف أجسر أن أقول: "لبيك اللهم لبيك" وأخشى أن يقول عز وجل [لي]: لا لبيك ولا سعديك.

##### ينتفع زائر الرضا في ثلاث مواطن

#### 3-220 حدثنا علي بن أحمد بن موسى رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن أبي عبد الله الكوفي، عن أحمد بن محمد بن صالح الرازي، عن حمدان الديواني قال: قال الرضا عليه السلام: من زارني على بعد داري أتيته يوم القيامة في ثلاث مواطن حتى اخلصه من أهوالـها: إذا تطايرت الكتب يـمينا وشمالا، وعند الصراط، وعند الميزان.

DEEDS CAN BE CLASSIFIED INTO THREE DISTINCT GROUPS
--------------------------------------------------

3-221 Abul Hassan Muhammad ibn Amr ibn Ali al-Basry narrated that Abul
Hassan Ali ibn al-Hassan ibn al-Maysami quoted Abul Hassan Ali ibn
Mahraviat al-Qazvini, on the authority of Abu Ahmad al-Qazi, on the
authority of Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB), on the authority of his father
Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB), on the authority of his father Ja’far
ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father Muhammad ibn
Ali al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of his father Ali ibn al-Hussein
as-Sajjad (MGB), on the authority of his father Al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB)
that he had heard his father Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) say, “Deeds can be
classified into three distinct groups: the obligatory deeds; the noble
deeds; and sins. The obligatory deeds are done based upon God’s Orders,
His Decrees, Pleasure, Volition, His Predetermination, and Knowledge.
However, the noble deeds are not done based upon God’s Orders. However,
they are done based upon God’s Pleasure, Decrees, Volition, His
Predetermination, and Knowledge. And sins are not done based upon God’s
Orders. However, they are done based upon God’s Decrees, Power,
Predetermination, Volition and Knowledge. That is why God punishes us
for committing them.”

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “When it
is said that sins are done based upon God’s Decrees, it implies that God
has admonished us against doing them, since the Honorable the Exalted
God’s Decrees for His servants regarding sins is to abandon them. What
is meant by ‘it is based upon God’s Predetermination’ is that God knows
the sin’s amount and extent. What is meant by ‘it is based upon God’s
Volition’ means that the Honorable the Exalted God only hinders him from
committing sins by means of advice, statements, forbidding and
admonishment - not by force and use of power.”

AL-BAQIR ENJOINED HIS SON AS-SADIQ TO DO THREE THINGS AND ADMONISHED HIM AGAINST DOING THREE THINGS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-222 Abu Ahmad al-Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Abdoyeh al-Siraj in
Hamedan narrated that Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Zabi quoted
Muhammad ibn Abdul Aziz, on the authority of Ubaydullah ibn Musa
al-Abasi, on the authority of Sufyan al-Sowri, “Once I met Ja’far ibn
Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB) and asked him, ‘O (grand)son of the Prophet of
God! Please give me some advice.’ The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘O Sufyan! One
who is dishonest is not chivalrous. There are no brothers for the
monarchs**[[277]](footnotes_1.htm#b0277)** and there is no rest for the
envious. There is no mastery for the ill-natured.’ Then I asked, ‘O
(grand)son of God’s Prophet! Please tell me more!’ The Imam (MGB) told
me, ‘O Sufyan! Trust in God so that you may

##### الاعمال على ثلاثة أحوال

#### 3-221 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن عمرو بن علي البصري قال: حدثنا أبوالحسن علي بن الحسن بن الميثمي قال: حدثنا أبوالحسن علي بن مهرويه القزويني قال: حدثنا أبوأحمد الغازي قال: حدثنا علي بن موسى الرضا قال: حدثني أبي موسى ابن جعفر قال حدثني أبي جعفر بن محمد قال: حدثني أبي محمد بن علي قال: حدثنا أبي علي بن الحسين قال: حدثنا أبي الحسين بن علي قال: سمعت أبي علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام يقول: الاعمال على ثلاثة أحوال فرائض، وفضائل، ومعاصي. فأما الفرائض فبأمر الله وبرضى الله وبقضاء الله وتقديره ومشيئته وعلمه عز وجل. وأما الفضائل فليست بأمر الله ولكن برضى الله وبقضاء الله وبمشيئته الله وبعلم الله عز وجل، وأما المعاصي فليست بأمر الله ولكن بقضاء الله وبقدر الله وبمشيئته وعلمه ثم يعاقب عليها.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه المعاصي بقضاء الله معناه بنهي الله لان حكمه عز وجل فيها على عباده الانتهاء عنها، ومعنى قوله "بقدر الله" أي بعلم الله بمبلغها ومقدارها. ومعنى قوله "وبمشيئته" فانه عز وجل شاء أن لا يمنع العاصي من المعاصي إلا بالزجر والقول والنهي والتحذير، دون الجبر والمنع بالقوة والدفع بالقدرة.

##### أمر الباقر عليه السلام ابنه الصادق عليه السلام بثلاث ونهاه عن ثلاث

#### 3-222 حدثنا أبو أحمد القاسم بن محمد السراج الهمذاني بهمذان قال: حدثنا أبوبكر محمد بن أحمد الضبي قال: حدثنا محمد بن عبدالعزيز الدينوري قال: حدثنا عبيد الله بن موسى العبسي، عن سفيان الثوري قال: لقيت الصادق بن الصادق جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام فقلت له: يا ابن رسول الله أوصني فقال لي: يا سفيان لا مروء‌ة لكذوب، ولا أخ لملوك ولا راحة لحسود، ولا سودد لسيئ الخلق، قلت: يا ابن رسول الله زدني، فقال لي: يا سفيان ثق بالله تكن مؤمنا، وارض بما قسم الله

become a true believer. Be content with whatever God grants to you so
that you may become truly needless. Treat your neighbours with kindness
so that you may become a true Muslim. Do not associate with a wicked
person so that you do not learn his corruption. Seek advice regarding
your affairs from those who fear the Honorable the Exalted God.’

Then I said, ‘O (grand)son of God’s Prophet! Tell me more.’ The Imam
(MGB) told me, ‘O Sufyan! Whoever wishes to become honored should not be
dependent upon his relatives. Whoever wishes to become needless should
not be a captive of his desires. Whoever wishes to become majestic
should not be associated with the King. He should transfer himself from
the debasement of disobedience of God to the honour of His Obedience.’

Then I said, ‘O (grand)son of God’s Prophet! Tell me more.’ Then the
Imam (MGB) told me, ‘O Sufyan! My father (MGB) enjoined me to do three
things and admonished me against doing three other things. He (MGB) told
me, ‘O my son! Whoever associates with a wicked one will not remain
safe. Whoever goes to wicked places will not be safe from being accused.
And whoever doesn’t control his tongue will become sorry.’ Then the Imam
(MGB) recited the following poem:

***Accustom your tongue to goodness to be safe  
 As it would utter what it gets accustomed to.  
 It utters what you teach it - be it good or evil.  
 So watch out for what you teach it.”***

ONCE THE RISER UPRISES, HE WILL ISSUE THREE DECREES NEVER ISSUED BEFORE
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

3-223 Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Musa - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Hamzih ibn al-Qasim al-Alavi quoted Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Imran
al-Barqy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ali al-Hamedany, on the
authority of Ali ibn Abi Hamzih, on the authority of Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) and Abil-Hassan (MGB), “Once the Riser (MGB) uprises, he
(MGB) will issue three decrees which no one has issued before him. He
will order that any fornicating old man be killed. He will order that
anyone who prohibits the alms-tax be killed. And he will order that a
man’s brothers should inherit from whatever property that produces a
shade.” **[[278]](footnotes_1.htm#b0278)**

THE PROPHET TOLD SALMAN FARSI THAT HE HAS THREE CHARACTERISTICS WHEN HE GETS ILL
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-224 Muhammad ibn Ali ibn ash-Shah narrated that Abu Hamid quoted Abu
Yazid Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Khalidy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Ahmad ibn Salih al-Tamimy, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Hatam al-Qat’tan, on the authority of Hammad

#### لك تكن غنيا، وأحسن مجاورة من جاورته تكن مسلما، ولا تصحب الفاجر فيعلمك من فجوره، وشاور في أمرك الذين يخشون الله عز وجل. {.t0}

#### فقلت: يا بن رسول الله زدني.

#### فقال لي: يا سفيان من أراد عزا بلا عشيرة وغنى بلا مال وهيبة بلا سلطان فلينقل من ذل معصية الله إلى عز طاعته.

#### فقلت: زدني يا بن رسول الله.

#### فقال لي: يا سفيان أمرني والدي عليه السلام بثلاث ونهاني عن ثلاث، فكان فيما قال لي: يا بني من يصحب صاحب السوء لا يسلم، ومن يدخل مداخل السوء يتهم، ومن لا يملك لسانه يندم، ثم أنشدني [فقال] عليه السلام:

 

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="50%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">إن اللسان لما عودت يعتاد</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">عود لسانك قول الخير تحظ به</h4></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">في الخير والشر فانظر كيف تعتاد</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">موكل بتقاضي ما سننت له</h4></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

##### اذا قام القائم عليه السلام حكم بثلاث لم يحكم بها أحد قبله

#### 3-223 حدثنا علي بن أحمد بن موسى رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا حمزة بن القاسم العلوي قال: حدثنا محمد بن عبد الله بن عمران البرقي قال: حدثنا محمد بن علي الهمداني، عن علي بن أبي حمزة، عن أبي عبد الله وأبي الحسن عليهما السلام قالا: لو قد قام القائم لحكم بثلاث لم يحكم بها أحد قبله: يقتل الشيخ الزاني، ويقتل مانع الزكاة، ويورث الاخ أخاه في الاظلة.

##### قول النبي صلى الله عليه وآله لسلمان الفارسي ان لك في علتك ثلاث خصال

#### 3-224 حدثنا محمد بن علي بن الشاه قال: حدثنا أبوحامد قال: حدثنا أبويزيد أحمد بن خالد الخالدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن صالح التميمي، عن أبيه قـال:

#### إن اللسان لما عودت يعتاد {style="text-align: center"}

#### عود لسانك قول الخير تحظ به {style="text-align: center"}

#### في الخير والشر فانظر كيف تعتاد {style="text-align: center"}

#### موكل بتقاضي ما سننت له {style="text-align: center"}

ibn Amr, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the
authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his grandfather
(MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) that God’s Prophet
(MGB) told Salman al-Farsi, “O Salman! When you become sick, you gain
three things: 1- You continually remember God., 2- Your prayers are
accepted., and 3- All your sins are pardoned due to that ailment. May
God give you good health up to the time of your death.

UMAR SAID HE REPENTS TO GOD FOR THREE THINGS
--------------------------------------------

3-225 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abdullah ibn al-Hassan al-Mo’adab
quoted Ahmad ibn Ali al-Isbahany, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad al-Saqafy, on the authority of Yahya ibn al-Hassan ibn al-Forat
al-Qaz’zaz, on the authority of Harun ibn Ubaydat, on the authority of
Yahya ibn Abdullah ibn al-Hassan ibn al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib
(MGB), “When Umar was facing death, he said, ‘I repent to God for the
following three actions: 1- Abu Bakr and I took the rule over the people
from others; 2- I forced the Caliph on the people; 3- I ranked some
people over others.’”

3-226 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abdullah ibn al-Hassan al-Mo’adab
quoted Ahmad ibn Ali al-Isbahany, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad al-Saqafy, on the authority of Al-Mas’oodi, on the authority of
Al-Hassan ibn Himad al-Ta’ee, on the authority of Zyad ibn al-Monzar, on
the authority of Atiye that he thinks that Jabir ibn Abdullah said, “I
witnessed that Umar said the following when he faced death: ‘I repent to
God for the following three things: 1- Freeing the atheist slaves from
Yemen captured by the Muslims; 2- Not obeying Usamah whom God’s Prophet
(MGB) appointed as the Chief of the Army; and 3- We pledged to each
other not to let any of the Prophet’s (MGB) family succeed the Prophet
(MGB) when God took away his life.’”

3-227 By the same documentation on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Muhammad
al-Saqafy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ali, on the authority of
Al-Hussein ibn Sufyan, on the authority of his father, on the authority
of Fazl ibn Zubayr, on the authority of Abu Ubaydat al-Heza’e Zyad ibn
Isa that he had heard Aba Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) say, “When Umar faced
death, he said, ‘I repent to God for the following three actions: 1-
Fleeing from the army of Usamah whom God’s Prophet (MGB) had appointed
as the Chief of the Army; 2- Freeing the atheist slaves from Yemen
captured by the Muslims; and 3- I repent to God for what is in our
hearts - may God protect us from its harm; and pledging allegiance to
Abu Bakr since it was not done with consultation.’”

#### حدثنا محمد بن حاتم القطان، عن حماد بن عمرو، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله لسلمان الفارسي رضي الله عنه: يا سلمان إن لك في علتك إذا اعتللت ثلاث خصال أنت من الله تبارك وتعالى بذكر، ودعاؤك فيها مستجاب، ولا تدع العلة عليك ذنبا إلا حطته، متعك الله بالعافية إلى انقضاء أجلك. {.t0}

##### قول عمر أتوب إلى الله من ثلاث

#### 3-225 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن الحسن المؤدب، عن أحمد بن علي الاصبهاني، عن إبراهيم بن محمد الثقفي قال: أخبرني يحيى بن الحسن ابن الفرات القزاز قال: حدثنا هارون بن عبيدة، عن يحيى بن عبد الله بن الحسن بن الحسن بن علي بن أبي طالب عليهما السلام قال: قال عمر حين حضره الموت: أتوب إلى الله من ثلاث: اغتصابي هذا الامر أنا وأبوبكر من دون الناس واستخلافي عليهم، وتفضيلي المسلمين بعضهم على بعض.

#### 3-226 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن الحسن المؤدب، عن أحمد بن علي الاصبهاني، عن إبراهيم بن محمد الثقفي قال: حدثني المسعودي قال: حدثنا الحسن بن حماد الطائي، عن زياد بن المنذر، عن عطية فيما يظن عن جابر بن عبد الله قال: شهدت عمر عند موته يقول: أتوب إلى الله من ثلاث من ردي رقيق اليمن، ومن رجوعي عن جيش اسامة بعد أن أمره رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله علينا، ومن تعاقدنا على أهل هذا البيت إن قبض الله رسوله لا نولي منهم أحدا.

#### 3-227 وبهذا الاسناد، عن إبراهيم بن محمد الثقفي قال: حدثني محمد بن علي قال: حدثنا الحسين بن سفيان، عن أبيه قال: حدثني فضل بن الزبير قال: حدثني أبوعبيدة الحذاء زياد بن عيسى قال: سمعت أبا جعفر عليه السلام يقول: لما حضر عمر الموت قال: أتوب إلى الله من رجوعي عن جيش اسامة، وأتوب إلى الله من عتقي سبي اليمن، وأتوب إلى الله من شيء كنا أشعرناه قلوبنا نسئل الله أن يكفينا ضره، وأن بيعة أبي بكر كانت فلتة.

WHAT ABU BAKR IS SORRY ABOUT
----------------------------

3-228 Al-Muzaf’far ibn Ja’far ibn al-Muzaf’far al-Alavi al-Samarqandi -
may God be pleased with him - narrated that Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn
Mas’ood al-Ayashi quoted his father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Hatam, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Hamid and Suleiman ibn Ma’abad,
on the authority of Abdullah ibn Salih, on the authority of Al-Lays ibn
Sa’ed, on the authority of Alvan ibn Davood ibn Salih, on the authority
of Salih ibn Kaysan, on the authority of Abdul Rahman ibn Hamid ibn
Abdul Rahman ibn Oaf, on the authority of his father that when Abu Bakr
had a fatal illness, he said, “I am not sorry about anything in this
world except for three actions I did which I wish I had never done; for
three things I did not do that I wish I had done; and three things which
I wish I had asked God’s Prophet (MGB). And the three things I did which
I wish I had never done; 1- I wish I had not opened the door of
Fatimah’s house even if it was shut in preparation for war. 2- I wish I
had not burnt Al-Fuja**[[279]](footnotes_1.htm#b0279)** but killed him
or freed him upon victory over him. 3- I wish on the day of the council
(Saqifa) of Bani Sa’eda**[[280]](footnotes_1.htm#b0280)** I had given
the rule to either Umar or Abi Ubayda and let either one rule and I be
their minister. And the three things I did not do but I wish I had done;
1- I wish I had chopped off the neck of Ash’ath ibn Qays on the day on
which he was captured and brought to me. I think one doesn’t experience
any evil unless he assists an evil one.

2- I wish I had gone to a town near the war front when I sent Khalid to
fight with those who had turned back from the religion, so that I could
have seen the Muslims’ victory with my very own eyes and could have
joined or been of some assistance to the Muslims if there had been any
plots against them.

3- I wish when I dispatched Khalid to Syria I had dispatched Umar ibn
al-Khat’tab to the east (to Iraq and Iran) and had used both my armies
in the way of God. And the three things which I wish I had asked God’s
Prophet (MGB) are as follows: 1- I wish I had asked him (MGB) about his
successor so that there would be no quarrels about it after his demise.
2- I wish I had asked him (MGB) whether the Helpers
(Ansar)**[[281]](footnotes_1.htm#b0281)** had any share in this rule.
And 3- I wish I had asked him (MGB) about the inheritance for one’s
brother and uncle since I feel I need to know this.”

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “’On the
day of Qadir Khum, no excuse was left for anyone.’ This is what Fatimah,
the Master of the Ladies (MGB), told the Helpers (Ansar) when the tract
of land called Fadak**[[282]](footnotes_1.htm#b0282)** was taken away
from her. The Helpers (Ansar) replied, ‘O daughter of Muhammad! Had we
heard this from you before our pledge of allegiance to Abu Bakr, we
would have not pledged allegiance to anyone but Ali (MGB). She (MGB)
said, ‘My father (MGB) left no excuse for anyone on the day of Qadir
Khum.’”

##### قول أبى بكر لا آسى من الدنيا الا على ثلاث…

#### 3-228 حدثنا المظفر بن جعفر بن المظفر العلوي السمرقندي قال: حدثنا جعفر بن محمد بن مسعود العياشي، عن أبيه قال: حدثنا محمد بن حاتم قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن حماد، وسليمان بن معبد قالا: حدثنا عبد الله بن صالح قال: حدثني الليث بن سعد، عن علوان بن داود بن صالح، عن صالح بن كيسان، عن عبدالرحمن ابن حميد بن عبدالرحمن بن عوف، عن أبيه قال: قال أبوبكر في مرضه الذي قبض فيه:أما إني لا آسى من الدنيا إلا على ثلاث فعلتها ووددت أني تركتها، وثلاث تركتها ووددت أني فعلتها، وثلاث وددت أني كنت سألت عنهن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أما التي وددت أني تركتها فوددت أني لم أكن كشفت بيت فاطمة وإن كان أعلن علي الحرب.ووددت أني لم أكن أحرقت الفجاء‌ة وأني قتلته سريحا أو أطلقته نجيحا، ووددت أني يوم سقيفة بني ساعدة كنت قذفت الامر في عنق أحد الرجلين: عمر، أو أبي عبيدة، فكان أميرا وكنت وزيرا.وأما التي تركتها [فوددت أني فعلتها] فوددت أني يوم أتيت بالاشعث أسيرا كنت ضربت عنقه فانه يخيل لي أنه لم ير صاحب شر إلا أعانه،ووددت أني حين سيرت خالدا إلى أهل الردة كنت قدمت إلى قرية فان ظفر المسلمون ظفروا وإن هزموا كيدا كنت بصدد لقاء أو مدد، ووددت أني كنت إذ وجهت خالدا إلى الشام قذفت المشرق لعمر بن الخطاب فكنت بسطت يدي يميني وشمالي في سبيل الله، وأما التي وددت أني كنت سألت عنهن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله فوددت أني كنت سألته فيمن هذا الامر فلم ننازعه أهله، ووددت أني كنت سألته هل للانصار في هذا الامر نصيب، ووددت أني كنت سألته عن ميراث الاخ والعم، فان في نفسي منها حاجة.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: إن يوم غدير خم لم يدع لاحد عذرا هكذا قالت سيدة النسوان فاطمة عليها السلام لما منعت فدك وخاطبت الانصار، فقالوا: يا بنت محمد لو سمعنا هذا الكلام منك قبل بيعتنا لابي بكر ما عدلنا بعلي أحدا،فقالت: وهل ترك أبي يوم غدير خم لاحد عذرا.

ON ABDULLAH IBN MAS’OOD SAYING, “THERE ARE THREE GROUPS OF SCHOLARS ON THE EARTH"
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-229 Abul-Qasim al-Hassan ibn Muhammad al-Sakoony al-Mazaki in Kufa
narrated that Muhammad ibn Abdullah al-Hazrami quoted Muhammad ibn
Maquq, on the authority of Hussein, on the authority of Yahya ibn Salma
ibn Kohayl, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Abil
Za’era that Abdullah ibn Mas’ood said, “The scholars in the world can be
divided into three groups: the scholars in Syria, the scholars in Saudi
Arabia, and the scholars in Iraq. The scholar in Syria is Abil Dirda.
The scholar in Iraq is your brother in
Kufa.**[[283]](footnotes_1.htm#b0283)** The scholar in Saudi Arabia is
Ali (MGB). The scholars in Syria**[[284]](footnotes_1.htm#b0284)** and
Iraq**[[285]](footnotes_1.htm#b0285)** need the scholar in Saudi
Arabia**[[286]](footnotes_1.htm#b0286)** , while the scholar in Saudi
Arabia doesn’t need them.”

THE THREE WHO DID NOT DENY REVELATIONS EVEN FOR THE TWINKLING OF AN EYE
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

3-230 Abdullah ibn Muhammad ibn Abdul Vah’hab (al-Isbahany) narrated
that Ahmad ibn al-Fazl al-Muqayrih quoted Abu Nasr Mansoor ibn Abdullah
ibn Ibrahim al-Isbahany, on the authority of Ali ibn Abdullah, on the
authority of Harun ibn Hameed, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
al-Muqayrih al-Shahrzoori, on the authority of Yahya ibn al-Hussein
al-Mada’eni, on the authority of Ibn Lahay’at, on the authority of Abil
Zubayr, on the authority of Jabir ibn Abdullah that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “There are three who did not deny revelations even for the
twinkling of an eye: the believer of
Al-i-Yas**[[287]](footnotes_1.htm#b0287)** , Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) and
Asia - the wife of Pharaoh.”

THE REWARD OF WHOEVER IS PATIENT WITH THREE DAUGHTERS
-----------------------------------------------------

3-231 Abu Muhammad Muhammad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Shafe’ee al-Furqany in
Furqan narrated that Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ja’far ibn al-Ash’as quoted
Abu Hatam (Muhammad ibn Idris ibn al-Monzar), on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abdullah al-Ansari, on the authority of Ibn Jarih, on the
authority of Abil Zubayr, on the authority of Umar ibn Nebhan, on the
authority of Abi Hurayrih that the Prophet (MGB) said, “Whoever has
three daughters and is patient with their upbringing during times of
ease and hardship will be protected on the Resurrection Day.”

THE THREE THAT WILL COMPLAIN TO THE HONORABLE THE EXALTED GOD ON THE RESURRECTION DAY
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-232 Muhammad ibn Umar al-Hafiz al-Baghdady known as Ja’abi narrated
that Abdullah ibn Bashir quoted Al-Hassan ibn al-Zebarqan al-Moradi, on
the authority of Abu Bakr ibn Ayyash, on the authority of
Al-Jalah**[[288]](footnotes_1.htm#b0288)** , on the authority of Abil
Zubayr, on the authority of Jabir, “I heard God’s Prophet (MGB) say,
‘Three things shall complain to the Honorable the

##### قول عبد الله بن مسعود علماء الارض ثلاثة

#### 3-229 حدثنا أبوالقاسم الحسن بن محمد السكوني المزكي بالكوفة قال: حدثنا محمد بن عبد الله الحضرمي قال: حدثنا محمد بن مرزوق قال: حدثنا حسين قال: حدثنا يحيى بن سلمة بن كهيل، عن أبيه، عن أبي الزعراء قال: قال عبد الله بن مسعود: علماء الارض ثلاثة: عالم بالشام، وعالم بالحجاز، وعالم بالعراق، أما عالم الشام فأبو الدرداء، وأما عالم الحجاز فهو علي عليه السلام، وأما عالم العراق فهو أخ لكم بالكوفة، وعالم الشام، وعالم العراق محتاجان إلى عالم الحجاز، وعالم الحجاز لا يحتاج إليهما.

##### ثلاثة لم يكفروا بالوحى طرفة عين

#### 3-230 حدثنا عبد الله بن محمد بن عبدالوهاب [الاصبهاني] قال: حدثنا أحمد ابن الفضل بن المغيرة قال: حدثنا أبونصر منصور بن عبد الله بن إبراهيم الاصبهاني قال: حدثنا علي بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا محمد بن هارون بن حميد قال: حدثنا محمد بن المغيرة الشهرزوري قال: حدثنا يحيى بن الحسين المدايني قال: حدثنا ابن لهيعة، عن أبي الزبير، عن جابر بن عبد الله قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ثلاثة لم يكفروا بالوحي طرفة عين: مؤمن آل يس، وعلي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام، وآسية امرأة فرعون.

##### ثواب من كن له ثلاث بنات فصبر عليهن

#### 3-231 حدثنا أبومحمد محمد بن أبي عبد الله الشافعي الفرغاني بفرغانة قال: حدثنا أبوجعفر محمد بن جعفر بن الاشعث قال: حدثنا أبوحاتم قال: حدثنا محمد بن عبد الله الانصاري قال: حدثني ابن جريج، عن أبي الزبير، عن عمر بن نبهان، عن أبي هريرة، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: من كن له ثلاث بنات فصبر على لاوائهن وضرائهن وسرائهن كن له حجابا يوم القيامة.

##### ثلاثة يشكون إلى الله عز وجل يوم القيامة

#### 3-232 حدثنا محمد بن عمر الحافظ البغدادي المعروف بالجعابي قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن بشير قال: حدثنا الحسن بن الزبرقان المرادي قال: حدثنا أبوبكر ابن عياش، عن الاجلح، عن أبي الزبير، عن جابر قال: سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليـه وآلـه

Exalted God on the Resurrection Day: 1- The Quran; 2- The
mosque**[[289]](footnotes_1.htm#b0289)** , and 3- My Household. The
Quran will say, ‘O Lord! They misinterpreted me and tore me up.’ The
mosque will say, ‘O Lord! They left me unused and wasted me.’ And my
Household will say, ‘O Lord! They killed us. They deported us. They made
us homeless. The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘I will sit down to judge this
case.’ However, God - may His Majesty be Exalted -says, ‘I deserve more
to do this.’”

THE PEN HAS BEEN LIFTED UP FOR THREE**[[290]](footnotes_1.htm#b0290)**
----------------------------------------------------------------------

3-233 Al-Hassan ibn Muhammad al-Sakoony al-Mazaki in Kufa narrated that
Muhammad ibn Abdullah al-Hazrami quoted Ibrahim ibn Abi Muawiyah, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Al-A’amash, on the
authority of Abi Zebyan, “An insane woman who had committed adultery was
brought to Umar. Umar order that she be stoned to death. They took her
to Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB). The Imam (MGB) asked, ‘What is going on?’
They said, ‘She is a crazy woman who has committed adultery. Umar has
ordered her to be punished.’ The Imam (MGB) said, ‘Do not rush to do
so.’ Then the Imam (MGB) told Umar, ‘Don’t you know that three people
are not subject to the rules? They are children until they mature, crazy
people until they become sane, and people who are asleep until they wake
up.”

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “This
tradition appeared here this way. The original version of this tradition
that has been narrated on the authority of the Divine Leaders (MGB)
says, ‘When an insane man commits adultery, he should be punished.
However, when an insane woman commits adultery she should not be
punished. That is because an insane man does the act (of adultery),
while an insane woman would be the subject (of adultery).”
**[[291]](footnotes_1.htm#b0291)**

STINGINESS COUPLED WITH GREED CAUSES THREE BAD CHARACTERISTICS
--------------------------------------------------------------

3-234 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Ibn Sa’ed quoted Al-Hassan ibn
Arafeh, on the authority of Umar ibn Abdul Rahman Abu Hafs al-Abbar, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Juhadat, on the authority of Bakir ibn
Abdullah al-Madani, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Amr that the
Prophet (MGB) said, “Be aware of stinginess coupled with greed
(covetousness of the soul), since it really destroys those before you.
It will instruct you to lie and you will lie; it will instruct you to
oppress and you will oppress; and it will instruct you to cut off ties
and you will cut off ties.”**[[292]](footnotes_1.htm#b0292)**

3-235 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Abul Abbas al-Suraj quoted
Qutaybat, on the authority of Bakr ibn
Ajlan**[[293]](footnotes_1.htm#b0293)**, on the authority of Sa’id
al-Moqbery, on the authority of Abi Hurayrih that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said,

#### يقول: يجئ يوم القيامة ثلاثة يشكون إلى الله عز وجل: المصحف، والمسجد، والعترة.يقول المصحف: يا رب حرقوني ومزقوني، ويقول المسجد: يا رب عطلوني وضيعوني، وتقول العترة: يا رب قتلونا وطردونا وشردونا فأجثوا للركبتين للخصومة، فيقول الله جل جلاله لي: أنا أولى بذلك. {.t0}

##### رفع القلم عن ثلاثة

#### 3-233 حدثنا الحسن بن محمد السكوني المزكي بالكوفة قال: حدثنا محمد بن عبد الله الحضرمي قال: حدثنا إبراهيم بن أبي معاوية قال: حدثني أبي، عن الاعمش، عن أبي ظبيان قال: أتى عمر بامرأة مجنونة قد فجرت فأمر عمر برجمها، فمروا بها على علي عليه السلام فقال: ما هذه؟ فقالوا: مجنونة قد فجرت، فأمر بها عمر أن ترجم، فقال: لا تعجلوا فأتى عمر فقال: أما علمت أن القلم رفع عن ثلاثة عن الصبي حتى يحتلم وعن المجنون حتى يفيق وعن النائم حتى يستيقظ.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عن:ه جاء هذا الحديث هكذا، والاصل في هذا قول أهل البيت عليهم السلام أن المجنون إذا زنى حد والمجنونة إذا زنت لم تحد لان المجنون يأتي والمجنونة تؤتى.

##### الشح يولد ثلاث خصال مذمومة

#### 3-234 حدثنا الخليل بن أحمد قال: حدثنا ابن صاعد قال: حدثنا الحسن بن عرفة قال: حدثنا عمر بن عبدالرحمن أبوحفص الابار، عن محمد بن جحادة عن بكير ابن عبد الله المدني، عن عبد الله بن عمرو، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: إياكم والشح فانما هلك من كان قبلكم بالشح، أمرهم بالكذب فكذبوا، وأمرهم بالظلم فظلموا، وأمرهم بالقطيعة فقطعوا.

#### 3-235 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا أبوالعباس السراج قال: حدثنا قتيبة قال: حدثنا بكر بن عجلان عن سعيد المقبري، عن أبي هريرة أن رسول الله صـلى

“Beware of using obscene language, since the Honorable the Exalted God
doesn’t like a vulgar person who uses obscene language. Beware of
oppression, since oppression in the opinion of the Honorable the Exalted
God is like the darkness of the Resurrection Day. Beware of stinginess
coupled with greed, since it led those before you to shed blood; severe
their bonds of kinship; devour illegitimately earned property; and be
overly permissive regarding their women.”

3-236 Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bindar, the jurisprudent in
Akhsikth**[[294]](footnotes_1.htm#b0294)** - narrated that Abul Abbas
Muhammad ibn Jumhoor al-Himady quoted Abu Ali Salih ibn Muhammad
al-Baghdady in Bukhara**[[295]](footnotes_1.htm#b0295)**, on the
authority of Sa’id ibn Suleiman, Muhammad ibn Bikar and Isma’il ibn
Ibrahim, on the authority of Al-Faraj ibn Fuzalat, on the authority of
Luqman ibn Amir, on the authority of Abi Imamat, “I asked, ‘O Prophet of
God! How was the beginning of your affair?’ The Prophet (MGB) replied,
‘The prayers of my (great grand)father Abraham
(MGB);**[[296]](footnotes_1.htm#b0296)** the glad tidings of Jesus - the
son of Mary (MGB);**[[297]](footnotes_1.htm#b0297)** and the dream of my
mother who saw that a ray of light extending out of her body and
illuminating the palaces in Syria.’”

THREE THINGS MAKES ONE A PARTNER WITH THE MUSLIMS
-------------------------------------------------

3-237 Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bandar narrated that Abul Ab’bas
Muhammad ibn Jumhoor al-Himady quoted Salih ibn Muhammad al-Baghdady, on
the authority of Al-Ab’bas ibn al-Walid al-Narsi, on the authority of
Abdul Rahman ibn Mehdi, on the authority of Mansoor ibn Sa’ed, on the
authority of Maymun ibn Siah, on the authority of Anas ibn
Malik**[[298]](footnotes_1.htm#b0298)** that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“Whoever faces our Qibla (prayer direction), prays the way we pray, and
eats what we slaughter is one of us and is our partner.”

THREE OF THE FORTY-FIVE PARTS OF PROPHETHOOD
--------------------------------------------

3-238 Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bandar narrated that Abul Ab’bas
al-Himady quoted Salih ibn Muhammad al-Baghdady, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Bikar, on the authority of Ubaydat ibn Hameed, on the
authority of Qaboos ibn Abi Zebyan, on the authority of his father, on
the authority of Ibn Abbas**[[299]](footnotes_1.htm#b0299)** that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “A good attitude, good looks and being frugal are
three of the forty-five parts of Prophethood.”

FAITH CONSISTS OF THREE THINGS
------------------------------

3-239 Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bandar narrated that Abul Abbas
al-Himady quoted Muhammad ibn Umar ibn Mansoor al-Balkhi in Mecca, on
the authority of Abu Yunus Muhammad ibn Yazid ibn Abdullah

#### الله عليه وآله قال:إياكم والفحش فان الله عز وجل لا يحب الفاحش المتفحش وإياكم والظلم فان الظلم عند الله هو الظلمات يوم القيامة، وإياكم والشح فانه دعا الذين من قبلكم حتى سفكوا دماء‌هم، ودعاهم حتى قطعوا أرحامهم، ودعاهم حتى انتهكوا واستحلوا محارمهم.

##### بدء أمر النبي صلى الله عليه وآله من ثلاثة

#### 3-236 حدثنا أبوأحمد محمد بن جعفر البندار الفقيه بأخسيكث قال: حدثنا أبوالعباس محمد بن جمهور الحمادي قال: حدثني أبوعلي صالح بن محمد البغدادي ببخارا قال: حدثنا سعيد بن سليمان، ومحمد بن بكار، وإسماعيل بن إبراهيم قال: حدثنا الفرج بن فضالة، عن لقمان بن عامر، عن أبي امامة قال: قلت: يا رسول الله ما كان بدء أمرك، قال: دعوة أبي إبراهيم، وبشرى عيسى بن مريم، ورأت أمي أنه خرج منها شيء أضاء‌ت منه قصور الشام.

##### ثلاث خصال من فعلهن فله ما للمسلمين وعليه ما عليهم

#### 3-237 حدثنا أبوأحمد محمد بن جعفر البندار قال: حدثنا أبوالعباس محمد بن محمد ابن جمهور الحمادي قال: حدثنا صالح بن محمد البغدادي قال: حدثنا العباس بن الوليد النرسي قال: حدثنا عبدالرحمن بن مهدي قال: حدثنا منصور بن سعد، عن ميمون بن سياه، عن أنس بن مالك قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:من استقبل قبلتنا، وصلى صلاتنا، وأكل ذبيحتنا فله مالنا وعليه ما علينا.

##### ثلاثة أشياء كل واحد منها جزء من خمسة وأربعين جزء‌ا من النبوة

#### 3-238 حدثنا أبوأحمد محمد بن جعفر البندار قال: حدثنا أبوالعباس الحمادي قال: حدثنا صالح بن محمد البغدادي قال: حدثنا محمد بن بكار قال: حدثنا عبيدة ابن حميد قال: حدثنا قابوس بن أبي ظبيان، عن أبيه، عن ابن عباس قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:الهدى الصالح، والسمت الصالح، والاقتصاد جزء من خمسة وأربعين جزء‌ا من النبوة.

##### الايمان ثلاثة أشياء

#### 3-239 حدثنا أبوأحمد محمد بن جعفر البندار قال: حدثنا أبوالعباس الحمادي قال: حدثنا محمد بن عمر بن منصور البلخي بمكة قال: حدثنا أبو يونس أحمد بن محمـد

al-Jamhi, on the authority of Abdul Salam ibn Salih al-Haravy, on the
authority of Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB), on the authority of his father
Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB), on the authority of his father Ja’far
ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father Muhammad ibn
Ali al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hussein as-Sajjad
(MGB), on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB), on the authority of
Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Faith consists
of whole-hearted acceptance, verbal expression, and acting accordingly.”

3-240 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Bakr ibn Salih al-Razi, on the
authority of Abu Salt al-Haravy, “I asked Al-Reza (MGB) about faith. The
Imam (MGB) replied, ‘Faith consists of whole-hearted acceptance, verbal
expression, and acting accordingly. Faith is nothing else.’”

3-241 Suleiman ibn Ahmad ibn Ayoob al-Lakhmy narrated that Ali ibn Abdul
Aziz and Mu’az ibn al-Mosana quoted Abdul Salam ibn Salih al-Haravy, on
the authority of Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB), on the authority of his
father Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB), on the authority of his father
Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father
Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of his father Ali ibn
al-Hussein as-Sajjad (MGB), on the authority of his father Al-Hussein
ibn Ali (MGB), on the authority of his father Ali (MGB) that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “Faith consists of whole-hearted acceptance, verbal
expression, and acting accordingly.”

3-242 Hamzih ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Alavi - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Abul Hassan Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hassan
al-Baz’zaz quoted Abu Ahmad Davood ibn Suleiman al-Qazi, on the
authority of Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB), on the authority of his father
Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB), on the authority of his father Ja’far
ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father Muhammad ibn
Ali al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of his father Ali ibn al-Hussein
as-Sajjad (MGB), on the authority of his father Al-Hussein ibn Ali
(MGB), on the authority of his father the Commander of the Faithful Imam
Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Faith consists of
whole-hearted acceptance, verbal expression, and acting accordingly.”

Hamzih ibn Muhammad - may God be pleased with him - and Abdul Rahman ibn
Abi Hatam narrated this same tradition on the authority of his father,
on the authority of Abu Salt al-Haravy Abdul Salam ibn Salih, on the
authority of Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB) with a similar documentation on
the chain of narrators. Abu Hatam said, ‘Should you recite the names in
this chain of narrators**[[300]](footnotes_1.htm#b0300)** to an insane
person, he will be treated.”

#### بن يزيد بن عبد الله الجمحي قال: حدثنا عبدالسلام بن صالح، عن علي بن موسى، عن أبيه موسى بن جعفر، عن أبيه جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه محمد بن علي، عن علي بن الحسين، عن الحسين بن علي، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الايمان معرفة بالقلب وإقرار باللسان وعمل بالاركان. {.t0}

#### 3-240 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن بكر بن صالح الرازي، عن أبي الصلت الهروي قال: سألت الرضا عليه السلام عن الايمان فقال: الايمان عقد بالقلب [و] لفظ باللسان [و] عمل بالجوارح، لا يكون الايمان إلا هكذا.

#### 3-241 أخبرنا سليمان بن أحمد بن أيوب اللخمي قال: حدثني علي بن عبدالعزيز، ومعاذ بن المثنى قالا: حدثنا عبدالسلام بن صالح الهروي قال: حدثنا علي بن موسى الرضا، عن أبيه موسى، عن أبيه جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه محمد بن علي، عن أبيه علي بن الحسين، عن أبيه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الايمان معرفة بالقلب، وإقرار باللسان، وعمل بالاركان.

#### 3-242 حدثنا حمزة بن محمد بن أحمد العلوي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أبوالحسن علي بن محمد البزاز قال: حدثنا أبوأحمد داود بن سليمان الغازي قال: حدثني علي ابن موسى الرضا عليهما السلام قال: حدثني أبي موسى بن جعفر قال: حدثني أبي جعفر ابن محمد قال: حدثني أبي محمد بن علي الباقر قال: حدثني أبي علي بن الحسين قال: حدثني أبي الحسين بن علي قال: حدثني أبي أمير المؤمنين عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:الايمان إقرار باللسان ومعرفة بالقلب وعمل بالاركان. قال حمزة بن محمد رضي الله عنه وسمعت عبدالرحمن بن أبي حاتم يقول: سمعت أبي يقول: وقد روى هذا الحديث عن أبي الصلت الهروي عبدالسلام بن صالح، عن علي ابن موسى الرضا عليهما السلام باسناد مثله. قال أبوحاتم: لو قرء هذا الاسناد على مجنون لبرأ.."

THREE WHO WILL NOT ENTER PARADISE
---------------------------------

3-243 Abul Abbas Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Taleqani - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abu Muhammad Yahya ibn Muhammad ibn
Sa’ed in the city of Medina as-Salam quoted Ibrahim ibn Jamil, on the
authority of Mo’tamer ibn Suleiman, on the authority of Fuzayl ibn
Maysare, on the authority of Abi Jarir, on the authority of Aba Barda,
on the authority of Abi Musa al-Ash’ari that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“The following three groups of people will not enter Paradise: the
alcoholics; the magicians; and those who cut-off relations of kin. The
Honorable the Exalted God will feed whoever dies as an alcoholic from
the Al-Qota river.” He (MGB) was asked what Al-Qota river is. He (MGB)
replied, “It is a river formed of the detestable things which flow out
of the vaginas of sluts and is even bothersome to the people of Hell.”

3-244 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Abdullah, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Sin’an, on the authority of some men that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB) said, “The following three groups of people will not enter
Paradise: those who shed blood; the alcoholics; and those who go around
to gossip.”

WHOEVER THREE OF HIS PROGENY ARE CRUCIFIED
------------------------------------------

3-245 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that
Al-Mokhledy**[[301]](footnotes_1.htm#b0301)** quoted Yunus ibn Abdul
Ali, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Wahab, on the authority of Amr ibn
al-Harith, on the authority of Ashanat
al-Ma’afery**[[302]](footnotes_1.htm#b0302)** that he had heard Aqabah
ibn Amer say that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The Honorable the Exalted
God has guaranteed Paradise for whoever three of his progeny are
crucified for the sake of God.”

THE REWARD FOR THREE THINGS: MAKING ABLUTIONS, EXPRESSING GREETINGS ALOUD, AND GIVING CHARITY IN PRIVATE
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-246 Abul Hassan Muhammad ibn Amr ibn Ali Al-Basry narrated that Abu
Abdullah Abdul Salam ibn Muhammad ibn Harun ibn al-Fazl ibn al-Ab’bas
ibn Ali ibn Abdullah ibn al-Ab’bas ibn Abdullah al-Ma’mun ibn Harun
ar-Rashid ibn Musa al-Hadi ibn Muhammad al-Mehdi ibn Abdullah al-Mansoor
ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Abdullah ibn al-Ab’bas quoted Muhammad ibn
Aqabah al-Sheibany, on the authority of Abul Qasim al-Khazr ibn Aban, on
the authority of Abi Hedyat Ibrahim ibn Hedyat al-Basry, on the
authority of Anas ibn Malik**[[303]](footnotes_1.htm#b0303)** that one
day God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “O Ans! Make complete ablutions so that
you may cross the Bridge**[[304]](footnotes_1.htm#b0304)** just like a
cloud; express your greetings aloud so that there are increased
blessings in your house; and give a lot of charity in private so as to
quench the Honorable the Exalted God’s Wrath.”

##### ثلاثة لا يدخلون الجنة

#### 3-243 حدثنا أبوالعباس محمد بن إبراهيم بن إسحاق الطالقاني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أبومحمد يحيى بن محمد بن صاعد بمدينة السلام قال: حدثنا إبراهيم بن جميل قال: حدثنا معتمر بن سليمان قال: قرأت على فضيل بن ميسرة، عن أبي جرير أن أبا بردة حدثه، عن أبي موسى الاشعري قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ثلاثة لا يدخلون الجنة مدمن خمر، ومدمن سحر، وقاطع رحم. ومن مات مدمن خمر سقاه الله عز وجل من نهر الغوطة، قيل: وما نهر الغوطة؟ قال: نهر يجري من فروج المومسات يؤذي أهل النار ريحهن

#### 3-244 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن سنان، عن بعض رجاله، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ثلاثة لا يدخلون الجنة: السفاك للدم، وشارب الخمر، ومشاء بنميمة.

##### في من مات له ثلاثة أولاد

#### 3-245 أخبرنا الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا المخلدي قال: حدثنا يونس ابن عبدالاعلى قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن وهب قال: حدثني عمرو بن الحارث أن أبا عشانة المعافري حدثه أنه سمع عقبة بن عامر يقول: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: من ثكل ثلاثة من صلبه فاحتسبهم على الله عز وجل وجبت له الجنة.

##### ثواب ثلاث خصال: اسباغ الوضوء وافشاء السلام وصدقة السر

#### 3-246 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن عمرو بن علي البصري قال: حدثنا أبوعبد الله عبدالسلام بن محمد بن هارون بن الفضل بن العباس بن علي بن عبد الله بن العباس بن عبد الله المأمون بن هارون الرشيد بن موسى الهادي بن محمد المهدي بن عبد الله المنصور ابن محمد بن علي بن عبد الله بن العباس قال: حدثنا محمد بن محمد بن عقبة الشيباني قال: حدثنا أبوالقاسم الخضر بن أبان، عن أبي هدية إبراهيم بن هدية البصري عن أنس ابن مالك قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يوما: يا أنس أسبغ الوضوء تمر على الصراط مر السحاب، أفش السلام يكثر خير بيتك، أكثر من صدقة السر فانها تطفي غضب الرب عز وجل.

THE FOUR BROTHERS WITH A TEN YEAR AGE DIFFERENCE
------------------------------------------------

3-247 Al-Hassan ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Alavi - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that his grandfather quoted Al-Hussein ibn Muhammad,
on the authority of Ibn Abil Sari, on the authority of Hisham ibn
Muhammad ibn al-Sa’eb**[[305]](footnotes_1.htm#b0305)** , on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Abi Salih that Ibn
Abbas**[[306]](footnotes_1.htm#b0306)** said, “There was an age
difference of ten years between Talib and Aqeel. There was an age
difference of ten years between Aqeel and Ja’far. And there was an age
difference of ten years between Ja’far and Ali (MGB). Ali (MGB) was the
youngest one of them.” **[[307]](footnotes_1.htm#b0307)**

PEOPLE WERE DEBASED ON THREE OCCASIONS
--------------------------------------

3-248 Al-Hassan ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Alavi - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that his grandfather quoted Davood, on the authority
of Isa ibn Abdul Rahman ibn Salih, on the authority of Abu Malik
al-Janby**[[308]](footnotes_1.htm#b0308)** , on the authority of Umar
ibn Bashr al-Hamedany, “I asked Abi Ishaq, ‘When were the people
debased?’ He replied, ‘Since Al-Hussein (MGB) was martyred; Zyad was
ascribed to Abu Sufyan**[[309]](footnotes_1.htm#b0309)** ; and the
killing of Hujr ibn Uday**[[310]](footnotes_1.htm#b0310)** .’”

THERE ARE THREE CHARACTERISTICS IN BEGGING AND THE WORST OF THE PEOPLE ARE THREE
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-249 Muhammad ibn Ali ibn ash-Shah narrated that Abu Hamid quoted Abu
Yazid Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Khalidy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Ahmad ibn Salih al-Tamimy, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Hatam al-Qat’tan, on the authority of Hammad
ibn Amr, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the authority
of his father (MGB), on the authority of his grandfather (MGB), on the
authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) told
Abuzar - may God have Mercy upon him, “O Abuzar! I admonish you against
begging from the people since that implies debasement at the present
time, and it will be pursued by poverty. It will also have a lot of
Reckoning on the Resurrection Day. O Abuzar! You live alone and you will
die alone. You will enter Paradise alone, too. Some of the people of
Iraq will be blessed enough to make the ablutions for the deceased for
your corpse, shroud you and bury you. O Abuzar! Do not beg, but take
what you are given.” Then the Prophet (MGB) asked his companions, “Do
you want me to tell you about the most wicked one of you?” They said, “O
Prophet of God! Yes.” The Prophet (MGB) said, “They are those who gossip
about other people and cause discord among friends. They are those who
wrongfully find fault with the good people.”

##### ثلاثة اخوة بين كل واحد منهم وبين الذى يليه عشر سنين

#### 3-247 حدثنا الحسن بن محمد بن يحيى العلوي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني جدي قال: حدثنا الحسين بن محمد قال: حدثنا ابن أبي السري قال: حدثنا هشام ابن محمد بن السائب، عن أبيه، عن أبي صالح، عن ابن عباس قال: كان بين طالب وعقيل عشر سنين، وبين عقيل وجعفر عشر سنين، وبين جعفر وعلي عليه السلام عشر سنين، وكان علي عليه السلام أصغرهم.

##### ذل الناس بعد ثلاثة أشياء

#### 3-248 حدثنا الحسن بن محمد بن يحيى العلوي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني جدي قال: حدثنا داود قال: حدثنا عيسى بن عبدالرحمن بن صالح قال: حدثنا أبومالك الجنبي عن عمر بن بشر الهمداني قال:قلت لابي إسحاق: متى ذل الناس قال: حين قتل الحسين بن علي عليهما السلام، وادعي زياد، وقتل حجر بن عدي.

##### في السؤال ثلاث خصال، وشر الناس ثلاثة

#### 3-249 حدثنا محمد بن علي بن الشاه قال: حدثنا أبوحامد قال: حدثنا أبويزيد أحمد بن خالد الخالدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن صالح التميمي، عن أبيه قال: حدثنا محمد بن حاتم القطان، عن حماد بن عمرو، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله لابي ذر رحمة الله عليه: يا أباذر إياك والسؤال فانه ذل حاضر، وفقر تتعجله، وفيه حساب طويل يوم القيامة يا أباذر تعيش وحدك، وتموت وحدك، وتدخل الجنة وحدك، يسعد بك قوم من أهل العراق يتولون غسلك وتجهيزك ودفنك، يا أباذر لا تسأل بكفك وإن أتاك شيء فاقبله، ثم قال عليه السلام لاصحابه: ألا اخبركم بشراركم؟ قالوا: بلى يا رسول الله، قال: المشاؤون بالنميمة، المفرقون بين الاحبة، الباغون للبرآء العيب.

IT IS NOT ALLOWED FOR ONE TO BE ON NO TALKING TERMS WITH HIS MUSLIM BROTHER FOR MORE THAN THREE DAYS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-250 Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bandar narrated that Abul Abbas al-Himady
quoted Muhammad ibn Ali al-Zayeq, on the authority of
Al-Qa’nabi**[[311]](footnotes_1.htm#b0311)** , on the authority of Ibn
Abi Za’eb**[[312]](footnotes_1.htm#b0312)** , on the authority of Ibn
Shahab, on the authority of Anas ibn
Malik**[[313]](footnotes_1.htm#b0313)** that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“It is not allowed for one to be on no talking terms with his Muslim
brother for more than three days.”

3-251 Ahmad ibn Zyad ibn Ja’far al-Hamedany - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Himran, on the authority of his father that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB)
said, “I despise any two believers who are on no talking terms for more
than three days.” He (MGB) was asked, “Well. This is fair enough for the
oppressor. But what about the oppressed one?” The Imam (MGB) said, “Why
doesn’t the oppressed one go to the oppressor and ask him to excuse him
so that they are on talking terms as before?”

THREE FORMS OF PROSPERITY FOR A MUSLIM
--------------------------------------

3-252 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Ibn Khozaymeh quoted Abu Musa on
the authority of Al-Zah’hak ibn Mokhlid, on the authority of Sufyan, on
the authority of Habib, on the authority of Jameel - the servant of
Abdul Harith, on the authority of Nafe’ah ibn Abdul Harith that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “Having a large house, a good neighbor and a good
vehicle makes for prosperity for a Muslim.”

3-253 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Ibn Khozaymeh quoted Abu Musa,
on the authority of Abdul Rahman, on the authority of Sufyan, on the
authority of Al-A’amash, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Meshar, on the
authority of Kharashat ibn al-Hor, on the authority of Abuzar that the
Prophet (MGB) said, “God would not speak to three people: the one who
mentions it whenever he does someone a favour; the one who is really
arrogant and shows it; and the one who falsely advertises his own
goods.”

THE THREE TRULY SINCERE BELIEVERS
---------------------------------

3-254 Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Isma’il narrated that Al-Nue’man ibn Abil
Dalhas al-Baladi quoted Al-Hussein ibn Abdul Rahman, on the authority of
Ubaydullah ibn Musa, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Layli that
God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The truly sincere believers are three: Ali
ibn Abi Talib (MGB), Habib - the
carpenter**[[314]](footnotes_1.htm#b0314)** , and the believer from the
family of Pharaoh (Hizkil**[[315]](footnotes_1.htm#b0315)**).”

##### لا هجرة فوق ثلاث

#### 3-250 حدثنا محمد بن جعفر البندار قال: حدثنا أبوالعباس الحمادي قال: حدثنا محمد بن علي الصايغ قال: حدثنا القعنبي قال: حدثنا ابن أبي ذئب، عن ابن شهاب، عن أنس بن مالك قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: لا يحل للمسلم أن يهجر أخاه فوق ثلاث.

#### 3-251 حدثنا أحمد بن زياد بن جعفر الهمداني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن محمد بن حمران، عن أبيه، عن أبي جعفر الباقر عليهما السلام أنه قال:

#### مامن مؤمنين اهتجرا فوق ثلاث إلا وبرئت منهما في الثالثة، فقيل له: يا ابن رسول الله هذا حال الظالم فما بال المظلوم؟ فقال عليه السلام: ما بال المظلوم لا يصير إلى الظالم فيقول: أنا الظالم حتى يصطلحا.

##### ثلاثة من سعادة المسلم

#### 3-252 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرني ابن خزيمة قال: حدثنا أبوموسى قال: حدثنا الضحاك بن مخلد، عن سفيان، عن حبيب، عن جميل مولى عبد الحارث عن نافع بن عبد الحارث قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:من سعادة المسلم سعة المسكن والجار الصالح، والمركب الهنئ.

##### ثلاثة لا يكلمهم الله عز وجل

#### 3-253 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا ابن خزيمة قال: حدثنا أبوموسى قال: حدثنا عبدالرحمن قال: حدثنا سفيان، عن الاعمش، عن سليمان بن مسهر، عن خرشة بن الحر، عن أبي ذر، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: ثلاثة لا يكلمهم الله: المنان الذي لا يعطي شيئا إلا بمنه، والمسبل إزاره والمنفق سلعته بالحلف الفاجر.

##### الصديقون ثلاثة

#### 3-254 أخبرني محمد بن علي بن إسماعيل قال: حدثنا النعمان بن أبي الدلهاث البلدي قال: حدثنا الحسين بن عبدالرحمن قال: حدثنا عبيد الله بن موسى، عن محمد ابن أبي ليلى قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:الصديقون ثلاثة: علي بن أبي طالب، وحبيب النجار، ومؤمن آل فرعون.

THE THREE COMPANIONS OF THE MOUNTAIN
------------------------------------

3-255 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Muhammad Ibn Ishaq al-Suraj
quoted Abu Homam al-Walid ibn Shoja’a al-Sakoony, on the authority of
Ali ibn Meshar, on the authority of Ubaydullah ibn Umar, on the
authority of Nafe’ah, on the authority of Ibn Umar that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “Three of the folks that were among you were going somewhere
when it suddenly started to rain. They rushed into a cave, but some
rocks closed off the cave and trapped them there. One of them told the
others, ‘O so and so! I swear by God that only honesty will save us.
Each of us should pray to God using what he honestly knows is true.’
Then one of them said, ‘O my God! You well know that I hired someone to
do something for me. His wage was a cup of rice which he entrusted me
with and went somewhere. I planted it and it grew. I bought a herd of
cows with what I harvested. When he returned to me and asked for his cup
of rice I told him, ‘Here you go. Look at this herd of cows. Take them.
O God! You well know that I did that due to fearing You. So please open
the rocks for us. Then the rock opened up a little. The second one said,
‘O my God! You well know that I had old parents. I took goat’s milk for
them every night. One night I was late and they had fallen asleep when I
arrived. I could not give them any goat milk to drink. I did not want to
wake them up to drink. I also feared that if I return, they might wake
up to drink their milk and not find me there. Therefore, I stayed up all
night until they woke up at dawn to drink their milk. You know that I
did that due to fearing You. Then please open the rocks for us.’ Then
the rock opened up a little bit more such that they could see the sky.
The third one said, ‘O my God! You know that I had a niece whom I loved
the most. I wanted to make love to her. She refused and made a condition
for me to give her one-hundred Dinars. I worked hard and earned that
one-hundred Dinars. I took the money to her and gave it to her. She let
me in. Once I was settled in between her legs she said, ‘Fear God and do
not unjustly break the hymen.’ I got up and left the money for her. You
should know that I did that due to fearing You. Then please open the
rocks for us.’ Then the Honorable the Exalted God opened up the rocks
for them and they left the cave.”

THE BEST DEEDS IN THE OPINION OF THE HONORABLE THE EXALTED GOD ARE THREE
------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-256 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Abul Qasim al-Boqavy quoted
Ali - that is Ibn al-Ja’ed, on the authority of Al-Shu’bat, on the
authority of Al-Walid ibn al-Ayzar ibn Hareeth, on the authority of Aba
Amr al-Sheibany, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Masood, on the
authority of the Prophet (MGB), “Indeed the best deeds in the Opinion of
God are praying, kindness and participating in a holy war.”
**[[316]](footnotes_1.htm#b0316)**

##### اصحاب الرقيم ثلاثة

#### 3-255 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا محمد بن إسحاق السراج قال: حدثنا أبوهمام الوليد بن شجاع السكوني قال: حدثنا علي بن مسهر قال: حدثنا عبيد الله بن عمر، عن نافع، عن ابن عمر قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: بينا ثلاثة نفر فيمن كان قبلكم يمشون إذ أصابهم مطر فأووا إلى غار فانطبق عليهم فقال بعضهم لبعض: يا هؤلاء والله ما ينجيكم إلا الصدق فليدع كل رجل منكم بما يعلم الله عز وجل أنه قد صدق فيه، فقال أحدهم: اللهم إن كنت تعلم أنه كان لي أجير عمل لي عملا على فرق من أرز فذهب وتركه فزرعته، فصار من أمره أني اشتريت من ذلك الفرق بقرا، ثم أتاني فطلب أجره فقلت: اعمد إلى تلك البقر فسقها فقال:إنما لي عندك فرق من أرز فقلت: اعمد إلى تلك البقر فسقها فانها من ذلك، فساقها.فان كنت تعلم أني فعلت ذلك من خشيتك ففرج عنا، فانساحت الصخرة عنهم. وقال الآخر: اللهم إن كنت تعلم أنه كان لي أبوان شيخان كبيران فكنت آتيهما كل ليلة بلبن غنم لي فأبطأت عليهما ذات ليلة فأتيتهما وقد رقدا، وأهلي وعيالي يتضاعون من الجوع، فكنت لا أسقيهم حتى يشرب أبواي فكرهت أن اوقظهما من رقدتهما وكرهت أن أرجع فيستيقظا لشربهما، فلم أزل أنتظرهما حتى طلع الفجر، فان كنت تعلم أني فعلت ذلك من خشيتك ففرج عنا، فانساحت عنهم الصخرة حتى نظروا إلى السماء. وقال الاخر: اللهم إن كنت تعلم أنه كانت لي ابنة عم أحب الناس إلي، وأني راودتها عن نفسها، فأبت علي إلا أن آتيها بمائة دينار فطلبتها حتى قدرت عليها فجئت بها فدفعتها إليها فأمكنتني من نفسها، فلما قعدت بين رجليها قالت: اتق الله ولا تفض الخاتم إلا بحقه فقمت عنها وتركت لها المائة، فان كنت تعلم أني فعلت ذلك من خشيتك ففرج عنا ففرج الله عز وجل عنهم فخرجوا.

##### أحب الاعمال إلى الله عز وجل ثلاثة

#### 3-256 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا أبوالقاسم البغوي قال: حدثنا علي يعني ابن الجعد قال: حدثنا شعبة قال: أخبرنا الوليد بن العيزار بن حريث قال: سمعت أبا عمرو الشيباني قال: حدثني عبد الله بن مسعود، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: إن أحب الاعمال إلى الله الصلاة والبر والجهاد.

THE PEOPLE ARE IN THREE GROUPS
------------------------------

3-257 Abul Hassan Muhammad ibn Ali ibn ash-Shah narrated that Abu Ishaq
al-Khavas quoted Muhammad ibn Yunus al-Kadimi, on the authority of
Sufyan ibn Vaki’a**[[317]](footnotes_1.htm#b0317)** , on the authority
of his father, on the authority of Sufyan al-Sowri, on the authority of
Mansoor, on the authority of Mujahid, on the authority of Komayl ibn
Zyad, “Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) came to me, took my hand and took me out
to the desert (outside of the town of Kufa). He sat down. I sat down,
too. Then he (MGB) raised his head up and told me, ‘O Komayl! Remember
what I will tell you. The people are in three groups: divine scholars;
students seeking to be saved; and the pests in the air which fly in
whichever direction the wind blows. They are the ones who have not
benefitted from any rays of knowledge and have not sought refuge in any
strong base. O Komayl! Knowledge is better than wealth. Knowledge will
guard you, but you must guard your wealth. Wealth will be reduced once
spent, but knowledge will increase when it is spread. O Komayl!
Expressing love by the students for the scholars is in return for what
they have borrowed from them (i.e. their knowledge). Students must obey
their teachers for as long as they are alive and should honor their
names after their death. There will be no return of wealth once it is
lost. O Komayl! Those who hoard up wealth are the living dead! The
scholars are the ones who are alive. They shall even survive after their
death to the end of time. Their bodies shall perish, but their teachings
shall be living in the people’s hearts. Yes, there exists in here (while
he was pointing to his heart) an endless treasure of knowledge. I wish I
could find good students who deserved to receive it. I have a student
who learns it, but is not trustworthy. He uses the religion as a tool to
gain worldly benefits. He oppresses the servants of God using God’s
Proofs and overcomes them using God’s Blessings. He does so to gather
the weak and uneducated people around himself to support him, and oppose
the true Friend of God. I have another student who is a sincere follower
of his teacher, but he is not wise enough to be able to retain his
knowledge. He starts to doubt things with the slightest bit of doubt in
his heart. I have another student who is neither like the former nor
like the latter. However, he delves into pleasure-seeking. He is
extremely lustful and in love with worldly treasures. Neither of these
can propagate the religion. They are more or less like the four-legged
animals. Therefore, knowledge will vanish upon the death of the one who
possesses it. I swear by God that the Earth shall not be left void of
God’s Proof**[[318]](footnotes_1.htm#b0318)** . It will either be
apparent, but oppressed by the oppressors, hidden behind curtains, on
deep waves and invisible to the eyes so that God’s Proofs and His Clear
Signs do not get destroyed.

##### الناس ثلاثة

#### 3-257 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن علي بن الشاه قال: حدثنا أبوإسحاق الخواص قال: حدثنا محمد بن يونس الكديمي، عن سفيان بن وكيع عن أبيه، عن سفيان الثوري، عن منصور، عن مجاهد، عن كميل بن زياد قال:خرج إلي علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام فأخذ بيدي وأخرجني إلى الجبان وجلس وجلست،ثم رفع رأسه إلي فقال: ياكميل احفظ عني ما أقول لك: الناس ثلاثة: عالم رباني، ومتعلم على سبيل نجاة، وهمج رعاع، أتباع كل ناعق، يميلون مع كل ريح، لم يستضيئوا بنور العلم، ولم يلجئوا إلى ركن وثيق،يا كميل العلم خير من المال، العلم يحرسك وأنت تحرس المال، والمال تنقصه النفقة، والعلم يزكو على الانفاق، يا كميل محبة العالم دين يدان به تكسبه الطاعة في حياته وجميل الاحدوثة بعد وفاته فمنفعة المال تزول بزواله،يا كميل مات خزان الاموال وهم أحياء والعلماء باقون ما بقي الدهر، أعيانهم مفقودة وأمثالهم في القلوب موجودة هاه [و] إن هاهنا، وأشار بيده إلى صدره، لعلما جما، لو أصبت له حملة، بلى أصبت لقنا غير مأمون، يستعمل آلة الدين في الدنيا ويستظهر بحجج الله على خلقه وبنعمه على عباده ليتخذه الضعفاء وليجة من دون ولي الحق، أو منقادا لحملة العلم لا بصيرة له في أحنائه يقدح الشك في قلبه بأول عارض من شبهة، ألا لاذا ولا ذاك، فمنهوم باللذات، سلس القياد أو مغري بالجمع والادخار، ليسا من رعاة الدين، أقرب شبها بهما الانعام السائمة، كذلك يموت العلم بموت حامليه، اللهم بلى لا تخلو الارض من قائم بحجة ظاهر أو خاف مغمور لئلا تبطل حجج الله وبيناته.

How many of them are there? They are small in number, but are always of
the highest rank. It is through them that God will retain His Proofs and
Clear Signs so that they may entrust them to worthy men like themselves;
and can foster them in the hearts of those who are similar to
themselves. They have delved deeply into the affairs of the world and
have attained the utmost level of certitude. What is extremely difficult
for the lovers of this world is easy for them. They are accustomed to
what the illiterate ones evade. Their bodies are in this world, but
their souls are eager for the heavens. O Komayl! Your masters are God’s
successors and the ones who invite others to His Religion. O I am very
eager to see them. I beseech God’s forgiveness for both you and I.”

The compiler of this book - may God be pleased with him - said, “I have
reported this tradition in many various ways in the book Kamal ad-Din wa
Itamam an-Ne’mat Fi Isbat al-Qaybat va Kashf al-Hayrat.”

THE LIGHT THAT IS DIVIDED INTO THREE PARTS
------------------------------------------

3-258 Abu Ali al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Muhammad al-Attar narrated that
Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Isma’il ibn al-Hussein ibn al-Qasim ibn al-Hassan
ibn Zayd (ibn al-Hassan) ibn al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB)
quoted Muhammad ibn Amer al-Nahavandi, on the authority of Amr ibn Abdus
al-Mohandis, on the authority of Hani ibn al-Mutevakil, on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Ayaz ibn Abdullah ibn Abi Raf’e, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of his grandfather, on the
authority of Abi Ayoob Al-Ansari that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “When
the Honorable the Exalted God created Paradise, He created it from the
Light of the Throne. Then God took some of that Light and spread it. I
received one-third of that Light. One-third of it reached Fatimah (MGB).
One-third reached Ali (MGB) and the members of his household (MGB).
Whoever is touched by this Light shall fall in love with the Household
of Muhammad. Whoever is untouched by this Light is in darkness being
outside the friendship of the Household of Muhammad.”

THE THREE REASONS WHY PEOPLE WORSHIP GOD
----------------------------------------

3-259 Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Senani al-Mokattib - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Harun al-Soofi quoted Ubaydullah ibn
Musa al-Hibal al-Tabary, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hussein
al-Khisahab, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Mohsin, on the authority
of Yunus ibn Zabyan that Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “There
are three reasons why the people worship the Exalted the Honorable God.
Some worship God in order to receive a reward. Such form of worship is
that of greedy people. Some worship God out of fear of

#### وكم وأين؟! أولئك الاقلون عددا الاعظمون خطرا، بهم يحفظ الله حججه حتى يودعوها نظراء‌هم، ويزرعوها في قلوب أشباههم، هجم بهم العلم على حقائق الامور، فباشروا روح اليقين، واستلانوا ما استوعره المترفون، وأنسوا بما استوحش منه الجاهلون، صحبوا الدنيا بأبدان أرواحها معلقة بالمحل الاعلى، يا كميل اولئك خلفاء الله والدعاة إلى دينه، هاي هاي شوقا إلى رؤيتهم، وأستغفر الله لي ولكم.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: قد رويت هذا الخبر من طرق كثيرة، قد أخرجتها في كتاب كمال الدين وتمام النعمة في إثبات الغيبة وكشف الحيرة.

##### ذكر النور الذى جعل ثلاثة أثلاث

#### 3-258 حدثنا أبوعلي الحسن بن علي بن محمد العطار قال: حدثنا محمد بن علي بن إسماعيل بن الحسين بن القاسم بن الحسن بن زيد [بن الحسن] بن الحسن بن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام قال: حدثنا علي بن محمد بن عامر النهاوندي، عن عمر [و] ابن عبدوس المهندس قال: حدثنا هانئ بن المتوكل، عن محمد بن علي بن عياض بن عبد الله ابن أبي رافع، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن أبي أيوب الانصاري قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: لما خلق الله عز وجل الجنة خلقها من نور العرش، ثم أخذ من ذلك النور فقذفه فأصابني ثلث النور، وأصاب فاطمة ثلث النور، وأصاب عليا وأهل بيته ثلث النور، فمن أصابه من ذلك النور اهتدى إلى ولاية آل محمد، ومن لم يصبه من ذلك النور ضل عن ولاية آل محمد.

##### الناس يعبدون الله عز وجل على ثلاثة اوجه

#### 3-259 حدثنا محمد بن أحمد السناني المكتب رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن هارون الصوفي قال: حدثنا عبيد الله بن موسى الحبال الطبري قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسين الخشاب قال: حدثنا محمد بن محصن، عن يونس بن ظبيان قال: قال الصادق جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام: إن الناس يعبدون الله عز وجل على ثلاثة أوجه، فطبقة يعبدونه رغبة في ثوابه فتلك عبادة الحرصاء وهو الطمـع، وآخـرون

the Fire. Such form of worship is due to fear. I worship God since I
love the Exalted the Honorable God. Such form of worship is that of
noble ones. There is security in it as stated by the Honorable the
Exalted God, ‘… and they will be secure from terror that
Day’**[[319]](footnotes_1.htm#b0319)** and ‘Say: If ye do love God,
Follow me: God will love you and forgive you your sins:
….’**[[320]](footnotes_1.htm#b0320)** Therefore, the Exalted the
Honorable God loves whomever loves God. Whoever the Honorable the
Exalted God loves is amongst the secure ones.”

THREE CONDITIONS SET BY THE COMMANDER OF THE FAITHFUL ALI
---------------------------------------------------------

3-260 Abu Mansoor Ahmad ibn Ibrahim
al-Jowzi**[[321]](footnotes_1.htm#b0321)** narrated that Zayd ibn
Muhammad al-Baghdady quoted on the authority of Abul Qasim Abdullah
Muhammad al-Ta’ee in Basra, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB), on the authority of his father
(MGB), on the authority of his forefathers that a man invited Ali ibn
Abi Talib (MGB) to his house. The Imam (MGB) accepted with three
conditions. The man said, “O Commander of the Faithful! What are they?”
The Imam (MGB) said, “That you bring nothing for me from outside of the
house; that you do not deny me of anything that is in the house; and
that you do not burden your wife on my behalf.” The man said, “Fine.”
Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) accepted his invitation.

THREE CHARACTERISTICS OF IMAM ALI
---------------------------------

3-261 Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Taleqani - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Ado’we quoted Ebad ibn
Saheeb (ibn Ebad ibn Saheeb), on the authority of his father, on the
authority of his forefather, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq (MGB), “A man asked the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali
(MGB) about his medium height, big belly and lack of hair on his
forehead. The Commander of the Faithful (MGB) replied, ‘The Blessed the
Sublime God has created me neither tall nor short, but of medium height
so that I can cut a short enemy into two pieces from head to toe, and
cut a tall enemy into two pieces from his waist. My belly is big since
the Prophet (MGB) opened up to me a gate of knowledge from which a
thousand doors to knowledge shall open up. Therefore, knowledge gathered
up in my belly. And the reason why there is no hair on my forehead is
that I have always worn a head armor and gone to fight with the enemy.”

THREE TRADITIONS ESTABLISHED ASCRIBED TO BARIRA - THE FREED MAID OF AYESHA
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-262 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Isa and Abdullah ibn Muhammad ibn Isa,

#### يعبدونه فرقا من النار فتلك عبادة العبيد وهي الرهبة، ولكني أعبده حبا له عز وجل فتلك عبادة الكرام وهو الامن لقوله عز وجل "وهم من فزع يومئذ آمنون" ولقوله عز وجل "قل إن كنتم تحبون الله فاتبعوني يحببكم الله ويغفر لكم ذنوبكم" فمن أحب الله أحبه الله عز وجل، ومن أحبه الله عز وجل كان من الآمنين. {.t0}

##### ضمن أمير المؤمنين من أضافه ثلاث خصال

#### 3-260 حدثنا أبومنصور أحمد بن إبراهيم الجوزي قال: حدثنا زيد بن محمد البغدادي قال: حدثنا أبوالقاسم عبد الله بن أحمد الطائي بالبصرة قال: حدثنا علي ابن موسى الرضا، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام أنه دعاه رجل فقال له علي عليه السلام: على أن تضمن لي ثلاث خصال، قال: وما هي يا أمير المؤمنين؟ قال: لا تدخل علينا شيئا من خارج، ولا تدخر عني شيئا في البيت، ولا تجحف بالعيال قال: ذلك لك، فأجابه علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام.

##### ثلاث كن في أمير المؤمنين

#### 3-261 حدثنا محمد بن إبراهيم بن إسحاق الطالقاني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا الحسن بن علي العدوي، عن عباد بن صهيب [بن عباد صهيب] عن أبيه، عن جده عن جعفر بن محمد عليه السلام قال: سأل رجل أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام فقال له: أسألك عن ثلاث هن فيك: أسألك عن قصر خلقك، وعن كبر بطنك، وعن صلع رأسك فقال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: إن الله تبارك وتعالى لم يخلقني طويلا، ولم يخلقني قصيرا، ولكن خلقني معتدلا، أضرب القصير فأقده، وأضرب الطويل فأقطه وأما كبر بطني فان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله علمني بابا من العلم ففتح لي ذلك الباب ألف باب فازدحم العلم في بطني فنفجت عنه عضوي وأما صلع رأسي فمن إدمان لبس البيض ومجالدة الاقران.

##### جرت في بريرة مولاة عائشة ثلاث من السنن

#### 3-262 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد وعبد الله ابني محمـد بن عيسـى، عن محمـد بن أبـي

on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Hammad
ibn Uthman al-Nab, on the authority of Ubaydullah ibn Ali Al-Halabi that
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Barira was a married slave.
Ayesha**[[322]](footnotes_1.htm#b0322)** bought her and set her free.
Then the Prophet (MGB) gave her the choice to stay with her husband or
not as she willed. Those who had sold Barira to Ayesha had set a
condition that if she ever decided to set her free, they would have the
right to set her free or not. However, the Prophet of God (MGB) said,
‘It is the right of the one who has bought the slave to set it free or
not. This right cannot be reverted to the previous owners of the slave.’
So Ayesha set her free. On one occasion when Barira was given some meat
in charity, she brought it for the Prophet (MGB). Ayesha hung the meat
on a nail and said, ‘The Prophet (MGB) would not eat anything given in
charity.’ When the Prophet (MGB) came home and saw that meat, he (MGB)
asked, ‘Why did you not cook it?’ Ayesha said, ‘That was given to Barira
in charity and she brought it for us. You do not eat anything given away
in charity.’ The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘That is considered charity for her
and a gift for us.’ Then they cooked that meat. Thus, these three
traditions were established.

THREE PEOPLE ASCRIBED LIES TO GOD’S PROPHET (MGB)
-------------------------------------------------

3-263 Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Taleqani - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Abdul Aziz ibn Yahya quoted Muhammad ibn
Zakariya, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Am’marat, on the
authority of his father that he had heard Ja’far ibn Muhammad al-Baqir
(MGB) say, “There were three people who ascribed lies to God’s Prophet
(MGB): Abu Hurayrah, Anas ibn Malik**[[323]](footnotes_1.htm#b0323)** ,
and a woman.”

THREE PEOPLE ARE CURSED: THE RIDER, THE LEADER AND THE DRIVER
-------------------------------------------------------------

3-264 Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Saqr al-Sa’eq Baleri narrated that Abu
Hussayn Muhammad ibn Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Zyad al-Za’ferani quoted
Abil Ahvas, on the authority of Abu Bakr ibn Abi Shoyba’, on the
authority of Abu Qisan, on the authority of Hamid ibn Abdul Rahman, on
the authority of Al-A’amash, on the authority of Amr ibn Mar’rat, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn al-Harith, on the authority of Abdullah ibn
Malik az-Zubaydi, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Umar, “Abu Sufyan was
riding on a camel. Muawiyah was leading the camel, and Yazid was driving
the camel. Then God’s Prophet (MGB) cursed the rider, the leader and the
driver.”

THREE GREAT OFFENSES
--------------------

3-265 Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Senani al-Mokattib - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Zakariya al-Qat’tan quoted Bakr
ibn Abdullah ibn Habib, on the authority of Tamim ibn Buhlool, on

#### عمير، عن حماد بن عثمان الناب، عن عبيد الله بن علي الحلبي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام أنه ذكر أن بريرة كانت عند زوج لها وهي مملوكة فاشترتها عائشة فأعتقتها فخيرها رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إن شاء‌ت أن تقر عند زوجها وإن شاء‌ت فارقته، وكان مواليها الذين باعوها قد اشترطوا على عائشة أن لهم ولاء‌ها فقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: "الولاء لمن أعتق". وصدق على بريرة بلحم فأهدته إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله فعلقته عائشة، وقالت: إن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله لا يأكل الصدقة، فجاء رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله واللحم معلق فقال: ما شأن هذا اللحم لم يطبخ؟ قالت: يا رسول الله صدق به على بريرة فأهدته لنا، وأنت لا تأكل الصدقة. فقال: "هو لها صدقة ولنا هدية"، ثم أمر بطبخه فجرت فيها ثلاث من السنن. {.t0}

##### ثلاثة كانوا يكذبون على رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله

#### 3-263 حدثنا محمد بن إبراهيم بن إسحاق الطالقاني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبدالعزيز بن يحيى قال: حدثني محمد بن زكريا قال: حدثنا جعفر بن محمد بن عمارة، عن أبيه قال: سمعت جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام يقول: ثلاثة كانوا يكذبون على رسول الله أبوهريرة، وأنس بن مالك، وامرأة.

##### ثلاثة ملعونون: قائد وسائق وراكب

#### 3-264 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن الصقر الصايغ قال: حدثني أبوحصين محمد بن جعفر بن محمد بن زياد الزعفراني، عن أبي الاحوص قال: حدثنا أبوبكر بن أبي شيبة قال: حدثنا أبوغسان قال: حدثنا حميد بن عبدالرحمن قال: حدثنا الاعمش، عن عمرو بن مرة، عن عبد الله بن الحارث، عن عبد الله بن مالك الزبيدي، عن عبد الله بن عمر [و] أن أبا سفيان ركب بعيرا له ومعاوية يقوده ويزيد يسوق به فلعن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله الراكب والقائد والسائق.

##### ثلاثة لا أدري أيهم أعظم جرما

#### 3-265 حدثنا محمد بن أحمد السناني المكتب رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن يحيي بن زكريا القطان عن بكر بن عبد الله بن حبيب عن تميم بن بهلول، عن أبيه،

the authority of his father, on the authority of Abdullah ibn al-Fazl
al-Hashemi that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Of the following
three I do not really know which one is a greater offense than the
others. The first is following a funeral procession without having on
one’s robe. The second is striking one’s buttocks with the hand at times
of calamities. The third one is saying ‘Be benign to him. Have mercy
upon him. May God have mercy upon you’ when attending a funeral
procession.”

3-266 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted
Al-Nawfaly, on the authority of Al-Sakoony, on the authority of Ja’far
ibn Muhammad (MGB)**[[324]](footnotes_1.htm#b0324)** , on the authority
of his father (MGB)**[[325]](footnotes_1.htm#b0325)** , on the authority
of his forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “Of the following three I do not really know which
one is a greater offense than the others. The first is following a
funeral procession without one’s robe. The second is saying ‘be benign
to him.’ And the third one is saying ‘Seek God’s forgiveness for him.
May God forgive you. (when attending a funeral procession).’”

THREE PROPHETIC TRADITIONS ASCRIBED TO AL-BARA’ AL-ANSARI
---------------------------------------------------------

3-267 Ahmad ibn Zyad ibn Ja’far al-Hamedany - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Amr ibn Uthman, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Mus’ab
that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Three traditions were ascribed
to Al-Bara’ ibn Ma’rur al-Ansari**[[326]](footnotes_1.htm#b0326)** . The
people used to clean themselves up with stones when they went to the
toilet. Once Al-Bara’ ibn Ma’rur had eaten a lot of pumpkin so he got
diarrhea and washed himself with water after going to the toilet. Then
the Honorable the Exalted God revealed the following verse, ‘…For Allah
loves those who turn to Him constantly and He loves those who keep
themselves pure and clean.’**[[327]](footnotes_1.htm#b0327)**
Thereafter, washing up with water after going to the toilet became
established as a tradition.

Al-Bara’ ibn Ma’rur al-Ansari was outside Medina when he was about to
pass away. He asked that he be turned facing the Prophet (MGB) who was
in Medina, and willed that one-third of his inheritance be spent in
charity. Thus, these three acts became established traditions.”

THREE PROPHETIC TRADITIONS ASCRIBED TO SAFVAN AL-JAHMI
------------------------------------------------------

3-268 Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “There are three Prophetic
traditions which were ascribed to the Umayyad Safvan ibn la-Jahmi. He
made seventy shields with fire. The Prophet (MGB) wanted to borrow them
from him (MGB). Safvan asked, ‘O Muhammad! Are you going to take them
from me by force?’ The Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘No. I will borrow them
from you and I will return them to you later.’

#### عن عبد الله بن الفضل الهاشمي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ثلاثة لا أدري أيهم أعظم جرما: الذي يمشي خلف جنازة في مصيبة غيره بغير رداء، أو الذي يضرب يده على فخذه عند المصيبة، أو الذي يقول: ارفقوا به وترحموا عليه يرحمكم الله. {.t0}

#### 3-266 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن النوفلي، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ثلاثة لا أدري أيهم أعظم جرما الذي يمشي مع الجنازة بغير رداء، والذي يقول: ارفقوا به، والذي يقول: استغفروا له غفر الله لكم.

##### جرت في البراء بن معرور الانصارى ثلاث من السنن

#### 3-267 حدثنا أحمد بن زياد بن جعفر الهمداني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن عمرو بن عثمان، عن الحسين بن مصعب، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: جرت في البراء بن معرور الانصاري ثلاث من السنن أما اوليهن فان الناس كانوا يستنجون بالاحجار فأكل البراء بن معرور الدباء فلان بطنه فاستنجى بالماء فأنزل الله عز وجل فيه "إن الله يحب التوابين ويحب المتطهرين" فجرت السنة في الاستنجاء بالماء. فلما حضرته الوفاة كان غائبا عن المدينة فأمر أن يحول وجهه إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله. وأوصى بالثلث من ماله. فنزل الكتاب بالقبلة، وجرت السنة بالثلث.

##### جرت في صفوان بن امية الجمحي ثلاث من السنن

#### 3-268 قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام جرت في صفوان بن امية الجمحي ثلاث من السنن: استعار منه رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله سبعين درعا حطمية فقال: أغصبا يا محمد؟ قال: بل عارية مؤداة.

He asked, ‘O Prophet of God! Will you return them to me before my
migration (from Mecca to Medina)?’ The Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘There
will be no migration after victory.’ Safvan was sleeping in the
Prophet's Mosque with his cloak under his head. He went to the toilet.
Upon his return he noticed that someone had stolen his cloak. He yelled,
‘Someone stole my cloak!’ and ran out of the mosque to find the thief.
He saw it in the hands of a man outside the mosque. He brought that man
to the Prophet (MGB). The Prophet (MGB) ordered that man’s hand to be
cut off. Safvan said, ‘O Prophet of God! If his hand will be cut off
because of my cloak, I will donate it to him.’ The Prophet (MGB) said,
‘No. His hand would not have been cut off if you had forgiven him before
bringing him to me, and before my issuing the decree to cut off his
hand.’”

3-269 There are three ranks for Sa’ed ibn
Ma’az**[[328]](footnotes_1.htm#b0328)** in Islam possessing any of which
would suffice the whole nation.**[[329]](footnotes_1.htm#b0329)**

THREE GROUPS SEEK KNOWLEDGE
---------------------------

3-270 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn al-Hussein al-Sa’ed Abady quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the
authority of Abil Jarud Zyad ibn al-Monzar, on the authority of Sa’id
ibn Alaqat that the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said,
“Those who seek knowledge can be classified into three groups. You can
distinguish them from each other by their characteristics and signs.
There are those who seek knowledge due to their haughtiness and
ignorance. There are those who seek knowledge so that they may rebel and
deceive others. There are also those who seek knowledge to learn and
become intelligent. Those who seek knowledge due to their haughtiness
and ignorance disturb the people with their acts when they are in a
group. They have a God-fearing outer look, while they are void of any
piety. May God break their backs and cut off their noses! Those who seek
knowledge due to their haughtiness and ignorance always rush ahead of
their colleagues and make a lot of noise. They bow down to those who are
lower themselves but are wealthy. They always feed on them and sell
their religion. May God make them blind and uproot them. Those who seek
knowledge to learn and become intelligent do not look so well and are
sad. They wake up during the darkness of the night to pray. They will
bend down while wearing their nightwear. They act with fear and avoid
everyone except their brethren to whom they are accustomed. May God
strengthen them and save them on the Resurrection Day.”

#### فقال: يا رسول الله أقبل هجرتي، فقال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: "لا هجرة بعد الفتح". وكان راقدا في مسجد رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وتحت رأسه رداء‌ه فخرج يبول فجاء وقد سرق رداؤه، فقال: من ذهب بردائي، وخرج في طلبه فوجده في يد رجل فرفعه إلى النبي صلى الله عليه وآله، فقال: اقطعوا يده، فقال: أتقطع يده من أجل ردائي يا رسول الله؟ فأنا أهبه له، فقال: ألا كان هذا قبل أن تأتيني به، فقطعت يده.

#### 3-269 لسعد بن معاذ ثلاثة مواقف في الاسلام لو كانت واحدة منهن لجميع الناس لاكتفوا بها فضلا

##### حملة العلم على ثلاثة أصناف

#### 3-270 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين السعد آبادي قال: حدثنا أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن محمد بن سنان، عن أبي الجارود زياد بن المنذر، عن سعيد بن علاقة قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: طلبة هذا العلم على ثلاثة أصناف ألا فاعرفوهم بصفاتهم وأعيانهم: صنف منهم يتعلمون العلم للمراء والجهل، وصنف منهم يتعلمون للاستطالة والختل، وصنف منهم يتعلمون للفقه والعقل، فأما صاحب المراء والجهل تراه مؤذيا مماريا للرجال في أندية المقال، وقد تسربل بالتخشع وتخلى من الورع، فدق الله من هذا حيزومه وقطع منه خيشومه أما صاحب الاستطالة والختل فانه يستطيل على أشباهه من أشكاله ويتواضع للاغنياء من دونهم، فهو لحلوانهم هاضم، ولدينه حاطم، فأعمى الله من هذا بصره، وقطع من آثار العلماء أثره. وأما صاحب الفقه والعقل تراه ذا كأبة وحزن، قد قام الليل في حندسه، وقد انحنى في برنسه ، يعمل ويخشى خائفا وجلا من كل أحد إلا من كل فقيه من إخوانه، فشد الله من هذا أركانه، وأعطاه يوم القيامة أمانه.

##### ثلاثة من عازهم ذل

#### 3-270 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن الهيثم العجلي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أبوالعباس أحمد بن يحيى بن زكريا القطان قال: حدثنا بكر بن عبد الله بن حبيب قال: حدثنا تميم بن بهلول، عن أبيه، عن عبيد الله بن الفضل الهاشمي قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام ثلاثة من عازهم ذلك: الوالد والسلطان والغريم.

WHOEVER IS ANTAGONISTIC WITH THREE WILL BE DEBASED
--------------------------------------------------

3-271 Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Haysam al-Ajali - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Abul-Ab’bas Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Zakariya al-Qat’tan
quoted Bakr ibn Abdullah ibn Habib, on the authority of Tamim ibn
Buhlool, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Ubaydullah
ibn al-Fazl al-Hashemi that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Whoever
is antagonistic with the following three people will be debased: his
father, the King and the one who has given him a loan.”

PEOPLE ARE DIVIDED INTO THREE GROUPS WHEN CONSIDERING FATE
----------------------------------------------------------

3-272 Ahmad ibn Harun al-Fami and Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Masroor - may
God be pleased with them - narrated that Muhammad ibn Ja’far ibn Bat’tat
quoted Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saf’far, Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Mahboob,
and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Abdul-Aziz, on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Sa’id, on the
authority of Hammad ibn Isa al-Jahani, on the authority of Hurayz ibn
Abdullah, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “The people
can be classified into three groups regarding the issue of fate. There
are those who think that the Exalted the Honorable God has forced the
people to commit sins. Such people have wronged the Exalted the
Honorable God with their decree. They are atheists. There are others who
think that running all the affairs has been turned over to them. Such
people have undermined God’s Kingdom. Thus, they are atheists. There are
also those who say, ‘The Honorable the Exalted God has placed such a
burden upon His servants that they can bear. God has not overburdened
the people to such an extent which they cannot stand. Once they do good,
they praise God. And once they do bad, they seek God’s forgiveness.’
Such people are true Muslims. It is God who grants success.

##### الناس في القدر على ثلاثة اوجه

#### 3-272 حدثنا أحمد بن هارون الفامي، وجعفر بن محمد بن مسرور رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا محمد بن جعفر بن بطة قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، ومحمد بن علي ابن محبوب، ومحمد بن الحسن بن عبدالعزيز، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسين ابن سعيد، عن حماد بن عيسي الجهني، عن حريز بن عبد الله، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: الناس في القدر على ثلاثة أوجه رجل يزعم أن الله عز وجل أجبر الناس على المعاصي فهذا قد ظلم الله عز وجل في حكمه فهو كافر، ورجل يزعم أن الامر مفوض إليهم فهذا [قد] وهن الله في سلطانه فهو كافر، ورجل يقول: إن الله عز وجل كلف العباد ما يطيقون ولم يكلفهم ما لا يطيقون، فاذا أحسن حمد الله، وإذا أساء استغفر الله، فهذا مسلم بالغ، والله الموفق.
