Part 4- On Four-numbered Characteristics
========================================

**Section 1**

“I WILL INTERCEDE ON THEIR BEHALF ON THE RESURRECTION DAY”
----------------------------------------------------------

4-1 Abdullah ibn Muhammad al-Wahab narrated that Abu Nasr Mansoor ibn
Abdullah ibn Ibrahim al-Isfahani quoted on the authority of Ali ibn
Abdullah, on the authority of Davood ibn Suleiman, on the authority of
Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on the
authority of his grandfather (MGB), on the authority of his forefathers
(MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“There are four groups on whose behalf I will intercede on the
Resurrection Day: Those who honor the members of my Household after me;
those who fulfill their needs; those who try to assist them in times
they need them; and those who love them both wholeheartedly and
verbally.”

###### باب الاربعة

##### قول النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أربعة أنا الشفيع لهم يوم القيامة

#### 4-1 حدثنا عبد الله بن محمد بن عبدالوهاب قال: حدثنا أبونصر منصور بن عبد الله ابن إبراهيم الاصبهاني قال: حدثنا علي بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا داود بن سليمان، عن علي بن موسى الرضا قال: حدثني أبي، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أربعة أنا الشفيع لهم يوم القيامة ولو آتوني بذنوب أهل الارض: معين أهل بيتي، والقاضي لهم حوائجهم عندما اضطروا إليه، والمحب لهم بقلبه ولسانه، والدافع عنهم بيده.

THE PUNISHMENT OF THOSE WHO OBEY THEIR WIVES IN FOUR ISSUES
-----------------------------------------------------------

4-2 Abul Hussein Muhammad ibn Ali ibn ash-Shah narrated that Abu Hamid
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hussein quoted on the authority of Abu Yazid
Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Khalidy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn
Salih al-Tamimy, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Anas ibn Muhammad Abu Malik, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the authority of his father
(MGB), on the authority of his grandfather (MGB), on the authority of
Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) that in his will God’s Prophet (MGB) told him,
“O Ali! God will throw those who obey their wives face down into the
Fire of Hell.” Ali (MGB) asked, “What is meant by that obedience?” The
Prophet (MGB) replied, “(That obedience is) to permit one’s wife to go
to public baths, wedding parties, mourning ceremonies, and wear
transparent clothes.”

4-3 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Al-Abbas ibn Ma’ruf, on the
authority of Abi Himmam - Isma’il ibn Himmam, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Sa’id ibn Qazvan, on the authority of Al-Sakoony, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his
father (MGB)**[[330]](footnotes_1.htm#b0330)** , on the authority of his
forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB), “God will throw
whoever obeys his wife regarding four issues into the Fire..” He (MGB)
was asked, “What are they?” The Imam (MGB) replied, “Regarding wearing
transparent clothes, going to public baths, attending wedding parties
and going to mourning ceremonies.”

FOUR WHOSE PRAYERS SHALL NOT BE UNANSWERED
------------------------------------------

4-4 Abul Hussein Muhammad ibn Ali ibn ash-Shah narrated that Abu Hamid
Ahmad ibn al-Hussein quoted Abu Yazid Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Khalidy, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Salih al-Tamimy, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Anas ibn Muhammad Abu
Malik, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Ja’far ibn
Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on the
authority of his grandfather (MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn Abi
Talib (MGB) that in his will to Ali God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “O Ali,
the prayers of four classes of people are never unanswered: just rulers,
fathers when they pray for their sons, people who privately pray for
their brethren, and the oppressed. The Majestic the Glorified God says,
‘I swear by My Glory and Majesty that I will take your revenge
(referring to the oppressed) when proper.’”

##### عقوبة من أطاع امرأته في أربعة أشياء

#### 4-2 حدثنا أبوالحسين محمد بن علي بن الشاه قال: حدثنا أبوحامد أحمد بن محمد بن الحسين قال: حدثنا أبويزيد أحمد بن خالد الخالدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن صالح التميمي قال: حدثنا أبي قال: حدثنا أنس بن محمد أبومالك، عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال في وصيته له: يا علي من أطاع امرأته أكبه الله على وجهه في النار، فقال علي عليه السلام: وما تلك الطاعة؟ قال: يأذن لها في الذهاب إلى الحمامات والعرسات والنياحات، ولبس الثياب الرقاق.

#### 4-3 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن العباس بن معروف، عن أبي همام إسماعيل بن همام عن محمد بن سعيد ابن غزوان، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: من أطاع امرأته في أربعة أشياء أكبه الله على منخريه في النار قيل: وما هي؟ قال: في الثياب الرقاق والحمامات والعرسات والنياحات.

##### أربعة لاترد لهم دعوة

#### 4-4 حدثنا أبوالحسين محمد بن علي بن الشاه قال: حدثنا أبوحامد أحمد بن الحسين قال: حدثنا أبويزيد أحمد بن خالد الخالدي، عن محمد بن أحمد بن صالح التميمي قال: حدثنا أبي قال: حدثني أنس بن محمد أبومالك، عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال في وصيته له: يا علي أربعة لا ترد لهم دعوة: إمام عادل، ووالد لولده، والرجل يدعو لاخيه بظهر الغيب، والمظلوم، يقول الله جل جلالة: وعزتي وجلالي لانتصرن لك ولو بعد حين.

FOUR ISSUES STRENGTHEN THE RELIGION
-----------------------------------

4-5 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah Al-Barqy, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Jameel ibn
Dur’raj, on the authority of Zurarah that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB)
narrated that the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said, “There
are four issues that will strengthen the religion: outspoken scholars
who act according to their knowledge; rich folks who are not stingy in
assisting those who adhere to God’s Religion; poor folks who do not
outsell their religious beliefs to worldly affairs; and ignorant folks
who are not too arrogant to quest for knowledge. Once the knowledgeable
ones hide their knowledge, the rich are stingy with their wealth, the
poor trade their afterlife in exchange for this world and the ignorant
are too arrogant to seek knowledge, the world will start to retreat. At
that time you should not be fooled by the increasing number of mosques
and the many who go there.” The Imam (MGB) was asked, “O Commander of
the Faithful! How should one live at that time?” The Imam (MGB) replied,
“Associate with the people superficially. One only gets what he earns
and will be resurrected with whatever he likes. Await relief to be sent
by the Honorable the Exalted God.”

GOD FORGIVES ONE WHO TAKES IT EASY REGARDING FOUR ISSUES
--------------------------------------------------------

4-6 The jurisprudent at Sarakhs - Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Tamim
al-Sarakhsi narrated that Abu Valid Muhammad ibn Idris al-Shami quoted
Al-Hassan ibn Muhammad al-Za’ferani, on the authority of Abdul Vah’hab
ibn Ata, on the authority of Israel ibn Yunus, on the authority of Zayd
ibn Ata ibn Sa’eb, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Munkadir, on the
authority of Jabir ibn Abdullah that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The
Honorable the Exalted God forgives one who takes it easy whenever he
sells, buys, judges or has a demand.”

THE FOUR DESIRABLE THINGS FOR PEOPLE IN THIS EPHEMERAL WORLD
------------------------------------------------------------

4-7 Ahmad ibn al-Hassan al-Qat’tan narrated that Al-Hassan ibn Ali
al-Askari quoted Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Juwhary, on the authority of
Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Am’marat, on the authority of his father that
Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “The people desire four things
in this ephemeral world: wealth; comfort; easy life and respect. Wealth
comes with contentment. Whoever seeks it in having a lot of wealth shall
not find it. Comfort comes with having fewer worries. Whoever has more
things to worry about shall not find it. An easy life comes with having
very little work to do. Whoever seeks it in a lot of work shall not find
it. Respect comes with obeying the Creator. Whoever seeks it in serving
the people shall not find it.”

##### قوام الدين بأربعة

#### 4-5 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن جميل بن دراج، عن زرارة، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: قوام الدين بأربعة: بعالم ناطق مستعمل له، وبغني لا يبخل بفضله على أهل دين الله، وبفقير لا يبيع آخرته بدنياه، وبجاهل لا يتكبر عن طلب العلم. فإذا كتم العالم علمه، وبخل الغني بماله، وباع الفقير آخرته بدنياه، واستكبر الجاهل عن طلب العلم رجعت الدنيا إلى ورائها القهقرى، فلا تغرنكم كثرة المساجد وأجساد قوم مختلفة، قيل: يا أمير المؤمنين كيف العيش في ذلك الزمان، فقال: خالطوهم بالبرانيةيعني في الظاهروخالفوهم في الباطن، للمرء ما اكتسب وهو مع من أحب، وانتظروا مع ذلك الفرج من الله عز وجل.

##### غفر الله عز وجل لرجل كان سهلا في أربعة أحوال

#### 4-6 حدثنا أبونصر محمد بن أحمد بن تميم السرخسي الفقيه بسرخس قال: حدثنا أبوالوليد محمد بن إدريس الشامي قال: حدثنا الحسن بن محمد الزعفراني قال: حدثنا عبدالوهاب بن عطاء قال: حدثنا إسرائيل بن يونس، عن زيد بن عطاء بن سائب، عن محمد بن المنكدر، عن جابر بن عبد الله قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: غفر الله عز وجل لرجل كان من قبلكم كان سهلا إذا باع، سهلا إذا اشترى، سهلا إذا قضى، سهلا إذا اقتضى.

##### مطلوبات الناس في الدنيا الفانية أربعة

#### 4-7 حدثنا أحمد بن الحسن القطان قال: حدثنا الحسن بن علي السكري قال: حدثنا محمد بن زكريا الجوهري قال: حدثنا جعفر بن محمد بن عمارة، عن أبيه، قال: قال الصادق جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام: مطلوبات الناس في الدنيا الفانية أربعة: الغنى والدعة وقلة الاهتمام والعز. فأما الغنى فموجود في القناعة، فمن طلبه في كثرة المال لم يجده، وأما الدعة فموجودة في خفة المحمل، فمن طلبها في ثقله لم يجدها. وأما قلة الاهتمام فموجودة في قلة الشغل، فمن طلبها مع كثرته لم يجدها. وأما العز فموجود في خدمة الخالق، فمن طلبه في خدمة المخلوق لم يجده.

4-8 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Sejezy narrated that Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn
Ishaq ibn Khozaymeh quoted Ali ibn Hijr, on the authority of Sharik, on
the authority of Mansoor ibn al-Moe’tamar, on the authority of Rub’ay
ibn Kharash, on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “One is not a true believer unless he does the following four
things: bears witness to the fact that ‘There is no god but God, He is
One and there are no partners for Him, and I (Muhammad) am God’s
Prophet; I have been rightly appointed; there is resurrection after
death; and there is destiny.’”

4-9 Abu Sa’id Muhammad ibn al-Fazl ibn Muhammad ibn Ishaq al-Mozakir
narrated that Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Sa’id quoted Abu
Abdullah Muhammad ibn Muslim ibn Vareh al-Razi, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Foryani, on the authority of Sufyan al-Sowri, on
the authority of Isma’il al-Sadi, on the authority of Abdeh Kheyr (ibn
Yazid al-Hamedany), “Ali (MGB) had four rings. A ruby ring for nobility;
a turquoise**[[331]](footnotes_1.htm#b0331)** ring for help; a Chinese
iron ring for power; and an agate ring for protection. The engraving on
the ruby ring was ‘Lailaha illalah al-Mulkil Haq al-Mobin.’ The
engraving on the turquoise ring was ‘Allah al-Mulkil Haq.’ The engraving
on the Chinese iron ring was Al-Ezatallah jami’an. The engraving on the
agate ring was in three lines ‘Masha Allah, La quwata illa billah,
Istaqfurallah.’”

FOUR CHAPTERS OF THE HOLY QURAN MADE THE PROPHET’S HAIR GREY
------------------------------------------------------------

4-10 Abul-Hassan Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ali ibn Asad Al-Asady narrated
that Abdullah ibn Zaydan and Ali ibn al-Ab’bas al-Bajalyan quoted Abu
Kurayb, on the authority of Muawiyah ibn Hisham, on the authority of
Shayban (ibn Abdul Rahman al-Tamimy), on the authority of Abi Ishaq, on
the authority of Akrama, on the authority of Ibn
Abbas**[[332]](footnotes_1.htm#b0332)** , that Abu Bakr asked the
Prophet, “O Prophet of God! Your hair became grey too fast?” The Prophet
(MGB) replied, “Four Chapters of the Holy Quran made my hair grey. They
were Hud**[[333]](footnotes_1.htm#b0333)** ,
Waqi’a**[[334]](footnotes_1.htm#b0334)** ,
Mursalat**[[335]](footnotes_1.htm#b0335)** and
An-Nab**[[336]](footnotes_1.htm#b0336)** .”

THE PROPHET PERFORMED THE UMRA HAJJ FOUR TIMES
----------------------------------------------

4-11 Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bandar narrated that Abul Ab’bas
al-Himady quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Shafe’ee, on the authority of his
uncle, on the authority of Davood ibn Abdul Rahman, on the authority of
Amr, on the authority of Akrama, on the authority of Ibn
Abbas**[[337]](footnotes_2.htm#b0337)** that the Prophet (MGB) said,
“The Prophet (MGB) performed the Umra Hajj four times. Once it was the
Al-Hudaybiah Umra**[[338]](footnotes_2.htm#b0338)** . Then it was the
Umrat al-Qada**[[339]](footnotes_2.htm#b0339)** on the following year.
Then it was the Ja’rana**[[340]](footnotes_2.htm#b0340)** for the third
time and finally it was at the Farewell pilgrimage.”

##### لا يؤمن عبد حتى يؤمن بأربعة

#### 4-8 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد السجزي قال: حدثنا أبوبكر محمد بن إسحاق بن خزيمة قال: حدثنا علي بن حجر قال: حدثنا شريك، عن منصور بن المعتمر، عن ربعي بن خراش عن علي عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: لا يؤمن عبد حتى يؤمن بأربعة: حتى يشهد أن لا إله إلا الله وحده لا شريك له وأني رسول الله، بعثني بالحق، وحتى يؤمن بالبعث بعد الموت، وحتى يؤمن بالقدر.

##### كان لامير المؤمنين أربعة خواتيم

#### 4-9 حدثنا أبوسعيد محمد بن الفضل بن محمد بن إسحاق المذكر قال: أخبرنا أبوجعفر محمد بن أحمد بن سعيد قال: حدثنا أبوعبد الله محمد بن مسلم ابن وارة الرازي قال: حدثنا محمد بن يوسف الفريابي قال: حدثنا سفيان الثوري، عن إسماعيل السدي عن عبد خير قال: كان لعلي عليه السلام أربعة خواتيم يتختم بها: ياقوت لنبله، وفيروزج لنصرته، والحديد الصيني لقوته، وعقيق لحرزه. وكان نقش الياقوت "لا إله إلا الله الملك الحق المبين" ونقش الفيروزج "الله الملك الحق" ونقش الحديد الصيني "العزة لله جميعا" ونقش العقيق ثلاثة أسطر "ما شاء الله، لا قوة إلا بالله، أستغفر الله".

##### أربع سور شيبت النبي صلى الله عليه وآله

#### 4-10حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن أحمد بن علي بن أسد الاسدي قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن زيدان وعلي بن العباس البجليان قالا: حدثنا أبوكريب قال: حدثنا معاوية بن هشام قال: حدثنا شيبان، عن أبي إسحاق، عن عكرمة، عن ابن عباس قال: قال أبوبكر: يا رسول الله أسرع إليك الشيب؟ قال: شيبتني هود، والواقعة، والمرسلات، وعم يتساء‌لون.

##### اعتمر النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أربع عمر

#### 4-11حدثنا أبوأحمد محمد بن جعفر البندار قال: حدثنا أبوالعباس الحمادي قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد الشافعي قال: حدثنا عمي قال: حدثنا داود بن عبدالرحمن، عن عمرو، عن عكرمة، عن ابن عباس أن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: اعتمر أربع عمر: عمرة الحديبية، وعمرة القضاء من قابل، والثالثة من جعرانة والرابعة التي مع حجته.

A DIVINE LEADER CAN BE RECOGNIZED BY FOUR CHARACTERISTICS
---------------------------------------------------------

4-12 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Walid, on the
authority of Hammad ibn Uthman, on the authority of Al-Harith ibn
al-Muqayrih al-Nasri, “I asked Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq, ‘What are the
signs with which one can recognize a true Divine Leader?’ The Imam (MGB)
replied, ‘Serenity, solemnity, knowledge and
will**[[341]](footnotes_2.htm#b0341)**.’”

4-13 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn
Ahmad ibn Isa, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the authority
of Abil Jarud, “I asked Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB), ‘May I be your
ransom! If the most knowledgeable one from your household perishes, how
can one know the Trustee who comes after him?’ The Imam (MGB) replied,
‘Through guidance, serenity, the testimony of the members of the
Household of Muhammad (MGB) to his nobility, and his ability to respond
to any questions asked.’”

4-14 Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bandar narrated that Mujahid ibn
A’ayn Abul-Haj’jaj quoted Abu Bakr ibn Abil Awam, on the authority of
Yazid (ibn Muhammad ibn Abdul Samad), on the authority of Suleiman
al-Tamimee (Abdul Rahman), on the authority of Sayyar (Al-Umavi
al-Dameshqi), on the authority of Abi Imamat that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “I was honored over the other Prophets by the following four
things: the ground was established as the place of prostration and
cleansing for my nation. Should any of my followers want to pray and he
doesn’t have access to water, he can use dirt with which to purify
himself and on which to pray. I was victorious over my enemies by means
of their fear of me which affected them one month before encountering
them. The war booties became legitimate for my nation. I was sent to all
the people of the world.”

4-15 Abu Ahmad al-Hassan ibn Abdullah ibn Sa’id ibn al-Hassan ibn Hakim
al-Askari narrated that Abu Masood Abdullah ibn Muhammad quoted Abdan
al-Askari, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Suleiman Lavin (Muhammad ibn
Suleiman ibn Habib Al-Asady), on the authority of Hiban ibn Ali
(al-Anzi), on the authority of Aqeel (ibn Khalid), on the authority of
Al-Zuhra, on the authority of Ubaydullah ibn Abdullah, on the authority
of Ibn Abbas**[[342]](footnotes_2.htm#b0342)** that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “The best number for companions is four. The best number for
members for a government is four-hundred. The best number of troops is
four-thousand. Twelve-thousand troops would not be defeated by a few if
they persevere and sincerely fight.”

##### يعرف الامام باربع خصال

#### 4-12 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد ابن أحمد، عن محمد بن الوليد، عن حماد بن عثمان، عن الحارث بن المغيرة النصري قال: قلت لابي عبد الله عليه السلام: بم يعرف صاحب هذا الامر؟ قال: بالسكينة والوقار والعلم والوصية.

#### 4-13حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس قال: حدثنا محمد ابن أحمد بن عيسى عن محمد بن سنان، عن أبي الجارود، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قلت له: جعلت فداك إذا مضى عالمكم أهل البيت فبأي شيء يعرفون من يجئ بعده؟ قال: بالهدى والاطراق وإقرار آل محمد له بالفضل، ولا يسأل عن شيء مما بين صدفيها إلا أجاب فيه.

##### قول النبي صلى الله عليه وآله فضلت بأربع

#### 4-14حدثنا أبوأحمد محمد بن جعفر البندار قال: حدثنا مجاهد بن أعين أبوالحجاج قال: حدثنا أبوبكر بن أبي العوام قال: حدثنا يزيد قال: أخبرنا سليمان التميمي، عن سيار، عن أبي امامة قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: فضلت بأربع جعلت لامتي الارض مسجدا وطهورا وأيما رجل من امتي أراد الصلاة فلم يجد ماء ووجد الارض فقد جعلت له مسجدا وطهورا، ونصرت بالرعب مسيرة شهر، يسير بين يدي، واحلت لامتي الغنائم، وارسلت إلى الناس كافة.

##### خير الصحابة أربعة، وخير السرايا أربعمائة، وخير الجيوش أربعة آلاف

#### 4-15 حدثنا أبوأحمد الحسن بن عبد الله بن سعيد بن الحسن بن إسماعيل بن حكيم العسكري قال: حدثنا أبومسعود عبد الله بن محمد، عن عبدان العسكري قال: حدثنا محمد بن سليمان لوين قال: حدثنا حبان بن علي، عن عقيل، عن الزهري، عن عبيد الله بن عبد الله، عن ابن عباس قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: خير الصحابة أربعة، وخير السرايا أربعمائة، وخير الجيوش أربعة آلاف، ولن يهزم اثنى عشر ألف من قلة إذا صبروا وصدقوا.

WHOEVER IS GRANTED FOUR THINGS WOULD NOT GET DISAPPOINTED WITH FOUR OTHER THINGS
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4-16 Abu Ahmad al-Hassan ibn Abdullah al-Askari narrated that Abul Qasim
Badr ibn al-Haysam al-Qazi quoted Ali ibn Monzar al-Kufy, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn al-Fuzayl, on the authority of Abil Sabah that
Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Whoever is granted four things
would not get disappointed with four other things. Whoever is granted
the opportunity to supplicate would not be disappointed with its being
answered. Whoever is granted the opportunity to ask for God’s
forgiveness would not be disappointed with being forgiven. Whoever is
granted the opportunity to be grateful would not be disappointed with an
increase in his blessings. Whoever is granted the opportunity to
persevere would not be disappointed with its reward.”

4-17 Ahmad ibn Zyad ibn Ja’far al-Hamedany - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of A’ez al-Ahmasi
that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “There are four who hear
everyone: The Prophet (MGB), the green-eyed
Houries**[[343]](footnotes_2.htm#b0343)** , Paradise, and the Fire. In
fact, the Prophet (MGB) hears the prayers of whoever sends blessings
upon the Prophet Muhammad (MGB), and takes his prayers up to God. When
anyone asks God to be married to green-eyed Houries, they will say, ‘O
Lord! Please grant your servant what he asks for and marry us to him.’
When anyone asks God to take him into Paradise, Paradise would say, ‘O
Lord! Please grant to your servant what he has asked Thou for and let
him reside in Paradise.’ When anyone asks God for protection from the
Fire, the Fire would say, ‘O Lord! Protect your servant from me.’”

GOD WOULD NOT LOOK AT FOUR PEOPLE ON THE RESURRECTION DAY
---------------------------------------------------------

4-18 Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bandar narrated that Ja’far ibn
Muhammad ibn Nooh quoted Muhammad ibn Amr, on the authority of Yazid ibn
Zari’a, on the authority of Bashir ibn Namir, on the authority of
Al-Qasim ibn Abdul Rahman, on the authority of Abi Imamat that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “God would not take a look at the following four
people on the Resurrection Day: those who are damned by their parents;
those who mention their favors; those who deny predestination; and
alcoholics.”

THE FOUR WHO WILL BE RIDING ON THE RESURRECTION DAY
---------------------------------------------------

4-19 Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Isma’il narrated that Abu Muhammad
ibn Zaydan al-Balkhi - in what Abul Ab’bas ibn Aqadat recited to him -
on the authority of Ali ibn al-Masna, on the authority of Zayd ibn
Hobab, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Lahay’at, on the authority of
Ja’far

##### من اعطي أربعا لم يحرم أربعا

#### 4-16حدثنا أبوأحمد الحسن بن عبد الله العسكري قال: حدثنا أبوالقاسم بدر بن الهيثم القاضي قال: حدثنا علي بن منذر الكوفي قال: حدثنا محمد بن الفضيل عن أبي الصباح قال: قال جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام: من اعطي أربعا لم يحرم أربعا من اعطي الدعاء لم يحرم الاجابة، ومن اعطي الاستغفار لم يحرم المغفرة، ومن اعطي الشكر لم يحرم الزيادة، ومن اعطي الصبر لم يحرم الاجر.

##### أربعة أشياء اعطيت سمع الخلائق

#### 4-17 حدثنا أحمد بن زياد بن جعفر الهمداني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي ابن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن عائذ الاحمسي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: أربعة اوتوا سمع الخلائق: النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وحور العين والجنة والنار، فما من عبد يصلي على النبي صلى الله عليه وآله ويسلم عليه إلا بلغه ذلك وسمعه وما من أحد قال: اللهم زوجني من الحور العين إلا سمعنه وقلن يا ربنا إن فلانا قد خطبنا إليك فزوجنا منه، وما من أحد يقول: اللهم ادخلني الجنة إلا قالت الجنة: اللهم أسكنه في، وما من أحد يستجير بالله من النار إلا قالت النار: يا رب أجره مني.

##### أربعة لا ينظر الله اليهم يوم القيامة

#### 4-18حدثنا أبوأحمد محمد بن جعفر البندار قال: حدثنا جعفر بن محمد بن نوح قال: حدثنا محمد بن عمرو، قال: حدثنا يزيد بن زريع قال: حدثنا بشر بن نمير، عن القاسم بن عبدالرحمن، عن أبي امامة قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أربعة لا ينظر الله إليهم يوم القيامة: عاق ومنان، ومكذب بالقدر، ومدمن خمر.

##### الركبان يوم القيامة أربعة

#### 4-19 أخبرني أبوبكر محمد بن علي بن إسماعيل قال: حدثنا أبومحمد عبد الله بن زيدان البلخي فيما قرأه عليه أبوالعباس بن عقدة قال: حدثني علي بن المثنـى قال:

ibn Rabi’a, on the authority of Akrama, on the authority of Ibn
Abbas**[[344]](footnotes_2.htm#b0344)** , “God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
‘There will be no others who will be riding besides the four of us on
the Resurrection Day.’

Abbas asked, ‘Who will they be?’ The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘I will be
riding Al-Boraq. Its face is like that of a man, but its cheeks are like
that of a horse. Its wings will be made of woven pearls. Its two ears
will be chrysolite**[[345]](footnotes_2.htm#b0345)** green. Its eyes
will be like Venus. They will shine like two bright stars with rays like
that of the sun. It is fat and has long fire and hind legs. Its soul is
similar to that of a man. It can hear and understand. It is bigger than
a donkey, but smaller than a mule.’

Ab’bas asked, ‘O Prophet of God! Who else?’ The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘And
my brother Salih who will be riding the Camel of the Honorable the
Exalted God which his people had
immolated**[[346]](footnotes_2.htm#b0346)** .’

Ab’bas asked, “O Prophet of God! Who else?’ The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘And
my uncle Hamzih ibn Abdul Mutalib who was the Lion of God and the Lion
of God’s Prophet. He is the Master of the Martyrs who will be riding my
camel called Kaswa.’

Abbas asked, ‘O Prophet of God! Who else?’ The Prophet (MGB) replied,
‘And my brother Ali who will be riding on one of the camels of Paradise.
Its reins will be made of pearls. The people will say, ‘This is either a
dispatched Prophet or a nearby-stationed angel.’ Then there will be a
call from inside the Threshold saying, ‘This is neither a
nearby-stationed angel nor a dispatched Prophet. He is not the Holder of
the Throne either. This is Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB). He is the Trustee of
the Messenger of the Lord of the Two Worlds. He is the Divine Leader of
the pious ones, and the Leader of those with white
foreheads**[[347]](footnotes_2.htm#b0347)** .’”

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “This is
a strange narration since there is a name of Al-Boraq and how it is.
There is also a mention of Hamzih ibn Abdul Mutalib in it.”

4-20 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar narrated that Sa’ed ibn
Abdullah quoted on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil
Khat’tab, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Abdul Rahman al-Asim, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn al-Batl (who is Abdullah ibn Qasim
al-Hazrami), on the authority of Amr ibn Abil Miqdam, on the authority
of his father, on the authority of Sa’id ibn Jabeer that Ibn
Abbas**[[348]](footnotes_2.htm#b0348)** said, “One day the Prophet of
God (MGB) came out while holding Ali’s hand and said, “O Helpers! O
Hashemites**[[349]](footnotes_2.htm#b0349)** ! O Bani Abdul Mutalib! I
am Muhammad. I am the Messenger of God. Four of us have been made of
Forgiven Clay. That is Ali, Hamzih, Ja’far and me.’

#### حدثني زيد بن حباب قال: حدثني عبد الله بن لهيعة قال: حدثني جعفر بن ربيعة، عن عكرمة، عن ابن عباس قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ما في القيامة راكب غيرنا ونحن أربعة، {.t0}

#### فقام إليه العباس بن عبدالمطلب فقال: من هم يا رسول الله؟ فقال: أما أنا فعلى البراق ووجهها كوجه الانسان وخدها كخد الفرس وعرفها من لؤلؤ مسموط واذناها زبرجدتان خضراوان وعيناها مثل كوكب الزهرة، تتوقدان مثل النجمين المضيئين، لها شعاع مثل شعاع الشمس، ينحدر من نحرها الجمان مطوية الحلق طويلة اليدين والرجلين، لها نفس كنفس الآدميين، تسمع الكلام وتفهمه، وهي فوق الحمار ودون البغل. قال العباس: ومن يا رسول الله؟ قال صلى الله عليه وآله: وأخي صالح على ناقة الله عز وجل التي عقرها قومه، قال العباس: ومن يا رسول الله؟ قال: وعمي حمزة ابن عبدالمطلب أسد الله وأسد رسوله، سيد الشهداء على ناقتي العضباء، قال العباس: ومن يا رسول الله؟ قال: وأخي علي على ناقة من نوق الجنة، زمامها من لؤلؤ رطب عليها محمل من ياقوت أحمر، قضبانه من الدر الابيض على رأسه تاج من نور عليه حلتان خضراوان، بيده لواء الحمد وهو ينادي أشهد أن لا إله إلا الله وحده لا شريك له وأن محمدا رسول الله. فيقول الخلائق ما هذا إلا نبي مرسل أو ملك مقرب، فينادي مناد من بطنان العرش: ليس هذا ملك مقرب، ولا نبي مرسل، ولا حامل عرش، هذا علي بن أبي طالب وصي رسول رب العالمين، وإمام المتقين، وقائد الغرالمحجلين.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: هذا حديث غريب لما فيه من ذكر البراق ووصفه، وذكر حمزة بن عبدالمطلب.

#### 4-20 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن عبد الله بن عبدالرحمن الاصم، عن عبد الله البطل عن عمرو بن أبي المقدام، عن أبيه، عن سعيد بن جبير، عن ابن عباس قال: خرج رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله ذات يوم وهو آخذ بيد علي عليه السلام وهو يقول: يا معشر الانصار، يا معشر بني هاشم، يا معشر بني عبدالمطلب أنا محمد، أنا رسول الله إلا أني خلقت من طينة مرحومة في أربعة من أهل بيتي أنا وعلي وحمزة وجعفر.

Someone asked, ‘O Prophet of God! Will these be the riders on the
Resurrection Day?’

The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘May your mother not experience the sorrow of
your death! No one but these four will be riding on the Resurrection
Day: Ali, Fatimah, the Prophet Salih and me. I will be riding Al-Boraq.
My daughter Fatimah will be riding my camel Kaswa. Salih will be riding
the Camel of God which was immolated**[[350]](footnotes_2.htm#b0350)**.
Ali will be riding one of the Camels from Paradise. Its reins will be
made of pearls. It has two green covers. It will stop between Paradise
and Hell. On the day on which the people sweat, there will be a wind
from below the Threshold and the people’s sweat will dry up. When the
angels, the Prophets and the honest ones see him, they will say, ‘O That
is either a nearby-stationed angel or a dispatched Prophet.’ But there
will be a caller saying, ‘No. He is neither a nearby-stationed angel nor
is he a dispatched Prophet. He is Ali - the brother of God’s Prophet
Muhammad in the world and the Hereafter.”

FOUR THINGS WHICH THE OLD ISRAELITE LADY ASKED MOSES FOR
--------------------------------------------------------

4-21 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Faz’zal, on
the authority of Abil Hassan Al-Kazim (MGB), “The moon did not shine for
the Children of Israel for some time. God - may His Majesty be Exalted -
revealed the following to Moses (MGB), ‘Take the remaining bones of
Joseph (MGB) out of Egypt.’ God promised that once the bones were taken
out, the moon would shine again. Moses (MGB) sought after someone who
knew where they were. He was told that an old lady knows where they are.
Moses (MGB) sent after her. They brought him a crippled blind old woman.
Moses (MGB) asked her, ‘Do you know where Joseph (MGB) is buried?’ She
said, ‘Yes.’ Moses (MGB) said, ‘Then let me know where it is.’ She said,
‘I have four conditions for this. Firstly, you must heal me legs;
secondly, you must return my youth; thirdly, you must return my sight;
and fourthly, you must take me to Paradise along with you.’ Moses (MGB)
thought that these conditions were too much to ask for, but God - may
His Majesty be Exalted - revealed to him, ‘O Moses! Give her what she
asks as you are doing that on my behalf.’ Moses (MGB) did that and the
lady showed him the grave. Moses (MGB) brought it out of a marble coffin
on the Nile's coast. Then the moon rose. They took it to Syria, and from
then on the People of the Book take their dead ones to
Syria.”**[[351]](footnotes_2.htm#b0351)**

THE FOUR BEST FEMALE RESIDENTS OF PARADISE
------------------------------------------

4-22 Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Isma’il narrated that Abul Ab’bas ibn Muni’a
quoted Sheiban ibn Forookh, on the authority of Davood ibn Abil Forat,
on the authority of Al-Ba’e ibn Ahmar, on the authority of Akrama that
Ibn Abbas**[[352]](footnotes_2.htm#b0352)** said, “God’s Prophet (MGB)
drew four lines on the ground and said,

#### فقال قائل: يا رسول الله هؤلاء معك ركبان يوم القيامة؟ فقال: ثكلتك أمك إنه لن يركب يومئذ إلا أربعة أنا وعلي وفاطمة وصالح نبي الله، فأما أنا فعلى البراق وأما فاطمة ابنتي فعلى ناقتي العضباء وأما صالح فعلى ناقة الله التي عقرت، وأما علي فعلى ناقة من نوق الجنة، زمامها من ياقوت، عليه حلتان خضراوان، فيقف بين الجنة والنار وقد الجم الناس [من] العرق يومئذ فتهب ريح من قبل العرش فتنشف عنهم عرقهم فيقول الملائكة والانبياء والصديقون ما هذا إلا ملك مقرب أو نبي مرسل فينادي مناد ما هذا ملك مقرب ولا نبي مرسل ولكنه علي بن أبي طالب أخو رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله في الدنيا والاخرة.

##### أربع خصال سالت عجوز بنى اسرائيل موسى عليه السلام

#### 4-21 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن الحسن بن علي بن فضال، عن أبي الحسن عليه السلام أنه قال: احتبس القمر عن ابني إسرائيل فأوحى الله جل جلاله إلى موسى عليه السلام أن أخرج عظام يوسف من مصر، ووعده طلوع القمر إذا أخرج عظامه فسأل موسى عمن يعلم موضعه، فقيل له: ههنا عجوز تعلم علمه، فبعث إليها فاتي بعجوز مقعدة عمياء، فقال لها: أتعرفين موضع قبر يوسف، قالت: نعم، قال: فأخبريني به، قالت: لا حتى تعطيني أربع خصال: تطلق لي رجلي، وتعيد إلي شبابي، وتعيد إلي بصري، وتجعلني معك في الجنة، قال: فكبر ذلك على موسى فأوحى الله جل جلاله إليه: يا موسى أعطها ما سألت فإنك إنما تعطي علي، ففعل فدلته عليه فاستخرجه من شاطئ النيل في صندوق مرمر فلما أخرجه طلع القمر، فحمله إلى الشام فلذلك يحمل أهل الكتاب موتاهم إلى الشام.

##### أفضل نساء أهل الجنة أربع

#### 4-22 أخبرني محمد بن علي بن إسماعيل قال: أخبرنا أبوالعباس ابن منيع قال: حدثنا شيبان بن فروخ قال: حدثنا داود بن أبي الفرات قال: حدثنا علباء بن أحمـر

‘Do you understand what this means?’ The people said, ‘No. God and God’s
Prophet (MGB) know best.’ Then God’s Prophet (MGB) said, ‘The four best
women in Paradise are the following: Khadijah - the daughter of
Khuwaylid**[[353]](footnotes_2.htm#b0353)** ; Fatimah - the daughter of
Muhammad; Mary**[[354]](footnotes_2.htm#b0354)** - the daughter of
Imran; and Asia - the daughter of Muzahim and the wife of Pharaoh.”

4-23 Suleiman ibn Ahmad ibn Ayoob al-Lakhmy narrated that Ali ibn Abdul
Aziz quoted Hijaj ibn al-Minhal, on the authority of Davood ibn Abil
Forat al-Kindi, on the authority of Al-ba’e ibn Ahmar, on the authority
of Akrama, on the authority of Ibn
Abbas**[[355]](footnotes_2.htm#b0355)** , “God’s Prophet (MGB) drew four
lines on the ground and said, ‘The four best women in Paradise are the
following: Mary**[[356]](footnotes_2.htm#b0356)** - the daughter of
Imran; Khadijah - the daughter of
Khuwaylid**[[357]](footnotes_2.htm#b0357)** ; Fatimah - the daughter of
Muhammad; and Asia - the daughter of Muzahim and the wife of Pharaoh.”

THE FOUR BACK-BREAKING THINGS
-----------------------------

4-24 Muhammad ibn Ali ibn ash-Shah narrated that Abu Hamid quoted Abu
Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Salih al-Tamimy, on
the authority of his father, on the authority of Anas ibn Muhammad Abu
Malik, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Ja’far ibn
Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on the
authority of his grandfather (MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn Abi
Talib (MGB) that in his will to Ali (MGB) God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “O
Ali, four issues are back-breaking: a leader who is obeyed while he
disobeys God; a wife who is disloyal to her husband while he is
considerate of her; poverty which the poor cannot overcome; and a
permanently bad neighbor.”

GOD TOOK FOUR LOOKS AT THE WORLD
--------------------------------

4-25 Abul Hassan Muhammad ibn Ali ibn ash-Shah narrated that Abu Hamid
quoted Abu Yazid Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Khalidy, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Salih al-Tamimy, on the authority of his father,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Hatam al-Qat’tan, on the authority of
Hammad ibn Amr, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB),
on the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his
grandfather (MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) that in
his will to Ali (MGB) God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “O Ali! The Honorable
the Exalted God took a look at the world and selected me from among all
the men in the world. Then He took a second look and selected you from
among the men of this world. Then He took a third look and selected the
Immaculate Divine Leaders who are your descendants from among the men of
this world. Then He took a fourth look and selected Fatimah from among
the women of this world.”

#### قال: حدثنا عكرمة، عن ابن عباس قال: خط رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أربع خطط في الارض وقال: أتدرون ما هذا: قلنا الله ورسوله أعلم فقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أفضل نساء [أهل] الجنة أربع: خديجة بنت خويلد، وفاطمة بنت محمد، ومريم بنت عمران، وآسية بنت مزاحم امرأة فرعون. {.t0}

#### 4-23 أخبرنا سليمان بن أحمد بن أيوب اللخمي قال: حدثنا علي بن عبدالعزيز قال: حدثنا حجاج بن المنهال قال: حدثنا داود بن أبي الفرات الكندي عن علباء بن أحمر، عن عكرمة، عن ابن عباس قال: خط رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أربع خطط ثم قال: خير نساء الجنة مريم بنت عمران، وخديجة بنت خويلد، وفاطمة بنت محمد، وآسية بنت مزاحم امرأة فرعون.

##### أربعة اشياء من قواصم الظهر

#### 4-24 حدثنا محمد بن علي بن الشاه قال: حدثنا أبوحامد قال: حدثنا أبويزيد قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن صالح التميمي، عن أبيه قال: حدثني أنس ابن محمد أبومالك، عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: في وصيته لي: يا علي أربعة من قواصم الظهر: إمام يعصي الله ويطاع أمره، وزوجة يحفظها زوجها وهي تخونه، وفقر لا يجد صاحبه له مداويا، وجار سوء في دار مقام.

##### الاطلاعات الاربع من الله عز وجل إلى الدنيا

#### 4-25 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن علي بن الشاه قال: حدثنا أبوحامد قال: حدثنا أبويزيد أحمد بن خالد الخالدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن صالح التميمي، عن أبيه قال: حدثنا محمد بن حاتم القطان، عن حماد بن عمرو، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عن جده، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال في وصيته له: يا علي إن الله عز وجل أشرف على الدنيا فاختارني منها على رجال العالمين، ثم اطلع الثانية فاختارك على رجال العالمين بعدي، ثم اطلع الثالثة فاختار الائمة من ولدك على رجال العالمين بعدك، ثم اطلع الرابعة فاختار فاطمة على نساء العالمين.

THE PROPHET (MGB) TOLD ALI THAT HE HAD SEEN ALI’S NAME ALONG WITH HIS IN FOUR PLACES
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4-26 Abul Hassan Muhammad ibn Ali ibn ash-Shah narrated that Abu Hamid
quoted on the authority of Abu Yazid Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Khalidy, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Salih al-Tamimy, on the authority of
his father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Hatam al-Qat’tan, on the
authority of Hammad ibn Amr, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority
of his grandfather (MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB)
that in his will to Ali (MGB) God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “O Ali! I saw
your name along with my name in four places. I was very delighted to see
that. When I reached the Holy Shrine in Jerusalem during my Ascension to
the heavens, I found the following was written on the Rocks of
Jerusalem, ‘There is no god but God and Muhammad is God’s Prophet. I
support and back him up with his
Vizier**[[358]](footnotes_2.htm#b0358)** .’ I asked Gabriel who my
Vizier would be. Gabriel replied, ‘He is Ali ibn Abi Talib.’ When I
arrived at the lote-tree (in the seventh heaven), I found the following
written on it, ‘Indeed I am God. There is no god but I alone. I have
chosen Muhammad from amongst my creatures. I support and back him up
with his Vizier.’ Then I asked Gabriel, ‘Who is my Vizier?’ Gabriel
answered, ‘He is Ali ibn Abi Talib.’ When I passed by that lote-tree, I
came to the (Divine) Throne of the Lord of the Two Worlds - may His
Majesty be Exalted. On the supports of that Throne, I found the
following written, ‘I am God. There is no god but I alone. Muhammad is
My beloved one. I support and back him up with his Vizier.’ When I
raised my head up, I saw that the following was written inside the
Throne, ‘I am God. There is no god but I alone. Muhammad is My slave and
My Prophet. I support and back him up with his Vizier.’”

ONLY FOUR CAN UNDERSTAND THE SAYINGS OF THE MEMBERS OF THE HOLY HOUSEHOLD
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

4-27 Ali ibn al-Hussein ibn Sufyan ibn Yaqoob ibn al-Harith ibn Ibrahim
al-Hamedany narrated in his house in Kufa that Abu Abdullah Ja’far ibn
Ahmad ibn Yusuf al-Azodi quoted Ali ibn Bazraj al-Hanat, on the
authority of Amr ibn al-Yasee’a, on the authority of Shoayb al-Had’dad
that he had heard Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB) say, “Indeed our
sayings are hard to understand. Only the following four can understand
them: either a nearby-stationed angel; a dispatched Prophet; a servant
of God whose faith has been tested or a strong town.” Shoayb al-Had’dad
asked, “What do you mean by a strong town?” The Imam (MGB) replied, “I
mean a heart with a firm belief.”

##### قول النبي صلى الله عليه وآله لعلى عليه السلام انى رأيت اسمك مقرونا إلى اسمى في أربعة مواطن

#### 4-26 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن علي بن الشاه قال: حدثنا أبوحامد قال: حدثنا أبويزيد أحمد بن خالد الخالدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن صالح التميمي عن أبيه قال: حدثنا محمد بن حاتم القطان، عن حماد بن عمرو، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال في وصيته لي:

#### يا علي إني رأيت اسمك مقرونا باسمي في أربعة مواطن، فآنست بالنظر إليه: إني لما بلغت بيت المقدس في معراجي إلى السماء وجدت على صخرتها مكتوبا لا إله إلا الله محمد رسول الله، أيدته بوزيره ونصرته بوزيره، فقلت لجبرئيل: من وزيري؟ فقال: علي بن أبي طالب، فلما انتهيت إلى سدرة المنتهى وجدت مكتوبا عليها: إني أنا الله لا إله أنا وحدي، محمد صفوتي من خلقي، أيدته بوزيره ونصرته بوزيره. فقلت لجبرئيل: من وزيري؟ فقال علي بن أبي طالب، فلما جاوزت السدرة انتهيت إلى عرش رب العالمين جل جلاله فوجدت مكتوبا على قوائمه أنا الله لا إله إلا أنا وحدي محمد حبيبي أيدته بوزيره ونصرته بوزيره، فلما رفعت رأسي وجدت على بطنان العرش مكتوبا أنا الله لا إله إلا أنا وحدي، محمد عبدي ورسولي أيدته بوزيره ونصرته بوزيره.

##### لا يحتمل حديث اهل البيت الا أربعة

#### 4-27 حدثنا علي بن الحسين بن سفيان بن يعقوب بن الحارث بن إبراهيم الهمداني في منزله بالكوفة قال: حدثنا أبوعبد الله جعفر بن أحمد بن يوسف الازدي قال: حدثنا علي بن بزرج الحناط قال: حدثنا عمرو بن اليسع، عن شعيب الحداد قال: سمعت الصادق جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام يقول: إن حديثنا صعب مستصعب، لا يحتمله إلا ملك مقرب أو نبي مرسل، أو عبد امتحن الله قلبه للايمان أو مدينة حصينة.قال عمرو: فقلت لشعيب: يا أبا الحسن وأي شيء المدينة الحصينة؟ قال: فقال: سألت الصادق عليه السلام عنها فقال لي: القلب المجتمع.

FOUR THINGS ARE INCUMBENT FOR HIM WHO HAS THREE CHARACTERISTICS
---------------------------------------------------------------

4-28 Abu Mansoor Ahmad ibn Ibrahim ibn Bakr narrated that Abu Muhammad
Zayd ibn Muhammad al-Baghdady quoted Abul Qasim Abdullah ibn Ahmad ibn
Amir ibn Suleiman at-Ta’ee in Basra, on the authority of his father, on
the authority of Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB), on the authority of his
father (MGB), on the authority of his forefathers (MGB), on the
authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “A person who has
the following characteristics has perfect chivalry and justice: one who
doesn’t oppress the people in his dealings with them; one who doesn’t
lie when he talks to the people; one who doesn’t act opposite to what he
promises. It is incumbent to act like a brother with him; support his
justness; respect his manliness; and not gossip about him.”

4-29 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja’far ibn Abi Ja’far
al-Kumaydany quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Sin’an, on the
authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “Four things are incumbent to
do for anyone who has the following three characteristics: one who
doesn’t lie to the people when he talks; one who doesn’t oppress the
people in his dealings with them; one who doesn’t act opposite to what
he promises. Such a person has perfect chivalry and justice. It is
incumbent support his justness; to act like a brother with him; support
his justness; not gossip about him; treat him like a brother.”

THE POEMS OF SATAN IN REPLY TO ADAM’S POEMS
-------------------------------------------

4-30 Abul-Hassan Muhammad ibn Amr ibn Ali ibn Abdullah al-Basry in Ilaq
narrated that the preacher Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Ahmad
ibn Jabalat quoted Abul Qasim Abdullah ibn Amer al-Ta’ee, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB),
on the authority of Musa ibn Ja’far (MGB), on the authority of Ja’far
ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ali (MGB), on the
authority of Ali ibn al-Hussein (MGB), on the authority of Al-Hussein
ibn Ali (MGB), “Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) was in the Jamea Mosque in Kufa.
A man from Syria stood up and said, “O Commander of the Faithful! I have
several questions.” The Imam (MGB) said, “Ask in order to understand. Do
not ask in order to bother us.” One of the questions that he asked was
as follows:**[[359]](footnotes_2.htm#b0359)** “Who was the first poet?
The Imam (MGB) answered, “It was Adam.” The man asked, “What was the
poem about?” The Imam (MGB) said, ‘When Adam was cast down to the Earth,
he saw the extent of the Earth and its atmosphere. When Abel killed
Cane, then Adam recited:

##### من عامل الناس مجتنبا لثلاث خصال وجبت له عليهم أربع خصال

#### 4-28 حدثنا أبومنصور أحمد بن إبراهيم بن بكر قال: حدثنا أبومحمد زيد بن محمد البغدادي قال: حدثنا أبوالقاسم عبد الله بن أحمد بن عامر بن سليمان الطائي بالبصرة قال: حدثنا أبي قال: حدثنا علي بن موسى الرضا، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: من عامل الناس فلم يظلمهم، وحدثهم فلم يكذبهم، ووعدهم فلم يخلفهم فهو ممن كملت مروء‌ته وظهرت عدالته ووجبت اخوته وحرمت غيبته.

#### 4-29 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن موسى بن جعفر بن أبي جعفر الكميداني، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن عبد الله بن سنان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ثلاث من كن فيه أوجبن له أربعا على الناس: من إذا حدثهم لم يكذبهم وإذا خالطهم لم يظلمهم وإذا وعدهم لم يخلفهم، وجب أن تظهر في الناس عدالته، وتظهر فيهم مروء‌ته، وأن تحرم عليهم غيبته، وأن تجب عليهم اخوته.

##### أربع أبيات شعر لإبليس أجاب بها آدم عن بيتين

#### 4-30 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن عمرو بن علي بن عبد الله البصري بايلاق قال: حدثني أبوعبد الله محمد بن عبد الله بن أحمد بن جبلة الواعظ قال: حدثني أبوالقاسم عبد الله ابن أحمد بن عامر الطائي قال: حدثنا أبي قال: حدثنا علي بن موسى الرضا قال: حدثنا موسى بن جعفر قال: حدثنا جعفر بن محمد قال: حدثنا محمد بن علي قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين قال: حدثنا الحسين بن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام قال: كان علي بن أبي طالب بالكوفة في الجامع إذ قام إليه رجل من أهل الشام فقال: يا أمير المؤمنين إني أسألك عن أشياء فقال: سل تفقها ولا تسأل تعنتا فسأله عن أشياء، فكان فيما سأله أن قال له: أخبرني عن أول من قال الشعر؟ فقال: آدم، فقال: وما كان [من] شعره قال: لما انزل إلى الارض من السماء فرأى تربتها وسعتها وهوائها وقتل قابيل هابيل فقال آدم عليه السلام:

***The land and its residents have changed vastly;  
 The looks of the Earth have turned black and ugly;  
 Whatever had a taste and color has changed;  
 And the freshness of that good looks has diminished;  
 Then Satan - may God damn him - replied,  
 Get away from this land and everyone who on it resides  
 As there is no more room for you anymore in this expanded Paradise  
 You and your spouse were living in peace  
 And from the troubles of the world was your heart at comfort.  
 But you could not escape my tricks and plots  
 Until you lost that valuable thing  
 And God gave the people tamarisk*[*[360]*](footnotes_2.htm#b0360) *and
bitter khamt*[*[361]*](footnotes_2.htm#b0361)*  
 Instead of Paradise and its open gates  
 And had*[*[362]*](footnotes_2.htm#b0362) *I not received the Mercy of
the Omnipotent  
 You*[*[363]*](footnotes_2.htm#b0363) *would not have lost Paradise
now.”***

GOD HAS EMBEDDED FOUR THINGS IN FOUR OTHER THINGS
-------------------------------------------------

4-31 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Barqy, on the authority of Al-Qasim ibn
Yahya, on the authority of his grandfather Al-Hassan ibn Rashid, on the
authority of Abi Basir, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim, on the
authority of Abi Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB), on the
authority of his father Ali ibn al-Hussein as-Sajjad (MGB), on the
authority of his father Al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB), on the authority of
his father the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB), “The Blessed
the Sublime God has embedded four things in four other things. He has
embedded His Pleasure in His obedience. Therefore, you should not
underestimate obedience to God. It may cause God’s Pleasure while you do
not know it. God has embedded His Wrath in disobeying Him. Therefore,
you should not underestimate any disobedience to God. It may cause God’s
Wrath while you do not know about it. God has embedded His Response to
supplications. Therefore, you should not underestimate any
supplications. It may cause God to respond to you while you do not know
about it. God has embedded His Friends amongst His Servants. Therefore,
you should not belittle anyone, since he may be a friend of God and you
may not know about it.”

DO NOT CONSIDER FOUR THINGS BAD SINCE THEY HAVE FOUR BENEFITS
-------------------------------------------------------------

4-32 Ahmad ibn Zyad ibn Ja’far al-Hamedany - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Qiyath ibn
Ibrahim,

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="50%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">فوجه الارض مغبر قبيح</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">تغيرت البلاد ومن عليها</h4></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">وقل بشاشة الوجه المليح</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">تغير كل ذي لون وطعم</h4></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

#### فأجابه إبليس:

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="50%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">فبي في الخلد ضاق بك الفسيح</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">تنح عن البلاد وساكنيها</h4></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">وقلبك من أذى الدنيا مريح</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">وكنت بها وزوجك في قرار</h4></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">إلى أن فاتك الثمن الربيح</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">فلم تنفك من كيدي ومكري</h4></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">بكفك من جنان الخلد ريح</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">فلولا رحمة الجبار أضحت</h4></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

##### ان الله تبارك وتعالى أخفى أربعة في أربعة

#### 4-31 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عمي محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد البرقي، عن القاسم بن يحيى، عن جده الحسن ابن راشد، عن أبي بصير، عن محمد بن مسلم، عن أبي جعفر محمد بن علي الباقر، عن أبيه علي بن الحسين، عن أبيه الحسين بن علي، عن أبيه أمير المؤمنين عليهم السلام قال: إن الله تبارك وتعالى أخفى أربعة في أربعة: أخفى رضاه في طاعته فلا تستصغرن شيئا من طاعته، فربما وافق رضاه وأنت لا تعلم.وأخفى سخطه في معصيته فلا تستصغرن شيئا من معصيته، فربما وافق سخطه معصيته وأنت لا تعلم.وأخفى إجابته في دعوته فلا تستصغرن شيئا من دعائه، فربما وافق إجابته وأنت لا تعلم. وأخفى وليه في عبادة فلا تستصغرن عبدا من عبيد الله، فربما يكون وليه وأنت لا تعلم.

##### قول النبي صلى الله عليه وآله لا تكرهوا أربعة فانها لاربعة

#### 4-32 حدثنا أحمد بن زياد بن جعفر الهمداني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني علي ابن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن غيـاث بن إبراهيـم، عـن

#### فوجه الارض مغبر قبيح {style="text-align: center"}

#### تغيرت البلاد ومن عليها {style="text-align: center"}

#### وقل بشاشة الوجه المليح {style="text-align: center"}

#### تغير كل ذي لون وطعم {style="text-align: center"}

#### فبي في الخلد ضاق بك الفسيح {style="text-align: center"}

#### تنح عن البلاد وساكنيها {style="text-align: center"}

#### وقلبك من أذى الدنيا مريح {style="text-align: center"}

#### وكنت بها وزوجك في قرار {style="text-align: center"}

#### إلى أن فاتك الثمن الربيح {style="text-align: center"}

#### فلم تنفك من كيدي ومكري {style="text-align: center"}

#### بكفك من جنان الخلد ريح {style="text-align: center"}

#### فلولا رحمة الجبار أضحت {style="text-align: center"}

on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority
of his father (MGB), on the authority of his forefathers (MGB), on the
authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Do not consider
the following four things to be bad since they have four benefits. Do
not consider influenza to be bad since it brings security from
vitiligo**[[364]](footnotes_2.htm#b0364)** . Do not consider
imposthume**[[365]](footnotes_2.htm#b0365)** to be bad since it brings
security from leprosy. Do not consider eye pain to be bad since it
brings security from going blind. Do not consider coughing to be bad
since it makes you secure from
hemiplegia.**[[366]](footnotes_2.htm#b0366)** ”

FOUR CHARACTERISTICS OF IMAM ALI WHICH NO OTHER ARAB HAD
--------------------------------------------------------

4-33 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ishaq al-Dinvari al-Qazi narrated that
Muhammad ibn Abdulhamid al-Furqany quoted Ahmad ibn Badil, on the
authority of Mufaz’zal ibn Salih Al-Asady, on the authority of Samak ibn
Harb, on the authority of Akrama, on the authority of Ibn
Abbas**[[367]](footnotes_2.htm#b0367)** , “The Commander of the Faithful
Imam Ali (MGB) had four characteristics which no other Arab had. He was
the first one who prayed with God’s Prophet (MGB). Ali (MGB) held the
Prophet’s flag in every battle. And the people escaped on the day of the
Battle of Uhud, while Ali (MGB) stayed with the Prophet (MGB). Ali (MGB)
carried out the ablutions for the deceased for the Prophet (MGB) and
placed him in the grave.”

4-34 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ishaq narrated that Abu Muhammad Abdullah
ibn Salih al-Bokhari quoted Yaqoob ibn Hamid ibn Kasib, on the authority
of Sufyan ibn Ayyineh, on the authority of Abi Najih, on the authority
of his father, on the authority of Rabi’at
al-Jarshi**[[368]](footnotes_2.htm#b0368)** , “There was a mention of
Ali (MGB) in the presence of Muawiyah when Sa’ed ibn Abi Vaqas was
present. Se’ed said, ‘You mentioned Ali’s name. Indeed Ali (MGB) had
four characteristics. If I had even one of these qualities, it would be
better than everything, even owning a flock of red-haired
camels**[[369]](footnotes_2.htm#b0369)** . Remember that the Prophet
said the following in the Battle of Khaybar, ‘Tomorrow I shall hand the
flag to the one (whom God and the Prophet love, and he loves God and the
Prophet.) Also remember that the Prophet said to Ali (MGB), ‘Your
position relative to me is the same as Aaron’s position relative to
Moses.’ Sa’ed forgot the fourth.”

MUAWIYAH’S TALK WITH IBN ABBAS REGARDING FOUR CHARACTERISTICS HE LIKED AND FOUR HE DISLIKED
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4-35 Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Musa - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Zakariya al-Qattan quoted Abu Muhammad Bakr ibn
Abdullah ibn Habib, on the authority of Al-Ab’bas ibn al-Faraj, on the
authority of Abu Salmat al-Qaffari, on the authority of Abdullah ibn
Ibrahim

#### جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: لا تكرهوا أربعة فانها لاربعة: لا تكرهوا ال زكام فانه أمان من الجذام، ولا تكرهوا الدماميل فانها أمان من البرص، ولا تكرهوا الرمد فانه أمان من العمى، ولا تكرهوا السعال فانه أمان من الفالج. {.t0}

##### لامير المؤمنين أربع مناقب لم يسبقه اليها عربى

#### 4-33 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن إسحاق الدينوري القاضي قال: أخبرني محمد بن عبدالحميد الفرغاني قال: حدثنا أحمد بن بديل قال: حدثنا مفضل بن صالح الاسدي عن سماك بن حرب، عن عكرمة، عن ابن عباس قال:كان لعلي عليه السلام أربع مناقب لم يسبقه إليها عربي: كان أول من صلى مع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: وكان صاحب رايته في كل زحف، وانهزم الناس يوم المهراس وثبت وغسله، وأدخله قبره.

#### 4-34 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن إسحاق قال: حدثنا أبومحمد عبد الله بن صالح البخاري قال: حدثنا يعقوب بن حميد بن كاسب قال: حدثنا سفيان بن عيينة، عن أبي نجيح عن أبيه، عن ربيعة الجرشي أنه ذكر عليا عليه السلام عند معاوية وعنده سعد بن أبي وقاص فقال له سعد: تذكر عليا، أما إن له مناقب أربع لان تكون لي واحدة [منها] أحب إلي من كذا وكذا ذكر حمر النعم، قوله صلى الله عليه وآله: "لاعطين الراية غدا" وقوله صلى الله عليه وآله: "أنت مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى" وقوله صلى الله عليه وآله: "من كنت مولاه فعلي مولاه". ونسي سعد الرابعة.

##### قول معاوية لابن عباس أنى لاحبك لخصال أربع مع مغفرتى لك خصالا أربعا

#### 4-35 حدثنا علي بن أحمد بن موسى رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن يحيى ابن زكريا القطان قال: حدثنا أبومحمد بكر بن عبد الله بن حبيب قال: حدثنا العباس ابن الفرج قال: حدثنا أبوسلمة الغفاري قال: حدثني عبـد الله بن إبراهيـم بن أبـي

ibn Abi Forut, on the authority of Abdul Malik ibn Marvan, “Once I was
with Muawiyah and a group of the people from the Quraysh tribe were
there. Some of the Hashemites**[[370]](footnotes_2.htm#b0370)** were
among them. Muawiyah said, “O Hashemites! Why do you think you are
better than us while we both come from the same father and mother, and
we both come from the same family and country?”

Ibn Abbas**[[371]](footnotes_2.htm#b0371)** said, “We say we are better
than you for the same reason that you say you are better than the
Quraysh, and the Quraysh say they are better than the Helpers (Ansar),
and the Helpers (Ansar) say they are better than the Arabs, and the
Arabs say they are better than the non-Arabs. That is we are proud
because of God’s Prophet (MGB). You can neither deny this nor escape
from this fact.”

Muawiyah said, “O Ibn Abbas! You have been granted such a convincing
tongue with which you press your false accusations over the truth.”

Ibn Abbas said, “Shut up! Indeed falsehood can never overcome the truth.
Quit being jealous as jealousy is bad.”

Muawiyah said, “You spoke the truth. I swear by God that I like you for
four characteristics and I forgive you for four deeds. The four reasons
I like you for are: First of all I like you because of your close
relationship to God’s Prophet (MGB). The second reason is that you are a
man from my family and from the pure race of Abd
Manaf**[[372]](footnotes_2.htm#b0372)**. The third reason is that my
father was friends with your father. The fourth reason is that you are
the speaker for the Quraysh tribe and you are their learned man. And
your four deeds which I forgive you for are: your taking part in the
Battle of Siffin along with those who attacked me; your ugly act being
not assisting Uthman against the rebels who attacked him, and your
attempts against Ayesha**[[373]](footnotes_2.htm#b0373)** , plus your
rejection of Zyad being my
step-brother.**[[374]](footnotes_2.htm#b0374)**

When I considered your wicked deeds in detail, I found an excuse for
your deeds from the Book of the Honorable the Exalted God and one from
Arab poems. Your excuse based on the Book (Quran) comes from the
following verse, ***‘Others (there are who) have acknowledged their
wrong-doings: they have mixed an act that was good with another that was
evil. Perhaps Allah will turn unto them (in Mercy): for Allah is
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.’*[[375]](footnotes_2.htm#b0375)** Your
excuse based on Arab poems comes from the words of the ***Zebyan***
tribe who said, ‘Which of your brothers can you find free of faults. You
will be left without any friends if you cut off relations for small
faults.’ You should know that I have recognized your four good
characteristics and have forgiven your four deeds as the poet said, ‘I
accept good deeds from my loved ones. I forgive them for whatever else
they may have done.’”

#### فروة عن عبدالملك بن مروان قال: كنا عند معاوية ذات يوم وقد اجتمع عنده جماعة من قريش وفيهم عدة من بني هاشم، فقال معاوية: يا بني هاشم بم تفخرون علينا؟ أليس الاب والام واحدا؟ والدار والمولد واحدا؟ فقال ابن عباس: نفخر عليكم بما أصبحت تفخر به على سائر قريش، وتفخر به قريش على [سائر] الانصار، وتفخز به الانصار على سائر العرب، وتفخر به العرب على [سائر] العجم: برسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وبما لا تستطيع له إنكارا ولا منه فرارا، فقال معاوية: يا ابن عباس لقد اعطيت لسانا ذلقا، تكاد تغلب بباطلك حق سواك، فقال ابن عباس: مه فان الباطل لا يغلب الحق، ودع عنك الحسد فلبئس الشعار الحسد، فقال معاوية: صدقت أما والله إني لاحبك لخصال أربع مع مغفرتي لك خصالا أربعا، فأما إني احبك فلقرابتك من رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وأما الثانية فانك رجل من اسرتي وأهل بيتي ومن مصاص عبد مناف. وأما الثالثة فأبي كان خلا لابيك، وأما الرابعة فانك لسان قريش وزعيمها وفقيهها. وأما الاربع التي غفرت لك: فعدوك علي بصفين فيمن عدا، وإساء‌تك في خذلان عثمان فيمن أساء، وسعيك على عائشة أم المؤمنين فيمن سعى، ونفيك عني زيادا فيمن نفى، فضربت أنف هذا الامر وعينه حتى استخرجت عذرك من كتاب الله عز وجل وقول الشعراء، أما ما وافق كتاب الله عز وجل فقوله "… خَلَطُوا عَمَلاً صَالِحاً وَآخَرَ سَيِّئاً …" وأما ما قالت الشعراء فقول أخي بني ذبيان: {.t0}

 

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="50%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">على شعث أي الرجال المهذب</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">ولست بمستبق أخا لا تلمه</h4></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

#### فاعلم أني قد قبلت فيك الاربع الاولى، وغفرت لك الاربع الاخرى، وكنت في ذلك كما قال الاول:

  
  
<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="50%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">وأغفر ما قد كان من غير ذلكا</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">سأقبل ممن قد احب جميله</h4></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

#### على شعث أي الرجال المهذب {style="text-align: center"}

#### ولست بمستبق أخا لا تلمه {style="text-align: center"}

#### وأغفر ما قد كان من غير ذلكا {style="text-align: center"}

#### سأقبل ممن قد احب جميله {style="text-align: center"}

When he finished, Ibn Abbas started to respond by first reciting God’s
praises and glorifications. Then he said, ‘You mentioned that you like
me because I am close to God’s Prophet (MGB). This is incumbent upon you
and all Muslims who believe in God and His Prophet (MGB), since this
love is the reward which God’s Prophet (MGB) asked for in return for
what he brought you in terms of illumination and clear reasoning. The
Honorable the Exalted God says, ***‘…Say: "No reward do I ask of you for
this except the love of those near of
kin.’*[[376]](footnotes_2.htm#b0376)** Whoever doesn’t follow this verse
and doesn’t love his near of kin is going to be hopeless, without honor
and in Hell.

You mentioned that you like me because I am a man from your family.
Well, that is right. You wanted to perform your duty and visit your
relations of kin. You seem to be doing a lot of that these days. You are
not to be blamed today for your past mistakes.

You mentioned that you like me because my father was friends with your
father. That is right and it is certified by what the poet said about
it:

***I will strive to be loyal to my friend for as long as he is alive  
 And shall do so with his relatives should he die and I stay alive  
 Whoever honors not his pledge, I shall not trust  
 Since then he shall not pacify my swollen heart.***

You mentioned that you like me because I am the speaker for the Quraysh
tribe and I am their learned man. You likewise have a similar rank.
However, you are so noble as to mention me to be of such a rank. This is
also supported by what the poet said about it:

***Noble ones set other ones up higher than themselves  
 They honor others though they are nobler themselves***

You mentioned my animosity with you, since I attacked you at Siffin. By
God, I would have been amongst the worst creatures in the world had I
not done so. O Muawiyah! How could you even imagine that I would abandon
my cousin Ali - the Commander of the Faithful and the Master of the
Muslims - who was supported by the Emigrants (Muhajerin), the Helpers
(Ansar), and the cream of the crop of the freedom-lovers, and join you!
O Muawiyah! Then I would have serious doubts about my faith in my
religion, my moral constitution and myself.

You mentioned that I abandoned Uthman. Well, even those who were much
closer to him abandoned him and left. I followed his close associates
and those who were not so close to him. I never assisted the rebels who
revolted against him. I just abandoned
him.**[[377]](footnotes_2.htm#b0377)** You mentioned my effort made
against Ayesha**[[378]](footnotes_2.htm#b0378)** . You know that she had
been ordered by the Sublime God’s Prophet (MGB) to stay behind the veil
at home, but she tore the veil, left her house and opposed the Prophet
(MGB). The way we treated with her was
appropriate.**[[379]](footnotes_2.htm#b0379)**

#### ثم أنصت فتكلم ابن عباس فقال بعد حمد الله والثناء عليه: وأما ما ذكرت أنك تحبني لقرابتي من رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله فذلك الواجب عليك وعلى كل مسلم آمن بالله وبرسوله، لانه الاجر الذي سألكم رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله على ما آتاكم به من الضياء والبرهان المبين، فقال عز وجل: " قل لا أسئلكم عليه أجرا إلا المودة في القربى" فمن لم يجب رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله إلى ما سأله خاب وخزي وكبا في جهنم، وأما ما ذكرت أني رجل من اسرتك وأهل بيتك، فذلك كذلك وإنما أردت به صلة الرحم ولعمري إنك اليوم وصول مما قد كان منك مما لا تثريب عليك فيه اليوم.

#### وأما قولك إن أبي كان خلا لابيك فقد كان ذلك، وقد سبق فيه قول الاول:

 

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="50%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">وأحفظه من بعده في الاقارب</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">سأحفظ من آخى أبي في حياته</h4></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">ولا هو عند النائبات بصاحب</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">ولست لمن لا يحفظ العهد وامقا</h4></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

#### وأما ما ذكرت من أني لسان قريش وزعيمها وفقيهها فاني لم اعط من ذلك شيئا إلا وقد اوتيته غير أنك قد أبيت بشرفك وكرمك إلا أن تفضلني، وقد سبق في ذلك قول الاول:

  
  
<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="50%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">يراه له أهلا وإن كان فاضلا</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">وكل كريم للكرام مفضل</h4></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

#### وأما ما ذكرت من عدوي عليك بصفين فوالله لو لم أفعل ذلك لكنت من ألام العالمين، أكانت نفسك تحدثك يا معاوية أني أخذل ابن عمي أمير المؤمنين وسيد المسلمين وقد حشد له المهاجرون والانصار والمصطفون الاخيار.ولم يا معاوية!! أشك في ديني؟ أم حيرة في سجيتي؟ أم ضن بنفسي؟.

#### وأما ما ذكرت من خذلان عثمان، فقد خذله من كان أمس رحما به مني ولي في الاقربين والابعدين اسوة، وإني لم أعد عليه فيمن عدا بل كففت عنه كما كف أهل المروات والحجى.

#### وأما ما ذكرت من سعيي على عائشة فان الله تعالى أمرها أن تقر في بيتها وتحتجب بسترها فلما كشفت جلباب الحياء وخالفت نبيها صلى الله عليه وآله، وسعنا ما كان منا إليها.

#### وأحفظه من بعده في الاقارب {style="text-align: center"}

#### سأحفظ من آخى أبي في حياته {style="text-align: center"}

#### ولا هو عند النائبات بصاحب {style="text-align: center"}

#### ولست لمن لا يحفظ العهد وامقا {style="text-align: center"}

#### يراه له أهلا وإن كان فاضلا {style="text-align: center"}

#### وكل كريم للكرام مفضل {style="text-align: center"}

You mentioned my rejection of your step-brotherhood with
Zyad**[[380]](footnotes_2.htm#b0380)**. However, this was not my denial
but the Prophet’s denial since he (MGB) has said, ‘the offspring belongs
to the owner of the bed and the fornicatress gets
stoned.’**[[381]](footnotes_2.htm#b0381)** Now I like to do what would
please you, whatever it may be.’

Then Amr Ibn Al-A'as started to talk and said, ‘O commander of the
faithful (referring to Muawiyah!) By God, he doesn’t like you and just
wants to fool you into thinking that he agrees with you using his sharp
tongue. He cited the poems to support this.’

Then Ibn Abbas said, ‘Indeed Amr put himself to great trouble. He should
now know that he is facing a strong opponent.’

Then Ibn Abbas added, ‘O Amr! I swear by God that I am opposed to you
for the sake of God and I shall not apologize for that. You had said, ‘I
hate Muhammad.’ The Honorable the Exalted God revealed, ‘For he who
hateth thee, he will be cut off (from Future Hope).’
**[[382]](footnotes_2.htm#b0382)**

You have been cut off from the religion and the world. You even hated
Muhammad in the Age of Ignorance!

Indeed the Blessed the Sublime God says, ‘Thou wilt not find any people
who believe in Allah and the Last Day, loving those who resist Allah and
His Messenger…’**[[383]](footnotes_2.htm#b0383)** Indeed you have always
resisted God and God’s Prophet (MGB). You did whatever you could against
the Prophet of God (MGB). You gathered all your forces - on foot or
riding - against the Prophet (MGB) until God defeated you, hanged up
your sign of deception around your neck, reduced your strength and
rejected your way. That is why you turned around and changed your
approach and re-directed your plans of animosity with the members of the
Holy Household of the Prophet (MGB). Therefore, you united with Muawiyah
for this goal. However, you should know that love for the household of
Muawiyah and no others is nothing but animosity with the Honorable the
Exalted God and His Prophet (MGB). You still have your old animosity
with and jealousy of the progeny of Abd Manaf as the poet says,

***Amr blamed me but he himself was debased  
 Near a male lion he turned into a weak
hyena*[*[384]*](footnotes_2.htm#b0384)*  
 He doesn’t equal me so I shall not fight him  
 He is not my servant so I can’t punish him!***

Amr Ibn Al-A'as wanted to reply but Muawiyah stopped him and said, ‘O
Amr! I swear by God that you cannot match him. It would be best for you
to stop it.’

#### وأما ما ذكرت من نفي زياد، فاني لم أنفه بل نفاه رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله إذ قال: "الولد للفراش وللعاهر الحجر." وإني من بعد هذا لاحب ما سرك في جميع امورك.

#### فتكلم عمرو بن العاص فقال: يا أمير المؤمنين والله ما أحبك ساعة قط غير أنه قد اعطي لسانا ذربا فقلبه كيف شاء، وإن مثلك ومثله كما قال الاول وذكر بيت شعر فقال ابن عباس إن عمرا داخل بين العظم واللحم والعصا واللحاء وقد تكلم فليستمع فقد وافق قرنا. أما والله يا عمرو إني لابغضك في الله وما أعتذر منه، إنك قمت خطيبا فقلت: أنا شانئ محمد، فأنزل الله عز وجل "إن شانئك هو الابتر" فأنت أبتر الدين والدنيا، وأنت شانئ محمد في الجاهلية والاسلام، وقد قال الله تبارك وتعالى: "لا تجد قوما يؤمنون بالله واليوم الآخر يوادون من حاد الله ورسوله" وقد حاددت الله ورسوله قديما وحديثا ولقد جهدت على رسول الله جهدك، وأجلبت عليه بخيلك ورجلك حتى إذا غلبك الله على أمرك ورد كيدك في نحرك وأوهن قوتك وأكذب احدوثتك، نزعت وأنت حسير، ثم كدت بجهدك لعداوة أهل بيت نبيه من بعده ليس بك في [ذلك] حب معاوية ولا آل معاوية إلا العداوة لله عز وجل ولرسوله صلى الله عليه وآله مع بغضك وحسدك القديم لابناء عبد مناف ومثلك في ذلك كما قال الاول:

  
  
<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="50%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">تعرض ضبع القفر للاسد الورد</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">تعرض لي عمرو وعمرو خزاية</h4></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">ولا هو لي عبد فأبطش بالعبد</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">فما هو لي ند فأشتم عرضه</h4></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

#### فتكلم عمرو بن العاص، فقطع عليه معاوية، وقال: أما والله يا عمرو ما أنت من رجاله فان شئت فقل وإن شئت فدع.

#### تعرض ضبع القفر للاسد الورد {style="text-align: center"}

#### تعرض لي عمرو وعمرو خزاية {style="text-align: center"}

#### ولا هو لي عبد فأبطش بالعبد {style="text-align: center"}

#### فما هو لي ند فأشتم عرضه {style="text-align: center"}

Amr Ibn Al-A'as used this opportunity and became silent. Ibn Abbas said,
‘O Muawiyah! Please I beseech by God! Please let him start talking. Then
I shall debase him so much that the masters and the slaves cite his case
and restate his story in meetings and parties up until the Resurrection
Day.’

Then Ibn Abbas started to speak and said, ‘O Amr!’ However, Muawiyah put
his hand on Ibn Abbas’s mouth and said, ‘O Ibn Abbas! I swear to you to
finish this since I do not like the Syrians to hear this speech.’ Then
Ibn Abbas told Amr, ‘O blameworthy servant! Get lost.’ Then they left.”

THERE ARE FOUR TYPES OF SIN
---------------------------

4-36 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, “During the long time I have associated with
Hisham ibn al-Hakam, the most beneficial to me has been what he said
regarding the Immaculateness of the Divine Leaders. One day I asked him
about the Immaculateness of a Divine Leader. I asked him, ‘Is a Divine
Leader Immaculate?’ He replied, ‘Yes, he is.’ I asked him, ‘What does
that imply and how can we tell?’ He replied, ‘Indeed all sins are due to
the following four (and there is no fifth reason): greed, jealousy,
anger, and lustful desires. None of these exist in a Divine Leader. A
Divine Leader cannot be greedy toward this world, since greediness
arises from poverty and all the world is under the Imam’s ring and he is
the treasurer of the Muslims in this respect. So why should he be
greedy? A Divine Leader cannot be jealous, since man would be jealous of
what is above him, not what is lower than him. However, there is no one
higher than a Divine Leader. So how could he be jealous of anyone who is
lower than himself? A Divine Leader cannot get angry at any worldly
affairs unless it be for what angers the Honorable the Exalted God. The
Honorable the Exalted God has made him responsible to establish the
limits. Therefore, it is natural for him to get angry at those who blame
him for doing so, and be nice to some regarding their religion so as to
uphold the Honorable the Exalted God’s established limits. A Divine
Leader cannot follow lusts since he has already preferred the Hereafter
over this world. Indeed, the Honorable the Exalted God has shown him the
preferable attributes of the Hereafter just as we see the preferable
attributes of this world. He looks at the Hereafter the way we look at
this world. So how could he then prefer this world over the Hereafter?
How could one abandon looking at a beautiful face and look at an ugly
face instead? How could one pick a bad tasting dish instead of a
delicious one? How could one prefer a rough attire over a soft one? How
could one abandon the everlasting blessings of the Hereafter for the
ephemeral pleasures of this world?’”

#### فاغتنمها عمرو وسكت، فقال ابن عباس: دعه يا معاوية فوالله لاسمنه بميسم يبقى عليه عاره وشناره إلى يوم القيامه تتحدث به الاماء والعبيد ويتغنى به في المجالس ويتحدث به في المحافل، ثم قال ابن عباس: يا عمرو وابتدأ في الكلام، فمد معاوية يده فوضعها على في ابن عباس، وقال له: أقسمت عليك يا ابن عباس إلا أمسكت، وكره أن يسمع أهل الشام ما يقول ابن عباس، وكان آخر كلامه: اخسأ أيها العبد وأنت مذموم، وافترقوا.

##### وجوه الذنوب أربعة

#### 4-36 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم ابن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير قال: ما سمعت ولا استفدت من هشام بن الحكم في طول صحبتي له شيئا أحسن من هذا الكلام في عصمة الامام، فاني سألته يوما عن الامام أهو معصوم؟ فقال: نعم، فقلت: فما صفة العصمة فيه؟ وبأي شيء يعرف؟ فقال: إن جميع الذنوب [لها] أربعة أوجه لا خامس لها: الحرص والحسد والغضب والشهوه فهذه منفية عنه، لا يجوز أن يكون حريصا على هذه الدنيا وهي تحت خاتمه لانه خازن المسلمين فعلى ماذا يحرص، ولا يجوز أن يكون حسودا لان الانسان إنما يحسد من فوقه وليس فوقه أحد فكيف يحسد من هو دونه، ولا يجوز أن يغضب لشئ من امور الدنيا إلا أن يكون غضبه لله عز وجل، فان الله عز وجل قد فرض عليه إقامة الحدود وأن لا تأخذه في الله لومة لائم ولا رأفة في دينه حتى يقيم حدود الله عز وجل ولا يجوز له أن يتبع الشهوات ويؤثر الدنيا على الآخرة لان الله عز وجل حبب إليه الآخرة كما حبب إلينا الدنيا فهو ينظر إلى الآخرة كما ننظر إلى الدنيا، فهل رأيت أحدا ترك وجها حسنا لوجه قبيح وطعاما طيبا لطعام مر، وثوبا لينا لثوب خشن، ونعمة دائمة باقية لدنيا زائلة فانية.

THE REWARD OF WHOEVER GOES ON HAJJ PILGRIMAGE FOUR TIMES
--------------------------------------------------------

4-37 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
al-Hussein ibn Abil Khat’tab, on the authority of Safvan ibn Yahya, on
the authority of Mansoor ibn Hazim, “I asked Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
what the reward of one who has gone on the Hajj pilgrimage for four
times will be. The Imam (MGB) said, ‘O Mansoor! Anyone who has gone on
Hajj pilgrimage for four times will never bear the pressures of the
grave. Once he dies, his visits to the Ka’ba will appear to him to be
the most beautiful people in his grave and will pray in the corner of
his grave until the Resurrection Day, while he will be rewarded for
these prayers. You should know that the reward of each unit of these
prayers would equal the reward of one-thousand units of prayers said by
men.’”

FOUR WHICH ARE NOT ALLOWED IN FOUR
----------------------------------

4-38 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr and Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr al-Bazanty, on the authority of Aban ibn
Uthman Al-Ahmar that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Spending money
gained through the following four ways: treason, obtaining
illegitimately earned property, theft and usury is not allowed on the
four following occasions: Hajj, Umra, participation in a holy war and
giving charity.”

IF FOOD HAS FOUR CHARACTERISTICS IT IS COMPLETE
-----------------------------------------------

4-39 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih, on the authority of Isma’il ibn
Muslim al-Sakoony, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq
(MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his
forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “If food has the following four characteristics it is
complete: It is lawful; many people eat it; it is eaten by mentioning
the Blessed the Sublime God’s name; and God is praised after it is
eaten.”

THE FOUR SIGNS OF BASTARDS
--------------------------

4-40 Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Masroor - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Al-Hussein ibn Muhammad ibn Amer quoted his uncle Abdullah
ibn Amer, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Zyad, on the authority of
Sayf ibn Umayrih, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq
(MGB), “Whoever doesn’t care about what he says or what he is told

##### ثواب من حج اربع حجج

#### 4-37 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن الحسين ابن أبي الخطاب، عن صفوان بن يحيى، عن منصور بن حازم قال: سألت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام عمن حج أربع حجج ماله من الثواب، قال: يا منصور من حج أربع حجج لم تصبه ضغطة القبر أبدا، وإذا مات صور الله الحج الذي حج في صورة حسنة من أحسن ما يكون من الصور بين عينيه، تصلي في جوف قبره حتى يبعثه الله من قبره ويكون ثواب تلك الصلاة له، واعلم أن صلاة من تلك الصلاة تعدل ألف ركعة من صلاة الادميين.

##### أربع لا يجزن في أربعة

#### 4-38 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى عن محمد بن أبي عمير، وأحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي عن أبان بن عثمان الاحمر عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: أربع لا يجزن في أربع: الخيانة والغلول والسرقة والربا، لا يجزن في حج ولا عمرة ولا جهاد ولا صدقة.

##### الطعام اذا جمع أربع خصال فقد تم

#### 4-39 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن إسماعيل بن مسلم السكوني عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إذا جمع للطعام أربع خصال فقد تم: إذا كان من حلال، وكثرت الايدي عليه، وسمى الله تبارك وتعالى في أوله، وحمد في آخره.

##### لولد الزنا أربع علامات

#### 4-40 حدثنا جعفر بن محمد بن مسرور رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا الحسين بن محمد بن عامر، عن عمه عبد الله بن عامر، عن محمد بن زياد، عن سيف بن عميرة

is a sort of partner for Satan. Whoever doesn’t care about what evil
deeds he does in front of the people is a sort of partner for Satan.
Whoever gossips about a believer unduly is a sort of partner for Satan.
Whoever enjoys forbidden love and the lust of adultery is a sort of
partner for Satan. The Imam (MGB) then added, “Bastards have definite
characteristics: First, they hate us - members of the Household of the
Holy Prophet (MGB). Second, they long for the illegitimate way in which
they themselves were created. Third, they disparage the religion.
Fourth, they mistreat the people. They are only welcomed by those who
were conceived through their mother having sex with men other than her
husband, or whose mothers conceived them in their periods of
menstruation.”

GOD ADVISED MOSES ON FOUR ISSUES
--------------------------------

4-41 Ahmad ibn al-Hassan al-Qat’tan narrated that Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Sa’id al-Hamdani (al-Kufy) quoted Ali ibn al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Faz’zal,
on the authority of his father, on the authority of Harun ibn Muslim, on
the authority of Sabet ibn Abi Safiyya, on the authority of Sa’ed
al-Khifaf, on the authority of Al-Asbaq ibn al-Nobatat that the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said, “The Blessed the Sublime
God told Moses (MGB), ‘O Moses! Follow my advice to you regarding four
issues: First, try not to find faults with others as long as you do not
know whether or not your own sins are forgiven; Second, do not worry
about your share of daily bread as long as you know that my treasures
are not finished. Third, do not place hope in other’s help as long as
you know My Kingdom is lasting. Fourth, do not feel secure from the
plans of Satan for as long as Satan exists.’”

IMAM ALI HAD FOUR CHARACTERISTICS WHENEVER HE WENT TO A BATTLE
--------------------------------------------------------------

4-42 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
al-Hussein ibn Abil Khat’tab, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an,
on the authority of Al-Mufaz’zal ibn Umar, on the authority of Jabir ibn
Yazid al-Jo’afy, on the authority of Abil Zubayr (Muhammad ibn Muslim
ibn Tadras Al-Asady) al-Macci, on the authority of Jabir ibn Abdullah
al-Ansari that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “I swear by Him in whose Hands
is my soul that whenever I sent Ali to a battle I saw Gabriel along with
seventy-thousand angels on his right side and
Michael**[[385]](footnotes_2.htm#b0385)** with seventy-thousand angels
on his left side. I also saw that the angel of death (Israel) was in
front of him and there was a cloud shadowing over his head all the way
until he became victorious.”

#### قال: قال الصادق جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام: من لم يبال ما قال وما قيل فيه فهو شرك شيطان، ومن لم يبال أن يراه الناس مسيئا فهو شرك الشيطان، ومن اغتاب أخاه المؤمن من غير ترة بينهما فهو شرك شيطان، ومن شعف بمحبة الحرام وشهوة الزنا فهو شرك شيطان، ثم قال عليه السلام: إن لولد الزنا علامات أحدها بغضنا أهل البيت، وثانيها أنه يحن إلى الحرام الذي خلق منه، وثالثها الاستخفاف بالدين، ورابعها سوء المحضر للناس ولا يسئ محضر إخوانه إلا من ولد على غير فراش أبيه، أو [من] حملت به أمه في حيضها. {.t0}

##### أوصى الله عز وجل موسى بأربعة أشياء

#### 4-41 حدثنا أحمد بن الحسن القطان قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد الهمداني قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسن بن علي بن فضال، عن أبيه، عن هارون ابن مسلم، عن ثابت بن أبي صفية، عن سعد الخفاف، عن الاصبغ بن نباتة قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: قال الله تبارك وتعالى لموسى عليه السلام: يا موسى احفظ وصيتي لك بأربعة أشياء: أولهن مادمت لا ترى ذنوبك تغفر فلا تشتغل بعيوب غيرك، والثانية مادمت لا ترى كنوزي قد نفدت فلا تغتم بسبب رزقك، والثالثة مادمت لا ترى زوال ملكي فلا ترج أحدا غيري، والرابعة مادمت لا ترى الشيطان ميتا فلا تأمن مكره.

##### كان لامير المؤمنين اذا توجه في سرية أربع خصال

#### 4-42 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن محمد بن سنان، عن المفضل بن عمر، عن جابر بن يزيد الجعفي، عن أبي الزبير المكي، عن جابر بن عبد الله الانصاري قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:والذي نفسي بيده ما وجهت عليا قط في سرية إلا ونظرت إلى جبرئيل عليه السلام في سبعين ألفا من الملائكة عن يمينه، وإلى ميكائيل عن يساره في سبعين ألفا من الملائكة، وإلى ملك الموت أمامه، وإلى سحابة تظله حتى يرزق حسن الظفر.

I WONDER WHY THOSE WHO FEAR FOUR THINGS DO NOT TAKE REFUGE IN FOUR THINGS
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

4-43 Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Masroor - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Al-Hussein Muhammad ibn Amer quoted his uncle Abdullah ibn
Amer, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of a
group of the elders including Aban ibn Uthman, Hisham ibn Salim and
Muhammad ibn Himran that Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “I
wonder why those who fear the following four things do not seek refuge
in the following four things. Why doesn't the one who fears take refuge
in God's statement?: ‘For us God sufficeth, and He is the best disposer
of affairs’,**[[386]](footnotes_2.htm#b0386)** since I heard that God
added, ‘And they returned with Grace and Bounty from God; no harm ever
touched them.’ **[[387]](footnotes_2.htm#b0387)**

I wonder why doesn't the one who is sad take refuge in God's statement?:
‘There is no god but Thou: Glory to Thee: I was indeed
wrong!’,**[[388]](footnotes_2.htm#b0388)** since I heard that God added,
‘So We listened to him: and delivered him from distress: and thus do We
deliver those who have faith.’ **[[389]](footnotes_2.htm#b0389)**

I wonder why doesn't one who has been cheated take refuge in God's
statement?: ‘My (own) affair I commit to God: For God (ever) watches
over His servants’,**[[390]](footnotes_2.htm#b0390)** since I heard that
God added, ‘Then God saved him from (every) ill that they plotted
(against him).’ **[[391]](footnotes_2.htm#b0391)**

And I wonder why doesn't the one who wants this world and its ornaments
seek refuge in God's statement: ‘God's Will (be done)! There is no power
but with God!’**[[392]](footnotes_2.htm#b0392)** since I heard that
God - may His Majesty be Exalted - added, ‘If thou dost see me less than
thee in wealth and sons, it may be that my Lord will give me something
better than thy garden.’**[[393]](footnotes_2.htm#b0393)** “It may be
that” in this verse stands for inevitability.

GOD ACCEPTED ALI’S CURSE ON THOSE WHO DID NOT TESTIFY TO HIS MASTERY
--------------------------------------------------------------------

4-44 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn al-Hussein al-Sa’ed Abady quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Al-Mufaz’zal ibn Umar, on the
authority of Abil Jarud Zyad ibn al-Monzar, on the authority of Jabir
ibn Yazid al-Jo’afy, on the authority of Jabir ibn Abdullah Al-Ansari,
“Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) delivered a sermon, recited praises and
glorifications of God. Then he stated, ‘O people! There are four
individuals among the Prophet’s companions here. These four well-known
companions of God’s Prophet are Anas ibn
Malik**[[394]](footnotes_2.htm#b0394)** , Al-Bara ibn Azib, Ash’ath ibn
Qays and Khalid ibn Yazid al-Bajaly. Then Ali (MGB) turned to Anas (ibn
Malik) and said, ‘O Anas! You heard God’s Prophet (MGB) say, ‘This Ali
is the master of whomever I am the master of.’ However, you are not
testifying to my Mastery today. May God strike you with whiteness
(vitiligo**[[395]](footnotes_2.htm#b0395)** ) that shall not be hidden
by a turban.’

##### العجب لمن يفزع من أربعة كيف لا يفزع إلى أربعة

#### 4-43 حدثنا جعفر بن محمد بن مسرور رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا الحسين بن محمد ابن عامر، عن عمه عبد الله بن عامر، عن محمد بن أبي عمير قال: حدثنا جماعة من مشايخنا منهم أبان بن عثمان، وهشام بن سالم، ومحمد بن حمران، عن الصادق جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام قال: عجبت لمن فزع من أربع كيف لا يفزع إلى أربع: عجبت لمن خاف كيف لا يفزع إلى قوله عز وجل: "حسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل" فاني سمعت الله جل جلاله يقول بعقبها: "فانقلبوا بنعمة من الله وفضل لم يمسسهم سوء" وعجبت لمن اغتم كيف لا يفزع إلى قوله عز وجل: "لاَ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ أَنْتَ سُبْحَانَكَ إِنِّي كُنتُ مِنْ الظَّالِمِينَ" " فاني سمعت الله عز وجل يقول بعقبها: "فَاسْتَجَبْنَا لَهُ وَنَجَّيْنَاهُ مِنْ الْغَمِّ وَكَذَلِكَ نُنْجِي الْمُؤْمِنِينَ" وعجبت لمن مكر به كيف لا يفزع إلى قوله: "وَأُفَوِّضُ أَمْرِي إِلَى اللَّهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ بَصِيرٌ بِالْعِبَادِ" فاني سمعت الله جل وتقدس يقول بعقبها: "فَوَقَاهُ اللَّهُ سَيِّئَاتِ مَا مَكَرُوا" وعجبت لمن أراد الدنيا وزينتها كيف لا يفزع إلى قوله تبارك وتعالى: "مَا شَاءَ اللَّهُ لاَ قُوَّةَ إِلاَّ بِاللَّهِ" فاني سمعت الله عز اسمه يقول بعقبها: "إِنْ تَرَنِ أَنَا أَقَلَّ مِنْكَ مَالاً وَوَلَدًا فَعَسَى رَبِّي أَنْ يُؤْتِيَنِي خَيْرًا مِنْ جَنَّتِكَ" وعسى موجبة.

##### أربعة كتموا الشهادة لامير المؤمنين بالولاية فاستجاب الله عز وجل دعاء‌ه عليهم

#### 4-44 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين السعد آبادي، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن سنان، عن المفضل بن عمر، عن أبي الجارود زياد بن المنذر عن جابر بن يزيد الجعفي، عن جابر بن عبد الله الانصاري قال: خطبنا علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام فحمد الله وأثنى عليه، ثم قال: أيها الناس إن قدام منبركم هذا أربعة رهط من أصحاب محمد صلى الله عليه وآله منهم أنس بن مالك، والبراء بن عازب، والاشعث بن قيس الكندي، وخالد بن يزيد البجلي، ثم أقبل على أنس فقال: يا أنس إن كنت سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يقول: "من كنت مولاه فهذا علي مولاه" ثم لم تشهد لي اليوم بالولاية فلا أماتك الله حتى يبتليك ببرص لا تغطيه العمامة

And you O Ash’ath! You heard God’s Prophet (MGB) say, ‘This Ali is the
master of whomever I am the master of.’ However, you are not testifying
to my Mastery today. May God not take away your life before both your
eyes go blind!’

And you O Khalid ibn Yazid (al-Bajaly)! You heard God’s Prophet (MGB)
say, ‘This Ali is the master of whomever I am the master of. O my God!
Be friends with whomever is his friend, and be the enemy of whoever is
his enemy.’ However, you are not testifying to my Mastery today. May God
not take away your life except as it was in the Age of Ignorance!’

And you O Bara ibn Azib! You heard God’s Prophet (MGB) say, ‘This Ali is
the master of whomever I am the master of. O my God! Be friends with
whomever is his friend, and be the enemy of whoever is his enemy.’
However, you are not testifying to my Mastery today. May God not take
away your life except in the place where you emigrated from!”

Jabir ibn Abdullah al-Ansari added, “I swear by God that I saw Anas ibn
Malik**[[396]](footnotes_2.htm#b0396)** who had become ill with vitiligo
so badly that he could never cover it up with his turban. I saw Ash’ath
ibn Qays with his both of his eyes blind. He kept on saying, ‘I praise
God who fulfilled the curse of Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) on me in this
world and that Ali (MGB) did not curse me to be tortured in the
Hereafter!’ Also when Khalid ibn Yazid (al-Bajaly) died, his next of kin
buried him in the house. When the Kondeh tribe heard about this, they
brought a horse and a camel and slaughtered both in his house as it was
the common practice during the Age of Ignorance!’ And Al-Bara ibn Azib
was appointed as the governor of Yemen by Muawiyah. He died in the place
where he had migrated from.”

FOUR SAYINGS FOR SECURITY IN THIS WORLD, AND FOUR SAYING FOR SECURITY IN THE HEREAFTER
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4-45 The Georgian**[[397]](footnotes_2.htm#b0397)** Abu Muhammad Abdus
ibn Ali ibn al-Ab’bas in his house in Samarqand narrated that Abu
Muhammad Bindar ibn Ibrahim ibn Isa quoted Am’mar ibn Raja, on the
authority of Davood ibn Davood, on the authority of Abu Hormoz Nafe’ah
ibn Abdullah al-Khorasani that he had heard Ata ibn Abi Ribah quote on
the authority of Abdullah Ibn Abbas**[[398]](footnotes_2.htm#b0398)** ,
“Qabisa ibn Mukhariq al-Hilaly came to God’s Prophet (MGB) and greeted
him.

Then the Prophet (MGB) asked him, ‘O Qabisa! What have you come here
for?’ He said, ‘O Prophet of God! I have become old, lost my power, been
belittled near my next of kin, and am unable to do what I used to do.
Please teach me some words that I may benefit from God. Please shorten
them since I quickly forget. The Prophet (MGB) asked, ‘O Qabisa! What
did

#### وأما أنت يا أشعث فان كنت سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يقول: "من كنت مولاه فهذا علي مولاه" ثم لم تشهد لي اليوم بالولاية فلا أماتك الله حتى يذهب بكريمتيك، وأما أنت يا خالد بن يزيد فان كنت سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يقول: "من كنت مولاه فهذا علي مولاه اللهم وال من والاه وعاد من عاداه" ثم لم تشهد لي اليوم بالولاية فلا أماتك الله إلا ميتة جاهلية، وأما أنت يا براء بن عازب فان كنت سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يقول: "من كنت مولاه فهذا علي مولاه اللهم وال من والاه وعاد من عاداه" ثم لم تشهد لي اليوم بالولاية فلا أماتك الله إلا حيث هاجرت منه.

#### قال: جابر بن عبد الله الانصاري: والله لقد رأيت أنس بن مالك وقد ابتلى ببرص يغطيه بالعمامة فما تستره، ولقد رأيت الاشعث بن قيس وقد ذهبت كريمتاه، وهو يقول: الحمد الله الذي جعل دعاء أمير المؤمنين علي بن أبي طالب علي بالعمى في الدنيا ولم يدع علي بالعذاب في الآخرة فاعذب، وأما خالد بن يزيد فانه مات فأراد أهله أن يدفنوه وحفر له في منزله فدفن، فسمعت بذلك كندة فجاء‌ت بالخيل والابل فعقرتها على باب منزله، فمات ميتة جاهلية. وأما البراء بن عازب فانه ولاه معاوية اليمن فمات بها ومنها كان هاجر.

##### ما فيه الامان من أربع خصال في الدنيا والكلمات الاربع للاخرة

#### 4-45 حدثنا أبومحمد عبدوس بن علي بن العباس الجرجاني بسمرقند في منزله قال: حدثنا أبومحمد بندار بن إبراهيم بن عيسى قال: حدثنا عمار بن رجاء قال: حدثنا داود بن داود قال: حدثنا أبوهرمز نافع بن عبد الله الخراساني قال: سمعت عطاء بن أبي رباح يحدث، عن عبد الله بن عباس قال: قدم قبيصة بن مخارق الهلالي على رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله فسلم عليه ورحب به، ثم قال: ما جاء بك يا قبيصة؟ قال: يا رسول الله كبرت سني، وضعفت قوتي، وهنت على أهلي، وعجزت عن أشياء قد كنت أحملها فعلمني كلمات ينفعنـي الله بهن وأوجـز، فانـي

you say?’ Qabisa repeated his statement. Then the Prophet (MGB) asked
him, ‘O Qabisa! What did you say?’ Qabisa repeated. Then the Prophet
(MGB) asked him, ‘O Qabisa! What did you say?’ Qabisa repeated. Then the
Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Nothing is left around you including all the rocks,
trees and stones which have not cried in sympathizing with you. O
Qabisa! Learn this from me. For the benefits in this world, you should
say the following thrice after your morning prayer, ‘Subhanallah va
bihamde, subhanallah al-Azim va bihamde va la hule va la quwata illa
billah.’ Once you do that you would be protected against blindness,
leprosy, vitiligo**[[399]](footnotes_2.htm#b0399)** and paralysis. And
as for the Hereafter you should say, ‘Allahuma ihdani min indeka, vafiz
ala min fazlika, vanshur ala min rahmateka, vanzil ala min barakateka.’

The Prophet (MGB) said these supplications and Qabisa counted them with
his fingers. Then Abu Bakr and Umar said, ‘O Prophet of God! This uncle
of yours counts these four sayings very nicely with his fingers.’

Then the Prophet (MGB) said, ‘On the Resurrection Day, he will not
forget these supplications. They shall open up four of the gates of
Paradise and he can enter Paradise from any gate he pleases.’ Nafe’ah
(ibn Abdullah al-Khorasani) said, ‘I narrated this tradition for one of
my neighbors who was a friend of Al-Hassan (al-Basry). He narrated it
for Al-Hassan (al-Basry). Al-Hassan (al-Basry) had asked him to bring me
to him. I went to see Al-Hassan (al-Basry). He asked me about this
narration. I reiterated it. He told me, ‘O (Nafe’ah ibn Abdullah)
al-Khorasani! This narration is highly esteemed by me, while it is of
little value to you. A man had to drive a camel to Egypt to get this
narration from the governor of Egypt who knew it. That man told the
governor of Egypt, ‘I have not come to take anything from you. I have
just come to hear this narration and return.’

FOUR CHARACTERISTICS ARE DUE TO OBSESSION
-----------------------------------------

4-46 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
Isa, on the authority of Ubaydullah ibn Abdullah al-Dihqan, on the
authority of Durost ibn Abi Mansoor al-Vaseti, on the authority of
Ibrahim ibn Abdul-Hamid, on the authority of Durost ibn Abi Mansoor
al-Vaseti, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Abdul Hamid, on the authority
of Abil Hassan - the first (MGB)**[[400]](footnotes_2.htm#b0400)** ,
“The following four acts are due to obsession: eating clay, breaking up
clay, biting one’s nails, and chewing one’s beard (Trichotillomania).”
**[[401]](footnotes_2.htm#b0401)**

FOUR THINGS WILL NEVER BE SATIATED WITH FOUR OTHERS
---------------------------------------------------

4-47 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Ubaydullah, on the authority of
Abdullah ibn Maymun al-Qad’dah that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq

#### رجل نسي، فقال له: كيف قلت يا قبيصة؟فأعاده، ثم قال له: كيف قلت؟ فأعاده، ثم قال له: كيف قلت؟ فأعاد فقال: ما بقي حولك حجر ولا شجر ولا مدر إلا وقد بكى رحمة لك، يا قبيصة احفظ عني: أما لدنياك فقل: ثلاث مرات إذا صليت الغداة "سبحان الله وبحمده، سبحان الله العظيم وبحمده ولا حول ولا قوة إلا بالله" فانك إذا قلتهن آمنت من عمى وجذام وبرص وفالج، وأما لآخرتك فقل "اللهم اهدني من عندك، وأفض علي من فضلك، وانشر علي من رحمتك، وأنزل علي من بركاتك" قال فجعل رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يقولهن وقبيصة يعقد عليهن أصابعه، فقال أبوبكر وعمر: إن خالك هذا يا رسول الله لشد ما عقد عليهن أصابعه يعني على الكلمات الاربع فقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إن وافى بهن يوم القيامة لم يدعهن متعمدا فتح له أربعة أبواب من الجنة يدخل من أيها شاء. قال نافع: فحدثت بهذا الحديث جارا لي جليسا للحسن فحدث به الحسن فقال له: ايتني به، فأتيته فسألني عن الحديث فحدثته فقال: ما أغلى حديثك هذا يا خراساني عندي وأرخصه عندك، والله لقد اوطئ رجل راحلته حتى قدم على صاحب الحديث وهو والي مصر فقال: إني لم آتك لشئ مما في يدك، ثم سأله عن الحديث ثم انصرف. {.t0}

##### أربعة من الوسواس

#### 4-46 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن عبيد الله بن عبد الله الدهقان، عن درست بن أبي منصور الواسطي، عن إبراهيم بن عبدالحميد، عن أبي الحسن الاول عليه السلام قال: أربعة من الوسواس: أكل الطين، وفت الطين، وتقليم الاظفار بالاسنان، وأكل اللحية.

##### أربعة لا يشبعن من أربعة

#### 4-47 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن جعفر بن محمد بن عبيد الله، عن عبد الله بن ميمون القداح،

(MGB) said, “There are four things which will never be satiated by four
other things: the Earth will never become satiated with rain; the eyes
will never be satiated with seeing; women will never be satiated with
men and scholars will never be satiated with knowledge.”

4-48 Abul-Hassan Muhammad ibn Amr ibn al-Basry narrated that the
preacher Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Ahmad ibn Jabalat quoted
Abul Qasim Abdullah ibn Amer al-Ta’ee, on the authority of his father,
on the authority of Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB), on the authority of Musa
ibn Ja’far (MGB), on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Ali (MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn
al-Hussein (MGB), on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB) that the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said, “The Commander of the
Faithful (MGB) told the Syrian man who had asked him several questions
in the Jamea Mosque in Kufa, ‘There are four things which will ever be
satiated from four things: the Earth will never become satiated from
rain; women will never be satiated with men; the eyes will never be
satiated from seeing; and scientists will never be satiated with
knowledge.’”

FOUR CHARACTERISTICS WITH WHICH ONE WOULD BE IN GOD'S LIGHT
-----------------------------------------------------------

4-49 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Khalid, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Yunus ibn
Abdul-Rahman, on the authority of Amr ibn Abil Miqdam, on the authority
of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB)
that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Whoever has the following four
characteristics is in the Great God's light: 1- Witnessing to God's
Unity and my Prophethood prevents him from committing sins 2- Saying
‘From God we are and to Him is our return’ in times of calamity 3-
Saying ‘Praise be to the Lord of the two worlds’ when he receives some
blessings 4- Saying ‘I ask for forgiveness from Allah and repent to him"
whenever he commits a sin.’”

POSSESSING FOUR CHARACTERISTICS WOULD PERFECT ONE’S ISLAM
---------------------------------------------------------

4-50 Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Masroor - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Al-Hussein ibn Muhammad ibn Amer quoted his uncle Abdullah
ibn Amer, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the authority of
Abi Ayoob, on the authority of Abi Hamzih that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir
(MGB), on the authority of Imam Ali ibn al-Hussein as-Sajjad (MGB),
“Possessing the following four characteristics will perfect your Islam
and eliminate your sins, and you will meet your Lord while He is pleased
with you: 1- Fulfilling your promises to the people, 2- Being honest
with the people, 3- Being ashamed of what is shameful in the sight of
God and the people, 4- Being good-tempered with your family."

#### عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: أربعة لا يشبعن من أربعة: الارض من المطر، والعين من النظر، والانثى من الذكر، والعالم من العلم. {.t0}

#### 4-48 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن عمرو البصري قال: حدثنا محمد بن عبد الله بن أحمد بن جبلة الواعظ قال: حدثنا أبوالقاسم عبد الله بن أحمد بن عامر الطائي قال: حدثنا أبي قال: حدثنا علي بن موسى الرضا قال: حدثنا موسى بن جعفر قال: حدثنا جعفر بن محمد قال: حدثنا محمد بن علي قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين قال: حدثنا الحسين بن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام للشامي الذي سأله عن المسائل في جامع الكوفة: أربعة لا يشبعن من أربعة، أرض من مطر وانثى من ذكر وعين من نظر، وعالم من علم.

##### أربع خصال من كن فيه كان في نور الله الاعظم

#### 4-49 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه قال: سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد، عن أبيه، عن يونس بن عبدالرحمن، عن عمرو بن أبي المقدام، عن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أربع من كن فيه كان في نور الله الاعظم: من كانت عصمة أمره شهادة أن لا إله إلا الله وأني رسول الله، ومن إذاأصابته مصيبة قال: إنا لله وإنا إليه راجعون، ومن إذا أصاب خيرا قال: الحمد لله رب العالمين، ومن إذا أصاب خطيئة قال: أستغفر الله وأتوب إليه.

##### أربع خصال من كن فيه كمل اسلامه

#### 4-50 حدثنا جعفر بن محمد بن مسرور رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا الحسين بن محمد ابن عامر، عن عمه عبد الله بن عامر، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن أبي أيوب، عن أبي حمزة، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قال علي بن الحسين عليهما السلام: أربع من كن فيه كمل إسلامه ومحصت عنه ذنوبه ولقى ربه عز وجل وهو عنه راض: من وفى لله عز وجل بما يجعل على نفسه للناس، وصدق لسانه مع الناس، واستحيى من كل قبيح عند الله وعند الناس، وحسن خلقه مع أهله.

FOUR WORDS OF WISDOM
--------------------

4-51 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB) through a chain of
documentation to Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “There is no neighbor for
a sea. There are no friends for a King. There is no replacement for
health. There are many who receive blessings without knowing about it.”

FOUR CHARACTERISTICS IN RETURN FOR FOUR HOUSES IN PARADISE
----------------------------------------------------------

4-52 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Muawiyah ibn
Wahab that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Who would pledge to abide
by four characteristics for whom I shall guarantee four houses in
Paradise: spending in charity without fearing to become poor; being fair
to the people; greeting aloud; and not arguing although you are right.”

FOUR CHARACTERISTICS FOR WHOSE POSSESSOR THE HONORABLE THE EXALTED GOD WOULD ESTABLISH A HOME IN PARADISE
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4-53 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Khalid, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the authority of
Abdullah ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Abi Hamzih al-Sumaly that Abi
Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “God will establish a home in Paradise for
whoever does the following four things: lodges orphans; is merciful to
the weak; is kind to his parents and is kind to his slaves.”

ABANDONING FOUR CHARACTERISTICS WOULD LEAD YOU TO PARADISE
----------------------------------------------------------

4-54 Ahmad ibn Harun al-Fami - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Ja’far quoted Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saf’far, on
the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn
al-Hassan al-Farsi, on the authority of Abdullah ibn al-Hussein ibn Zayd
ibn Ali, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Whoever in my
nation abandons the following four characteristics shall go to Paradise:
getting deeply involved in this world; following selfish desires; lust
for food and lust for sex. And whoever from the women in my nation has
four characteristics shall go to Paradise: guards her honor; obey her
husband; says the five daily prayers; and fasts for the month of
Ramazan**[[402]](footnotes_2.htm#b0402)** .”

##### أربع كلمات حكم

#### 4-51 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن جعفر باسناده قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: ليس للبحر جار، ولا للملك صديق، ولا للعافية ثمن، وكم من منعم عليه وهو لا يعلم.

##### أربع خصال بأربعة ابيات في الجنة

#### 4-52 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن محمد بن سنان، عن معاوية بن وهب، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال:من يضمن لي أربعة بأربعة أبيات في الجنة؟ من أنفق ولم يخف فقرا، وأنصف الناس من نفسه، وأفشى السلام في العالم، وترك المراء وإن كان محقا.

##### أربع خصال من كن فيه بنى الله عز وجل له بيتا في الجنة

#### 4-53 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني عمي محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن عبد الله بن سنان، عن أبي حمزة الثمالي، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: أربع من كن فيه بنى الله له بيتا في الجنة: من آوى اليتيم، ورحم الضعيف، وأشفق على والديه، ورفق بمملوكه.

##### من سلم من أربع خصال فله الجنة

#### 4-54 حدثنا أحمد بن هارون الفامي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن جعفر قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن الحسن بن أبي الحسن الفارسي، عن عبد الله بن الحسين بن زيد بن علي، عن أبيه، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: من سلم من أمتي من أربع خصال فله الجنة: من الدخول في الدنيا، واتباع الهوى، وشهوة البطن، وشهوة الفرج. ومن سلم من نساء امتي من أربع خصال فلها الجنة: إذا حفظت [ما] بين رجليها، وأطاعت زوجها، وصلت خمسها، وصامت شهرها.

GOD SHALL LOOK UPON FOUR ON THE RESURRECTION DAY
------------------------------------------------

4-55 Hamzih ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Alavi - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Uthman ibn Isa, on the authority of Sama’at ibn Mihran that
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “The Honorable the Exalted God shall
look upon four on the Resurrection Day: one who has bought something and
has changed his mind, but the seller doesn’t accept; one who has helped
a needy one; one who has freed a slave; and one who has helped an
unmarried man get married.”

THE SHIITES WILL NEVER SUFFER FROM FOUR CHARACTERISTICS
-------------------------------------------------------

4-56 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of some companions, on the authority
of Ali ibn Asbat, on the authority of some companions that Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Our Shiites will never suffer from four
characteristics: being born out of adultery; begging; being gay; and
being greenish-blue eyed (like cats)**[[403]](footnotes_2.htm#b0403)**
.”

GOD WOULD PROTECT WHOMEVER HAS FOUR CHARACTERISTICS
---------------------------------------------------

4-57 Ahmad ibn Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim narrated that his father
quoted his father, on the authority of his grandfather, on the authority
of Abdullah ibn Maymun**[[404]](footnotes_2.htm#b0404)** , on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his
father (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Whoever has four
characteristics shall be protected by God and taken to Paradise: being
good-tempered so as to live amongst the people; sympathizing with the
ones who have suffered from calamities; being kind to their parents; and
treating servants kindly.”

THE HONORABLE THE EXALTED GOD CHOSE FOUR OF EVERYTHING
------------------------------------------------------

4-58 Al-Hussein ibn Ahmad ibn Idris - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that his father quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of
Abu Abdullah al-Razi, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abi
Uthman, on the authority of Musa ibn Bakr, on the authority of Abil
Hassan - the first (MGB)**[[405]](footnotes_2.htm#b0405)** that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “The Blessed the Sublime God chose four of
everything. He chose Gabriel, Michael**[[406]](footnotes_2.htm#b0406)**
, Isra’fil**[[407]](footnotes_2.htm#b0407)** and the angel of death,
i.e. Israel - peace be upon them all - from amongst the angels. He chose
four from amongst the Prophets: Abraham - the Sword; David; Moses; and
me. He also chose four families and said, ‘Allah did choose Adam and
Noah, the family of Abraham, and the family of 'Imran above all
people.’**[[408]](footnotes_2.htm#b0408)** He chose four of the towns.
The Honorable the Exalted God said, ‘By the Fig and the Olive, And the
Mount of Sinai, And

##### أربعة ينظر الله عز وجل اليهم يوم القيامة

#### 4-55 حدثنا حمزة بن محمد بن أحمد العلوي رضي الله عنه قال: أخبرني علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن عثمان بن عيسى، عن سماعة بن مهران، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: أربعة ينظر الله عز وجل إليهم يوم القيامة: من أقال نادما، أو أغاث لهفان، أو أعتق نسمة، أو زوج عزبا.

##### أربع خصال لا تبتلى الشيعة بها

#### 4-56 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن عدة من أصحابنا، عن علي بن أسباط، عن بعض أصحابه، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ما ابتلى الله به شيعتنا فلن يبتليهم بأربع: بأن يكونوا لغير رشدة أو أن يسألوا بأكفهم، أو أن يؤتوا في أدبارهم، أو أن يكون فيهم أخضر أزرق.

##### أربع خصال من كن فيه كان في كنف الله عز وجل

#### 4-57 حدثنا أحمد بن علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن عبد الله بن ميمون، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أربع من كن فيه نشر الله عليه كنفه وأدخله الجنة في رحمته: حسن خلق يعيش به في الناس، ورفق بالمكروب وشفقة على الوالدين، وإحسان إلى المملوك.

##### ان الله عز وجل اختار من كل شيء أربعة

#### 4-58 حدثنا الحسين بن أحمد بن إدريس رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني أبي قال: حدثني محمد بن أحمد قال: حدثني أبوعبد الله الرازي، عن الحسن بن علي بن أبي عثمان، عن موسى بن بكر، عن أبي الحسن الاول عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إن الله تبارك وتعالى اختار من كل شيء أربعة: اختار من الملائكة جبرئيل وميكائيل وإسرافيل وملك الموت عليهم السلام، واختار من الانبياء أربعة للسيف إبراهيم وداود وموسى وأنا، واختار من البيوتات أربعة، فقال: "إن الله اصطفى آدم ونوحا وآل إبراهيم وآل عمران على العالمين". واختار من البلدان أربعة فقال عز وجل "والتين والزيتون وطور سينين وهذا البلد الامين"

this City of security.’**[[409]](footnotes_2.htm#b0409)** In this verse
‘the Fig’ refers to Medina, ‘the Olive’ refers to Bayt ul- Muqadas (Holy
Shrine in Jerusalem) and ‘Mount of Sinai’ refers to Kufa while ‘this
city of security’ refers to Mecca. And He chose four women: Mary, Asia,
Khadijah (- the daughter of Khuwaylid)**[[410]](footnotes_2.htm#b0410)**
, and Fatimah. And He chose four of the deeds in Hajj: offering; crying
out; wearing the Ihram ritual**[[411]](footnotes_2.htm#b0411)** ; and
circumambulation. And what is meant by ‘offering’ is slaughtering and
what is meant by ‘crying out’ is the people’s outcry of ‘Labayk.
Allahuma Labayk…’**[[412]](footnotes_2.htm#b0412)** And He chose four of
the months: Rajab, Shawwal; Dhul-Qa’ade and Dhul-Hijja. And He chose
four of the days of the week: Friday; the day of
Al-Tarviat**[[413]](footnotes_2.htm#b0413)** ; the day of
Arafat**[[414]](footnotes_2.htm#b0414)** ; and the day of the offering.”

FOUR CHARACTERISTICS WHICH CAUSE GRIEF
--------------------------------------

4-59 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar and Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn
Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari who linked it up through a chain of
narrators to Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “One day the Commander of the
Faithful (MGB) was grieved and said, ‘How come I am sad! I do not
remember having sat at the doorstop; having gone in the middle of the
herd; having worn my pajamas while standing up; and having cleaned my
hands and face with my underwear.’**[[415]](footnotes_2.htm#b0415)** ”

FOUR CHARACTERISTICS WILL NEVER VANISH IN MUHAMMAD’S NATION
-----------------------------------------------------------

4-60 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his
father, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn (Abil) Hussein al-Farsi, on
the authority of Suleiman ibn Hafs al-Basry, on the authority of
Abdullah ibn al-Hussein ibn Zayd ibn al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib,
on the authority of his father Zayd ibn Ali, on the authority of his
father Ali ibn al-Hussein (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB),
on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority
of his forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “Four characteristics will never vanish in my nation
until the Resurrection Day: taking pride in their ancestry; challenging
the lineage; relying on astrology; and mourning aloud over the dead. If
a woman who mourns aloud dies without having repented, she shall be
resurrected with a shirt made of tar and an itchy armor.”

THE BODY IS SUSTAINED ON FOUR THINGS
------------------------------------

4-61 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on
the authority of Durost, on the authority of Abil Asbaq that Aba

#### فالتين المدينة والزيتون بيت المقدس وطور سينين الكوفة، وهذا البلد الامين مكة، واختار من النساء أربعا: مريم وآسية وخديجة وفاطمة، واختار من الحج أربعة: الثج والعج والاحرام والطواف، فأما الثج فالنحر، والعج ضجيج الناس بالتلبية. واختار من الاشهر أربعة: رجب وشوال وذو القعدة وذو الحجة.واختار من الايام أربعة: يوم الجمعة، ويوم التروية، ويوم عرفة، ويوم النحر. {.t0}

##### أربع خصال يتولد منها الغم

#### 4-59 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، وأحمد بن إدريس جميعا، عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري بإسناده يرفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: اغتم أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام يوما فقال: من أين اتيت فما أعلم أني جلست على عتبة باب، ولا شققت بين غنم، ولا لبست سراويلي من قيام، ولا مسحت يدي ووجهي بذيلي.

##### أربع خصال لا تزال في امة محمد صلى الله عليه وآله

#### 4-60 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه عن الحسن بن [أبي] الحسين الفارسي، عن سليمان بن حفص البصري، عن عبد الله بن الحسين بن زيد بن علي بن الحسين بن علي بن أبي طالب، عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أربعة لا تزال في امتي إلي يوم القيامة: الفخر بالاحساب والطعن في الانساب والاستسقاء بالنجوم والنياحة وإن النائحة إذا لم تتب قبل موتها تقوم يوم القيامة وعليها سربال من قطران ودرع من جرب.

##### بني الجسد على أربعة اشياء

#### 4-61 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن درست، عن أبي الاصبـغ، عن أبي عبـد الله عليـه

Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “The body is based on four things: the
spirit, the mind; the blood and the breath. Once the spirit departs the
body, the mind shall follow it. Once the spirit sees something, it will
be saved by the mind and maintained by the blood and the breath.”

MAN’S STRENGTH AND SURVIVAL DEPENDS ON FOUR THINGS
--------------------------------------------------

4-62 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn
Abil Khat’tab, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the authority
of Al-Mufaz’zal ibn Umar, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB), “Man’s strength and survival depends on four things: fire, light,
air and water. Eating and drinking are assisted by fire. Man sees and
understands by light. Man hears and smells by air. Man enjoys food and
drinks with water. If there was no heat form fire in man’s stomach, he
could not digest food or drinks. If there was no light for his eyes, he
could not see and understand. If air did not exist, his stomach would
not get heated. If water did not exist, he could not enjoy eating food
and drinking beverages.”

Al-Mufaz’zal ibn Umar added, “I asked the Imam (MGB) about the various
types of fire. He (MGB) said, ‘There are four types of fire: fire that
eats and drinks; fire that eats but doesn’t drink; fire that drinks but
doesn’t eat; and fire that neither eats nor drinks. The first is the
fire with which one eats and drinks and that is in men and animals. The
fire which eats but doesn’t drink is the fire of wood. The fire that
drinks but doesn’t eat is the fire of the trees. The fire that neither
eats nor drinks is that of flint stone and a
glowworm.**[[416]](footnotes_2.htm#b0416)**”

FOUR ACTS CORRUPT THE HEART AND DEVELOP HYPOCRISY
-------------------------------------------------

4-63 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted on the authority
of Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of
Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abi Uthman, on the authority of Musa al-Marvazy,
on the authority of Abul Hassan - the first (Al-Kazim (MGB)) that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “There are four acts which corrupt the heart and
develop hypocrisy as water helps a tree develop: listening to vain or
obscene talk; going to the door of the king's palace, and going
hunting.”

THE PROPHET LIKED FOUR TRIBES AND DISLIKED FOUR TRIBES
------------------------------------------------------

4-64 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
Isa ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Ja’far al-Ja’fari, on
the authority of Al-Reza (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on
the authority of his forefathers (MGB), “God’s Prophet (MGB) liked four
tribes: the Helpers (Ansar); Abdul Qyas; Aslam; and Tamim tribe. God’s
Prophet (MGB) disliked four tribes: the Umayyads; the Hanif tribe; the
Thaqif tribe; and the Hazil tribe. The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘My mother
who delivered me was not from the Bakr tribe or the Thaqif tribe.’ He
(MGB) also said, ‘There are some noble people in all tribes except for
the Umayyads.’”

#### السلام قال: بني الجسد على أربعة أشياء [على] الروح والعقل، والدم والنفس فإذا خرج الروح تبعه العقل، وإذا رأى الروح شيئا حفظه عليه العقل وبقي الدم والنفس. {.t0}

##### قوام الانسان وبقاؤه بأربعة، والنيران أربعة

#### 4-62 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن محمد بن سنان، عن المفضل بن عمر، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قوام الانسان وبقاؤه بأربعة: بالنار والنور والريح والماء، فبالنار يأكل ويشرب، وبالنور يبصر ويعقل، وبالريح يسمع ويشم، وبالماء يجد لذة الطعام والشراب، فلولا النار في معدته لما هضمت الطعام والشراب، ولولا أن النور في بصره لما أبصر ولا عقل، ولولا الريح لما التهبت نار المعدة، ولولا الماء لم يجد لذة الطعام والشراب. قال: وسألته عن النيران، فقال: النيران أربعة: نار تأكل وتشرب، ونار تأكل ولا تشرب، ونار تشرب ولا تأكل، ونار لا تأكل ولا تشرب. فالنار التي تأكل وتشرب فنار ابن آدم وجميع الحيوان، والتي تأكل ولا تشرب فنار الوقود، والتي تشرب ولا تأكل فنار الشجرة، والتي لا تأكل ولا تشرب فنار القداحة والحباحب.

##### أربع خصال يفسدن القلب وينبتن النفاق

#### 4-63 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أحمد قال: روى الحسن بن علي بن أبي عثمان، عن موسى المروزي، عن أبي الحسن الاول عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أربع يفسدن القلب وينبتن النفاق في القلب كما ينبت الماء الشجر: استماع اللهو، والبذاء، واتيان باب السلطان، وطلب الصيد.

##### كان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يحب أربع قبائل ويبغض أربع قبائل

#### 4-64 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني محمد بن عيسى بن عبيد، عن سليمان بن جعفر الجعفري، عن الرضا، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن آبائه عليهم السلام أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله كان يحب أربع قبائل: كان يحب الانصار، وعبدالقيس، وأسلم، وبني تميم، وكان يبغض بني امية، وبني حنيف وبني ثقيف وبني هذيل وكان عليه السلام يقول: لم تلدني امي بكرية ولا ثقفية، وكان عليه السلام يقول: في كل حي نجيب إلا في بني امية.

FOUR ACTS WILL MAKE THE HEART PERISH
------------------------------------

4-65 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted Harun ibn Muslim, on the
authority of Mus’adat ibn Sadaqah, on the authority of Ja’far ibn
Muhammad (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB) that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “Four acts will make the heart perish: committing sins
continuously; talking with women often; arguing with a fool, (since you
keep talking with him, but he will never be guided to the right way),
and associating with the dead!” They asked him what he meant by the
dead? The Prophet of God (MGB) said, “All the rich who live in ease and
luxury.”

THE EARTH SHALL NEVER BE VOID OF FOUR GROUPS OF BELIEVERS
---------------------------------------------------------

4-66 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
al-Hussein ibn Abil Khat’tab, on the authority of Uthman ibn Isa, on the
authority of Khalid ibn Najih, on the authority of one of the Immaculate
Imams (MGB), “The Earth will never be void of four groups of believers.
Sometimes there will be more than that but it will never be less just as
a tent would not stay upright without four ropes and a middle pillar.”

FOUR THINGS WITH WHICH YOU WILL NOT NEED ANY MEDICATION
-------------------------------------------------------

4-67 Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Musa - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Zakariya al-Qat’tan quoted Bakr ibn Abdullah
ibn Habib, on the authority of Uthman ibn Ubayd, on the authority of
Hodbat ibn Khalid al-Qaysi, on the authority of Mobarak ibn Fuzalat, on
the authority of Al-Asbaq ibn al-Nobatat that the Commander of the
Faithful Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) told his son Al-Hassan (MGB), “O my
dear son! I will teach you four things by which you become needless of
any medication.” He (MGB) said, “O Commander of the Faithful! Yes.” The
Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, “Never eat unless you are not
hungry. Stop eating while you are still hungry; chew everything you eat
very well; go to the toilet before going to bed. If you follow these
instructions you will never need any medication.”

FOUR CHARACTERISTICS NOT ATTRIBUTED TO A BELIEVER
-------------------------------------------------

4-68 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad, on the
authority of Abu Abdullah al-Razi, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali
ibn Abi Uthman, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Abi
Basir, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “There are four
characteristics which do not belong to a believer: he is not insane; he
doesn’t go around begging at the people’s doors; he is not born of
adultery and he is not gay.”

##### أربع خصال يمتن القلب

#### 4-65 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري عن هارون بن مسلم، عن مسعدة بن صدقة، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أربع يمتن القلب: الذنب على الذنب، وكثرة مناقشة النساءيعني محادثتهن ومماراة الاحمق تقول ويقول ولا يرجع إلى خير [أبدا]، ومجالسة الموتى، فقيل له: يا رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وما الموتى؟ قال كل غني مترف.

##### لا تخلو الارض من أربعة من المؤمنين

#### 4-66 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال حدثنا سعد بن عبدالله عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب عن عثمان بن عيسى عن خالد بن نجيح عن أحدهما عليهما السلام قال: ليس تخلو الارض من أربعة من المؤمنين وقد يكونون أكثر ولا يكونون أقل من أربعة وذلك أن الفسطاط لا يقوم إلا بأربعة أطناب والعمود في وسطه.

##### أربع خصال يستغنى بها عن الطب

#### 4-67 حدثنا علي بن أحمد بن موسى رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن يحيى ابن زكريا القطان قال: حدثنا بكر بن عبد الله بن حبيب قال: حدثنا عثمان بن عبيد قال: حدثنا هدبة بن خالد القيسي قال: حدثنا مبارك بن فضالة، عن الاصبع بن نباتة قال: قال أمير المؤمنين علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام للحسن ابنه عليه السلام: يا بني ألا اعلمك أربع خصال تستغني بها عن الطب، فقال: بلى يا أمير المؤمنين، قال: لا تجلس على الطعام إلا وأنت جائع، ولا تقم عن الطعام إلا وأنت تشتهيه، وجود المضغ، وإذا نمت فاعرض نفسك على الخلاء. فاذا استعملت هذا استغنيت عن الطب.

##### أربع خصال لا تكون في مؤمن

#### 4-68 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن أحمد بن محمد قال: حدثني أبوعبد الله الرازي، عن الحسن بن علي بن أبي عثمان، عن أبيه، عن أبي بصير، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: أربع خصال لا تكون في مؤمن: لا يكون مجنونا، ولا يسأل عن أبواب الناس ولا يولد من الزنا، ولا ينكح في دبره.
