Section 2
=========

**Section 2**

GOD HAS TAKEN A PLEDGE FROM A BELIEVER ON FOUR ISSUES
-----------------------------------------------------

4-69 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Yaqoob
ibn Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an who linked it up
through a chain of narrators to Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “God has
received a pledge from the believer so that his speech doesn’t become
accepted, they do not believe his narration, he doesn’t take revenge
from his enemy unless he divulges himself because every believer is
silent.”

THE FOUR PROBLEMS THAT A BELIEVER ALWAYS FACES
----------------------------------------------

4-70 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
al-Hussein ibn Abil Khat’tab, on the authority of Ali ibn Asbat, on the
authority of Malik, on the authority of Mosma’ ibn Malik, on the
authority of Sama’at that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “O Sama’at!
There are always four problems that a believer faces: 1- A neighbor to
bother him 2- Satan tries to deviate him 3- A hypocrite to always follow
him and 4- A jealous believer.” He (MGB) then added, ‘O Sama’at! Do you
want me to tell you which one is the worst?’ I said, ‘Yes. Which one?’
The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘A jealous believer is the worst, because a
jealous believer will say bad things about him, and others will believe
him.’”

FOUR INSTANCES WITH A QUICK CHASTISEMENT
----------------------------------------

4-71 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Hussein ibn Sa’id, on
the authority of Sa’id ibn al-Hassan ibn al-Haseen, on the authority of
Musa ibn al-Qasim, on the authority of Safvan ibn Yahya, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn Bakir, on the authority of his father that Abi
Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “There are four things for which there will
be a quick chastisement. The chastisement for one who does you evil,
although you did him well; the chastisement of one whom you did not
oppress, but he oppresses you; the chastisement of one who makes a
pledge to you with the intention of breaking it, while you intend to
honor it; and the chastisement of one whom you visit, but he breaks off
the ties of kinship.”

4-72 Abul Hussein Muhammad ibn Ali ibn ash-Shah narrated that Abu Hamid
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hussein quoted on the authority of Abu Yazid
Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Khalidy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn
Salih al-Tamimy, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Anas ibn Muhammad Abu Malik, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the authority of his father

##### أخذ الله عز وجل ميثاق المؤمن على أربعة

#### 4-69 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن سنان يرفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: أخذ الله عز وجل ميثاق المؤمن على أن لا يقبل قوله، ولا يصدق حديثه، ولا ينتصف من عدوه، ولا يشفي غيظه إلا بفضيحة نفسه لان كل مؤمن ملجم.

##### لا ينفك المؤمن من أربع خصال

#### 4-70 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن علي بن أسباط، عن مالك، عن مسمع بن مالك، عن سماعة، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام أنه قال:يا سماعة لا ينفك المؤمن من خصال أربع: من جار يؤذيه، وشيطان يغويه، ومنافق يقفو أثره، ومؤمن يحسده، ثم قال: يا سماعة أما إنه أشدهم عليه، قلت: كيف ذاك؟ قال: إنه يقول فيه القول فيصدق عليه.

##### أربعة اسرع شيء عقوبة

#### 4-71 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن الحسين بن سعيد، عن سعيد بن الحسن بن الحصين، عن موسى ابن القاسم، عن صفوان بن يحيى، عن عبد الله بن بكير، عن أبيه، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال:أربعة أسرع شيء عقوبة رجل أحسنت إليه ويكافيك بالاحسان إليه أساء‌ة، ورجل لا تبغي عليه وهو يبغي عليك، ورجل عاهدته على أمر، فمن أمرك الوفاء له ومن أمره الغدر بك، ورجل يصل قرابته ويقطعونه.

#### 4-72 حدثنا أبوالحسين محمد بن علي بن الشاه قال: حدثنا أبوحامد أحمد ابن محمد بن الحسين قال: حدثنا أبويزيد أحمد بن خالد الخالدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن صالح التميمي قال: حدثنا أبي قال: حدثنا أنس بن محمـد أبو مـالك، عـن

(MGB), on the authority of his grandfather (MGB), on the authority of
Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) that in his will to Ali (MGB) the Prophet (MGB)
said, “O Ali! Four issues are the quickest in punishment: to recompense
the favor with mistreatment, to be hostile with one who is not hostile
to you; to break the faith of the party who keeps up his faith; and to
rupture the relations with the relatives who respect you.”

The Prophet (MGB) then added, “O Ali, rest will depart from him who is
predominated by discontent.”

FOUR THINGS EITHER OF WHICH CAN RUIN A HOME
-------------------------------------------

4-73 Al-Hussein ibn Ahmad ibn Idris - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that his father quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad on the authority of
Ahmad ibn al-Hussein ibn Sa’id, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn
al-Hassain, on the authority of Musa ibn al-Qasim al-Bajaly who through
a chain of narrators linked it up to Ali (MGB), “There are four things
either of which can destroy a home: stealing, treason, drinking
alcoholic beverages and committing adultery.”

THINGS EACH OF WHICH ARE BASED ON FOUR PILLARS
----------------------------------------------

4-74 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
al-Hussein ibn Abil Khat’tab and Ahmad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn
Faz’zal, on the authority of Ali ibn Asbat, on the authority of
Al-Hassan ibn Zayd, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Salim, on the
authority of Sa’ed ibn Tarif, on the authority of Al-Asbaq ibn
al-Nobatat that the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said,
“Faith is founded on the following four: perseverance; certitude;
justice and struggling in the way of God. There are four pillars of
perseverance: courage, fear, piety, and awaiting. Anyone who is eager
for Paradise will not be entrapped in lust. Anyone who fears Hell will
abstain from committing forbidden acts. Calamities will be easy to bear
for anyone who is pious in this world. Anyone who awaits death will
attempt to do good deeds.

There are four pillars of certitude: intelligence; foresight; wisdom;
preaching lessons; and ways of the people of the past. One who is
intelligent would have foresight. One who is wise would recognize things
from which he can learn. One who recognizes things from which he can
learn would learn the right approach. One who learns the right approach
it is as if he is living with the experiences of the people of the past.

There are four pillars for justice: deep understanding, thorough
knowledge, good insight and great wisdom. One who understands deeply
would explain the knowledge beautifully. One who has thorough knowledge
would make acceptable decisions and one who is wise would not neglect
anything and live admirably amongst the people.

#### أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: أنه قال في وصيته له: يا علي أربعة أسرع شيء عقوبة: رجل أحسنت إليه فكافأك بالاحسان إليه إساء‌ة، ورجل لا تبغي عليه وهو يبغي عليك، ورجل عاهدته على أمر فوفيت له وغدر بك، ورجل وصل قرابته فقطعوه، ثم قال عليه السلام: يا علي من استولى عليه الضجر رحلت عنه الراحة. {.t0}

##### أربعة لا تدخل واحدة منهن بيتا الاخرب

#### 4-73 حدثنا الحسين بن أحمد بن إدريس رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أبي، عن محمد ابن أحمد، عن أحمد بن الحسين بن سعيد، عن الحسين بن الحصين، عن موسى بن القاسم البجلي باسناده يرفعه إلي علي عليه السلام قال: أربعة لا تدخل واحدة منهن بيتا إلا خرب ولم يعمر: الخيانة، والسرقة، وشرب الخمر، والزنا.

##### الاشياء التي كل واحدة منها على أربعة

#### 4-74 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، وأحمد بن الحسن بن علي بن فضال جميعا، عن علي بن أسباط عن الحسن بن زيد قال: حدثني محمد بن سالم، عن سعد بن طريف، عن الاصبغ بن نباتة قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: الايمان على أربع دعائم: على الصبر واليقين والعدل والجهاد. والصبر على أربع شعب: على الشوق، والاشفاق، والزهد، والترقب. فمن اشتاق إلى الجنة سلا عن الشهوات ومن أشفق من النار رجع عن المحرمات، ومن زهد في الدنيا تهاون بالمصيبات، ومن ارتقب الموت سارع في الخيرات.

#### واليقين على أربع شعب: على تبصرة الفطنة وتأول الحكمة، وموعظة العبرة، وسنة الاولين، فمن تبصر في الفطنة تأول الحكمة، ومن تأول الحكمة عرف العبرة ومن عرف العبرة فكأنما عاش في الاولين.

#### والعدل على أربع شعب: على غائص الفهم، وغمرة العلم، وزهرة الحكمة، وروضة الحلم، فمن فهم فسر جمل العلم، ومن علم شرح غرائب الحكم، ومن كان حليما لم يفرط في أمر يلبسه في الناس.

There are four pillars of struggling in the way of God: enjoining to do
good; forbidding evil; persistence at the war front; and hating the
corrupt people. One who enjoins to do so strengthens the back of the
believers. One who forbids from evil, defeats the hypocrites. One who
persists at the war front has done his duty. One who hates the corrupt
people and the Honorable the Exalted God’s Wrath would also raise his
wrath. This is belief, its pillars and its kinds. This is faith, its
pillars and its various types.

Atheism is founded on the following four: corruption; tyranny; doubt and
dubiosity.

There are four pillars of corruption: oppression, blind-heartedness,
ignorance, and rebellion.

One who is oppressive would belittle the truth; consider knowledgeable
ones as his enemies, and insist on committing major sins. One who is
blind-hearted would forget God, would follow his suspicions and be
defeated by Satan. One who is ignorant would be fooled by high
aspirations and would feel sorry when he realizes that these were just
mirages. One who is rebellious would be debased by God through God’s
Dominion and Majesty since he turns away from God and rebels against the
decrees of his Noble Lord.

There are four pillars of tyranny: pickiness; causing conflicts; mental
aberration and causing discord.

One who is picky would not adhere to the right. He would only get more
drowned in problems. He is always entrapped in seditions and would be
deviated away from the religion and would wander about in trouble
aimlessly.

One who causes conflicts and fights others would lose his ties with
others. He would be in real trouble. Good things will turn into bad for
him. Bad things will turn into good. Such people would not be able to
find the right way, and it would become hard for them to find their way
out. They would turn away from the religion and follow a path other than
that which the believers follow.

There are four pillars for doubt: fear; distrust; hesitation and
surrendering. One who bases his religion on doubt would not be able to
even sleep until the morning. ‘O those who dispute! ‘Then which of the
gifts of thy Lord, (O man,) wilt thou dispute
about?’**[[417]](footnotes_2.htm#b0417)** One who fears what is ahead of
him would fall over. One who hesitates in doubt would fall behind
others. They will overpass him and would be destroyed under the feet of
the devils. One who surrenders would be destroyed between the affairs of
this world and the next. Whoever adheres to certitude shall survive.
There are four pillars for dubiosity: selfishness; fooling oneself;

#### والجهاد على أربع شعب: على الامر بالمعروف، والنهي عن المنكر، والصدق في المواطن وشنآن الفاسقين فمن أمر بالمعروف شد ظهر المؤمن، ومن نهى عن المنكر أرغم أنف المنافق ومن صدق في المواطن قضى الذي عليه، ومن شنأ الفاسقين وغضب لله عز وجل غضب الله له، فذلك الايمان ودعائمه وشعبه.

#### والكفر على أربع دعائم: على الفسق، والعتو، والشك، والشبهة.

#### والفسق على أربع شعب: على الجفاء، والعمى، والغفلة، والعتو.

#### فمن جفا حقر الحق، ومقت الفقهاء، وأصر على الحنث العظيم، ومن عمى نسي الذكر واتبع الظن، وألح عليه الشيطان، ومن غفل غرته الاماني، وأخذته الحسرة إذا انكشف الغطاء، وبدا له من الله مالم يكن يحتسب،ومن عتا عن أمر الله تعالى الله عليه. ثم أذله بسلطانه، وصغره بجلاله كما فرط في جنبه، وعتا عن أمر ربه الكريم.

#### والعتو على أربع شعب: على التعمق، والتنازع، والزيغ، والشقاق. فمن تعمق لم ينب إلى الحق ولم يزدد إلا غرقا في الغمرات، فلم تحتبس عنه فتنة إلا غشيته اخرى، وانخرق دينه، فهو يهيم في أمر مريج

#### ومن نازع وخاصم قطع بينهم الفشل وذاقوا وبال أمرهم، وساء‌ت عنده الحسنة، وحسنت عنده السيئة، ومن ساء‌ت عليه الحسنة أعورت عليه طرقه واعترض عليه أمره وضاق [عليه] مخرجه، وحري أن ترجع من دينه، ويتبع غير سبيل المؤمنين. والشك على أربع شعب: على الهول، والريب، والتردد، والاستسلام [فمن جعل المراء ديدنا لم يصبح ليله] "فبأي آلاء ربك يتمارى" المتمارون فمن هاله ما بين يديه نكص على عقبيه، ومن تردد في الريب سبقه الاولون، وأدركه الآخرون، وقطعته سنابك الشياطين، ومن استسلم لهلكة الدنيا والآخرة هلك فيما بينهما ومن نجا فباليقين. والشبهة على أربع شعب على الاعجاب بالزينة وتسويل

improper thoughts; and decorating what is indeed wrong in order to make
it look right. This is how by selfishness one blocks off what is right.
One who fools himself would be entrapped in the fire of lust. Improper
thoughts would greatly harm one. Decorating what is wrong to look like
right would cover up things with many layers of darkness. These were the
various categories of atheism, its foundations and its various types.
Hypocrisy is founded upon four things: selfishness, light-headedness,
animosity and greed.

There are four pillars for selfishness: trespassing, animosity, lust and
rebellion. One who trespasses would be in a lot of trouble. He would
never be calm. One who doesn’t control lust would wade in ice. One who
rebels would undoubtedly go astray.

And the various types of light-headedness are: sluggishness, being
deceived, postponing deeds to a later time and having great
expectations. One who acts sluggishly will not act according to God’s
religion. One who postpones the deeds will put them off until he dies.
If man did not have any great expectations, he would act according to
his duties. If man doesn’t know his duties, he would badly die in fear.
There are four types of animosity: haughtiness; pride; supporting one
side; and being biased. One who is haughty would fall behind. One who is
too proud would become corrupt. One who supports one side would be
insisting on sins. One who is biased would be wicked. And greed can be
classified into the following four categories: undue happiness and
cheerfulness, stubbornness and hoarding up. Undue happiness and
cheerfulness are not pleasant in the sight of the Honorable the Exalted
God. Stubbornness is an evil thing which would entrap one in sins.
Hoarding up would imply changing what could be useful into what is bad.
These were the various categories of hypocrisy, its foundations and its
various types.

NAJDAT AL-HARURI WROTE TO IBN ABBAS ABOUT FOUR ISSUES
-----------------------------------------------------

4-75 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
and Abdullah - the sons of Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Hammad ibn Uthman al-Nab, on
the authority of Ubaydullah ibn Ali Al-Halabi that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB) said, “A foreigner Najdat wrote to Ibn
Abbas**[[418]](footnotes_2.htm#b0418)** and asked him about four issues:
1-Does God’s Prophet (MGB) involve women in war? Does the Prophet (MGB)
give women any share of the booties? 2-Who is the alms-tax given to? 3-
When is an orphan considered to be a grown-up? 4- What about killing the
children of atheists?

#### النفس، وتأول الفرج وتلبس الحق بالباطل، وذلك بأن الزينة تزيل على البينة وأن تسويل النفس يقحم على الشهوة، وإن الفرج يميل ميلا عظيما، {.t0}

#### وإن التلبس ظلمات بعضها فوق بعض، فذلك الكفر ودعائمه وشعبه.

#### والنفاق على أربع دعائم: على الهوى، والهوينا، والحفيظة، والطمع.

#### والهوى على أربع شعب: على البغي، والعدوان، والشهوة، والطغيان، فمن بغي كثرت غوائله وعلاته، ومن اعتدى لم تؤمن بوائقه، ولم يسلم قلبه، ومن لم يعزل نفسه عن الشهوات خاض في الخبيثات، ومن طغى ضل على غير يقين ولا حجة له وشعب الهوينا الهيبة، والغرة، والمماطلة والامل، وذلك لان الهيبة ترد على دين الحق، وتفرط المماطلة في العمل حتى يقدم الاجل، ولولا الامل علم الانسان حسب ما هو فيه، ولو علم حسب ما هو فيه مات من الهول والوجل.

#### وشعب الحفيظة: الكبر، والفخر، والحمية، والعصبية، فمن استكبر أدبر، ومن فخر فجر، ومن حمى أضر، ومن أخذته العصبية جار، فبئس الامر أمر بين الاستكبار والادبار، وفجور وجور.

#### وشعب الطمع أربع: الفرح، والمرح، واللجاجة، والتكاثر، فالفرح مكروه عند الله عز وجل، والمرح خيلاء، واللجاجة بلاء لمن اضطرته إلى حبائل الآثام، والتكاثر لهو وشغل واستبدال الذي هو أدنى بالذي هو خير، فذلك النفاق ودعائمه وشعبه.

##### كتب نجدة الحروري إلى ابن عباس يسأله عن أربعة أشياء

#### 4-75 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد، وعبد الله ابني محمد بن عيسى، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن حماد بن عثمان الناب، عن عبيد الله بن علي الحلبي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إن نجدة الحروري كتب إلى ابن عباس يسأله عن أربعة أشياء هل كان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يغزو بالنساء؟ وهل كان يقسم لهن شيئا؟ وعن موضع الخمس، وعن اليتيم متى ينقطع يتمه؟ وعن قتل الذراري.

Ibn Abbas replied, “Regarding what you asked, God’s Prophet (MGB) let
women benefit from the booties, but it was not considered as a share. We
believe that the alms-tax should be given to us, but some people think
that it doesn’t belong to us. Therefore we are patient. An orphan is
considered to have grown up when he attains sexual maturity, unless he
is retarded or foolish. In such conditions, his custodian would be in
charge of his belongings. The Prophet of God would not kill any of the
children of the atheists. It was Khizr who killed the atheists and let
go of the believers of the children of the atheists. You may act
accordingly, if you possess the knowledge which Khizr possessed.”

WHITE HAIR GROWS IN FOUR PLACES
-------------------------------

4-76 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of Ali ibn Muhammad, on the
authority of Abi Ayoob Al-Madini, on the authority of Suleiman
al-Ja’fari, on the authority of Al-Reza (MGB), on the authority of his
forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “White hair on the forehead is a sign of prosperity. White
hair on the two cheeks is a sign of generosity. White hair on the head
is a sign of bravery and white hair on the back of the head is a sign of
misfortune.”

THERE ARE FOUR TYPES OF PEOPLE
------------------------------

4-77 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father and Muhammad
ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn
Abdullah quoted Al-Haysam ibn Abi Masruq al-Nehdi who linked it up
through a chain of narrators to Al-Hassan ibn Ali (MGB), “There are four
types of people. Some people are good-tempered but poor. Some people are
wealthy but bad-tempered. Some people are neither good-tempered nor
wealthy. They are the worst of the people. However, there are some
people who are both good-tempered and wealthy. They are the best of the
people.”

A DISTANCE AS SHORT AS FOUR FINGERS BETWEEN RIGHT AND WRONG
-----------------------------------------------------------

4-78 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Ali ibn al-Sindy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Amr ibn
Sa’id, on the authority of Kiram, on the authority of Maysar ibn Abdul
Aziz that he had heard Aba Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) say, “The Commander of
the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) was asked, ‘How much distance is there
between right and wrong?’ He (MGB) replied, ‘As much as four fingers.’
The Commander of the Faithful Ali (MGB) put his hand between his ear and
eyes and said, ‘What you see by the eyes is right, but what you hear by
the ears is wrong.’”

#### فكتب إليه ابن عباس أما قولك في النساء فان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله كان يحذيهن ولا يقسم لهن شيئا، وأما الخمس فانا نزعم أنه لنا، وزعم قوم أنه ليس لنا فصبرنا، فأما اليتيم فانقطاع يتمه أشده وهو الاحتلام إلا أن لا تؤنس منه رشدا فيكون عندك سفيها أو ضعيفا فيمسك عليه وليه، وأما الذراري فلم يكن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله يقتلها، وكان الخضر عليه السلام يقتل كافرهم ويترك مؤمنهم، فان كنت تعلم منهم ما يعلم الخضر فأنت أعلم.

##### العلامات في الشيب في أربعة مواضع

#### 4-76 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن علي بن محمد، عن أبي أيوب المديني، عن سليمان الجعفري، عن الرضا، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الشيب في مقدم الرأس يمن، وفي العارضين سخاء، وفي الذوائب شجاعة، وفي القفا شوم.

##### الناس أربعة

#### 4-77 حدثني أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن الهيثم بن أبي مسروق النهدي بإسناده يرفعه إلى الحسن بن علي عليهما السلام قال:الناس أربعة: فمنهم من له خلق ولا خلاق له، ومنهم من له خلاق ولا خلق له، ومنهم من لا خلق ولا خلاق له، وذلك [من] شر الناس، ومنهم من له خلق وخلاق فذلك خير الناس.

##### بين الحق والباطل أربع أصابع

#### 4-78 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن علي بن السندي، عن محمد بن عمرو بن سعيد، عن كرام، عن ميسر بن عبد العزيز قال:سمعت أبا جعفر عليه السلام وهو يقول: سئل أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: كم بين الحق والباطل؟ فقال: أربع أصابع، ووضع أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام يده على اذنه وعينيه فقال: ما رأته عيناك فهو الحق وما سمعته اذناك فأكثره باطل.

THE TREASURES OF TWO ORPHANS WERE FOUR PIECES OF ADVICE
-------------------------------------------------------

4-79 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
Abdul Hamid al-At’tar, on the authority of Al-Ala’ ibn Razin, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim al-Saqafy, on the authority of Abi
Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) who said the following regarding the words of the
Honorable the Exalted God, ‘…there was, beneath it, a buried treasure,
to which they were entitled.’**[[419]](footnotes_2.htm#b0419)** “I swear
by God that the treasure referred to here was not gold or silver. Rather
it was a tablet on which it was written, ‘Inni ana Allah! La ilaha illa
ana! Va Muhammad Rasuli! (Indeed I am God. There are no gods but Me.
Muhammad is My Prophet). I wonder how one who believes in death can be
happy! I wonder how one who believes in the Reckoning and the
Resurrection Day can laugh! I wonder how one who believes in destiny can
doubt the fact that God would send down the daily bread! I wonder how
one who has seen this world can deny the Hereafter!”

FOUR PEOPLE WHOM YOU SHOULD NOT GREET
-------------------------------------

4-80 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran
al-Ash’ari, who linked it up through a chain of narrators to the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB), “God's Prophet (MGB) forbade
greeting four people: a drunk person, a sculptor, one who throws dice,
and one who gambles. I will add one case and forbid you to greet one who
plays chess.”

FOUR THINGS CHEER YOU UP
------------------------

4-81 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his father quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Himdan ibn Suleiman, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hassan
ibn Ali ibn Faz’zal and Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Adamy, on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Muslimah, on the authority of Zyad ibn Bindar, on
the authority of Abdullah ibn Sin’an that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
said, “There are four things which will cheer you up: looking at a
beautiful face; looking at flowing water; looking at green grass; and
anointing the eyes with collyrium**[[420]](footnotes_2.htm#b0420)** at
bedtime.”

THE FOUR COMPANIONS MOST LOVED BY GOD
-------------------------------------

4-82 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah, on
the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Sayf, on the authority of his brother
Ali ibn Sayf, on the authority of his father Sayf ibn Umayrih, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Musa, on the authority of someone from the
progeny of Nofl ibn al-Mutalib, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“The companions (on a trip) most loved by the Honorable the Exalted God
are four. They will talk a lot and make too much noise if they are more
than seven.”

##### كنز اليتيمين أربع كلمات

#### 4-79 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا محمد ابن عبدالحميد العطار قال: حدثنا العلاء بن رزين، عن محمد بن مسلم الثقفي، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام في قول الله عز وجل "وكان تحته كنز لهما" قال: والله ما كان من ذهب ولا فضة وما كان إلا لوحا فيه كلمات أربع: إني أنا الله لا إله إلا أنا، ومحمد رسولي، عجبت لمن أيقن بالموت كيف يفرح قلبه، وعجبت لمن أيقن بالحساب كيف يضحك سنه، وعجبت لمن أيقن بالقدر كيف يستبطئ الله في رزقه، وعجبت لمن يرى النشأة الاولى كيف ينكر النشأة الاخرى.

##### أربعة لا يسلم عليهم

#### 4-80 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري باسناده رفعه إلى أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام قال: نهى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أن يسلم على أربعة: على السكران في سكره، وعلى من يعمل التماثيل، وعلى من يلعب بالنرد، وعلى من يلعب بالاربعة عشر، وأنا أزيدكم الخامسة أنهاكم أن تسلموا على أصحاب الشطرنج.

##### أربعة يضئن الوجه

#### 4-81 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني أبي، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن حمدان بن سليمان، عن علي بن الحسن بن علي بن فضال، ومحمد بن أحمد الادمي، عن أحمد بن محمد بن مسلمة، عن زياد بن بندار، عن عبد الله بن سنان قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: أربع يضئن الوجه: النظر إلى الوجه الحسن، والنظر إلى الماء والنظر إلى الخضرة، والكحل عند النوم.

##### أحب الصحابة إلى الله عز وجل أربعة

#### 4-82 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن الحسين بن سيف، عن أخيه علي بن سيف، عن أبيه سيف بن عميرة، عن محمد بن موسى، عن رجل من بني نوفل بن المطلب، عن أبيه، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام أنه قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أحب الصحابة إلى الله عز وجل أربعة، وما زاد قوم على سبعة إلا زاد لغطهم.

THE FIRE WILL BE FORBIDDEN FOR FOUR ON THE RESURRECTION DAY
-----------------------------------------------------------

4-83 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad al-Walid - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Al-Abbas ibn
Ma’ruf, on the authority of Sa’dan ibn Muslim, on the authority of
Sa’dan ibn Muslim, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Sin’an, on the
authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“Do you want me to tell you from whom the fire will be forbidden in the
Hereafter? The people said, “O Prophet of God! Yes.” God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “Humble ones; sociable ones; helpful ones; and simple ones.”

FOUR THINGS A LITTLE OF WHICH IS A LOT
--------------------------------------

4-84 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn
Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Salih who linked it up through a
chain of narrators to the Divine Leader, “There are four things a little
of which is a lot: fire, sleep, disease and animosity.”

USE FOUR THINGS BEFORE FOUR THINGS HAPPEN
-----------------------------------------

4-85 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Yaqoob ibn
Yazid, on the authority of Musa ibn al-Qasim, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Sa’id ibn Qazvan, on the authority of Isma’il ibn Muslim
al-Sakoony, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq(MGB), on
the authority of his forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB)
that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “You should benefit from four things
before four things happen: use your youth before you get old; use your
health before you get ill; use your wealth before you get poor; and use
your life before your death.”

4-86 Muhammad ibn Ali ibn ash-Shah narrated that Abu Hamid Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn al-Hussein quoted Abu Yazid Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Khalidy, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Salih al-Tamimy, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Anas ibn Muhammad Abu Malik, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority
of his grandfather (MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB)
that in his will to Ali (MGB) God’s Prophet (MGB) told him, “O Ali! You
should benefit from four things before four things happen: use your
youth before you get old; use your health before you get ill; use your
wealth before you get poor; and use your life before your death.”

ALL THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE PEOPLE IS IN FOUR AREAS
------------------------------------------------

4-87 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Qasim ibn
Muhammad al-Isfahani, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Davood
al-Minqari, on the authority of Sufyan ibn Ayyineh that he had heard Aba

##### تحرم النار على أربعة يوم القيامة

#### 4-83 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن العباس بن معروف، عن سعدان بن مسلم، عن عبد الله بن سنان عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ألا اخبركم بمن تحرم عليه النار غدا؟ قيل: بلى يا رسول الله، قال: الهين اللين القريب السهل.

##### أربعة القليل منها كثير

#### 4-84 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، عن صالح يرفعه باسناده قال: أربعة القليل منها كثير: النار القليل منها كثير، والنوم القليل منه كثير، والمرض القليل منه كثير، والعداوة القليل منها كثير.

##### المبادرة بأربع قبل أربع

#### 4-85 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني يعقوب ابن يزيد، عن موسى بن القاسم، عن محمد بن سعيد بن غزوان، عن إسماعيل بن مسلم السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: بادر بأربع قبل أربع، بشبابك قبل هرمك، وصحتك قبل سقمك، وغناك قبل فقرك، وحياتك قبل مماتك.

#### 4-86 حدثنا محمد بن علي بن الشاه قال: حدثنا أبوحامد أحمد بن محمد بن الحسين، قال حدثنا أبويزيد أحمد بن خالد الخالدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن صالح التميمي قال: حدثنا أبي قال: حدثني أنس بن محمد أبومالك، عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال في وصيته له: يا علي بادر بأربع قبل أربع بشبابك قبل هرمك، وصحتك قبل سقمك، وغناك قبل فقرك، وحياتك قبل موتك.

##### علم الناس كلهم موجود في أربع

#### 4-87 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن القاسم بن محمد الاصبهاني، عن سليمان بن داود المنقري، عن سفيان بن عيينة قال: سمعت أبا عبـد

Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, “I found that all the knowledge of the
people is in four areas: 1- to know your Lord; 2- to know what He has
done with you; 3- to know what He expects of you; and 4- to know what
will deviate you from your religion.”

4-88 Hamzih ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Alavi - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Ali ibn Ma’bad, on the authority of Abdullah ibn al-Qasim,
on the authority of Abdullah ibn Sin’an that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
quoted on the authority of God's Prophet (MGB), “My nation should always
do the following four: 1- They should love those who repent. 2- They
should be sympathetic with the weak. 3- They should help the good-doers.
4- They should pray for all the people.”

4-89 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Al-Qasim ibn Muhammad al-Isfahani, on the authority of
Suleiman ibn Davood al-Minqari, on the authority of Fuzayl ibn Ayaz, “I
asked Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), ‘Is
Jihad**[[421]](footnotes_2.htm#b0421)** recommended or obligatory?’ The
Imam (MGB) replied, ‘There are four types of Jihad: Two types are
obligatory; one type is recommended, but it is performed as obligatory;
one last type is recommended. The greatest jihad is fighting yourself,
trying not to commit any sins. This is obligatory. Fighting with the
infidels who attack you is also obligatory. However, the third type of
Jihad is fighting against the enemies and it is obligatory for all
people. If they abandon it, punishment will descend upon them. This type
of Jihad is recommended for the Divine Leader (MGB). At the most, the
enemies attack the people, and they will fight back. However, the type
of Jihad that is recommended is reviving the traditions. If you decide
to establish a good tradition and make an effort in developing it, your
deeds are of the best deeds, since it intends to revive the
traditions.’”

A SERVANT HAS FOUR EYES
-----------------------

4-90 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Qasim ibn
Muhammad al-Isfahani, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Davood
al-Minqari, on the authority of Sufyan ibn Ayyineh, on the authority of
Al-Zuhra that in part of a long narration, Ali ibn al-Hussein as-Sajjad
(MGB) said, “God’s servant has four eyes: two eyes with which he sees
the affairs of this world and his religion; and two inner eyes with
which he sees the affairs of the Hereafter. When God wishes good for His
servant, He opens the servants inner eyes which are in his heart, so
that he can see the affairs related to the Hereafter. However, when God
wishes anything else, He shall close his inner
eyes.**[[422]](footnotes_2.htm#b0422)** ”

#### الله عليه السلام يقول: وجدت علم الناس كلهم في أربع أولها أن تعرف ربك، والثاني أن تعرف ما صنع بك، والثالث أن تعرف ما أراد منك، والرابع أن تعرف ما يخرجك من دينك. {.t0}

##### يلزم الحق للامة في أربع

#### 4-88 حدثنا حمزة بن محمد بن أحمد العلوي رضي الله عنه قال: أخبرني علي ابن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن علي بن معبد، عن عبد الله بن القاسم، عن عبد الله ابن سنان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: يلزم الحق لامتي في أربع: يحبون التائب، ويرحمون الضعيف، ويعينون المحسن، ويستغفرون للمذنب.

##### الجهاد على أربعة أوجه

#### 4-89 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن القاسم بن محمد الاصبهاني، عن سليمان بن داود المنقري، عن فضيل بن عياض، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال، سألته عن الجهاد أسنة هو أم فريضة؟ فقال: الجهاد على أربعة أوجه: فجهادان فرض، وجهاد سنة لا يقام إلا مع فرض، وجهاد سنة، فأما أحد الفرضين فمجاهدة الرجل نفسه عن معاصي الله عز وجل، وهو من أعظم الجهاد ومجاهدة الذين يلونكم من الكفار فرض، وأما الجهاد الذي هو سنة لا يقام إلا مع فرض: فإن مجاهدة العدو فرض على جميع الامة ولو تركوا الجهاد لاتاهم العذاب، وهذا هو من عذاب الامة وهو سنة على الامام أن يأتي العدو مع الامة فيجاهدهم. وأما الجهاد الذي هو سنة فكل سنة أقامها الرجل وجاهد في إقامتها وبلوغها وإحيائها فالعمل والسعي فيها من أفضل الاعمال لانه أحيا سنة قال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: من سن سنة حسنة فله أجرها وأجر من عمل بها من غير أن ينتقص من اجورهم شيء.

##### للعبد أربع أعين

#### 4-90 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن القاسم بن محمد الاصبهاني، عن سليمان بن داود المنقري، عن سفيان بن عيينة، عن الزهري، عن علي بن الحسين عليهما السلام قال في حديث طويل يقول فيه: ألا إن للعبد أربع أعين: عينان يبصر بهما أمر دينه ودنياه، وعينان يبصر بهما أمر آخرته، فإذا أراد الله بعبد خيرا فتح له العينين اللتين في قلبه فأبصر بهما الغيب في أمر آخرته وإذا أراد به غير ذلك ترك القلب بما فيه.

THE FOUR NOBLEST CHARACTERISTICS
--------------------------------

4-91 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ali ibn
Muhammad al-Qasani, on the authority of Al-Qasim ibn Muhammad
al-Isfahani, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Davood, on the authority
of Sufyan ibn Najih that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “Solomon - the
son of David (MGB) said, ‘We have been granted whatever has been granted
to the people or not, and we have been taught whatever the people have
been taught or not. We found nothing to be better than fearing God in
public and private; frugality both at times of poverty and being
wealthy; telling the truth whether it be pleasing to us or to our loss;
and supplicating to the Honorable the Exalted God in all circumstances.”

4-92 Ja’far ibn Ali ibn al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih
al-Kufy - may God be pleased with him - narrated that his grandfather
Al-Hassan ibn Ali quoted his grandfather, on the authority of his
grandfather Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih, on the authority of Isma’il ibn
Abi Zyad (al-Sakoony ), on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq
(MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his
forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “Women are in four types: Ones with a good sustenance; ones
with good springs; ones who are suffocating anguishes and burdening
lice-infested parasites.”

The compiler of the book said, “What is meant by ‘ones with a good
sustenance’ is women who are good and have a good deal of God-given
daily sustenance. What is meant by ‘good springs’ is women who are
pregnant, even though they have some children. What is meant by
‘suffocating anguishes’ is women who are bad-tempered with their
husbands. What is meant by ‘burdening lice-infested parasites’ is bad
women with whom their husbands are stuck. Their husbands are tied up and
can neither help themselves not get away from them.”

FOUR OF THE TRADITIONS OF THE PROPHETS
--------------------------------------

4-93 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Khazzaz, on the authority of Talha
ibn Zayd, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the
authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his grandfather
(MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The
following four characteristics are from the traditions of the
Messengers: perfumes, women**[[423]](footnotes_2.htm#b0423)** , brushing
and putting on Henna.**[[424]](footnotes_2.htm#b0424)** ”

##### أربع خصال أفضل من كل شيء

#### 4-91 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن علي بن محمد القاساني، عن القاسم بن محمد الاصبهاني، عن سليمان بن داود، عن سفيان بن نجيح عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال قال سليمان بن داود عليهما السلام: اوتينا ما اوتی الناس ومالم يؤتوا، وعلمنا علم الناس ومالم يعلموا, فلم نجد شيئا أفضل من خشية الله في الغيب والمشهد، والقصد في الغنى والفقر، وكلمة الحق في الرضا والغضب، والتضرع إلى الله عز وجل في كل حال.

##### النساء أربع

#### 4-92 حدثنا جعفر بن علی بن الحسين بن علی بن عبد الله بن المغيره الکوفی رضی الله عنه، عن جده الحسن بن علي، عن جده، عن جده عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن إسماعيل بن أبي زياد (السكوني) عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه ، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: النساء أربع جامع مجمع، وربيع مربع، وكرب مقمع وغل قمل.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: جامع مجمع أي كثير الخير مخصبة وربيع مربع التي في حجرها ولد وفي بطنها آخر وكرب مقمع أي سيئة الخلق مع زوجها، وغل قمل أي هي عند زوجها كالغل القمل، وهو غل من جلد يقع فيه القمل في أكله فلا يتهيأ أن يحل (منه شيء، وهو مثل للعرب).

##### أربع خصال من سنن المرسلين

#### 4-93 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني علي بن إبراهيم ابن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن يحيى الخزاز، عن طلحة بن زيد، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أربع من سنن المرسلين: العطر، والنساء، والسواك، والحناء.

THE PRAYERS OF FOUR ARE NOT ACCEPTED
------------------------------------

4-94 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah
al-Barqy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ali al-Kufy, on the authority
of Ibn Biqah, on the authority of Zakaria ibn Muhammad, on the authority
of Abdul Malik ibn Abi Umayr that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said,
“Prayers of the following four are not accepted: an unjust leader, an
unwanted leader, a fugitive slave who has run away from his master
unjustly; and a woman who leaves her husband’s house without his
permission.”

FOUR THINGS WILL HAPPEN WHEN FOUR THINGS SPREAD
-----------------------------------------------

4-95 Ja’far ibn Ali ibn al-Hassan al-Kufy - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his grandfather ibn Ali ibn Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih
al-Kufy narrated that his grandfather Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abdullah ibn
al-Muqayrih quoted Ali ibn Hisan, on the authority of his uncle Abdul
Rahman ibn Kasir al-Hashemi that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “When
there is a lot of adultery, there will be an earthquake. When a lot of
people do not pay the alms-tax, quadrupeds will die. When the judges
issue unjust decrees, there will be no rain. When the safety of the
unbelievers who are under the protection of Islam is denied, unbelievers
will defeat the Muslims.”

THE FOUR SIGNS OF MISERY
------------------------

4-96 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn al-Hussein al-Sa’ed Abady quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah, on the authority of Al-Nawfaly, on the authority of
Al-Sakoony, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on
the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his forefathers
(MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The
following are amongst the signs of misery: solidity of the
eye**[[425]](footnotes_2.htm#b0425)** , hard-heartedness, excessive
greed to gain one’s daily bread and insisting on committing sins.”

4-97 Muhammad ibn Ali ibn ash-Shah narrated that Abu Hamid quoted Abu
Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn al-Salih al-Tamimy, on
the authority of his father, on the authority of Anas ibn Muhammad Abu
Malik, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Ja’far ibn
Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on the
authority of his grandfather (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that
God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “O Ali! The following are among the signs of
misery: solidity of the eye, hard-heartedness, having high aspirations,
and the love for a very long life.”

##### أربعة لا تقبل لهم صلاة

#### 4-94 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني عمي محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن محمد بن علي الكوفي، عن ابن بقاح عن زكريا بن محمد، عن عبدالملك بن [أبي] عمير، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: أربعة لا تقبل لهم صلاة: الامام الجائر، والرجل يؤم القوم وهم له كارهون، والعبد الآبق من مواليه من غير ضرورة، والمرأة تخرج من بيت زوجها بغير إذنه.

##### اذا فشت أربعة ظهرت أربعة

#### 4-95 حدثنا جعفر بن علي بن الحسن الكوفي رضي الله عنه، عن جده الحسن ابن علي بن عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن علي بن حسان، عن عمه عبدالرحمن بن كثير الهاشمي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إذا فشت أربعة ظهرت أربعة: إذا فشا الزنا ظهرت الزلازل، وإذا أمسكت الزكاة هلكت الماشية، وإذا جار الحاكم في القضاء أمسكت القطر من السماء، وإذا خفرت الذمة نصر المشركون على المسلمين.

##### أربع من علامات الشقاء

#### 4-96 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين السعد آبادي، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن النوفلي، عن السكوني، عن جعفر ابن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: من علامات الشقاء جمود العين وقسوة القلب، وشدة الحرص في طلب الرزق، والاصرار على الذنب.

#### 4-97 حدثنا محمد بن علي بن الشاه قال: حدثنا أبوحامد قال: حدثنا أبويزيد قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن الصالح التميمي، عن أبيه قال: حدثني أنس ابن محمد أبومالك، عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي عليهم السلام عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال: يا علي أربع خصال من الشقاء: جمود العين، وقساوة القلب وبعد الامل، وحب البقاء.

GOD SUMMARIZED EVERYTHING IN FOUR SAYINGS FOR ADAM
--------------------------------------------------

4-98 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Salt quoted
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Yusuf ibn Imran,
on the authority of Maysam ibn Yaqoob ibn Shoayb that Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “The Honorable the Exalted God revealed to Adam
(MGB) that He would summarize everything for him in four sayings. Adam
(MGB) said, ‘O Lord! What are they?’ God said, ‘One of them is for Me;
one is for you; one is between Me and you and one is between you and the
people.’ Adam (MGB) said, ‘O my Lord! Please tell them to me so that I
may learn them.’ God said, ‘The one that is for Me is that you should
worship Me and do not ascribe any partners for Me. The one which is for
you is that I will give the recompense of your work to you when you are
very needy for it. The one which is between you and Me is that you
should supplicate to Me and I will answer. The one that is between you
and the people is that you should accept for yourself whatever you
accept for the people.’”

4-99 Ahmad ibn al-Hassan al-Qat’tan, Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Haysam
al-Ajali and Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Sin’ani - may God be pleased with
them - narrated that Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Zakaria al-Qat’tan quoted Musa
ibn Ishaq, on the authority of Abu Ibrahim al-Tarjomani, on the
authority of Salih ibn Bashir Abu Bashar
al-Mari**[[426]](footnotes_2.htm#b0426)** that he had heard al-Hassan
quote on the authority of Anas ibn
Malik**[[427]](footnotes_2.htm#b0427)** quoted that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “God - may His Majesty be Exalted - said, ‘There are four
characteristics as follows: one is for Me; one is for you; one is
between Me and you and one is between you and My servants. The one that
is for Me is that you should worship Me and do not ascribe any partners
for Me. The one which is for you is to do good deeds and I will reward
you for it. The one which is between you and Me is that you should
supplicate to Me and I will answer. The one that is between you and My
servants is that you should accept for yourself whatever you accept for
people.’ There is no mention of Adam in this tradition.”

ADMONISHMENT AGAINST FRIENDSHIP WITH FOUR PEOPLE
------------------------------------------------

4-100 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd, on the
authority of Al-Qasim ibn Yusuf - the brother of Ahmad ibn Yusuf ibn
al-Qasim al-Katib, on the authority of Han’nan ibn Sadeer al-Sayrafi, on
the authority of Sadeer al-Sayrafi that Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said,
“Do not associate or become friends with the following four people:
stupid fellows; jealous people; cowards; and liars. Stupid fellows wish
to help you get some benefits, but they will bring you a loss. Jealous
people will take from you, but will not give anything in return. Cowards
will run away when you need help. They will even run away from their own
parents when they need help. Liars may often tell the truth, but no one
would believe them.”

##### جمع الله عز وجل الكلام لادم عليه السلام في أربع كلمات

#### 4-98 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن علي بن الصلت، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن سنان، عن يوسف بن عمران، عن ميثم بن يعقوب بن شعيب، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: أوحى الله عز وجل إلى آدم عليه السلام أني سأجمع لك الكلام في أربع كلمات، قال: يا رب وما هن؟ قال: واحدة لي، وواحدة لك، وواحدة فيما بيني وبينك، وواحدة فيما بينك وبين الناس، فقال: يا رب بينهن لي حتى أعلمهن، فقال: أما التي لي فتعبدني [و] لا تشرك بي شيئا، وأما التي لك فاجزيك بعملك أحوج ما تكون إليه وأما التي بيني وبينك فعليك الدعاء وعلي الاجابة، وأما التي بينك وبين الناس فترضى للناس ما ترضاه لنفسك.

#### 4-99 حدثنا أحمد بن الحسن القطان، وأحمد بن محمد بن الهيثم العجلي، ومحمد ابن أحمد السناني رضي الله عنه قالوا: حدثنا أحمد بن يحيى بن زكريا القطان قال: حدثنا موسى بن إسحاق قال: حدثنا أبوإبراهيم الترجماني قال: حدثنا صالح بن بشير أبوبشر المري قال: سمعت الحسن يحدث عن أنس بن مالك قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله فيما يروي عن ربه جل جلاله أنه قال: أربع خصال واحدة لي، وواحدة لك وواحدة فيما بيني وبينك، وواحدة فيما بينك وبين عبادي، فأما التي لي فتعبدني [و] لا تشرك بي شيئا، وأما التي لك فما عملت من خير جزيتك به، وأما التي بيني وبينك فمنك الدعاء وعلي الاجابة، وأما التي بينك وبين عبادي فأن ترضى لهم ما ترضى لنفسك. ولم يذكر آدم في هذا الحديث.

##### النهى عن مصادقة أربعة ومؤاخاتهم

#### 4-100 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن عيسى بن عبيد، عن القاسم بن يوسف أخي أحمد بن يوسف بن القاسم الكاتب، عن حنان بن سدير الصيرفي، عن سدير الصيرفي قال: قال أبوجعفر عليه السلام: لا تقارن ولا تواخ أربعة: الاحمق والبخيل والجبان والكذاب، أما الاحمق فانه يريد أن ينفعك فيضرك، وأما البخيل فانه يأخذ منك ولا يعطيك، وأما الجبان فإنه يهرب عنك وعن والديه، وأما الكذاب فإنه يصدق ولا يصدق.

FOUR WILL BENEFIT FROM KNOWLEDGE
--------------------------------

4-101 Ja’far ibn Ali ibn al-Hassan ibn al-Kufy - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his grandfather Al-Hassan ibn Ali quoted on the
authority of his great grandfather Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih, on the
authority of Al-Sakoony, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his
father**[[428]](footnotes_2.htm#b0428)** (MGB), “Knowledge is a
treasure, the key for which is asking. Therefore ask, may God have Mercy
upon you. Four people shall benefit from knowledge: those who ask
questions; those who respond to the questions; those who listen to them;
and those who like the above three.”

DO NOT TAX FOUR THINGS
----------------------

4-102 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father and Muhammad
ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with them - narrated that Muhammad
ibn Yahya al-Attar and Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn
Yahya, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isa who linked it up through a
chain of narrators to Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB), “You should not tax
four things: slaughtering; burial; buying slaves; and traveling to
Mecca.”

4-103 Abul Hussein Muhammad ibn Ali ibn ash-Shah narrated that Abu Hamid
quoted Abu Yazid Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Khalidy, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Salih al-Tamimy, on the authority of his father,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Hatam al-Qat’tan, on the authority of
Hammad ibn Amr, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB),
on the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his
grandfather (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “O Ali! Do not tax four things: an animal for offering; a
coffin; a slave, or driving an animal to Mecca.”

FOUR CAUSES TO GRANT ONE THE PERMISSION TO RETURN A SLAVE WITHIN ONE YEAR
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

4-104 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ibn Faz’zal who
narrated that Abil Hassan - the second - that is Al-Reza (MGB) said,
“One can return a slave within one year for the following four causes:
insanity; leprosy; vitiligo**[[429]](footnotes_2.htm#b0429)** and
blockage of the vagina.**[[430]](footnotes_2.htm#b0430)** ”

THE BEST FOUR FORMS OF WEALTH
-----------------------------

4-105 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on
the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn
Yazid al-Nawfaly, on the authority of Isma’il ibn Muslim al-Sakoony,

##### يؤجر في العلم أربعة

#### 4-101 حدثنا جعفر بن علي بن الحسن الكوفي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني جدي الحسن بن علي، عن جده عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال:العلم خزائن والمفاتيح السؤال فاسألوا يرحمكم الله، فإنه يؤجر في العلم أربعة: السائل، والمتكلم، والمستمع، والمحب لهم.

##### لا يماكس في أربعة اشياء

#### 4-102 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، وأحمد بن إدريس جميعا، عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى، عن محمد بن عيسى بإسناده يرفعه إلى أبي جعفر عليه السلام أنه قال:لا يماكس في أربعة أشياء: في الاضحية، والكفن وثمن النسمة، والكرى إلى مكة.

#### 4-103 حدثنا أبوالحسين محمد بن علي بن الشاه قال: حدثنا أبوحامد قال: حدثنا أبويزيد أحمد بن خالد الخالدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن صالح التميمي، عن أبيه قال: حدثنا محمد بن حاتم القطان، عن حماد بن عمرو، عن جعفر بن محمد [عن أبيه] عن جده، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: يا علي لا تماكس في أربعة أشياء: في شراء الاضحية، والكفن، والنسمة، والكرى إلى مكة.

##### أربع خصال تحدث في الرقيق خيار سنة

#### 4-104 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار قال: حدثني محمد بن أحمد، عن محمد بن عيسى قال: كان ابن فضال يروي عن أبي الحسن الثاني عليه السلام في أربعة أشياء خيار سنة: الجنون، والجذام، والبرص، والقرن.

##### خير المال أربعة أشياء

#### 4-105 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطـار قـال: حدثنـي محمـد بن أحمد، عن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن الحسين بن يزيد

on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad
(MGB)**[[431]](footnotes_2.htm#b0431)** , on the authority of his father
(MGB)**[[432]](footnotes_2.htm#b0432)** , on the authority of his
forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB), “God’s Prophet (MGB)
was asked, ‘What is the best form of wealth?’ The Prophet (MGB) replied,
‘What one cultivates for himself and has paid its alms-tax when he picks
it.’ The Prophet (MGB) was asked, ‘What is the next best form of
wealth?’ He (MGB) replied, ‘Flocks of sheep which one herds himself in
pastures where he prays, and for which he pays the alms-tax.’ He (MGB)
was asked, ‘What is the best form of wealth after sheep?’ The Prophet
(MGB) replied, ‘Cows which give milk in the morning and at night.’ He
(MGB) was asked, ‘O Prophet of God! What is the best form of wealth
after cows?’ The Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘Tall palm trees which are
deeply rooted in the ground. Whoever sells these trees, what he gets in
return is as the dust on top of the mountain which would scatter around
with the slightest wind: unless he buys another palm field instead.’ He
(MGB) was asked, ‘O Prophet of God! What is the best form of wealth
after date palms?’ The Prophet (MGB) remained silent. A man asked, ‘How
about camels?’ The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Owning camels involves a lot of
misery, hardship, and exertion. You must take it far away in the morning
and night. It lives in the desert. It has no use except for its
unfortunate owners to worry that it may be harmed.’”

4-106 Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Musa - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Kufy quoted Salih ibn Abi Himad, on
the authority of Isma’il ibn Mihran, on the authority of his father, on
the authority of Amr ibn Abil Miqdam, on the authority of Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority
of his forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “Sheep are profitable whether they face you or turn
around**[[433]](footnotes_2.htm#b0433)** . Cows are also profitable
whether they face you or turn around. However, camels are from the
regions of the satans. They cause a loss whether they face you or turn
around. They have no use except for their unfortunate owners who worry
that they may get harmed.’ The Prophet (MGB) was asked, ‘O Prophet of
God! Who should then raise camels?’ The Prophet (MGB) replied,
‘Unfortunate owners!’”

Salih ibn Abi Himad added, ‘And then Isma’il ibn Mihran recited a poem
in this respect.’”

4-107 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his
father, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Hurayz,
on the authority of Zurarah that Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “There
are four prayers which one can say at any time. They are: make-up
prayers which are said whenever one remembers to make them up; two unit
of the obligatory circumambulation prayer; praying at the time of
eclipse; and praying for the deceased. These are prayers which one can
say at any time.”

#### النوفلي عن إسماعيل بن مسلم السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: سئل رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أي المال خير؟ قال: زرع زرعه صاحبه وأصلحه وأدى حقه يوم حصاده، قيل: فأي المال بعد الزرع خير؟ قال: رجل في غنمه قد تبع بها مواضع القطر يقيم الصلاة ويؤتي الزكاة، قيل: فأي المال بعد الغنم خير؟ قال: البقر تغدو بخير وتروح بخير، قيل: فأي المال بعد البقر خير؟ قال: الراسيات في الوحل والمطعمات في المحل، نعم الشئ النخل من باعه فانما ثمنه بمنزلة رماد على رأس شاهقة اشتدت به الريح في يوم عاصف إلا أن يخلف مكانها، قيل: يا رسول الله فأي المال بعد النخل خير؟ فسكت فقال له رجل: فأين الابل؟ قال: فيها الشقاء والجفاء والعناء وبعد الدار، تغدو مدبرة وتروح مدبرة، لا يأتي خيرها إلا من جانبها الاشأم أما إنها لا تعدم الاشقياء الفجرة. {.t0}

#### 4-106 حدثنا علي بن أحمد بن موسى رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن أبي عبد الله الكوفي، عن صالح بن أبي حماد قال: حدثنا إسماعيل بن مهران، عن أبيه، عن عمرو بن أبي المقدام، عن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الغنم إذا أقبلت أقبلت وإذا أدبرت أقبلت، والبقر إذا أقبلت أقبلت وإذا أدبرت أدبرت، والابل أعنان الشياطين إذا أقبلت أدبرت وإذا أدبرت أدبرت، ولا يجئ خيرها إلا من الجانب الاشأم، قيل: يا رسول الله فمن يتخذها بعد ذا؟ قال: فأين الاشقياء الفجرة.

#### قال صالح: وأنشد إسماعيل بن مهران:

 

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="50%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">فمن شاء داراها ومن شاء باعها</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">هي المال لولا قلة الخفض حولها</h4></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

##### أربع صلوات يصليها الرجل في كل ساعة

#### 4-107حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن حماد بن عيسى، عن حريز، عن زرارة قال: قال أبوجعفر عليه السلام: أربع صلوات يصليها الرجل في كل ساعة: صلاة فاتتك فمتى ذكرتها أديتها، وصلاة ركعتي طواف الفريضة، وصلاة الكسوف، والصلاة على الميت، هؤلاء يصليهن الرجل في الساعات كلها.

#### فمن شاء داراها ومن شاء باعها {style="text-align: center"}

#### هي المال لولا قلة الخفض حولها {style="text-align: center"}

THERE ARE FOUR TYPES OF JUDGES
------------------------------

4-108 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn al-Hussein al-Sa’ed Abady quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr who linked it up to Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
saying, “There are four types of judges: 1- There are those who
unknowingly judge right. They will go to Hell. 2- There are those who
unknowingly judge wrong. They will also go to Hell. 3- There are those
who knowingly judge wrong. They will also go to Hell. 4- There are those
who knowingly judge right. They will go to Paradise.”

A MAN HAS TO PAY FOR THE EXPENSES OF FOUR
-----------------------------------------

4-109 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father and Muhammad
ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn
Yahya al-Attar and Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Musa ibn Umar, on the authority of Abdullah ibn
al-Muqayrih, on the authority of Hurayz, “I asked Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB), “Whose expenses do I have to pay for?” The Imam (MGB) replied,
“Your parents, your children and your wife.”

THE FOUR PROPHETS WHO WERE KINGS ON THE EARTH
---------------------------------------------

4-110 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of Hisham ibn Salim who quoted someone on the authority of Abi
Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) as having said, “Indeed the Blessed the Sublime
God did not appoint any of the Prophets after Noah as kings on the Earth
except for four: Zul-Qarnayn (the one with two
horns)**[[434]](footnotes_2.htm#b0434)** whose name was Ayash; David
(MGB); Solomon (MGB); and Joseph (MGB). And Ayash ruled over the areas
between the East and the West. David (MGB) ruled over the area between
the Shamat and Astakhr. This was the same as Solomon’s (MGB) territory.
Joseph (MGB) ruled over Egypt and the surrounding deserts. His reign did
not extend elsewhere.”

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him said, “This is
the way this tradition has been narrated, but I do not think that
Zul-Qarnayn was a Prophet. Rather, I believe that Zul-Qarnayn was a good
servant of God who liked God. God also liked him. He worked for the sake
of God. So God also helped him. The Commander of the Faithful (MGB) has
said, ‘Also you have a Zul-Qarnayn amongst you (meaning himself).
Zul-Qarnayn was given the rule by God as He made Saul (i.e.
Talut)**[[435]](footnotes_2.htm#b0435)** the King as the Honorable the
Exalted God says, ‘Their Prophet said to them: "(Allah)

##### القضاة أربعة

#### 4-108 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين السعد آبادي قال: حدثنا أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير رفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: القضاة أربعة: قاض قضى بالحق وهو لا يعلم أنه حق فهو في النار، وقاض قضى بالباطل وهو لا يعلم أنه باطل فهو في النار، وقاض قضى بالباطل وهو يعلم أنه باطل فهو في النار، وقاض قضى بالحق وهو يعلم أنه حق فهو في الجنة.

##### يجبر الرجل على نفقة أربعة

#### 4-109 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، وأحمد بن إدريس جميعا، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن موسى بن عمر، عن عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن حريز، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قلت: من الذي أجبر عليه وتلزمني نفقته؟ قال: الوالدان، والولد، والزوجة.

##### ملوك الانبياء في الارض أربعة

#### 4-110 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن هشام ابن سالم، عمن ذكره، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: إن الله تبارك وتعالى لم يبعث الانبياء ملوكا في الارض إلا أربعة بعد نوح: ذو القرنين واسمه عياش، وداود، وسليمان، ويوسف عليهم السلام فأما عياش فملك ما بين المشرق والمغرب، وأما داود فملك ما بين الشامات إلى بلاد اصطخر، وكذلك كان ملك سليمان، وأما يوسف فملك مصر وبراريها [و] لم يجاوزها إلى غيرها.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: جاء هذا الخبر هكذا، والصحيح الذي أعتقده في ذي القرنين أنه لم يكن نبيا وإنما كان عبدا صالحا أحب الله فأحبه الله ونصح لله فنصحه الله، قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: وفيكم مثله، وذو القرنين ملك مبعوث وليس برسول ولا نبي كما كان طالوت [ملكا] قال الله عز وجل: "وقال لهم نبيهم إن الله قد بعث لكم طالوت ملكا..." وقـد يجوز أن يذكر في جملة

hath appointed Talut as king over
you..."’**[[436]](footnotes_2.htm#b0436)** Talut was a king and it is
allowed to bring his name among the Prophets since he was like them,
although he was not a Prophet. As it is allowed for Satan which is not
an angel to be named amongst the angels as the Honorable the Exalted God
says, ‘Behold! We said to the angels, "Bow down to Adam": They bowed
down except Iblis**[[437]](footnotes_2.htm#b0437)** . He was one of the
Jinns…”’**[[438]](footnotes_2.htm#b0438)**”

4-111 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on
the authority of Musa ibn Ja’far ibn Wahab al-Baghdady, on the authority
of Ubaydullah ibn Abdullah, on the authority of Musa ibn Ibrahim
al-Marvazy, on the authority of Abil Hassan Musa ibn Ja’far (MGB) that
God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There are four attributes in sunshine. It
changes color; creates a bad smell; wears out the clothes; and causes
pain.”

FOUR KINDS OF MEDICAL TREATMENT
-------------------------------

4-112 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Yaqoob
ibn Yazid, on the authority of Ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Hafs
ibn al-Bakhtari, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “There
are four types of medical treatment. They are cupping, inhaling snuff,
inserting a suppository**[[439]](footnotes_2.htm#b0439)** , and making
an injection.”

FOUR THINGS WILL MODERATE DIGESTION
-----------------------------------

4-113 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of
Al-Sayyari, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Aslam, on the authority of
Nooh ibn Shoayb al-Neishaboory, on the authority of Abdul Aziz ibn
al-Mohtadi who linked it up through a chain of narrators to Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB), “Four things will moderate digestion: Syrian
pomegranates, cooked unripe dates; viola; and
chicory.”**[[440]](footnotes_2.htm#b0440)**

THE FOUR CHARACTERISTICS OF LEEKS
---------------------------------

4-114 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Ali al-Hamedany, on the authority of Umar
ibn Isa, on the authority of Forat ibn Ahnaf, “Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB) was questioned about leeks. The Imam (MGB) said, ‘They have four
characteristics: It makes your mouth smell fresh, it lets off the air
from the digestive system; it can stop hemorrhoids, and it can provide
immunity from leprosy if you constantly eat it.”

#### الانبياء من ليس بنبي كما يجوز أن يذكر في جملة الملائكة من ليس بملك قال الله عز وجل ثناؤه "وإذ قلنا للملائكة اسجدوا لآدم فسجدوا إلا إبليس كان من الجن" {.t0}

##### في الشمس أربع خصال

#### 4-111 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن موسى بن جعفر بن وهب البغدادي، عن عبيد الله بن عبد الله، عن موسى بن إبراهيم المروزي، عن أبي الحسن موسى بن جعفر عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: في الشمس أربع خصال: تغير اللون، وتنتن الريح، وتخلق الثياب وتورث الداء.

##### الدواء أربعة

#### 4-112 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن حفص بن البختري عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: الدواء أربعة: الحجامة، والسعوط والحقنة، والقئ.

##### أربعة يعدلن الطبايع

#### 4-113 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أحمد، [عن] السياري، عن محمد بن أسلم، عن نوح بن شعيب النيسابوري، عن عبدالعزيز بن المهتدي يرفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: أربعة يعدلن الطبايع، الرمان السوراني، والبسر المطبوخ، والبنفسج، والهندبا.

##### في الكراث أربع خصال

#### 4-114حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن محمد بن علي الهمداني، عن عمر بن عيسى، عن فرات بن أحنف قال: سئل أبوعبد الله عليه السلام عن الكراث فقال: كله فان فيه أربع خصال: يطيب النكهة، ويطرد الرياح، ويقطع البواسير، وهو أمان من الجذام لمن أدمن عليه.

FOUR SIGNS OF BLOOD PRESSURE
----------------------------

4-115 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his
father, on the authority of Isma’il ibn Marar, on the authority of Yunus
ibn Abdul-Rahman that Abil Hassan Al-Reza (MGB) said, “Blood pressure
has four signs: itching, pimples; drowsiness, and
dizziness.”**[[441]](footnotes_2.htm#b0441)**

THE FOUR HEAVENLY RIVERS
------------------------

4-116 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Hilal, on the authority of Isa ibn Abdullah al-Hashemi, on the authority
of his father, on the authority of his grandfather, on the authority of
his forefathers, on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “There are four Heavenly rivers: The Euphrates, the Nile, Sihran
and Jehran. The Euphrates provides water in this world and the
Hereafter. The Nile provides honey. Sehran provides wine and Jehran
provides milk.”**[[442]](footnotes_2.htm#b0442)**

FOUR NICKNAMES ADMONISHED AGAINST
---------------------------------

4-117 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih, on the authority of Al-Sakoony,
on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority
of his father (MGB), on the authority of his forefathers (MGB), on the
authority of Ali (MGB), “The Prophet (MGB) admonished the people against
using four nicknames: Abi Isa, Abil Hikam, Abi Malik, and Abil Qasim
which is Muhammad’s (MGB) nickname.”

THE BEST AND THE WORST FOUR NAMES
---------------------------------

4-118 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted his father,
on the authority of Ahmad ibn an-Nazr, on the authority of Amr ibn
Shimr, on the authority of Jabir, on the authority of Abi Ja’far
al-Baqir (MGB) that on the pulpit God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Indeed the
best four names are Abdullah, Abdul Rahman, Haritha and Himam. And the
worst four names are Zarar, Marrat, Harb and Zalim.”

THE FORBIDDANCE OF USING FOUR THINGS AND FOUR DISHES
----------------------------------------------------

4-119 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the authority of
Khalid ibn Jarir, on the authority of Abil Rabi’a ash-Shamy, “I asked
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) about chess and backgammon. He (MGB)

##### علامات الدم أربع

#### 4-115 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن إسماعيل بن مرار، عن يونس بن عبدالرحمن، عن أبي الحسن عليه السلام قال: علامات الدم أربع الحكة والبثرة والنعاس والدوران.

##### أربعة أنهار من الجنة

#### 4-116 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني أحمد بن هلال، عن عيسى بن عبد الله الهاشمي، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أربعة أنهار من الجنة: الفرات والنيل وسيحان وجيحان، فالفرات الماء في الدنيا والآخرة، والنيل العسل، وسيحان الخمر، وجيحان اللبن.

##### النهى عن أربع كنى

#### 4-117حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد، عن أبيه، عن عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام أن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله نهى عن أربع كنى: عن أبي عيسى، وعن أبي الحكم، وعن أبي مالك، وعن أبي القاسم إذا كان الاسم محمدا.

##### خير الاسماء أربعة، وشر الاسماء أربعة

#### 4-118حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن أحمد بن النضر، عن عمرو بن شمر، عن جابر، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله على منبره: ألا إن خير الاسماء عبد الله، وعبدالرحمن، وحارثة، وهمام، وشر الاسماء ضرار، ومرة، وحرب، وظالم.

##### النهى عن أربعة أشياء، وعن أربعة ظروف

#### 4-119 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله ابن جعفر الحميري، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن خالد بن

said, ‘God’s Prophet (MGB) said, Do not play them.’ I asked, ‘What about
listening to songs?’ He (MGB) said, ‘There is no use in it. Do not
listen to them.’ I asked, ‘What about drinking date wine?’ He (MGB)
replied, ‘God’s Prophet (MGB) has forbidden drinking any intoxicator.
All that is intoxicating is forbidden.’

I asked, ‘What about using the dishes in which wine is made?’ He (MGB)
replied, ‘God’s Prophet (MGB) has forbidden four kinds of them which
are: Daba, Mazqat, Hantam and Naqir.’ I asked, ‘What are these?’ He
(MGB) replied, ‘Daba refers to squash skin. Mazqat refers the potter’s
vat. Hantam refers to grey colored pots and Naqir refers a wooden dish
which was carved out until its middle became empty during the Age of
Ignorance and they filled it with dates. Some have said that Hantam
refers to green pots.’”

4-120 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Abi
Ishaq Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Abdullah ibn al-Hussein
ibn Zayd ibn Ali ibn al-Hussein ibn Ali Abi Talib, on the authority of
his father, on the authority of his forefathers, on the authority of Ali
(MGB), “God’s Prophet (MGB) ordered us to bury the following four
things: hair, teeth, nails and blood.”

FOUR OF THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROPHETS
-------------------------------------------

4-121 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of Aban, on the authority of Al-Halabi that Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Indeed perseverance, kindness, patience and being
good-tempered are of the characteristics of the Prophets.”

FOUR WHO CANNOT SHORTEN THEIR PRAYERS
-------------------------------------

4-122 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja’far ibn Abi Ja’far
al-Kumaydany quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Hurayz,
on the authority of Zurarah that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “The
following four people cannot shorten their prayers whether they are at
home or on a journey: quadruped keepers who rents them; those who drive
the rented quadrupeds; the (long-distance) couriers; and the desert
shepherds.”

The compiler of the book said, “Courier refers to a postman.”

#### جرير، عن أبي الربيع الشامي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: سئل عن الشطرنج والنرد قال: لا تقربوهما، قلت: فالغناء؟ قال: لا خير فيه لا تفعلوا، قلت: فالنبيذ؟ قال: نهي رسول الله عن كل مسكر، وكل مسكر حرام، قلت: فالظروف التي تصنع فيها؟ قال: نهى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله عن الدباء والمزفت والحنتم والنقير، قلت: وما ذاك قال الدباء القرع، والمزفت الدنان. والحنتم جرار الارزن، والنقير خشبة كان أهل الجاهلية ينقرونها حتى يصير لها أجواف ينبذون فيها، وقيل: إن الحنتم: الجرار الخضر. {.t0}

##### الامر بدفن أربعة أشياء

#### 4-120 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد ابن أحمد، عن أبي إسحاق إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن عبد الله بن الحسين بن زيد بن علي ابن الحسين بن علي أبي طالب، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: أمرنا رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله بدفن أربعة: الشعر والسن والظفر والدم.

##### أربع خصال من أخلاق الانبياء

#### 4-121حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن أبان، عن الحلبي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إن الصبر والبر والحلم وحسن الخلق من أخلاق الانبياء.

##### أربعة يجب عليهم التمام في سفر كانوا أو في حضر

#### 4-122حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن موسى بن جعفر بن أبي جعفر الكميداني، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن أبيه، عن حماد بن عيسى، عن حريز، عن زرارة، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: أربعة يجب عليهم التمام في سفر كانوا أو في حضر: المكاري، والكري، والاشتقان، والراعي لانه عملهم.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب: الاشتقان: البريد.

DO NOT SHORTEN PRAYERS ON FOUR OCCASIONS DUE TO GOD’S TREASURE
--------------------------------------------------------------

4-123 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn al-Nue’man, on the authority of Aba Abdullah
Al-Barqy, on the authority of Ali ibn Mahzyar and Abi Ali ibn Rashid, on
the authority of Hammad ibn Isa that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said,
“One should not shorten his prayers on four occasions due to the
Honorable the Exalted God’s Treasure. They are: the Honorable the
Exalted God’s Shrine (the Ka’ba); the Shrine of God’s Prophet (MGB); the
Shrine of the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB), and the Shrine
of Al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB).”

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “What is
meant here is that one should not shorten his prayers in these holy
shrines by the usual practice by intending to stay there for less than
ten days for one who travels.”

THE FOUR VERSES TO PROSTRATE AFTER
----------------------------------

4-124 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr
al-Bazanty, on the authority of Davood ibn Sarhan that Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “You must prostrate whenever you read either of the
following four Quranic Chapters: Al-Alaq, ‘Proclaim! (or read!) in the
name of thy Lord and Cherisher, Who created…’ (‘Iqra Bisme Rabika Al-azi
Khalaq)**[[443]](footnotes_2.htm#b0443)** ;
An-Najm**[[444]](footnotes_2.htm#b0444)** , Tanzil
al-Sajdah**[[445]](footnotes_2.htm#b0445)** ; and Ha-Mim
as-Sajdah.”**[[446]](footnotes_2.htm#b0446)**

ONE CANNOT MOVE ON THE RESURRECTION DAY UNTIL ASKED ABOUT FOUR THINGS
---------------------------------------------------------------------

4-125 Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ali Al-Asady narrated that Roqaya - the
daughter of Ishaq ibn Musa ibn Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn
al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) quoted her father - Ishaq ibn
Musa ibn Ja’far, on the authority of his father Musa ibn Ja’far (MGB),
on the authority of his father Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on
the authority of his father Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB), on the
authority of his father Ali ibn al-Hussein as-Sajjad (MGB), on the
authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of the Commander of the
Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “A servant will
be asked about four (things) on the Resurrection Day before he can move:
how he spent his lifetime; what he used his youth for; how he earned his
income; and how he spent it; and about our love - the love for the
members of the Holy Household.”

##### من مخزون علم الله عز وجل الاتمام في أربعة مواطن

#### 4-123حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار قال: حدثني الحسن بن علي بن النعمان، عن أبي عبد الله البرقي عن علي بن مهزيار، وأبي علي بن راشد، عن حماد بن عيسى، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من مخزون علم الله عز وجل الاتمام في أربعة مواطن: حرم الله عز وجل، وحرم رسوله صلى الله عليه وآله، وحرم أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام، وحرم الحسين بن علي عليهما السلام.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: يعني أن ينوي الانسان في حرمهم عليهم السلام مقام عشرة أيام ويتم ولا ينوي مقام دون عشرة أيام فيقصر وليس ما يقوله غير أهل الاستبصار بشيء: أنه يتم في هذه المواضع على كل حال.

##### العزائم التى يسجد فيها أربع سور

#### 4-124 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي، عن داود بن سرحان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إن العزائم أربع: اقرأ باسم ربك الذي خلق، والنجم، وتنزيل السجدة، وحم السجدة.

##### لا تزول قدما عبد يوم القيامة حتى يسأل عن أربع

#### 4-125 حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن علي الاسدي: قال: حدثتنا رقية بنت إسحاق ابن موسى بن جعفر بن محمد بن علي بن الحسين بن علي بن ابي طالب عليهم السلام قالت: حدثني أبي إسحاق بن موسى بن جعفر قال: حدثني أبي موسى بن جعفر، عن أبيه جعفر ابن محمد، عن أبيه محمد بن علي، عن أبيه علي بن الحسين، عن أبيه، عن أمير المؤمنين عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: لا تزول قدما عبد يوم القيامة حتى يسأل عن أربع، عن عمره فيما أفناه، و[عن] شبابه فيما أبلاه، وعن ماله من أين اكتسبه وفيما أنفقه وعن حبنا أهل البيت.

THE PROPHET WAS ORDERED TO LOVE FOUR PEOPLE
-------------------------------------------

4-126 Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hassan, known as Ibn Muqayrih al-Qazvini
narrated that Ubaydullah ibn Abdul Rahman ibn Vaqid in Baghdad quoted
Isma’il ibn Musa, on the authority of Sharik, on the authority of Abi
Rabi’a al-Ayadi, on the authority of Ibn Barida, on the authority of his
father that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Indeed the Honorable the Exalted
God ordered me to love four people.” He (MGB) was asked, “O Prophet of
God! Who are they?” The Prophet (MGB) replied, “Ali is one of them. I
was also ordered to love Salman, Abuzar and Miqdad. I was told that God
also loves them.”

4-127 Abu Abdullah al-Hussein ibn Muhammad al-Ashnani - the judge in
Balkh - narrated that his grandfather quoted Ibrahim ibn Nasr, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Sa’id, on the authority of Sharik, on the
authority of Abi Rabi’a al-Ayadi, on the authority of Ibn Barida, on the
authority of his father that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The Honorable
the Exalted God ordered me to love four of my companions. I was also
informed that God loves them.” He (MGB) was told, “O Prophet of God! Who
are they? We love to be amongst them.” The Prophet (MGB) said, “Ali
(MGB) is one of them.” They he (MGB) became silent. Then he (MGB) went
on saying, “Ali (MGB) is one of them. The rest are Abuzar, Salman and
Miqdad ibn al-Aswad al-Kindi.”

THE FIRST FOUR TO ENTER PARADISE
--------------------------------

4-128 Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Qazvini narrated that Abdullah
ibn Zaydan quoted Al-Hassan ibn Muhammad, on the authority of Hassan ibn
Hussein, on the authority of Yahya ibn Mosavir, on the authority of Abi
Khalid, on the authority of Zayd ibn Ali, on the authority of his
forefathers that Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) said, “I complained to God’s
Prophet (MGB) about those who envied me. The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘O Ali!
Are you not happy that the first ones who go to Heaven are me and you.
Then our offspring will enter from the back. Then our followers will
come from the right and left.’”

THE FOUR CHARACTERISTICS OF A HYPOCRITE
---------------------------------------

4-129 Al-Hassan ibn Abdullah ibn Sa’id al-Askari narrated that the
judge - Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Walid quoted Yahya ibn Hatam, on the
authority of Yazid ibn Harun, on the authority of Shu’bat, on the
authority of Al-A’amash, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Mar’rat, on
the authority of Masruq, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Masood that
the Prophet (MGB) said, “Whoever possesses four characteristics is a
hypocrite. Even if one has only one of these characteristics he is a
hypocrite, unless he gives up that characteristic: one who lies when he
talks; one who breaks his promises; one who breaks his pledges; and one
who cheats when he fights.”**[[447]](footnotes_2.htm#b0447)**

##### أمر النبي صلى الله عليه وآله بحب أربعة

#### 4-126 حدثنا علي بن محمد بن الحسن المعروف بابن مقبرة القزويني قال: حدثنا عبيد الله بن عبدالرحمن بن واقد ببغداد قال: حدثنا إسماعيل بن موسى قال: حدثنا شريك، عن أبي ربيعة الايادي عن ابن بريدة، عن أبيه أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله قال: إن الله عز وجل أمرني بحب أربعة، فقلنا: يا رسول الله من هم سمهم لنا، فقال: علي منهم وسلمان وأبوذر والمقداد، وأمرني بحبهم، وأخبرني أنه يحبهم.

#### 4-127حدثنا أبوعبد الله الحسين بن محمد الاشناني العدل ببلخ قال: أخبرني جدي قال: حدثنا إبراهيم بن نصر قال: حدثنا محمد بن سعيد قال: أخبرنا شريك، عن أبي ربيعة الايادي، عن ابن بريدة، عن أبيه قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إن الله عز وجل أمرني بحب أربعة من أصحابي، وأخبرني أنه يحبهم، قلنا: يا رسول الله فمن هم فكلنا نحب أن نكون منهم فقال: ألا إن عليا منهم، ثم سكت، ثم قال: ألا إن عليا منهم وأبوذر وسلمان الفارسي والمقداد بن الاسود الكندي.

##### أول أربعة يدخلون الجنة

#### 4-128 حدثنا علي بن محمد بن الحسن القزويني قال: أخبرنا عبد الله بن زيدان قال: حدثنا الحسن بن محمد قال: حدثنا حسن بن حسين قال: حدثنا يحيى بن مساور عن أبي خالد عن زيد بن علي، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: شكوت إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله حسد من يحسدني فقال: يا علي أما ترضى أن أول أربعة يدخلون الجنة أنا وأنت، وذرارينا خلف ظهورنا، وشيعتنا عن أيماننا وشمائلنا.

##### أربع من كن فيه فهو منافق

#### 4-129 حدثنا الحسن بن عبد الله بن سعيد العسكري قال: حدثنا محمد بن موسى ابن الوليد العدل قال: حدثنا يحيى بن حاتم قال: حدثنا يزيد بن هارون قال: حدثنا شعبة، عن الاعمش، عن عبد الله بن مرة، عن مسروق، عن عبد الله بن مسعود، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: أربع من كن فيه فهو منافق وإن كانت فيه واحدة منهن كانت فيه خصلة من النفاق حتى يدعها: من إذا حدث كذب، وإذا وعد أخلف وإذا عاهد غدر، وإذا خاصم فجر.

THE FOUR KINGS OF THE EARTH: TWO BELIEVERS AND TWO ATHEISTS
-----------------------------------------------------------

4-130 Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Abdullah ibn Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy
narrated that his father quoted Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority
of his father Muhammad ibn Khalid who linked it up through a chain of
narrators to Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “There were four kings on the
Earth: two of the believers and two of the atheists. The two of the
believers were Solomon - the son of David (MGB) and Zul-Qarnayn. The
name of Zul-Qarnayn was Abdullah ibn Zahhak ibn Ma’d. The two atheists
were Nimrood and Bakht ul-Nasr.”

THE FOUR WAYS THE PROPHET’S TRADITIONS REACH THE PEOPLE
-------------------------------------------------------

4-131 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his
father, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ibrahim
ibn Umar al-Yamani and Umar ibn Azineh, on the authority of Aban ibn Abi
Ayyash, on the authority of Salim ibn Qays al-Hilaly, “I once asked the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB), ‘O Commander of the Faithful!
I have heard from Salman, Miqdad and Abuzar some interpretations (of the
Quran) and traditions from the Prophet (MGB) which differ with what is
in the hands of the people. Then I heard that you acknowledged what I
had heard from the people. There are many things in the hands of the
people including interpretations of the Quran and traditions of the
Prophet (MGB) with which you disagree and consider invalid. Do you think
that the people falsely ascribe these traditions to God’s Prophet (MGB)
and interpret the Quran as they wish?’ Then Ali (MGB) faced me and said,
‘You asked. Now try to understand the answer. In fact, what exists in
the hands of the people includes truth and falsehood; right and wrong;
etc. During the Prophet’s lifetime, they ascribed so many lies to him
that he was forced to stand up and say, ‘O people! The lies ascribed to
me have become too much. Whoever intentionally ascribes lies to me will
go to Hell.’ However, there were a lot more lies ascribed to him. Indeed
the Prophet’s narrations only reach you from four persons. Firstly,
narrations may reach you from a hypocrite who claims to believe in
public, but has not hesitation whatsoever to ascribe lies to the Prophet
(MGB). The people would not accept his lies, if they know that he is a
hypocrite. However, the people believe what he says, because they think
that he has seen the Prophet (MGB) and has heard what he says from the
Prophet (MGB). They do not really know him. However, the Honorable the
Exalted God has informed us about the hypocrites and their
characteristics and said, ‘When thou lookest at them, their exteriors
please thee; and when they speak, thou listenest to their words…’

##### ملك الارض كلها أربعة: مؤمنان وكافران

#### 4-130 حدثنا علي بن أحمد بن عبد الله بن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي قال: حدثنا أبي، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه محمد بن خالد باسناده رفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ملك الارض كلها أربعة مؤمنان وكافران فأما المؤمنان فسليمان بن داود عليهما السلام وذو القرنين، والكافران نمرود وبختنصر، واسم ذي القرنين عبد الله بن ضحاك بن معد.

##### أتى الناس الحديث من رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله من أربعة ليس لهم خامس

#### 4-131حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن حماد بن عيسى، عن إبراهيم بن عمر اليماني، وعمر بن اذينة، عن أبان بن أبي عياش، عن سليم بن قيس الهلالي قال: قلت لامير المؤمنين عليه السلام:يا أمير المؤمنين أني سمعت من سلمان والمقداد وأبي ذر شيئا من تفسير القرآن وأحاديث عن نبي الله صلى الله عليه وآله غير ما في أيدي الناس، ثم سمعت منك تصديق ما سمعت منهم ورأيت في أيدي الناس أشياء كثيرة من تفسير القرآن ومن الاحاديث عن نبي الله صلى الله عليه وآله أنتم تخالفونهم فيها وتزعمون أن ذلك كله باطل، أفترى الناس يكذبون على رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله متعمدين ويفسرون القرآن بآرائهم، قال: فأقبل علي عليه السلام فقال: قد سألت فافهم الجواب إن في أيدي الناس حقا وباطلا، وصدقا وكذبا، وناسخا ومنسوخا، وعاما وخاصا، ومحكما ومتشابها، وحفظا ووهما. وقد كذب على رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله على عهده حتى قام خطيبا فقال:أيها الناس قد كثرت على الكذابة، فمن كذب على متعمدا فليتبوء مقعده من النار، ثم كذب عليه من بعده، إنما أتاكم الحديث من أربعة ليس لهم خامس: رجل منافق يظهر الايمان متصنع بالاسلام لا يتألم ولا يتحرج أن يكذب على رسول الله متعمدا فلو علم الناس أنه منافق كذاب لم يقبلوا منه ولم يصدقوه ولكنهم قالوا: هذا قد صحب رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله ورآه وسمع منه فأخذوا عنه، وهم لا يعرفون حاله وقد أخبره الله عن المنافقين بما أخبره ووصفهم بما وصفهم فقال عز وجل: "وَإِذَا رَأَيْتَهُمْ تُعْجِبُكَ أَجْسَامُهُمْ وَإِنْ يَقُولُوا تَسْمَعْ لِقَوْلِهِمْ."

Such hypocrites existed even after the Prophet (MGB). They got close to
the leaders who misled the people and invite to the fire, and spoke in
favor of them so that they may be hired to fill major positions. The
people usually follow their leaders, unless they are saved by God.

Secondly, narrations may reach you through a man who has heard something
from God’s Prophet (MGB), but has not memorized it. He has no intentions
of lying but he has not understood it well. He possesses incorrect
narrations. He instructs others to follow them and follows them himself.
He narrates them for others and says that he has heard it from God’s
Prophet. If the Muslims know that it is wrong, they would not accept it
from him. It may even be the case that he might discard it, if he knew
it was wrong.

Thirdly, narrations may reach you from someone who has heard that God’s
Prophet (MGB) has issued an order, but has not heard that God’s Prophet
(MGB) himself has later issued an opposite order. Or he may have heard
that God’s Prophet (MGB) has admonished against something, but has not
heard that God’s Prophet (MGB) himself has later advised it. He
remembers it one way but he has either not heard or doesn’t remember it
the other way. If the Muslims knew that such and such an order has later
been dismissed, they would abandon it.

Fourthly, narrations may reach you from someone who has not ascribed
lies to the Prophet of God (MGB). Rather he hates to lie since he fears
the Honorable the Exalted God and honors God’s Prophet (MGB). Such a
person may have memorized whatever he has heard from God’s Prophet (MGB)
and may restate his words in exactly the same way that he has heard
them. However, it may be the case that they use one decree and not use
its opposite. The decrees of the Prophet (MGB) are similar to the verses
of the Quran. There are ones that are opposite to the previous ones (to
cancel or change them). The Prophet (MGB) had many such statements. We
must accept what the Prophet (MGB) has said, and abandon what he has
withheld as the Honorable the Exalted God said in His Book, ‘…So take
what the Messenger assigns to you, and deny yourselves that which he
withholds from you. And fear Allah for Allah is strict in
Punishment.’**[[448]](footnotes_2.htm#b0448)**

Whoever doesn’t realize what God and the Prophet (MGB) meant would fall
into error. It is not the case that all the companions of the Prophet
(MGB) could give the proper answer to whatever they may be asked. Some
of them asked some questions, but never tried to understand the answer.
It seemed hard for them to understand things. They waited for a Bedouin
to come and ask questions from the Prophet (MGB), so that they may hear
the

#### ثم بقوا بعده فتقربوا إلى أئمة الضلالة والدعاة إلى النار بالزور والكذب والبهتان فولوهم الاعمال، وحملوهم على رقاب الناس وأكلوا بهم الدنيا وإنما الناس مع الملوك والدنيا إلا من عصم الله، فهذا أحد الاربعة. ورجل سمع من رسول الله شيئا لم يحفظه على وجهه ووهم فيه ولم يتعمد كذبا فهو في يده يقول به ويعمل به ويرويه ويقول: أنا سمعته من رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله فلو علم المسلمون أنه وهم لم يقبلوه، ولو علم هو أنه وهم لرفضه، ورجل ثالث سمع من رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله شيئا أمر به ثم نهى عنه، وهو لا يعلم، أو سمعه ينهى عن شيء ثم أمر به وهو لا يعلم فحفظ منسوخه ولم يحفظ الناسخ فلو علم أنه منسوخ لرفضه ولو علم المسلمون أنه منسوخ لرفضوه، وآخر رابع لم يكذب على رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله مبغض للكذب خوفا من الله عز وجل وتعظيما لرسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله لم يسه بل حفظ ما سمع على وجهه فجاء به كما سمع لم يزد فيه ولم ينقص منه، وعلم الناسخ من المنسوخ فعمل بالناسخ ورفض المنسوخ، فان أمر النبي صلى الله عليه وآله مثل القرآن ناسخ ومنسوخ، وخاص وعام، ومحكم ومتشابه، وقد كان يكون من رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله الكلام له وجهان وكلام عام، وكلام خاص مثل القرآن و[قد] قال الله عز وجل في كتابه: "وَمَا آتَاكُمْ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ فَانْتَهُوا." فيشتبه على من لم يعرف ولم يدر ما عنى الله به ورسوله صلى الله عليه وآله، وليس كل أصحاب رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يسأله عن الشئ فيفهم، كان منهم من يسأله ولا يستفهم حتى أن كانوا ليحبون أن يجيئ الاعرابي والطاري فيسأل رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله حتى يسمعوا، وكنت أدخل على رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله كل يوم دخلة وكل {.t0}

Prophet’s response. I always had an especial time during the day and at
night with the Prophet (MGB). He (MGB) let me be with him (MGB) during
these times. All the companions of the Prophet (MGB) knew well that he
(MGB) never treated anyone else this way. Sometimes the Prophet (MGB)
came to see me in my house. Sometimes I went to see the Prophet (MGB) in
his house. He (MGB) would then tell his wives to leave the room and had
a private meeting with me. When the Prophet (MGB) came to see me in my
house, he (MGB) would not tell Fatimah (MGB) or any of my children to
leave. He (MGB) responded to whatever I asked. He (MGB) talked whenever
I finished asking questions and remained silent. He (MGB) would clearly
recite to me whatever Quranic verse which was revealed to him (MGB), so
that I may write it in my own handwriting. He (MGB) taught me their
interpretation and the other related issues. He (MGB) asked God to help
me memorize it. I have not forgotten any of the verses of the Holy Quran
and any of the knowledge which he (MGB) stated to me and I wrote it
down. The Prophet (MGB) did not withhold anything from me and taught me
whatever God had taught him including issues such as the legitimate and
the illegitimate; obligatory and forbidden deeds; books of the previous
Prophets; their enjoining to do good deeds and admonishing against evil
deeds. I memorized everything and did not forget anything. Then he put
his hand on my chest and asked God to fill up my heart with knowledge,
understanding, wisdom and light. I said, ‘O Prophet of God! May my
parents be your ransom! I have forgotten nothing and have written all of
that which you taught me since the time you prayed to God for me. Are
you worried that I may forget them?’ The Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘No. I
am not worried about that at all.’”

4-132 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Abu Sa’id Sahl
ibn Zyad al-Adamy, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Bashar al-Vaseti, on
the authority of Ubaydullah ibn Abdullah al-Dihqan, on the authority of
Durost ibn Abi Mansoor al-Vaseti, on the authority of Umar ibn Azineh,
on the authority of Zurarah ibn A’ayan, on the authority of Abi Ja’far
al-Baqir (MGB) that the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said,
“It is enough to do as much good in return for a favor as has been done
for you. If you do more than has been done to you, then you are being
grateful. One who is grateful is also generous. One should recognizes
that whatever good he does, he indeed dose it for himself. Thus, one
will no longer expect anyone to return his favors, nor will he expect
any friendship in return for his friendly deeds. Do not demand anything
from others in return for what you do for yourself so as to guard your
own honor. Anyone who asks you for something from you has indeed
disregarded his own honor. So do not disregard your own reputation and
fulfill his request.”

#### ليلة دخلة، فيخليني فيها أدور معه حيثما دار، وقد علم أصحاب رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أنه لم يصنع ذلك بأحد من الناس غيري، فربما كان ذلك في بيتي يأتيني رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أكثر ذلك في بيتي، وكنت إذا دخلت عليه بعض منازله أخلاني وأقام عني نساء‌ه، فلا يبقى عنده [أحد] غيري، وإذا أتاني للخلوة معي في بيتي لم تقم عنه فاطمة ولا أحد من بني، وكنت إذا سألته أجابني، وإذا سكت وفنيت مسائلي ابتدأني، فما نزلت على رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله آية من القرآن إلا أقرأنيها وأملاها علي فكتبتها بخطي، وعلمني تأويلها وتفسيرها، وناسخها ومنسوخها، ومحكمها ومتشابهها،وخاصها وعامها، ودعا الله لي أن يؤتيني فهمها وحفظها، فما نسيت آية من كتاب الله، ولا علما أملاه علي وكتبته منذ دعا الله لي بما دعا، وما ترك شيئا علمه الله من حلال ولا حرام [ولا] أمر ولا نهي كان أو يكون، ولا كتاب منزل على أحد قبله في أمر بطاعة أو نهي عن معصية إلا علمنيه وحفظته فلم أنس حرفا واحدا، ثم وضع عليه السلام يده على صدري ودعا الله لي أن يملا قلبي علما وفهما وحكما ونورا، فقلت: يا نبي الله بأبي أنت وامي إني منذ دعوت الله لي بما دعوت لم أنس شيئا ولم يفتني شيء لم أكتبه أفتتخوف علي النسيان فيما بعد؟ فقال: لا لست أخاف عليك النسيان ولا الجهل. {.t0}

#### 4-132حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس قال: حدثنا أبوسعيد سهل بن زياد الادمي قال: حدثني جعفر بن بشار الواسطي قال: حدثنا عبيد الله ابن عبد الله الدهقان، عن درست بن أبي منصور الواسطي، عن عمر بن اذينة، عن زرارة ابن أعين، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام:من صنع مثل ما صنع إليه فقد كافأ، ومن أضعف كان شكورا، ومن شكر كان كريما، ومن علم أن ما صنع إنما صنع لنفسه لم يستبط الناس في برهم، ولم يستزدهم في مودتهم، فلا تطلبن غيرك شكر ما أتيته إلى نفسك ووقيت به عرضك، واعلم أن طالب الحاجة إليك لم يكرم وجهه عن وجهك، فأكرم وجهك عن رده.

4-133 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil Khat’tab, on the authority of Ali ibn
Asbat, on the authority of Salim - the servant of Tarbal that he had
heard Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) say, “The world is making progress.
Whatever you earn in this world, you earn it despite your weaknesses.
Yet, you may lose some thing and not be able to hold on to them with all
your strength.”

He (MGB) then added, “Whoever forgets about what he has lost is in
comfort, and whoever is pleased with what he has been granted will be
cheerful.”

4-134 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr
al-Bazanty, on the authority of a man from Khoza’at, on the authority of
Aslami, on the authority of his father that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
said, “You should learn Arabic since it is the language with which God
has spoken to His servants. Utter the words properly.”

The compiler of the book - Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Hussein - may God be
pleased with him - said, “This narration has also been narrated by Abu
Saeed Adami who has added the following at the end, ‘and wear your rings
on your little finger or your ring finger not on the thumb since that
has been a practice of the people of
Lot.**[[449]](footnotes_2.htm#b0449)** ’”

4-135 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of Abi Ayoob al-Khizaz, on the authority of Abil Vard, on the
authority of Abi Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB), “God’s Prophet
(MGB) addressed the people on the last Friday of the Arabic month of
Sha'ban. He glorified God, praised Him, and then said, ‘O People!
Indeed, a month has come in which each night is better than a thousand
months. It is the month of Ramazan. God has prescribed fasting during it
for you. Whoever stays up one night during that month and prays will
receive the reward of one who has stayed up for seventy nights in other
months and prayed. If you do any good deeds during that month, you will
receive the reward of one who has done seventy good deeds in other
months. If you perform any obligatory deeds in that month, your reward
will be that of seventy similar cases in other months. It is the month
of patience. The reward of patience is Paradise. Ramazan is the month of
sympathy. It is the month in which God increases the share of a
believer’s daily bread. Whoever feeds another believer (to break his
fast) shall be given the reward

#### 4-133حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن علي بن أسباط عن سليم مولى طربال، عن رجل، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: سمعته يقول:الدنيا دول، فما كان لك فيها أتاك على ضعفك، وما كان منها عليك أتاك ولم تمتنع منه بقوة.

#### ثم أتبع هذا الكلام بأن قال: من يئس مما فات أراح بدنه، ومن قنع بما اوتي قرت عينه.

#### 4-134 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا أحمد ابن محمد بن عيسى، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي، عن رجل من خزاعة، عن أسلمي، عن أبيه، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: تعلموا العربية فانها كلام الله الذي تكلم به خلقه، ونظفوا الماضغين، وبلغوا بالخواتيم.قال محمد بن علي بن الحسين مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: قد روى هذا الحديث أبوسعيد الآدمي وقال في آخره: بلعوا بالخواتيم، أي اجعلوا الخواتيم في آخر الاصابع ولا تجعلوها في أطرافها فانه يروى أنه من عمل قوم لوط.

##### أربع خصال لا غنى بالناس عنها في شهر رمضان

#### 4-135 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن أبي أيوب الخزاز، عن أبي الورد، عن أبي جعفر محمد بن علي عليهما السلام قال: خطب رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله الناس في آخر جمعة من شعبان فحمد الله وأثنى عليه، ثم قال: أيها الناس إنه قد أظلكم شهر فيه ليلة خير من ألف شهر، وهو شهر رمضان، فرض الله صيامه، وجعل قيام ليلة فيه بتطوع صلاة كمن تطوع بصلاة سبعين ليلة فيما سواه من الشهور، وجعل لمن تطوع فيه بخصلة من خصال الخير والبر كأجر من أدى فريضة من فرائض الله، ومن أدى فيه فريضة من فرائض الله كان كمن أدى فيه سبعين فريضة فيما سواه، وهو شهر الصبر، وإن الصبر ثوابه الجنة، وهو شهر المواساة، وهو شهر يزيد الله فيه في رزق المؤمن، ومن فطر فيه مؤمنا صائما كان له بـذلك

of freeing a slave. His past sins will also be forgiven.’ It was said to
him (MGB), ‘O Prophet of God! Not all of us are able to feed another
believer to break his fast!’ The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Indeed the
Honorable the Exalted God is generous. He would even give this reward to
those of you who have nothing but a cup of milk, some juice, water or a
date to feed another believer to break his fast. Whoever helps his slave
with his duties during this month will be rewarded by God with an easier
Reckoning. It is the month whose beginning is mercy, whose middle is
forgiveness, and whose end is answering and releasing from the Fire. In
it you are in need of four qualities: two qualities with which to please
God, and two qualities with which you ask for the fulfillment of your
own needs. The two qualities with which to please God are: testify that
there is no god but God, and that I (Muhammad) am God’s Prophet. And the
two qualities with which you may ask for the fulfillment of your needs
are: Ask God for your needs and Paradise during that month. Also ask God
to protect you from the Fire of Hell.’”

ANIMALS CAN RECOGNIZE FOUR THINGS
---------------------------------

4-136 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Al-Abbas ibn Ma’ruf, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of Ali ibn Re’ab, on the authority of Abi Hamzih that Ali ibn
al-Hussein as-Sajjad (MGB) said, “Animals can recognize four things:
their Lord - the Blessed the Sublime; death; male and female; and
pastures.”

GOD CREATED HORSES FROM FOUR THINGS
-----------------------------------

4-137 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father and Muhammad
ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with them - narrated that Ahmad ibn
Idris and Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn
Yahya, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hussein, on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Ali, on the authority of Abi Khalid Zayd ibn Mihran, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abdul Jab’bar, on the authority of Al-Hussein
ibn Zayd, “It has been reported to me that the Honorable the Exalted God
has created horses from four things: the great ocean encompassing the
world; fire; tears of an angle called Ibrahim and a clean well.”

This is a part of a long narration. Here only a short part of it is
cited due to its length.

THE FOUR WINDS
--------------

4-138 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Al-Abbas ibn Ma’ruf, on the
authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the authority of Ali ibn Re’ab
and Hisham ibn Salim, on the authority of Abi Basir, “I asked Aba Ja’far
al-

#### عند الله عز وجل عتق رقبة، ومغفرة لذنوبه فيما مضى. فقيل له: يا رسول الله: ليس كلنا يقدر على أن يفطر صائما، فقال: إن الله تبارك وتعالى كريم يعطي هذا الثواب منكم لمن لا يقدر إلا على مذقة من لبن يفطر بها صائما، أو شربة من ماء عذب، أو تميرات لا يقدر على أكثر من ذلك، ومن خفف فيه عن مملوكه خفف عنه حسابه، وهو شهر أوله رحمة، ووسطه مغفرة، وآخره إجابة والعتق من النار، ولا غنى بكم فيه عن أربع خصال، خصلتين ترضون الله بهما، وخصلتين لا غنى بكم عنهما، وأما اللتان ترضون الله بهما فشهادة أن لا إله إلا الله وأني رسول الله، وأما اللتان لا غنى بكم عنهما فتسألون الله فيه حوائجكم والجنة، وتسألون الله فيه العافية، وتتعوذون به من النار. {.t0}

##### لم تبهم البهائم عن أربعة

#### 4-136 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن العباس بن معروف، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن علي بن رئاب، عن أبي حمزة عن علي بن الحسين عليهما السلام أنه كان يقول: ما بهمت البهائم عنه فلم تبهم عن أربعة: معرفتها بالرب تبارك وتعالى، ومعرفتها بالموت، ومعرفتها بالانثى من الذكر، ومعرفتها بالمرعى الخصب.

##### خلق الله عز وجل الخيل من أربعة اشياء

#### 4-137 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس ومحمد بن يحيى العطار جميعا قالا: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى قال: حدثني محمد بن الحسين، عن أحمد بن علي، عن أبي خالد زيد بن مهران قال: حدثنا محمد بن عبدالجبار عن الحسين بن زيد قال: بلغني أن الله عز وجل خلق الخيل من أربعة أشياء: من البحر الاعظم المحدق بالدنيا، ومن النار، ومن دموع ملك يقال له إبراهيم، ومن بئر طيبة والحديث طويل أخذنا منه موضع الحاجة.

##### الرياح الاربع

#### 4-138حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار عن العباس بن معروف، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن علي بن رئـاب، وهشـام بـن

Baqir (MGB) regarding the four winds: the North wind; the South wind;
the Eurus wind from the East**[[450]](footnotes_2.htm#b0450)** ; and the
Zephyr wind from the West**[[451]](footnotes_2.htm#b0451)** . I told
him, ‘The people say that the North wind blows from Paradise and the
South wind blows from Hell. He (MGB) replied, ‘The Honorable the Exalted
God has troops of winds with which He chastises the disobedient ones
which He pleases to chastise. An angel is appointed to each wind.
Whenever the Honorable the Exalted God wishes to impose a certain form
of chastisement to a nation, He would inspire that appointed angel with
what kind of chastisement He wants to be imposed upon them. The angel
would issue an order to the wind to blow and the wind will roar like a
lion. Each wind has a name. Consider what the Honorable the Exalted God
said, ‘The Ad (people) (too) rejected (Truth): then how terrible was My
Penalty and My Warning?’**[[452]](footnotes_2.htm#b0452)** And God
mentions a wind to torture them as we read, ‘For We sent against them a
furious wind, on a Day of violent Disaster, plucking out men as if they
were roots of palm-trees torn up (from the
ground).’**[[453]](footnotes_2.htm#b0453)** When the people talk of the
North wind, the South wind, the Eurus or the Zephyr, they ascribe these
winds to their appointed angels.’”

PEOPLE ARE IN FOUR GROUPS
-------------------------

4-139 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abdul Rahman al-Muqar’ri narrated that Abu
Amr Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Muqar’ri al-Gorjany quoted Abu Bakr Muhammad
ibn al-Hassan al-Mooseli in Baghdad, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Asim al-Tarifi, on the authority of Abu Zayd Ay‎ash ibn Zayd ibn
al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Kihal - the servant of Zayd ibn Ali, on the
authority of Zayd ibn al-Hassan, on the authority of Musa ibn Ja’far
(MGB), on the authority of his father Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq
(MGB), “People are in four groups: ignorant people who get ruined by
obeying their whims; haughty worshippers who get haughtier as they
worship more; scholars who want to have more followers and be admired;
and knowledgeable ones on the right path who wish to follow that path
but cannot. The last group are the best people in your era and they have
the most wisdom.”

THE FOUR TYPE OF SLEEPING
-------------------------

4-140 Abul-Hassan Muhammad ibn Amr ibn Ali ibn Abdullah al-Basry in Ilaq
narrated that the preacher Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Ahmad
ibn Jabalat quoted Abul Qasim Abdullah ibn Amer al-Ta’ee, on the
authority of Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB), on the authority of Musa ibn
Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB), on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq
(MGB), on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB), on the
authority of Ali ibn al-Hussein as-Sajjad (MGB), on the authority of
al-Hussein

#### سالم عن أبي بصير قال:سألت أبا جعفر عليه السلام عن الرياح الاربع: الشمال، والجنوب، والدبور، والصبا. وقلت له: إن الناس يذكرون أن الشمال من الجنة، والجنوب من النار، فقال: إن لله عز وجل جنودا من رياح يعذب بها من يشاء ممن عصاه، ولكل ريح منها ملك موكل بها، فإذا أراد الله عز وجل أن يعذب قوما بنوع من العذاب أوحى إلى الملك الموكل بذلك النوع من الريح التي يريد أن يعذبهم بها قال: فأمرها الملك فتهيج كما يهيج الاسد المغضب، ولكل ريح منها اسم أما تسمع قوله عز وجل: "كذبت عاد فكيف كان عذابي ونذر" وذكر رياحا في العذاب، ثم قال فريح الشمال، وريح الصبا، وريح الجنوب، وريح الدبور أيضا تضاف إلى الملائكة الموكلين بها. {.t0}

##### الناس على أربعة اصناف

#### 4-139 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن عبدالرحمن المقرئ قال: حدثنا أبوعمرو محمد ابن جعفر المقرئ الجرجاني قال: حدثنا أبوبكر محمد بن الحسن الموصلي ببغداد قال: حدثنا محمد بن عاصم الطريفي قال: حدثنا أبوزيد عياش بن زيد بن الحسن ابن علي الكحال مولي زيد بن علي قال: أخبرني زيد بن الحسن قال: حدثني موسى بن جعفر، عن أبيه الصادق جعفر بن محمد عليهم السلام قال:الناس على أربعة أصناف جاهل متردي معانق لهواه، وعابد متقوي كلما ازداد عبادة ازداد كبرا، وعالم يريد أن يوطأ عقباه ويحب محمدة الناس. وعارف على طريق الحق يحب القيام به فهو عاجز أو مغلوب، فهذا أمثل أهل زمانك وأرجحهم عقلا.

##### النوم على أربعة وجوه

#### 4-140 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن عمرو بن علي بن عبد الله البصري بايلاق قال: حدثنا أبوعبد الله محمد بن عبد الله بن أحمد بن جبلة الواعظ قال: حدثنا أبوالقاسم عبد الله ابن أحمد بن عامر الطائي قال: حدثنا علي بن موسى الرضا قـال: حدثنـا

ibn Ali (MGB), “The Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) was in the
Jamea Mosque in Kufa. A Syrian man came up to him and asked some
questions including the following. He asked, ‘Tell me about sleeping.
How many kinds of sleeping are there?’ He (MGB) replied, “There are four
kinds of sleeping: the sleeping of the Prophets who sleep on their
backs; the sleeping of the faithful believers who sleep on their right
sides; the sleeping of the rulers and their offspring who sleep on their
left sides so that they may digest all that they have eaten; and the
sleeping of Satan, his brethren, and the insane ones who sleep on their
stomachs.”

SATAN CRIED OUT FOUR TIMES
--------------------------

4-141 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Faz’zal, on
the authority of Ali ibn Aqabah, on the authority of some companions
that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Satan cried out four times.
Firstly, it was on the day on which it was cursed. The second time was
when it was sent down to the Earth. The third time was when Muhammad
(MGB) was appointed to the Prophethood at the end of the Prophethood
chain. Then it was when the Fatiha Chapter of the Quran was revealed.
Satan was pleased twice: when Adam (MGB) ate of the forbidden tree, and
when Adam (MGB) was sent down to the Earth.”

FOUR THINGS ARE VAIN TO DO
--------------------------

4-142 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja’far ibn Abi Ja’far
al-Kumaydany quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ali
ibn al-Hikam who linked it up through a chain of narrators to Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “O Ali! Four things are done in vain: eating
after (attaining) satiety; lighting a lamp in moonlight; planting seeds
in salty ground; and doing a favor for people who are not worthy of it.”

4-143 Muhammad ibn Ali ibn ash-Shah narrated that Abu Hamid quoted Abu
Yazid Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Khalidy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Ahmad ibn Salih al-Tamimy, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Hatam al-Qat’tan, on the authority of Hammad
ibn Amr, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the
authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his grandfather
(MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) that the Prophet
(MGB) in his will to Ali (MGB) said, “O Ali! Four things are done in
vain: eating after (attaining) satiety; lighting a lamp in moonlight;
planting seeds in salty ground; and doing a favor for people who are not
worthy of it.”

#### موسى بن جعفر قال: حدثنا جعفر بن محمد قال: حدثنا محمد بن علي قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين قال: حدثنا الحسين بن علي عليهم السلام قال: كان علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام بالكوفة في الجامع إذ قام إليه رجل من أهل الشام فسأله عن مسائل، فكان فيما سأله أن قال له: أخبرني عن النوم على كم وجه هو؟ فقال: النوم على أربعة أوجه: الانبياء عليهم السلام تنام على أقفيتهم، مستلقين، وأعينهم لا تنام متوقعة لوحي الله عز وجل، والمؤمن ينام على يمينه مستقبل القبلة، والملوك وأبناؤها تنام على شمائلها ليستمرئوا ما يأكلون وابليس وإخوانه وكل مجنون وذو عاهة ينام على وجهه منبطحا. {.t0}

##### رن ابليس لعنه الله اربع رنات

#### 4-141حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن الحسن بن علي بن فضال، عن علي بن عقبة، عن بعض أصحابنا، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: رن إبليس أربع رنات: أولهن، يوم لعن، وحين اهبط إلى الارض، وحين بعث محمد صلى الله عليه وآله على حين فترة من الرسل، وحين انزلت أم الكتاب ونخر نخرتين: حين أكل آدم من الشجرة، وحين اهبط من الجنة.

##### أربعة يذهبن ضياعا

#### 4-142 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن موسى بن جعفر بن أبي جعفر الكميداني، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن علي بن الحكم بإسناده يرفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: أربعة يذهبن ضياعا: البذر في السبخة، والسراج في القمر، والاكل على الشبع، والمعروف إلى من ليس بأهله.

#### 4-143 حدثنا محمد بن علي بن الشاه قال: حدثنا أبوحامد قال: حدثنا أبو يزيد أحمد بن خالد الخالدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن صالح التميمي، عن أبيه قال: حدثنا محمد بن حاتم القطان، عن حماد بن عمرو، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: أنه قال في وصيته له: يا علي أربعة يذهبن ضياعا: الاكل بعد الشبع، والسراج في القمر، والزرع في السبخة، والصنيعة عند غير أهلها.

4-144 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Ubaydullah ibn Abdullah
al-Dihqan, on the authority of Durost ibn Abi Mansoor al-Vaseti, on the
authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “Four things are done in vain:
being friends with disloyal ones; doing good to ungrateful ones;
teaching those who do not listen; and entrusting secrets with those who
would not safeguard them.”

AS-SADIQ SAID THAT THE MUSLIMS HAVE FOUR FESTIVE DAYS
-----------------------------------------------------

4-145 Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Musa - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Kufy quoted Al-Hussein ibn Ubaydullah
al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd, on the
authority of Al-Qasim ibn Yahya, on the authority of his grandfather
Al-Hassan ibn Rashid, on the authority of Al-Mufaz’zal ibn Umar, “I
asked Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), ‘How many festive days do the Muslims
have?’ He (MGB) replied, ‘Four.’ I said, ‘I know about the two Eids
(Festivals) and Fridays.’ The Imam (MGB) said, ‘Even nobler and greater
than them is the eighteenth day of Dhul-Hijja. That was the day on which
God’s Prophet (MGB) raised Ali (MGB) up and appointed him as the Master
of the people.’ I asked, ‘What should we do on that day?’ The Imam (MGB)
replied, ‘It is incumbent upon you to fast in gratitude and recite
glorifications for God, even though God deserves to be thanked all the
time. The Prophets (MGB) appointed their Trustees in the same manner.
You should fast on the day on which the Trustee was appointed and
consider it as a day of festivity. For whoever fasts on that day, it
would be considered to be more rewarding than doing good deeds for sixty
years.’

REGARDING GOD’S WORDS TO ABRAHAM (MGB), ‘TAKE FOUR BIRDS. TAME THEM TO TURN TO THEE…’
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4-146 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted Abu Samina
Muhammad ibn Ali al-Kufy, on the authority of Musa ibn Sa’edan, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn al-Qasim, on the authority of Salih ibn Sahl
that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said the following regarding the
Honorable the Exalted God’s words, ‘Take four birds. Tame them to turn
to thee. Put a portion of them on every hill and call out to them. They
will come to thee (flying) with speed. Then know that God is Exalted in
Power, Wise.’**[[454]](footnotes_2.htm#b0454)**

The Imam (MGB) said, “Abraham (MGB) took a hoopoe, a shrike, a peacock
and a crow. He chopped them into pieces and mixed them up. Then he
placed a part of their mixed flesh on top of (each of) the ten hills

#### 4-144 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن محمد بن عيسى بن عبيد، عن عبيد الله بن عبد الله الدهقان، عن درست بن أبي منصور الواسطي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: أربعة يذهبن ضياعا: مودة تمنحها من لا وفاء له، ومعروف عند من لا يشكر له، وعلم عند من لا استماع له، وسر تودعه عند من لا حصانة له.

##### قول الصادق عليه السلام للمسلمين أربعة أعياد

#### 4-145حدثنا علي بن أحمد بن موسى رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن أبي عبد الله الكوفي قال: حدثني الحسين بن عبيد الله الاشعري قال: حدثني محمد بن عيسى ابن عبيد، عن القاسم بن يحيى، عن جده الحسن بن راشد، عن المفضل بن عمر قال: قلت لابي عبد الله عليه السلام: كم للمسلمين من عيد؟ فقال: أربعة أعياد، قال: قلت: قد عرفت العيدين والجمعة، فقال لي: أعظمها وأشرفها يوم الثامن عشر من ذي الحجة وهو اليوم الذي أقام فيه رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام ونصبه للناس علما، قال: قلت: ما يجب علينا في ذلك اليوم؟ قال: يجب عليكم صيامه شكرا لله وحمدا له مع أنه أهل أن يشكر كل ساعة، وكذلك أمرت الانبياء أوصياء‌ها أن يصوموا اليوم الذي يقام فيه الوصي يتخذونه عيدا، ومن صامه كان أفضل من عمل ستين سنة.

##### قول الله عز وجل لابراهيم "فَخُذْ أَرْبَعَةً مِنْ الطَّيْرِ فَصُرْهُنَّ إِلَيْكَ…"

#### 4-146حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه، عن عمه محمد بن أبي القاسم قال: حدثني أبوسمينة محمد بن علي الكوفي، عن موسى بن سعدان، عن عبد الله بن القاسم، عن صالح بن سهل، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام في قول الله عز وجل: "فَخُذْ أَرْبَعَةً مِنْ الطَّيْرِ فَصُرْهُنَّ إِلَيْكَ ثُمَّ اجْعَلْ عَلَى كُلِّ جَبَلٍ مِنْهُنَّ…" قال: أخذ الهدهد والصرد والطاووس والغراب، فذبحهن وعزل رؤوسهن، ثم نحز أبدانهن في المنحاز بريشهن ولحومهن وعظامهن حتى اختلـطت، ثم جزأهن عشـرة

around there. He held each bird’s beak in his hand. He placed some seeds
and water near himself and called out to them. The various parts of each
bird started to fly towards each other and formed a perfect body. Each
body went towards its own head and joined it to become a live bird. Then
Abraham (MGB) let their beaks go. The birds flew and then landed. They
drank the water and ate some seeds and said, ‘O Prophet of God! You have
revived us. May God revive you.’ Abraham (MGB) said, ‘It is God who
revives and takes away life. He has power over all things.’ This is the
superficial interpretation.”

The Imam (MGB) added, “However, the deep interpretation of this verse is
as follows: Find four of the wise people. Teach them your knowledge.
Send them around the world to invite the people to worship God.”

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “I
believe that Abraham (MGB) was ordered to do both things. The birds
which he was ordered to catch were: a peacock, an eagle, a rooster and a
duck. I heard Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Muhammad ibn Tayfur say the
following regarding the following verse of the Holy Quran, ‘Behold!
Abraham said, "My Lord! Show me how Thou givest life to the dead." He
said, "Dost thou not then believe?" He said, "Yea! but to satisfy My own
undertaking." He said, "Take four birds; Tame them to turn to thee; put
a portion of them on every hill and call to them: They will come to thee
(Flying) with speed. Then know that Allah is Exalted in Power, Wise.”’
**[[455]](footnotes_2.htm#b0455)**

“Indeed the Honorable the Exalted God ordered Abraham to visit one of
His good servants. When Abraham saw him, the man told him, ‘Indeed the
Blessed the Sublime God has a servant in this world called Abraham whom
He has taken as His friend.’ Abraham asked him, ‘What are the signs of
this servant?’ The man said, ‘God will bring back to life the dead for
him.’ Then Abraham had doubts that he himself may not be that servant.
That is why Abraham asked God to bring the dead back to life for him.
‘He said, "Dost thou not then believe?" He said, "Yea! but to satisfy My
own undertaking."’**[[456]](footnotes_2.htm#b0456)**

That was when he was ordered to offer his son Ishmael. Indeed the
Honorable the Exalted God ordered Abraham (MGB) to offer four birds - a
peacock, an eagle, a duck and a rooster. The peacock referred to the
adornments of this world. The eagle referred to great expectations. The
duck referred to being needy, and the rooster referred to lustfulness.
Indeed, in order to revive Abraham’s heart, the Honorable the Exalted
God told him that he should abandon these four characteristics, since as
long as he have them you cannot be with God.”

#### أجزاء على عشرة أجبل، ثم وضع عنده حبا وماء، ثم جعل مناقيرهن بين أصابعه، ثم قال: آتين سعيا بإذن الله عز وجل، فتطاير بعضها إلى بعض اللحوم والريش والعظام حتى استوت الابدان كما كانت وجاء كل بدن حتى التزق برقبته التي فيها رأسه والمنقار، فخلى إبراهيم عن مناقيرهن فوقعن وشربن من ذلك الماء، والتقطن من ذلك الحب، ثم قلن: يا نبي الله أحييتنا أحياك الله، فقال إبراهيم: بل الله يحيى ويميت، فهذا تفسير الظاهر، قال عليه السلام وتفسيرة [في] الباطن خذ أربعة ممن يحتمل الكلام فاستودعهم علمك ثم ابعثهم في أطراف الارضين حججا لك على الناس وإذا أردت أن يأتوك دعوتهم بالاسم الاكبر يأتونك سعيا باذن الله عز وجل. {.t0}

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: الذي عندي في ذلك أنه عليه السلام أمر بالامرين جميعا، وروي أن الطيور التي أمر بأخذها الطاووس والنسر والديك والبط، وسمعت محمد بن عبد الله بن محمد بن طيفور يقول في قول إبراهيم عليه السلام "رَبِّ أَرِنِي كَيْفَ تُحْيِي الْمَوْتَى…" إن الله عز وجل أمر إبراهيم أن يزور عبدا من عباده الصالحين فزاره فلما كلمه قال: إن لله تبارك وتعالى في الدنيا عبدا يقال له إبراهيم اتخذه خليلا، قال إبراهيم: وما علامة ذلك العبد؟ قال: يحيى له الموتى فوقع لابراهيم أنه هو فسأله أن يحيي له الموتى "قَالَ أَوَلَمْ تُؤْمِنْ قَالَ بَلَى وَلَكِنْ لِيَطْمَئِنَّ قَلْبِي" يعني على الخلة ويقال: إنه أراد أن يكون له في ذلك معجزة كما كانت للرسل، وإن إبراهيم عليه السلام سأل ربه أن يحيي له الميت فأمره الله عز وجل أن يميت لاجله الحي سواء بسواء، وهو أنه لما أمره بذبح ابنه إسماعيل وإن الله عز وجل أمر إبراهيم عليه السلام أن يذبح أربعة من الطير طاووسا ونسرا وديكا وبطا، فالطاووس يريد به زينة الدنيا، والنسر يريد به الامل الطويل، والبط يريد به الحرص، والديك يريد به الشهوة. يقول الله عز وجل إن أحببت أن يحيى قلبك ويطمئن معي فاخرج عن هذه الاشياء الاربعة فانه إذا كانت هذه الاشياء في قلب فانه لا يطمئن معي. وسألته كيف قال: "أَوَلَمْ تُؤْمِنْ" مع علمه

The Imam (MGB) was asked, ‘Why did God ask Abraham whether or not he
believed in God, although God is well-aware of his secrets and
conditions?’ The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘When Abraham (MGB) said, ‘My Lord!
Show me how Thou givest life to the dead?’ It seems that on the surface
Abraham had doubts. However, this was asked so that he may be given a
chance to answer and be acquitted of any such accusations.”

THE FOUR CHARACTERISTICS DESPISED BY GOD
----------------------------------------

4-147 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Sejezy narrated that Ibn Sa’ed quoted
Hamzih ibn al-Abbas al-Marvazy, on the authority of Yahya ibn Nasr ibn
Hajib, on the authority of Varqa ibn Umar, on the authority of
al-A’amash, on the authority of Abi Salih, on the authority of Abi
Hurayrih that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The Honorable the Exalted God
despises one who swears, is corrupt, begs or makes persistent requests.”

#### بسره وحاله، فقال: إنه لما قال "رَبِّ أَرِنِي كَيْفَ تُحْيِي الْمَوْتَى" كان ظاهر هذه اللفظة توهيما أنه لم يكن يتيقن، فقرره الله عز وجل بسؤاله عنه إسقاطا للتهمة عنه وتنزيها له من الشك.

##### أربع خصال يبغض الله عز وجل من كن فيه

#### 4-147 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد السجزي القاضي قال: أخبرنا ابن صاعد قال: حدثنا حمزة بن العباس المروزي قال: حدثنا يحيى بن نصر بن حاجب قال: حدثنا ورقاء بن عمر، عن الاعمش، عن أبي صالح، عن أبي هريرة قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إن الله عز وجل يبغض الفاحش البذي السائل الملحف.
