Part 7 -on Seven-numbered Characteristics
=========================================

**Section 1**

THE PROPHET ORDERED SEVEN THINGS OF MAN TO BE BURIED
----------------------------------------------------

7-1 Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bandar narrated that Abu Bakr
Mosadat ibn Asma’e quoted on the authority of Abu Hamid Ahmad ibn Ishaq
al-Haravy, on the authority of Al-Fazl ibn Abdullah al-Haravy, on the
authority of Malik ibn Suleiman, on the authority of Davood ibn Abdul
Rahman, on the authority of Hisham ibn
Urwah**[[618]](footnotes_3.htm#b0618)** , on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Ayesha that God’s Prophet (MGB) ordered
seven things of man to be buried: the hair, the nails, the blood, the
menses, the placenta, the teeth, and the bones.”

THE PROPHET ADMONISHED AGAINST SEVEN THINGS AND ADVISED TO DO SEVEN
-------------------------------------------------------------------

7-2 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad ibn Ahmad al-Sejezy narrated that Abul-Abbas
al-Saqafy quoted on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Sabah, on the
authority of Jarir, on the authority of Abi Ishaq al-Sheibany, on the
authority of Ash’as ibn Abil-Sa’esa’ al-Maharebi, on the authority of
Muawiyah ibn Sowayd ibn Maqran, on the authority of Al-Bara ibn Azib
that God’s Prophet (MGB) admonished the people against seven things and
advised the people to do seven things. He (MGB) prohibited us from
wearing golden rings; and drinking in golden or silver vessels. He (MGB)
said, ‘Whoever drinks in such vessels in this world will not do so in
the Hereafter.’ The Prophet (MGB) also advised us against riding on a
silk saddle; wearing Egyptian silk clothing; wearing silk garments, fine
(colored) silk brocade, and thick brocade.

The Prophet (MGB) also ordered us to attend funeral processions; visit
the ill; say ‘God bless you’ to one who sneezes; assist the victims of
injustice; greet others aloud; accept invitations; and honor our oaths.

Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad (al-Sejezy) added, “It is better to say honor your
promise.”

SEVEN THINGS FROM THE SHEEP THAT ARE FORBIDDEN
----------------------------------------------

7-3 Abul-Hussein Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Shah narrated that Abu Hamid
quoted on the authority of Abu Yazid Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Khalidy, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Solh al-Tamimy, on the authority of
his father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Hatam al-Qat’tan, on the
authority of Hammad ibn Amr, on the authority of Ja’far ibn
Muhammad**[[619]](footnotes_3.htm#b0619)** , on the authority of his
father, on the authority of his grandfather, on the

###### باب السبعة

##### ورد الامر بدفن سبعة أشياء

#### 7-1 حدثنا أبوأحمد محمد بن جعفر البندار قال: حدثنا أبوبكر مسعدة بن أسمع قال: حدثنا أبوحامد أحمد بن إسحاق الهروي قال: حدثنا الفضل بن عبد الله الهروي قال: حدثنا مالك بن سليمان، عن داود بن عبدالرحمن، عن هشام بن عروة، عن أبيه، عن عائشة أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله كان يأمر بدفن سبعة أشياء من الانسان: الشعر والظفر، والدم، والحيض، والمشيمة، والسن، والعلقة.

##### نهي رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله عن سبع وامر بسع

#### 7-2 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد السجزي قال: أخبرنا أبوالعباس الثقفي قال: حدثنا محمد بن الصباح قال: أخبرنا جرير، عن أبي إسحاق الشيباني، عن أشعث بن أبي الشعثاء المحاربي، عن معاوية بن سويد بن مقرن، عن البراء بن عازب قال: نهى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله عن سبع وأمر بسبع: نهانا أن نتختم بالذهب، وعن الشرب في آنية الذهب والفضة، وقال: من شرب فيها في الدنيا لم يشرب فيه في الآخرة، وعن ركوب المياثر، وعن لبس القسي، وعن لبس الحرير والديباج والاستبرق، وأمرنا عليه السلام باتباع الجنائز، وعيادة المريض، وتسميت العاطس، ونصرة المظلوم وإفشاء السلام، وإجابة الداعي، وإبرار القسم.

#### قال الخليل بن أحمد: لعل الصواب إبرار المقسم.

##### حرم من الشاة سبعة أشياء

#### 7-3 حدثنا أبوالحسين محمد بن علي بن الشاه، قال: حدثنا أبوحامد، قال: حدثنا أبويزيد أحمد بن خالد الخالدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن صلح التميمي عن أبيه قال: حدثنا محمد بن حاتم القطان، عن حماد بن عمرو، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن

authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said in
his advice to him, “O Ali! Seven things from the sheep are forbidden:
the blood, the genitals, the urinary bladder, the bone marrow, the
glands, the spleens, and the gall bladders.”

7-4 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Harun, on the authority of Abi Yahya al-Vaseti who through a chain of
narrations linked it up to the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB)
who went to the butchers and admonished them against selling seven parts
of sheep: The blood; the glands; the corners of the heart; the spleens;
the bone marrow; the balls and the penis.” One of the butchers told him
(MGB), ‘O Commander of the Faithful! The spleens and the liver are the
same.’

The Commander of the Faithful (MGB) told him, ‘O liar! You are lying!
Bring me two bowls of water so that I may show you the difference
between them.’ He brought two bowls of water. The Commander of the
Faithful (MGB) took a liver and a spleen and put each one in one of the
bowls of water. He (MGB) then squashed each one of them with his hand.
The liver got squashed but no blood came out of it, but the spleen did
not. There was a lot of blood in it which all came out into the water,
and all that was left of it was the veins and the skin that was in it.
Then the Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘This is the difference
between the liver and the spleens. The first one is a form of meat, but
the second one is just blood!’”

THE SEVEN CHARACTERISTICS GRANTED TO ALI (MGB)
----------------------------------------------

7-5 Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Shah narrated that Abu Hamid quoted on the
authority of Abu Yazid Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Khalidy, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Salih al-Tamimy, on the authority of his father,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Hatam al-Qat’tan, on the authority of
Hammad ibn Amr, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of his grandfather, on the
authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB), on the authority of God’s Prophet
(MGB) in the Prophet’s will to Ali (MGB), “O Ali! Indeed the Blessed the
Sublime God has granted me seven characteristics similar to you. You
will be the first one whom the grave will push out of the ground (on the
Resurrection Day) along with me. You will be the first one to stop on
the Bridge**[[620]](footnotes_3.htm#b0620)** with me. You will be the
first one to be dressed when they dress and are brought back to life
when they are brought back to life. You will be the first one to reside
with me in the highest Heaven. You will be the first one to drink the
sealed nectar drink of Paradise with me which is sealed by musk.”

#### أبيه، عن جده، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال: في وصيته له: يا علي حرم من الشاة سبعة أشياء: الدم، والمذاكير، والمثانة، والنخاع، والغدد، والطحال، والمرارة. {.t0}

#### 7-4 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن محمد بن هارون، عن أبي يحيى الواسطي بإسناده رفعه إلى أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام أنه مر بالقصابين فنهاهم عن بيع سبعة أشياء من الشاة: نهاهم عن بيع الدم والغدد، وآذان الفؤاد، والطحال والنخاع والخصي والقضيب فقال له رجل من القصابين: يا أمير المؤمنين ما الكبد والطحال إلا سواء، فقال له: كذبت يالكع آتني بتورين من ماء آتك بخلاف ما بينهما، فأتي بكبد وطحال وتورين من ماء، فقال: أمرس كل واحد منهما في إناء على حدة فمرسهما جميعا كما أمر به فانقبضت الكبد ولم يخرج منه شيء ولم ينقبض الطحال وخرج ما فيه كله وكان دما كله وبقي جلده وعروقه، فقال: هذا خلاف ما بينهما، هذا لحم وهذا دم.

##### اعطي النبي صلى الله عليه وآله في علي عليه السلام سبع خصال

#### 7-5 حدثنا محمد بن علي بن الشاه قال: حدثنا أبو حامد قال: حدثنا أبو يزيد أحمد بن خالد الخالدي: قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن صالح التميمي، عن أبيه قال: حدثنا محمد بن حاتم القطان، عن حماد بن عمرو، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله آله قال في وصيته له: يا علي إن الله تبارك وتعالى أعطاني فيك سبع خصال أنت أول من ينشق عنه القبر معي، وأنت أول من يقف على الصراط معي، وأنت أول من يكسى إذا كسيت ويحيى إذا حييت، وأنت أول من يسكن معي في عليين وأنت أول من يشرب معي من الرحيق المختوم الذي ختامه مسك.

THE PROPHET SAID: ‘BLESSED BE THOSE WHO BELIEVE IN ME WITHOUT HAVING SEEN ME’
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

7-6 Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bindar narrated that Abul-Abbas al-Himady
quoted on the authority of Abu Ja’far al-Hazrami, on the authority of
Hodbat ibn Khalid, on the authority of Homam ibn Yahya, on the authority
of Qitadeh, on the authority of Aymen, on the authority of Abi Imamat
that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Blessed
be**[[621]](footnotes_3.htm#b0621)** those who believe in me without
having seen me.” He (MGB) then repeated it seven times.

SEVEN PEOPLE WILL BE IN THE SHADE OF GOD’S THRONE ON THE RESURRECTION DAY
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

7-7 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Ibn Muni’a quoted Mus’ab, on the
authority of Malik, on the authority of Aba Abdul Rahman, on the
authority of Hafs ibn Asem, on the authority of Abi Sa’id al-Khidry, or
Abi Hurayrih that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “God - the Honorable the
Exalted - will put His Shade over seven people on the day in which there
is no shade except for His Shade: just leaders; young people who have
grown up in the worship of the Honorable the Exalted God; men whose
heart is with the mosque when they leave it until they return to it; two
men who gather together in the mosque in order to obey the Honorable the
Exalted God and stay there until they part; men who remember the
Honorable the Exalted God when they are alone and cry due to the fear of
the Honorable the Exalted God; men invited by a beautiful woman with a
good reputation, but do not accept her invitation and say that they fear
the Honorable the Exalted God; and men who give charity in private in
such a way that no one finds out.”

7-8 Al-Muzaf’far ibn Ja’far (Ibn al-Muzaf’far) al-Alavi al-Umari
al-Samarqandi - may God be pleased with him - narrated that Ja’far ibn
Muhammad ibn Masood al-Ayashi quoted his father, on the authority of
Al-Hussein ibn Ishkeeb, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ali al-Kufy, on
the authority of Abi Jamileh Al-Asady, on the authority of Abu Bakr
al-Khizermi, on the authority of Salma ibn Kohayl who linked it up to
Ibn Abbas**[[622]](footnotes_3.htm#b0622)** that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “Seven people will be in the Shade of the Honorable the Exalted
God’s Throne on the day in which there is no shade except for His Shade:
just leaders; young people who have grown up in the worship of God; men
who give charity in private such that even their left hands do not
realize what they gave with their right hands (stressing the fact that
they give charity such that no one else sees it); men who remember the
Honorable the Exalted God when they are alone and cry due to the fear of
the Honorable the Exalted God; men who upon seeing their believing
brethren say, ‘I like you for the sake of the Honorable the Exalted
God’; men who intend to return to the mosque whenever they leave it; men
invited by a beautiful woman, but do not accept her invitation and say
that they fear the Lord of the Two Worlds.”

##### قول النبي صلى الله عليه وآله طوبى ثم طوبی سبع مرات لمن لم يرني وآمن بي

#### 7-6 حدثنا محمد بن جعفر البندار قال: حدثنا أبوالعباس الحمادي قال: حدثنا أبوجعفر الحضرمي قال: حدثنا هدبة بن خالد قال: حدثنا همام بن يحيى قال: حدثنا قتادة، عن أيمن، عن أبي امامة قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: طوبى لمن رآني وآمن بي، طوبى ثم طوبى يقولها سبعالمن لم يرني وآمن بي.

##### سبعة في ظل عرش الله يوم القيامة

#### 7-7 أخبرنا الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا ابن منيع قال: حدثنا مصعب قال: حدثني مالك، عن أبي عبدالرحمن، عن حفص بن عاصم، عن أبي سعيد الخدري، أو عن أبي هريرة قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله سبعة يظلهم الله عز وجل في ظله يوم لا ظل إلا ظله إمام عادل، وشاب نشأ في عبادة الله عز وجل، ورجل قلبه متعلق بالمسجد إذا خرج منه حتى يعود إليه، ورجلان كانا في طاعة الله عز وجل فاجتمعا على ذلك وتفرقا، ورجل ذكر الله عز وجل خاليا ففاضت عيناه من خشية الله عز وجل ورجل دعته امرأة ذات حسب وجمال، فقال: إني أخاف الله عز وجل، ورجل تصدق بصدقة فأخفاها حتى لا تعلم شماله ما يتصدق بيمينه.

#### 7-8 حدثنا المظفر بن جعفر [بن المظفر] العلوي العمري السمرقندي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا جعفر بن محمد بن مسعود العياشي، عن أبيه، عن الحسين بن إشكيب، عن محمد بن علي الكوفي، عن أبي جميلة الاسدي، عن أبي بكر الخضرمي، عن سلمة بن كهيل رفعه، عن ابن عباس قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:سبعة في ظل عرش الله عز وجل يوم لا ظل إلا ظله: إمام عادل، وشاب نشأ في عبادة الله عز وجل، ورجل تصدق بيمينه فأخفاه عن شماله، ورجل ذكر الله عز وجل خاليا ففاضت عيناه من خشية الله عز وجل،و رجل لقى أخاه المؤمن فقال: إني لاحبك في الله عز وجل، ورجل خرج من المسجد وفي نيته أن يرجع إليه،و رجل دعته امرأة ذات جمال إلى نفسها، فقال: إني أخاف الله رب العالمين.

THERE ARE SEVEN CHARACTERISTICS IN RAISINS
------------------------------------------

7-9 Abu Mansoor Ahmad ibn Ibrahim ibn Bakr al-Khowzi narrated that Zayd
ibn Muhammad al-Baghdady quoted on the authority of Abul Qasim Abdullah
ibn Ahmad al-Ta’ee, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Abul Hassan Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB), on the authority of his father
(MGB), on the authority of his forefathers (MGB), on the authority of
Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “I advise you to eat raisins
since that will cure biliousness; alleviate the phlegm; strengthen your
nerves; relieve your fatigue; improve your temper; purify yourself; and
fend off your grief.”

SEVEN MOUNTAINS WERE MOVED FROM ONE PLACE TO ANOTHER PLACE DURING THE TIME OF MOSES (MGB)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7-10 Abu Ahmad al-Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Abdoyeh al-Siraj in
Hamedan narrated that Abul-Hassan Ali ibn al-Hassan ibn Sa’id al-Baz’zaz
quoted Hameed ibn Zanjooyeh, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Yusuf, on
the authority of Khalid ibn Yazid ibn Sabeeh, on the authority of Talha
ibn Amr al-Hazrami, on the authority of Ata ibn Abi Ribah, on the
authority of Ibn Abbas**[[623]](footnotes_3.htm#b0623)** that the
Prophet (MGB) said, “Seven mountains were moved from their original
place and joined Saudi Arabia**[[624]](footnotes_3.htm#b0624)** and
Yemen. These mountains are Ahad and Varqan which are in Medina; Sowr,
Sobayr and Hira which are in Mecca; Sabre and Hazur which are in Yemen.”

7-11 Abul Hassan Muhammad ibn Amr ibn Ali ibn Abdullah al-Basry in Ilaq
narrated that the preacher Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Ahmad
ibn Jabala quoted on authority of Abul Qasim Abdullah ibn Ahmad ibn Amer
al-Ta’ee, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Ali ibn
Musa al-Reza (MGB), on the authority of his father Musa ibn Ja’far
(MGB), on the authority of his father Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the
authority of his father Muhammad ibn Ali (MGB), on the authority of his
father Ali ibn al-Hussein (MGB), on the authority of his father
Al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB), “Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) was in the Jamea
Mosque in Kufa. A man from Syria got up and asked him several questions
amongst which was the following, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! What are
the colors of the seven heavens and what are their names?’ The Imam
(MGB) said, ‘The lowest heaven is called Rafi’a made of smoke and water.
The second heaven is called Faydoom and it is the same color as copper.
The third heaven is called Maroom and it is the same color as brass. The
fourth heaven is called Arfoloon and it is the same color as silver. The
fifth heaven is called Hayoon and it is the same color as gold. The
sixth heaven is called Aroos and it is the same color as green
chrysolite.**[[625]](footnotes_3.htm#b0625)** The seventh heaven is
called Ajma and it is the same color as a white pearl.’”

This has been a part of a longer narration. Only a part of it has been
presented here as needed.

##### في الزبيب سبع خصال

#### 7-9 حدثنا أبومنصور أحمد بن إبراهيم بن بكر الخوزي قال: حدثنا زيد بن محمد البغدادي قال: حدثنا أبوالقاسم عبد الله بن أحمد الطائي قال: حدثني أبي قال: حدثني علي بن موسى الرضا، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:عليكم بالزبيب فإنه يكشف المرة ويذهب بالبلغم، ويشد العصب، ويذهب بالاعياء، ويحسن الخلق، ويطيب النفس، ويذهب بالغم.

##### سبعة جبال تطايرت يوم موسى

#### 7-10حدثنا أبوأحمد القاسم بن محمد بن أحمد بن عبدويه السراج بهمدان قال: حدثنا أبوالحسن علي بن الحسن بن سعيد البزاز قال: حدثنا حميد بن زنجويه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن يوسف قال: حدثني خالد بن يزيد بن صبيح، عن طلحة بن عمرو الحضرمي، عن عطاء بن أبي رباح، عن ابن عباس، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال: من الجبال التي تطايرت يوم موسى سبعة أجبل فلحقت بالحجاز واليمن، منها بالمدينة أحد وورقان، وبمكة ثور وثبير وحراء، وباليمن صبر وحضور.

##### أسماء السماوات السبع وألوانها

#### 7-11حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن عمرو بن علي بن عبد الله البصري بايلاق قال: حدثنا أبوعبد الله محمد بن عبد الله بن جبلة الواعظ قال: حدثنا أبوالقاسم عبد الله بن أحمد بن عامر الطائي قال: حدثني أبي قال: حدثنا علي بن موسى الرضا قال: حدثنا موسى بن جعفر قال: حدثنا جعفر بن محمد قال: حدثنا محمدبن علي قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين قال: حدثنا الحسين بن علي عليهم السلام قال: كان علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام بالكوفة في الجامع إذ قام إليه رجل من أهل الشام فسأله عن مسائل فكان فيما سأله أن قال له: ياأمير المؤمنين أخبرني عن ألوان السماوات وأسمائها؟ فقال له: إن اسم السماء الدنيا رفيع وهي من ماء ودخان، واسم السماء الثانية فيدوم وهي على لون النحاس، والسماء الثالثة اسمها الماروم وهي على لون الشبه، والسما الرابعة اسمها أرقلون وهي على لون الفضة، والسماء الخامسة اسمها هيفون وهي على لون الذهب، والسماء السادسة اسمها عروس وهي ياقوتة خضراء، والسماء السابعة اسمها عجماء وهي درة بيضاء والحديث طويل أخذنا منه موضع الحاجة.

GOD’S PROPHET (MGB) GAVE ABUZAR SEVEN PIECES OF ADVICE
------------------------------------------------------

7-12 Abu Ali al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Muhammad al-Attar narrated that
Muhammad ibn Mahmood quoted on the authority of Abu Suleiman Muhammad
ibn Mansoor al-Faqeeh, Isma’il, al-Maleki and Hamdan, on the authority
of Al-Makeki ibn Ibrahim, on the authority of Hisham ibn Hisan and
al-Hassan ibn Dinar, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Vase’a, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn al-Samet, on the authority of Abuzar - may God
have Mercy upon him, “God’s Prophet (MGB) gave me seven pieces of
advice. The Prophet (MGB) advised me to always consider the situation of
the people who are in an inferior position than I am. The Prophet (MGB)
advised me never to consider the position of those who are in a better
position than I am. The Prophet (MGB) advised me to like the poor and
associate with them. The Prophet (MGB) advised me to tell the truth even
though it may be unpleasant. The Prophet (MGB) advised me to visit my
relations of kin, even if they may have cut off relations with me. The
Prophet (MGB) advised me not to fear the blame of those who blame me for
the sake of God. The Prophet (MGB) advised me to say ‘There is no power
nor any strength save in God the Sublime the Great’ often as it is one
of the treasures of Paradise.”

7-13 Abu Muhammad - Muhammad ibn Abdullah al-Shafe’ee in Furqana
narrated that Mujahid ibn A’ayn quoted Abu Yahya Abdul Samad ibn al-Fazl
al-Balkhi, on the authority of Macci ibn Ibrahim, on the authority of
Hisham ibn Hisan and al-Hassan ibn Dinar, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Vase’a, on the authority of Abdullah ibn al-Samet, on the authority
of Abuzar, “God’s Prophet (MGB) gave me seven pieces of advice.”

The rest of this narration is similar to the one above.

THE BELIEF OF ONE WHO HAS SEVEN CHARACTERISTICS IS COMPLETE
-----------------------------------------------------------

7-14 Abul-Hussein Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Shah narrated that Abu Hamid
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hussein quoted on the authority of Abu Yazid
Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Khalidy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn
Salih al-Tamimy, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Anas ibn Muhammad Abu Malik, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of his grandfather, on the authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib
(MGB) that in his will to Ali (MGB), the Prophet (MGB) told him, “O Ali!
The belief of one who has the following seven characteristics is
complete and the gates of Paradise shall open up for him: to perform the
(ritual) ablution properly; to say the prayers properly; to pay the
alms-tax; to quench one’s anger; to control one’s tongue; to seek God’s
forgiveness for the sins; and to (follow and) give advice according to
the way of the Prophet’s Household.”

##### أوصى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أبا ذر بسبع

#### 7-12حدثنا أبوعلي الحسن بن علي بن محمد العطار قال: حدثنا محمد بن محمود قال: حدثنا أبوسليمان محمد بن منصور الفقيه، وإسماعيل، والمكي، وحمدان قالوا: حدثنا المكي بن إبراهيم قال: حدثنا هشام بن حسان، والحسن بن دينار، عن محمد ابن واسع، عن عبد الله بن الصامت، عن أبي ذر رحمة الله عليه قال: أوصاني رسول الله بسبع أوصاني أن أنظر إلى من هو دوني، ولا أنظر اليم من هو فووقي، وأوصاني بحب المساكين والدنو منهم، وأوصاني أن أقول الحق وإن كان مرا، وأوصاني أن أصل رحمي وإن أدبرت، وأوصاني أن لا أخاف في الله لومة لا ئم، وأوصاني أن أستكثر من قول "لاحول ولا قوة إلا بالله [العلي العظيم]" فانها من كنوز الجنة.

#### 7-13 حدثنا أبومحمد محمد بن أبي عبد الله الشافعي بفرغانة قال: أخبرنا مجاهد بن أعين قال: حدثنا أبويحيى عبدالصمد بن الفضل البلخي قال: حدثنا مكي بن إبراهيم قال: حدثنا هشام بن حسان، والحسن بن دينار، عن محمد بن واسع، عن عبد الله بن الصامت، عن أبي ذر قال: أوصاني رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله بسبع - وذكر الحديث مثله سواء.

##### سبعة من كن فيه فقد استكمل حقيقة الايمان

#### 7-14 حدثنا أبوالحسين محمد بن علي بن الشاه قال: حدثنا أبوحامد أحمد بن محمد بن الحسين قال: حدثنا أبويزيد أحمد بن خالد الخالدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد ابن صالح التميمي قال: حدثنا أبي قال: حدثنا أنس بن محمد أبومالك، عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام أن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال في وصيته له: يا علي سبعة من كن فيه فقد استكمل حقيقة الايمان، وأبواب الجنة مفتحة له: من أسبغ وضوء‌ه، وأحسن صلاته، وأدى زكاة ماله، وكف غضبه، وسجن لسانه، واستغفر لذنبه، وأدى النصيحة لاهل بيت نبيه.

GOD GIVES SEVEN THINGS TO ONE WHO FASTS IN RAMAZAN
--------------------------------------------------

7-15 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah
al-Barqy, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hussein al-Req’qi, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn Jabal’lat, on the authority of Muawiyah ibn
Am’mar, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Abdullah, on the authority of
his forefathers, on the authority of his grandfather Al-Hassan ibn Ali
ibn Abi Talib, on the authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB), “God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, ‘The Blessed the Sublime God would give seven things
to any believer who fasts during the month of Ramazan for the sake of
God as follows: God would melt down any flesh that may gave grown on his
body due to eating illegitimate food; the Honorable the Exalted God
would make him closer to His Mercy; his act would be considered as an
expiation for the sin of his great forefather Adam (MGB); God would ease
the hardships of death for him; he shall be immune from thirst and
hunger on the Resurrection Day; the Honorable the Exalted God would feed
him with pure Heavenly foods; and the Honorable the Exalted God would
grant him immunity from the Fire (of Hell).’ I said, ‘O Muhammad! You
speak the truth.’”

SEVEN PEOPLE SHALL RECEIVE THE HARDEST PUNISHMENT ON THE RESURRECTION DAY
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

7-16 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Al-Abbas ibn Ma’ruf, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn
Mahboob, on the authority of Hanan ibn Sadeer, that one of the
companions of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said that he had heard him
say, “Seven people who shall receive the hardest punishment on the
Resurrection Day are as follows: Adam’s son who killed his brother
(MGB); Nimrood who argued with Abraham (MGB) about God; two of the
Israelites one of whom made the Israelites Jewish and the other one who
made the Israelites Christian; the Pharaoh who said, ‘I am your Lord,
Most High’**[[626]](footnotes_3.htm#b0626)** ; and two of the followers
of the Muslim nation.”

THE OPENING ALLAHU AKBARS (GOD IS GREAT) ARE SEVEN
--------------------------------------------------

7-17 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted on
the authority of Ahmad ibn Abdullah al-Khalijee, on the authority of the
father of Ali al-Hassan ibn Rashid, “I asked Al-Reza (MGB) about the
number of times the Allahu Akbars (God is Great) are said before the
start of the prayer. He (MGB) replied, ‘It is seven times.’ I said, ‘It
has been narrated that God’s Prophet (MGB) said it only once.’ The Imam
replied, ‘God’s Prophet (MGB) said it loudly once and said it quietly
the other six times.’”

##### من صام شهر رمضان وجبت له سبع خصال

#### 7-15 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عمي محمد بن أبي القاسم عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين الرقي عن عبد الله ابن جبلة، عن معاوية بن عمار، عن الحسن بن عبد الله، عن آبائه، عن جده الحسن ابن علي بن أبي طالب، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام في حديث طويل يقول فيه قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ما من مؤمن يصوم شهر رمضان احتسابا إلا أوجب الله تبارك وتعالى له سبع خصال: أولها يذوب الحرام من جسده، والثانية يقرب من رحمة الله عز وجل، والثالثة قد كفر خطيئة أبيه آدم، والرابعة يهون الله عليه سكرات الموت، والخامسة أمان من الجوع والعطش يوم القيامة، والسادسة يطعمه الله عز وجل من طيبات الجنة، والسابعة يعطيه الله عز وجل براء‌ة من النار. قال: صدقت يا محمد.

##### سبعة من أشد الناس عذابا يوم القيامة

#### 7-16 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن العباس بن معروف، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن حنان بن سدير قال: حدثني رجل من أصحاب أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: سمعته يقول: إن أشد الناس عذابا يوم القيامة سبعة نفر أولهم ابن آدم الذي قتل أخاه، ونمرود الذي حاج إبراهيم في ربه، واثنان من بني إسرائيل هودا قومهم ونصراهم، وفرعون الذي قال: أنا ربكم الاعلى، واثنان من هذه الامة.

##### تكبيرات الافتتاح سبع

#### 7-17 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن أحمد بن عبد الله الخليجي، عن أبي علي الحسن بن راشد قال: سألت الرضا عليه السلام عن تكبيرة الافتتاح، فقال: سبع قلت: روي عن النبي صلى اله عليه وآله إنه كان يكبر واحدة، فقال: إن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله كان يكبر واحدة يجهز بها ويسر ستا.

7-18 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted on
the authority of Ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Bakir
that Zurarah said, “I saw Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) and heard him
start his prayer with seven continuous Takbirs (saying God is Great).”

7-19 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the
authority of Himad, on the authority of Al-Halabi, on the authority of
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “Whenever you are the prayer leader it
suffices that you say the opening Takbir (God is Great) once aloud and
say the rest in a low voice.”

7-20 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on
the authority of Hurayz, on the authority of Zurarah that Abi Ja’far
al-Baqir (MGB) said, “The minimum number of the opening Takbirs (saying
God is Great) before the start of the prayer is 1. It may be said three
times. It is even better to say it five or even seven times.”

The compiler of the book added, “I have compiled the reasons behind the
seven opening Takbirs in my book Elal al-Shar’ye val Asbab.”

SEVEN INSTANCES TO RECITE AL-IKHLAS AND KAFIRUN
-----------------------------------------------

7-21 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ayoob ibn
Nooh, on the authority of Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih, on the authority of
Mu’az ibn Muslim, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB),
“Never abandon reading the Al-Ikhlas**[[627]](footnotes_3.htm#b0627)**
and the Kafirun**[[628]](footnotes_3.htm#b0628)** Quranic Chapters in
the following seven instances: in the two units of recommendable
(Nafila) prayers before dawn prayers; in the two units of recommendable
(Nafila) prayers at sunset; in the two units of recommendable (Nafila)
prayers after the evening prayer; in the first two units of the night
prayer; in the two units of Ihram prayer; in the two units of the
morning prayer; and in the two units of the Ka’ba circumambulation
prayer.”

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “The
instruction above for reciting the above-mentioned two Quranic Chapters
in these seven instances is a recommendation. It is not an obligation.”

A WISE MAN PURSUED ANOTHER WISE MAN FOR SEVEN-HUNDRED FARSAKHS**[[629]](footnotes_3.htm#b0629)** FOR SEVEN PIECES OF ADVICE
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7-22 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih -may God be pleased with him- narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Abu Abdullah al-Razi, on the authority of Sajjadat

#### 7-18 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه عن ابن أبي عمير، عن عبد الله بن بكير، عن زرارة قال: رأيت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام وسمعته استفتح الصالة بسبع تكبيرات ولاء.

#### 7-19 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن حماد، عن الحلبي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إذا كنت إماما فإنه يجزيك أن تكبر واحدة وتسر ستا.

#### 7-20 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن حماد بن عيسى، عن حريز، عن زرارة، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: أدنى ما يجزي من التكبير في التوجه إلى الصلاة تكبيرة واحدة، وثلاث تكبيرات وخمس وسبع أفضل. وقد أخرجت علة السبع التكبيرات في الافتتاح في كتاب علل الشرايع والاحكام والاسباب.

##### يقرأ قل هو الله احد وقل يا ايها الكافرون في سبع مواطن

#### 7-21 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أيوب بن نوح، عن عبد الله بن المغيرة قال: حدثني معاذ بن مسلم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: لا تدع أن تقرأ قل هو الله احد وقل يا أيها الكافرون في سبعة مواطن: في الركعتين قبل الفجر، وركعتي الزوال، والركعتين بعد المغرب، والركعتين في أول صلاة الليل وركعتي الاحرام، وركعتي الفجر إذا أصبحت بها، وركعتي الطواف.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: الامر بقراء‌ة هاتين السورتين في هذه السبع المواطن على الاستحباب لا على الوجوب.

##### تبع حكيم حكيما سبع مائة فرسخ في سبع كلمات

#### 7-22 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار عن محمد بن أحمد قال: حدثني أبوعبد الله الرازي، عن سجادة واسمه الحسن

- who is al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abi Uthman whereas Abi Uthman is Habib,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Hamzih, on the authority of
Muawiyah ibn Wahab, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “A
wise man pursued another wise man for seven-hundred
Farsakhs**[[630]](footnotes_3.htm#b0630)** for seven pieces of advice.
Once he met him he asked, ‘O Sir! Please tell me what is higher than the
sky; what is wider than the Earth; what is deeper than the sea; what is
harder than the rocks; what is hotter than fire; what is colder than
bitter cold; and what is heavier than the mountains?’ The wise man
replied, ‘Truth is higher than the skies; justice is wider than the
Earth; self-contentment is deeper than the sea; an atheist’s heart is
harder than rocks; the greed of a miser is hotter than the fire;
disappointment for obtaining God’s Mercy is colder than bitter cold; and
finally accusing an innocent person is heavier than the mountains.’”

SEVEN SPOIL THEIR DEEDS
-----------------------

7-23 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn
Ahmad, on the authority of Abu Abdullah al-Razi, on the authority of
Al-Hassan ibn Abi Uthman, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Umar al-Hilal,
on the authority of Yahya ibn Imran al-Halabi that he had heard Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, “The following seven people spoil their
deeds.

1- A wise highly knowledgeable man who doesn’t teach his knowledge to
the people and is unknown to the extent that nobody mentions his name

2- A wise man who entrusts his wealth to wicked liars who would not
return it to him

3- Those who trust mischievous and disloyal people

4- Noble people who are not compassionate to others

5- Mothers who do not protect the secrets of their offspring and divulge
them

6- Those who rush to blame their companions and brethren

7- Those who continually quarrel with their colleagues and brethren.”

THE PROSTRATION ON SEVEN BONES
------------------------------

7-24 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his
father, on the authority of Himad, on the authority of Zurarah that Abi
Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “You perform the prostration on seven bones:
the forehead; the palms of the hands; the ends of the knees; the big
toes of the feet; and the tip of the nose. The first seven is a must but
touching the tip of the nose to the ground during prostration is just
recommendable.”

#### بن علي ابن أبي عثمان، واسم أبي عثمان حبيب عن محمد بن أبي حمزة، عن معاوية بن وهب، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: تبع حكيم حكيما سبع مائة فرسخ في سبع كلمات فلما لحق به قال له: ياهذا ما أرفع من السماء وأوسع من الارض وأغنى من البحر وأقسى من الحجر وأشد حرارة من النار وأشد بردا من الزمهرير، وأثقل من الجبال الراسيات؟، فقال له: يا هذا الحق أرفع من السماء، والعدل أوسع من الارض، وغنى النفس أغنى من البحر، وقلب الكافر أقسى من الحجر، والحريص الجشع أشد حرارة من النار، واليأس من روح الله أشد بردا من الزمهرير، والبهتان على البرئ أثقل من الجبال الراسيات. {.t0}

##### سبعة يفسدون أعمالهم

#### 7-23 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أحمد قال: حدثني أبوعبد الله الرازي، عن الحسن بن علي بن أبي عثمان، عن أحمد بن عمر الحلال، عن يحيى بن عمران الحلبي قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: سبعة يفسدون أعمالهم: الرجل الحليم ذو العلم الكثير لا يعرف بذلك ولا يذكر به، والحكيم الذي يدين ماله كل كاذب منكر لما يؤتى إليه، والرجل الذي يأمن ذا المكر والخيانة والسيد الفظ الذي لا رحمة له، والام التي لا تكتم عن الولد السر وتفشي عليه، والسريع إلى لائمة إخوانه، والذي لا يزال يجادل أخاه مخاصما له.

##### السجود على سبعة أعظم

#### 7-24 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن حماد، عن زرارة، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال:السجود على سبعة أعظم: الجبهة والكفين والركبتين، والابهامين، وترغم بأنفك، أما الفرض فهذه السبعة، وأما الارغام فسنة.

THE PROPHET (MGB) HAS CURSED SEVEN GROUPS
-----------------------------------------

7-25 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on
the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad, on the authority of Abil Qasim
al-Kufy, on the authority of Abdul-Mumin al-Ansari, on the authority of
Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB), “God’s Prophet (MGB) said, ‘I have cursed
seven groups. God and all the other Prophets (MGB) whose prayers are
sure to be fulfilled have also cursed them.’ They asked him (MGB), ‘Who
are they?’ The Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘They are those who add things to
the Quran; those who deny Divine Destiny; those who oppose my
traditions; those who allow what has been forbidden regarding my
Itrat**[[631]](footnotes_3.htm#b0631)** ; those who come into power by
force so as to debase those who are endeared by God, and to endear those
who are debased by God; those who consider lawful what the Honorable the
Exalted God has established to be unlawful.’”

7-26 Muhammad ibn Umar al-Hafiz quoted on the authority of Abu Ja’far
Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Hafs al-Khas’ami, on the authority of Sabit
ibn Qarim al-Sanjari, on the authority of Abdul Malik ibn Valid, on the
authority of Amr ibn Abdul-Jab’bar, on the authority of Abdullah ibn
Zyad, on the authority of Zayd ibn Ali, on the authority of his father,
on the authority of his grandfather, on the authority of Ali (MGB) that
the Prophet (MGB) said, “God and all the Prophets (MGB) whose prayers
are sure to be fulfilled have cursed seven groups of people. They are
those who change the Quran; those who deny Divine Destiny; those who
change the tradition of God’s Prophet; those who allow what has been
forbidden regarding my Itrat; those who come into power by force so as
to debase those who are endeared by God, and to endear those who are
debased by God; those who consider lawful what the Honorable the Exalted
God has established to be unlawful; and those who are too proud with
those who worship the Honorable the Exalted God.”

THE SEVEN RIGHTS OF BELIEVERS INCUMBENT UPON OTHER BELIEVERS
------------------------------------------------------------

7-27 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
Abdul Jab’bar, on the authority of Al-Hassan Ali ibn Fazal, on the
authority of Solabat ibn Maymun, on the authority of some companions, on
the authority of Al-Moála ibn Khanees, “I asked Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB), ‘What are the rights of the believers incumbent upon other
believers?’ The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘There are seven rights for any
believer that are incumbent upon other believers to honor. All seven are
obligatory. If you do not honor any of these rights, you have left the
domain of divine friendship and God's obedience.’

##### لعن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله سبعة

#### 7-25 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن أبي القاسم الكوفي، عن عبدالمؤمن الانصاري، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إني لعنت سبعة لعنهم الله وكل نبي مجاب قبلي، فقيل: ومن هم؟ فقال: الزائد في كتاب الله، والمكذب بقدر الله، والمخالف لسنتي، والمستحل من عترتي ما حرم الله، والمتسلط بالجبرية ليغز من أذل الله، ويذل من أعز الله، والمستأثر على المسلمين بفيئهم مستحلا له والمحرم ما أحل الله عز وجل.

#### 7-26 حدثنا محمدبن عمر الحافظ قال: حدثني أبوجعفر محمدبن الحسين بن حفص الخثعمي قال: حدثنا ثابت بن غارم السنجاري قال: حدثنا عبدالملك بن الوليد قال: حدثنا عمرو بن عبدالجبار قال: حدثني عبد الله بن زياد قال: أخبرني زيد بن علي، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله سبعة لعنهم الله وكل نبي مجاب: المغير لكتاب الله، والمكذب بقدر الله، والمبدل سنة رسول الله، والمستحل من عترتي ما حرم الله عز وجل، والمتسلط في سلطانه ليعز من أذل الله يذل من أعز الله، والمستحل لحرم الله، والمتكبر على عبادالله عز وجل.

##### للمؤمن على المؤمن سبعة حقوق

#### 7-27 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن عبد الجبار، عن الحسن علي بن فضال، عن ثعلبة بن ميمون، عن بعض أصحابنا، عن المعلى بن خنيس قال: قلت لابي عبد الله عليه السلام: ما حق المؤمن على المؤمن؟ قال: سبعة حقوق واجبات ما فيها حق إلا وهو واجب عليه وإن خالفه خرج من ولاية الله وترك طاعته ولم يكن لله عزو جل فيه نصيب.

I asked the Imam (MGB), ‘May I be your ransom! What are these seven
rights?’ The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘Excellent O Moála! The simplest right
is that you should like for them what you like for yourself, and dislike
for them what you dislike for yourself. The second right is that you
must assist them in fulfilling their needs, please them and not oppose
what they say. The third right is that you must use your soul, wealth,
tongue, hands and feet to assist them. The fourth right is that you must
be like their eyes, their guide, their mirror, and their clothing. The
sixth right is that if you have a wife and a servant, and your brother
doesn’t, you must send your servant to his house to wash his clothes,
prepare his food and make his bed. These are all established duties
between you and him. The seventh right is that you must accept his oath
and his invitation. You must attend his burial ceremony. You should go
to visit him if he gets ill, and make all efforts to fulfill his needs.
You should not let him beg you for help, but immediately fulfill his
needs. Once you do this, you have tied his friendship and yours
together, and have tied your friendship to the Almighty God's
friendship.’”

7-28 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted
Harun ibn Muslim ibn Sa’edan, on the authority of Mus’adat ibn Sadaqah
al-Rub’ee, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), “The
Honorable the Exalted God has established seven rights for each believer
incumbent upon any other believer as follows:

1-He must honor him in his sight.

2- He must love him wholeheartedly.

3- He must help him.

4- He should consider to be good for him whatever he considers to be
good for himself and should not gossip about him.

5- He should visit him when he gets ill.

6- He should attend and escort his funeral procession.

7- He should only speak good of him after his death.”

AN ATHEIST EATS WITH SEVEN INTESTINES
-------------------------------------

7-29 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Walid - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Harun ibn Muslim,
on the authority of Mus’adat, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq (MGB), “The atheists eat with seven
intestines.**[[632]](footnotes_3.htm#b0632)** ”

7-30 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of some
companions, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “A believer eats with one intestine, but an atheist
eats with seven intestines.”

#### قال: قلت: جعلت فداك حدثني ماهي؟ قال: ويحك يا معلى إني شفيق عليك أخشى أن تضيع ولا تحفظ، وتعلم ولا تعمل، قلت لا قوة إلا بالله، قال: أيسر منها أن تحب له ما تحب لنفسك، وتكره له ما تكره لنفسك، والحق الثاني أن تمشي في جاجته وتبتغي رضاه ولا تخالف قوله، والحق الثالث أن تصله بنفسك ومالك ويدك ورجلك ولسانك. والحق الرابع أن تكون عينه ودليله ومرآته وقميصه. والحق الخامس أن لا تشبع ويجوع، ولا تلبس ويعرى، ولا تروي ويظمأ. والحق السادس إن يكون لك امرأة وخادم وليس لاخيك امرأة ولا خادم أن تبعث خادمك فتغسل ثيابه، وتصنع طعامه، وتمهد فراشه، فإن ذلك كله إنما جعل بينك وبينه، والحق السابع أن تبر قسمه وتجيب دعوته، وتشهد جنازته وتعوده في مرضه، وتشخص بدنك في قضاء حاجته، ولا تحوجه إلى أن يسألك ولكن تبادر إلى قضاء حوائجه، فاذا فعلت ذلك به وصلت ولايتك بولايته وولايته بولاية الله عز وجل.

#### 7-28 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري قال: حدثنا هارون بن مسلم بن سعدان، عن مسعدة بن صدقة الربعي، عن جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام قال: للمؤمن على المؤمن سبعة حقوق واجبة له من الله عز وجل والله سائله عما صنع فيها: الاجلال له في عينه، والود له في صدره، والمواساة له في ماله، وأن يجب له ما يحب لنفسه وأن يحرم غيبته، وأن يعوده في مرضه، ويشيع جنازته، ولا يقول فيه بعد موته إلا خيرا.

##### الكافر يأكل في سبعة أمعاء

#### 7-29 حدثنا بذلك محمد بن الحسن بن الوليد رضي الله عنه، عن محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن هارون بن مسلم، عن مسعدة، عن جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام: الكافر يأكل في سبعة أمعاء.

#### 7-30 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن بعض أصحابنا، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: المؤمن يأكل في معاء واحد، والكافر يأكل في سبعة أمعاء.

A BELIEVER IS ONE WHO HAS SEVEN CHARACTERISTICS
-----------------------------------------------

7-31 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Yahya, on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad and others who linked it up through a
chain of narrators to the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB), “A
believer is one whose business is legitimate; is good-tempered; has a
good soul; gives charity from his excessive wealth; doesn’t talk a lot;
the people are secure with him; and he treats others fairly.”

THERE ARE SEVEN RANKS FOR A BELIEVER
------------------------------------

7-32 Al-Hussein ibn Ahmad ibn Idris - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Ahmad quoted Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy,
on the authority of his father who linked it up through a chain of
narrators to Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “There are seven ranks for a
believer. None of them would go beyond their rank. Those with a given
rank may get honored by the Honorable the Exalted God and be promoted,
but they would never achieve a different rank. One group are God’s
witnesses for His creatures. One group are the noble ones. One group are
the examined ones. One group are the brave ones. One group are the
patient ones. One group are the pious ones and one group are those who
seek forgiveness.”

SEVEN HEARTS WOULD NOT TASTE THE SWEETNESS OF BELIEF
----------------------------------------------------

7-33 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn
Ahmad, on the authority of Sahl ibn Zyad, on the authority of Mansoor,
on the authority of Nasr al-Kowsaj, on the authority of Motrif - a
servant of Ma’an, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB),
“Seven hearts would not taste the sweetness of belief: the Sandi; the
Zanji; the Khuzestani; the Kurdish; the Bedouins; those who reside in
the hills of Ray**[[633]](footnotes_3.htm#b0633)** ; and those born of
adultery.”

SEVEN GROUPS OF LEARNED MEN SHALL GO TO HELL
--------------------------------------------

7-34 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Al-Hassan ibn Musa al-Khishab, on the authority of Isma’il
ibn Mihran, and Ali ibn Asbat, on the authority of some men that Abu
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “A group of learned men like to pile up
their knowledge like a treasure and not let the people use it. They
shall be on the first floor of Hell. Some of the learned men get
insulted when they are given some advice and have a hard time giving
advice to others. They shall be on the second floor of Hell.

##### المؤمن الذى يجتمع فيه سبع خصال

#### 7-31 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن يحيى قال: حدثني أحمد بن محمد وغيره بإسناده رفعاه إلى أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام أنه قال: المؤمن من طاب مكسبه، وحسنت خليقته، وصحت سريرته، وأنفق الفضل من ماله، وأمسك الفضل من كلامه، وكفي الناس من شره وأنصف الناس من نفسه.

##### المؤمنون على سبع درجات

#### 7-32 حدثنا الحسين بن أحمد بن إدريس رضي الله عنه، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه يرفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: المؤمنون على سبع درجات: صاحب درجة منهم في مزيد من الله عز وجل لايخرجه ذلك المزيد من درجته إلى درجة غيره، ومنهم شهداء الله على خلقه، ومنهم النجباء، ومنهم الممتحنة، ومنهم النجداء، ومنهم أهل الصبر، ومنهم أهل التقوى، ومنهم أهل المغفرة.

##### لا يدخل حلاوة الايمان قلوب سبعة

#### 7-33 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس قال: حدثني محمد بن أحمد، عن سهل بن زياد، عن منصور، عن نصر الكوسج، عن مطرف مولى معن عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: لايدخل حلاوة الايمان قلب سندي، والزنجي، ولاخوزي ولاكردي، ولا بربري، ولا نبك الري، ولامن حملته أمه من الزنا.

##### سبعة من العلماء في النار

#### 7-34 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن الحسن بن موسي الخشاب، عن إسماعيل بن مهران، وعلي بن أسباط فيما أعلم، عن بعض رجالهما قال: قال أبوعبدلله عليه السلام: إن من العلماء من يحب أن يخزن علمه ولا يؤخذ عنه، فذاك في الدرك الاول من النار، ومن العلماء من إذا وعظ أنف وإذا وعظ عنف فذاك في الدرك الثاني من النار.

Some of the learned men consider only the rich and the elite to be
worthy of learning, and do not consider the poor and the needy to be
worthy of teaching. They shall be on the third floor of Hell. Some of
the learned men are oppressive like the rulers and the kings. They would
get angry if you object to them or fail to carry out any of their
orders. They shall reside on the fourth level of Hell. Some of the
learned men seek to acquire the narrations of the Jews and the
Christians in order to serve as a source of pride and honor for them and
increase their body of knowledge of traditions. They shall reside on the
fifth level of Hell. Some of the learned men assume themselves as being
the reference for religious decrees, and say that others should ask them
even though they have not even learned a single word! God doesn’t like
such people and they shall reside on the sixth level of Hell. Some of
the learned men use their knowledge as a means of showing off their
intellect and manlihood. Such people shall reside on the seventh level
of Hell.”

SEVEN CREATURES WHICH GOD CREATED BUT NOT BORN OF THEIR MOTHER’S WOMB
---------------------------------------------------------------------

7-35 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted
Al-Yashkari**[[634]](footnotes_3.htm#b0634)** , on the authority of Abi
Ahmad Muhammad ibn Zyad al-Azodi, on the authority of Aban ibn Uthman,
on the authority of Aban ibn Taqlib, on the authority of Sufyan ibn Abi
Layli, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) that it
has been recorded as a part of a long narration in which the Imam (MGB)
responded to the Roman Emperor who had asked him about the seven
creatures which God created but not born of their mother’s womb as
follows: “They are Adam, Eve, Abraham’s ram, the she-camel of Salih, the
snake in Heaven, the raven which God sent for Cain to scratch the ground
and show him how to bury his brother
Abel**[[635]](footnotes_3.htm#b0635)** , and the damned Satan - may the
Blessed the Sublime God curse him.”

GOD THE SUBLIME HAS PARTITIONED ISLAM INTO SEVEN PARTS
------------------------------------------------------

7-36 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of Am’mar ibn Abil Ahvas, “Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) was
asked, ‘There are people amongst us who believe in the Caliphate of the
Commander of the Faithful (MGB), and consider him to be superior to all
people, but do not believe in your nobility as we do. Should we be
friends with them?’ Imam as-Sadiq (MGB) replied, ‘Yes, absolutely. Is it
not true that God has things that the Prophet of God doesn’t have? Is it
not true that the Prophet of God has things that we do not have? Is it
not true that

#### ومن العلماء من يرى أن يصنع العلم عند ذوي الثروة والشرف، ولا يرى له في المساكين وضعا فذاك في الدرك الثالث من النار، ومن العلامة من يذهب في علمه مذهب الجبابرة والسلاطين فان رد عليه شيء من قوله أوقصر في شيء من أمره غضب فذاك في الدرك الرابع من النار، ومن العلماء من يطلب أحاديث اليهود والنصارى ليغزر به ويكثر به حديثه فذاك في الدرك الخامس من النار، ومن العلماء من يصنع نفسه للفتيا ويقول: سلوني ولعله لا يصيب حرفا واحدا والله لا يحب المتكلفين فذاك في الدرك السادس من النار، ومن العلماء من يتخذ علمه مروء‌ة وعقلا فذاك في الدرك السابع من النار.

##### سبعة أشياء خلقها الله عز وجل لم تخرج من رحم

#### 7-35 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن ابراهيم ابن هاشم، عن اليشكري، عن أبي أحمد محمد بن زياد الازدي، عن أبان بن عثمان، عن أبان بن تغلب، عن سفيان بن أبي ليلى، عن الحسن بن علي بن أبي طالب عليهما السلام أنه قال: في حديث طويل له مع ملك الروم إن ملك الروم سأله فيما سأله عن سبعة أشياء خلقها الله عز وجل لم تخرج من رحم، فقال: آدم وحواء، وكبس إبراهيم، وناقة صالح، وحية الجنة، والغراب الذي بعثه الله عز وجل يبحث في الارض، وإبليس لعنه الله تبارك وتعالى.

##### وضع الله تعالى الاسلام على سبعة أسهم

#### 7-36 حدثنا أبي رصي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبدلله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن عمار بن أبي الاحوص، قال: قلت لابي عبدلله عليه السلام إن عندنا أقواما يقولون بأمير المؤمنين عليه السلام يفضلونه على الناس كلهم وليس يصفون من نصف من فضلكم أنتولاهم؟ فقالى لي: نعم في الجملة،

we have things that you do not have? Is it not true that you have things
that others do not have? God the Blessed the Sublime has partitioned
Islam into seven parts, and has distributed them amongst the people.
These are perseverance, honesty, certitude, contentment, loyalty,
knowledge, and patience. Whoever possesses all seven has perfect faith
and is strong. He gave some people just one, some just two, some just
three, some just four, some just five, some just six, and some all seven
of these. Therefore, you should not expect one who has only been given
one part of the faith to be responsible for two parts. You cannot burden
one who has been granted only two parts of the faith with what you would
ask from those who have three parts of faith. And so on. If you expect
too much of them, they will be over-burdened and might turn away from
the religion. Instead you should be patient and treat them with
kindness, and make things easy for them. Now I will cite an example for
you. There was a Muslim man with an infidel neighbor who was his friend.
The man wished to help his friend become a Muslim. He kept trying to
show him how nice Islam was, and insisted on his becoming a Muslim.
Finally, he managed, and the man accepted Islam. The next morning the
man went to his neighbor's house, and asked him to accompany him to the
morning congregation prayer. They went there and when the prayer ended
he told the new Muslim man to sit down and recite the Quran until
sunrise. They stayed there, and continued reciting until sunrise. Then
he told him it was nice to fast that day and study the Quran until noon.
The new Muslim agreed. After the noon and afternoon prayers, he
suggested to the new Muslim man to stay there until dawn, to say their
prayers in the mosque and then go home at night. He agreed. They did
their night prayer, got up and went home. The next morning the man went
to his neighbor's house again and asked him to go to the mosque. The man
said, ‘Leave me alone. This religion is too difficult. I cannot stand
it.’ Therefore you should learn not to pressure the people. Do you know
that the rule of the Umayyad clan was based upon force, the sword and
oppression? However, we rule the people's hearts with patience,
kindness, concealing of faith, good association, piety, and struggling.
Try to attract the people to your religion.’”

GOD HAS GRANTED HIS PROPHETSEVEN CHARACTERISTICS
------------------------------------------------

7-37 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah
al-Barqy, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Jabal’le, on the authority of
Al-Hassan ibn Abdullah, on the authority of his forefathers, on the
authority of his grandfather Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) in a
long narration, “One of the Jews went to see God’s Prophet (MGB) and
asked him (MGB) several questions among which he asked, ‘Please inform
us of seven things which God has especially granted you from amongst all
the Prophets and has especially granted your nation from amongst the
nations.’

#### أليس عند الله مالم يكن عند رسول الله، ولرسول الله عند الله ما ليس لنا، وعندنا ما ليس عندكم، وعندكم ماليس عند غيركم؟ إن الله تبارك وتعالى وضع الاسلام على سعبة أسهم: على الصبرو الصدق واليقين والرضا والوفاء والعلم والحلم، ثم قسم ذلك بين الناس فمن جعل فيه هذه السبعة الاسهم فهو كامل الايمان محتمل، ثم قسم لبعض الناس السهم وولبعض السهمين ولبعض الثلاثة الاسهم ولبعض الاربعة الاسهم ولبعض الخمسة الاسهم ولبعض الستة الاسهم ولعبض السبعة الاسهم فلا تحملوا على صاحب السهم سهمين، ولا على صاحب السهيمن ثلاثة أسهم، ولا على صاحب الصلاة أربعة أسهم، ولا على صاحب الاربعة خمسة أسهم، ولا على صاحب الخمسة ستة أسهم ولا على صاحب الستة سبعة أسهم، فتثقلوهم وتنفروهم ولكن ترفقوابهم وسهلوا لهم المدخل، وسأضرب لك مثلا تعتبر به: إنه كان رجل مسلم وكان له جار كافر، وكان الكافر يرافق المؤمن فأحب المؤمن للكافر الاسلام ولم يزل يزين الاسلام ويحببه إلى الكافر حتى أسلم فغدا عليه المؤمن فاستخرجه من منزله فذهب به إلى المسجد ليصلي معه الفجر في جماعة فلما صلى قال له: لوقعدنا نذكر الله عز وجل حتى تطلع الشمس فقعد، فقال له: لو تعلمت القرآن إلى أن تزول الشمس وصمت اليوم كان أفضل، فقعد معه وصام حتى صلى الظهر والعصر فقال: لو صبرت حتى تصلي المغرب والعشاء الآخرة كان أفضل فقعد معه حتى صلى المغرب والعشاء الآخرة ثم نهضا وقد بلغ مجهوده وحمل عليه ما لا يطيق فلما كان من الغد غدا عليه وهو يريد به مثل ما صنع بالامس فدق عليه بابه ثم قال له: اخرج حتى نذهب إلى المسجد فأجابه أن انصرف عني فإن هذا دين شديد لا اطيقه. فلا تخرقوا بهم أما علمت أن إمارة بنى امية كانت بالسيف والعسف والجور وإن إمارتنا بالرفق والتألف والوقار والتقية وحسن الخلطة والورع والاجتهاد، فرغبوا الناس في دينكم وفيما أنتم فيه. {.t0}

##### سبع خصال أعطاها الله عز وجل نبيه صلى الله عليه وآله

#### 7-37 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه، عن عمه محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبي الحسن علي بن الحسين البرقي، عن عبد الله بن جبلة، عن الحسن بن عبد الله، عن آبائه، عن جده الحسن بن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام في حديث طويل قال: نفرمن اليهود إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله فسأله أعلمهم عن أشياء فكان فيما سأله أخبرنا عن سبع خصال أعطالك الله من بين النبيين وأعطى امتك من بين الامم؟ فقال النبي: أعـطاني الله عز وجـل فاتحـة

The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘The honorable the Exalted God has granted me
the Opening Chapter (Al-Fatiha**[[636]](footnotes_3.htm#b0636)** ), the
general call to prayer (azan), the congregational prayers in the mosque,
the Friday prayer, the prayer for the deceased ones; permission to say
three prayers aloud**[[637]](footnotes_3.htm#b0637)** . God has granted
my nation permission to break their fast during illness or on a journey;
and the possibility of my intercession on behalf of those who commit a
major sin.’

The Jew asked, ‘O Muhammad! You are right! What would be the reward of
one who recites the Opening Chapter (Al-Hamd)?’ God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, ‘The Honorable the Exalted God would grant whomever recites the
Opening Chapter of the Book (Al-Fatiha**[[638]](footnotes_3.htm#b0638)**
) the reward of reciting as many as the number of verses which have been
revealed from the heavens. And the reward for those of my nation who say
the azan**[[639]](footnotes_3.htm#b0639)** would be being resurrected
amongst the Prophets, the honest ones, the martyrs and the good-doers.
And the reward for the congregational prayer is that the lines of those
of my nation who stand to say the congregational prayer is like the line
of the angels in the heavens. Each unit of prayer said in a
congregational prayer is worth more than twenty-four units of regular
prayers. Each unit of congregational prayers is liked by the Honorable
the Exalted God more than forty years of worship. And Friday is the day
on which God would bring about those of the latter and those of the
former times for the Reckoning. The Honorable the Exalted God would give
a discount to any believer who goes to the Friday congregational prayers
and would reduce his fears on the Resurrection Day and would reward him
with Paradise. And the reward for saying the prayers aloud is that the
Fire would be put out for as far away as the voice of the one who says
the prayers goes. He will also cross the
Bridge**[[640]](footnotes_3.htm#b0640)** and have a pleasant entry into
Paradise.

Regarding the sixth it should be stated that the Honorable the Exalted
God would diminish the amount of fear on the Resurrection Day for those
of my nation as mentioned in the Holy
Quran.**[[641]](footnotes_3.htm#b0641)** And God would make entry into
Paradise a certainty for any believer who prays for the deceased unless
he is a hypocrite or damned by his parents. Moreover, my intercession
for the major sins excludes those who are oppressors and those who
associate partners with God.’

The Jew said, ‘O Muhammad! You are right! I bear witness that there is
no god but God and that you are His servant, His Messenger, the seal of
the Prophets and the Leader of the Pious ones.’ He accepted Islam and
then brought out a piece of white paper in which all that the Prophet
(MGB) said

#### الكتاب والاذان والجماعة في المسجد ويوم الجمعة والصلاة على الجنائز والاجهار في ثلاث صلوات والرحصة لامتي عند الامراض والسفر، والشفاعة لاصحاب الكبائر من امتي.

#### قال اليهودي: صدقت يامحمد فما جزاء من قرأ فاتحة الكتاب؟

#### فقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله من قرأفاتحة الكتاب أعطاه الله عز وجل بعدد كل آية نزلت من السماء ثواب تلاوتها وأما الاذان فإنه يحشر المؤذنون من أمتي مع النبيين والصد يقين والشهداء والصالحين. وأما الجماعة فإن صفوف امتي في الارض كصفوف المائكة في السماء، والركعة في جماعة أربع وعشرون ركعة أحب إلى الله عز وجل من عبادة أربعين سنة، وأما يوم الجمعة فان الله يجمع فيه الاولين والآخرين للحساب فمامن مؤمن مشى إلى الجماعة إلا خفف الله عز وجل عليه أهوال يوم القيامة ثم يجازيه الجنة وأما الاجهار فإنه يتباعد منه لهب النار بقدر ما يبلغ صوته ويجوز على الصراط ويعطي السرور حتى يدخل الجنة.

#### وأما السادس فإن الله عز وجل يخفف أهوال يوم القيامة لامتي كما ذكر الله في القرآن، وما من مؤمن يصلى على الجنائز إلا أوجب الله له الجنة إلا أن يكون منافقا أو عاقا، وأما شفاعتي ففي أصحاب الكبائر ما خلا أهل الشرك والظلم.

#### قال: صدقت يا محمد وأنا أشهد أن الا إله إلا الله وأنك عبده ورسوله خاتم النبيين وإمام المتقين ورسول رب العالمين.

#### فلما أسلم وحسن إسلامه أخرج رقا أبيض فيه جميع ما قال النبي صـلى الله عليـه

was already written. He said, ‘O Prophet of God! I swear by Him who
appointed you to the position of Prophethood that I have copied this
material from the Tablets which the Honorable the Exalted God had sent
to Moses - the son of Imran. I have read in the Torah that no one but
you can give the right answers to these questions. O Muhammad! I have
read so much about your nobilities in the Torah that I doubted it. I
tried to eliminate your name from the Torah for forty years, but it
still remains there. I have also read in the Torah that at the time of
answering these questions Gabriel shall be on your right side,
Michael**[[642]](footnotes_3.htm#b0642)** shall be on your left side,
and your Trustee shall be in front of you.’ The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘You
are right! This is Gabriel on my right side. This is Michael on my left
side. And this is my Trustee Ali ibn Abi Talib who is in front of you.’
The Jew truly accepted Islam.

THE OFFERING OF A COW OR A CAMEL IS ACCEPTED FROM SEVEN PEOPLE
--------------------------------------------------------------

7-38 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Banan ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Yunus ibn Yaqoob, “I asked Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB),
‘How many people would the offering of a cow or a camel be accepted
from?’ The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘It would be accepted from seven
people.’”

7-39 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority of Vaheeb
ibn Hafs, on the authority of Abi Basir that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
said, “The offering of a cow or a camel would be accepted from seven
people whether they be from the same family or not.”

THE SUN AND THE MOON HAVE SEVEN LAYERS
--------------------------------------

7-40 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Isa ibn Muhammad, on the authority of Ali ibn Mahzyar, on
the authority of Ali ibn Hisan, on the authority of Abi Ayoob, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim, “I asked Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB),
‘May I be your ransom! Why is the Sun hotter than the moon?’ Then he
(MGB) replied, ‘Indeed the Blessed the Sublime God created the Sun from
layers of the light of fire and pure gaseous water one layer of each
upon the other until the seventh layer which can be seen and is made of
fire. Thus, the heat of the Sun is more than that of the moon.’ I asked,
‘How about the moon?’ The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘The Sublime God has made
the moon from layers of the light of fire and gaseous vapors one upon
another for seven layers and has covered up the seventh layer with
water. That is why the moon is cooler than the Sun.’

#### وآله وقال: يا رسول الله والذي بعثك بالحق نبيا ما استنسختها إلا من الالواح التي كتب الله عز وجل لموسى بن عمران ولقد قرأت في التوراة فضلك حتى شككت فيه يا محمد، ولقد كنت أمحواسمك منذ أربعين سنة من التوراة وكلما محوته وجدته مثبتا فيها، ولقد قرأت في التوراة أن هذه المسائل لا يخرجها غيرك، وأن في الساعة التي تردد عليك فيها هذه المسائل يكون جبرئيل عن يمينك وميكائيل عن يسارك ووصيك بين يديك، فقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: صدقت هذا جبرئيل عن يميني وميكائيل عن يساري ووصيي علي بن أبي طالب بين يدي فآمن اليهودي وحسن إسلامه. {.t0}

##### البقرة والبدنة تجزيان عن سبعة نفر

#### 7-38 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن بنان بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن الحسن بن أحمد، عن يونس بن يعقوب قال: سألت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام عن البقرة يضحى بها؟ فقال: تجزي عن سبعة نفر.

#### 7-39 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن وهيب بن حفص، عن أبي بصير، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: البقرة والبدنة تجزيان عن سبعة إذا اجتمعوا من أهل بيت ومن غيرهم.

##### الشمس سبعة أطباق والقمر سبعة أطباق

#### 7-40 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن عيسى بن محمد، عن علي بن مهزيار، عن علي بن حسان، عن أبى أيوب، عن محمد بن مسلم قال:قلت لابي جعفر عليه السلام جعلت فداك لاي شيئ صارت الشمس أشد حرارة من القمر؟ فقال إن الله تبارك وتعالى خلق الشمس من نور النار وصفوا لماء طبقا من هذا وطبقا من هذا، حتى إذا كانت سبعة أطباق ألبسها لباسا من نار، فمن ثم صارت أشد حرارة من القمر، فقلت: جعلت فداك فالقمر؟ فقال: إن الله تعالى خلق القمر من نور النار وصفو الماء طبقا من هذا وطبقا من هذا حتى إذا صارت سبعة أطباق ألبسها لباسا من ماء فمن ثم صار القمر أبرد من الشمس.

THERE ARE SEVEN TERRITORIES IN THE WORLD
----------------------------------------

7-41 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Abi Yahya al-Vaseti who linked it
up through a chain of narrators to As-Sadiq (MGB), “The world is divided
into seven territories: Yajooj; Majooj; Rome; China; Blacks; the tribe
of Moses; and the Babel's territories.”

7-42 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn
Ibrahim ibn Ishaq, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isma’il ibn Bazi’a
who linked it up through a chain of narrators to Abi Ja’far al-Baqir
(MGB), “It is not necessary to make any especial supplications in seven
instances: prayer for a deceased one,
Qunut**[[643]](footnotes_3.htm#b0643)** in the
Al-Mustajar**[[644]](footnotes_3.htm#b0644)** ; Safa and Marva; Arafat
and in the two units of circumambulations prayer.”

7-43 Hamzih ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Alavi - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih, on the authority of Al-Sakoony,
on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority
of his father (MGB), on the authority of his forefathers (MGB), on the
authority of Ali (MGB), “Seven persons should not recite the Quran: one
who is bowing down; one who is prostrating; one who is in the toilet;
one who is in the bath; one who is in a state of major ritual impurity;
a woman who is in childbed; and a menstruating woman.”

The author of this book - may God be pleased with him - said, “This
indicates that this is detested, not that it is absolutely forbidden. As
you know it is absolutely forbidden for one who is in a state of major
ritual impurity**[[645]](footnotes_3.htm#b0645)** and a woman who is
menstruating to recite the Quran. There are four Quranic Chapters which
require prostration as follows: Luqman; Ha-mim; An-Najm; and Iqra. It
has also been narrated that one can recite the Quran in the bath if his
recitation is not meant to be a form of singing and his private parts
should also be covered. One should not recite the Quran while bowing
down or prostrating since they are meant for glorifications, except for
praying for a need in which it is allowed. One should not recite the
Quran in the toilet. A woman who is in childbed is like one who is
menstruating.”

THE QURAN WAS REVEALED IN SEVEN LETTERS
---------------------------------------

7-44 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Al-Abbas ibn Ma’ruf, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Yahya al-

##### الدنيا سبعة أقاليم

#### 7-41 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن أبي يحيى الواسطي باسناده رفعه إلى الصادق عليه السلام قال: الدنيا سبعة أقاليم: يأجوج ومأجوج الروم والصين والزنج وقوم موسى وأقاليم بابل.

##### سبعة مواطن ليس فيها دعاء موقت

#### 7-42 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أحمد عن إبراهيم بن إسحاق، عن محمد بن إسماعيل بن بزيع بإسناده يرفع الحديث إلى أبي جعفر عليه السلام فقال: سبعة مواطن ليس فيها دعاء موقت: الصلاة على الجنازة والقنوت والمستجار والصفا والمروة والوقوف بعرفات وركعتا الطواف.

##### سبعة لايقرؤون القرآن

#### 7-43 حدثنا حمزة بن محمد بن أحمد العلوي رضي الله عنه قال: أخبرني علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: سبعة لايقرؤون القرآن: الراكع والساجد وفي الكنيف وفي الحمام والجنب والنفساء والحائض.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: هذا على الكراهة لا على النهي وذلك لان الجنب والحائض مطلق لهما قراء‌ة القرآن إلا العزائم الاربع وهي سجدة لقمان وحم السجدة والنجم إذا هوى وسورة اقرأ باسم ربك، وقد جاء الاطلاق للرجل في قراء‌ة القرآن في الحمام ما لم يرد به الصوت إذا كان عليه مئزر، وأما الركوع والسجود فلا يقرأ فيهما لان الموظف فيهما التسبيح إلاماورد في صلاة الحاجة، وأما الكنيف فيجب أن يصان القرآن من أن يقرأ فيه، وأما النفساء فتجري مجرى الحائض في ذلك.

##### نزل القرآن على سبعة أحرف

#### 7-44 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن العباس بن معروف، عن محمد بن يحيى الصيرفي، عن حماد

Sayrafi, on the authority of Hammad ibn Uthman that he told Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB), “‘We have received various narrations on the authority
of the Divine Leaders.’ He (MGB) said, ‘The Quran was revealed in seven
letters.**[[646]](footnotes_3.htm#b0646)** The least allowed thing for a
Divine Leader is to issue decrees in seven different ways.’ Then
as-Sadiq (MGB) added, ‘Such are Our Bounties: whether thou bestow them
(on others) or withhold them, no account will be asked.’”
**[[647]](footnotes_3.htm#b0647)**

7-45 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Hilal**[[648]](footnotes_3.htm#b0648)** , on the
authority of Isa ibn Abdullah al-Hashemi, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of his forefathers (MGB) that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “Gabriel was sent to me by the Honorable the Exalted God and
told me, 'God has ordained that you recite the Quran in one letter
only.' I said, ‘O God! Please be more lenient with my nation.’ Then
Gabriel said, ‘The Honorable the Exalted God ordained that you recite
the Quran in seven letters.’”

SINCE GOD CREATED THE EARTH, HE HAS CREATED SEVEN GROUPS OF LEARNED MEN
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

7-46 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Abil Khat’tab, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Abdullah ibn Hilal, on the authority of Al-Ala’ ibn Razin, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim that he had heard Aba Ja’far al-Baqir
(MGB) say, “Since the Honorable the Exalted God created the Earth, He
has created seven groups of learned men who were not the offspring of
Adam. He also created all of them on the Earth and placed each group in
the time and the place assigned to them. Then God created Adam who is
the father of all the people and created his Household. I swear by God
that ever since Heaven was created it has been used by the spirits of
the believers. Ever since Hell was created, it has also been always
occupied by the spirits of the sinful unbelievers. Perhaps you think
that once the Resurrection Day arrives and God takes the bodies and
souls of the believers to Paradise, and the bodies and souls of the
residents of Hell to Hell, then there shall be no one left on the Earth
to worship, glorify and bear testimony to the Unity of the Honorable the
Exalted God. The Honorable the Exalted God will create another world
with a new set of monotheistic people without any male or female
distinction to worship, glorify and bear testimony to the Unity of God.
God will create another Earth for them to live in and will create
another sky to cast a shadow upon their heads. As the Honorable the
Exalted God said, ‘One day the Earth will be changed into a different
Earth, and so will be the heavens’**[[649]](footnotes_3.htm#b0649)** The
Honorable the Exalted God also said, ‘Were We then weary with the first
Creation, that they should be in confused doubt about a new
Creation?’**[[650]](footnotes_3.htm#b0650)**

#### بن عثمان قال: قلت لابي عبد الله عليه السلام: إن الاحاديث تختلف عنكم قال: فقال: إن القرآن نزل على سبعة أحرف وأدنى ماللامام أن يفتي على سبعة وجوه، ثم قال: "هَذَا عَطَاؤُنَا فَامْنُنْ أَوْ أَمْسِكْ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ". {.t0}

#### 7-45 حدثنا محمد بن على ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن أحمد بن هلال عن عيسى بن عبد الله الهاشمي، عن أبيه عن آبائه عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:أتاني آت من الله فقال: إن الله عز وجل يأمرك أن تقرأ القرآن على حرف واحد، فقلت: يارب وسع على إمتي فقال: إن الله عز وجل يأمرك أن تقرأ القرآن على حرف واحد، فقلت: يارب وسع على إمتي فقال: إن الله عز وجل يأمرك (أن تقرأ القرآن على حرف واحد، فقلت يارب وسع على امتي فقال: إن الله يأمرك) أن تقرأ القرآن على سبعة أحرف.

##### خلق الله عز وجل في الارض منذ خلقها سبعة عالمين

#### 7-46 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن محمد بن الحسن بن أبي الخطاب، عن محمد بن عبد الله بن هلال عن العلاء بن رزين، عن محمد بن مسلم قال: سمعت أبا جعفر عليه السلام يقول: لقد خلق الله عز وجل في الارض منذ خلقها سبعة عالمين ليس هم من ولد آدم، خلقهم من أديم الارض فاسكنهم فيها واحدا بعد واحد مع عالمه، ثم خلق الله عز وجل آدم أباهذا البشر وخلق ذريته منه، ولا والله ما خلت الجنة من أرواح المؤمنين منذخلقها، ولاخلت انار من أرواح الكفار والعصاة منذ خلقها عز وجل، لعكم ترون أنه كان يوم القيامة وصير الله أبدان أهل الجنة مع أرواحهم في الجنة، وصير أبدان أهل النار مع أرواحهم في النار أن الله عز وجل لايعبد في بلاده ولا يخلق خلقا يعبدونه ويوحدونه ويعظمونه؟ بلى والله ليخلقن الله خلقا من غير فحولة ولا إناث يعبدونه ويوحدونه ويعظمونه ويخلق لهم أرضا تحملهم وسماء تظلهم، أليس الله عروجل: يقول "يَوْمَ تُبَدَّلُ الأَرْضُ غَيْرَ الأَرْضِ وَالسَّمَاوَاتُ" وقال الله عزو جل: "أَفَعَيِينَا بِالْخَلْقِ الأَوَّلِ بَلْ هُمْ فِي لَبْسٍ مِنْ خَلْقٍ جَدِيدٍ".

NOTHING IN THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH EXCEPT DUE TO SEVEN THINGS
---------------------------------------------------------------

7-47 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ali ibn
Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Aba Abdullah Al-Barqy, on the
authority of Abil Hassan - the first
(MGB)**[[651]](footnotes_3.htm#b0651)** , “Nothing will be found in the
heavens and the Earth except as a result of the following: fate;
destiny; will; volition; written record; death; and permission. Whoever
says anything else has indeed ascribed lies to the Honorable the Exalted
God.”

THE PROPHET SAID ALLAHU AKBAR SEVEN TIMES WHEN AL-NAJASHI DIED
--------------------------------------------------------------

7-48 Muhammad ibn al-Qasim al-Astar Abady - may God be pleased with
him - quoted on the authority of Yusuf ibn Muhammad, on the authority of
Zyad**[[652]](footnotes_3.htm#b0652)** , on the authority of his father,
on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali (MGB), on the authority of his
father (MGB), on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ali (MGB), on the
authority of his father Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB), on the authority of
his father Musa ibn Ja’far (MGB), on the authority of his forefathers,
on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “When
Gabriel brought the news of the death of Al-Najashi to God’s Prophet
(MGB), he (MGB) cried very hard for him and said, ‘Your brother whose
name is Al-Najashi has died.’ Then the Prophet (MGB) went to the desert
and said Allahu Akbar seven times. Then God evened out all the hills for
him so that Muhammad (MGB) could see Al-Najashi’s corpse in Ethiopia.”

GOD WOULD SEND SEVEN CALAMITIES UPON THE PEOPLE IF HE GETS ANGRY AT THEM AND DOESN’T DESTROY THEM
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7-49 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Abbas ibn
Ma’ruf, on the authority of someone, on the authority of Mandel ibn Ali
al-Enzi, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Motrif, on the authority of
Mosma’, on the authority of Al-Asbaq ibn al-Nobatat, on the authority of
the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “If the Honorable the Exalted God becomes angry with a nation and
doesn’t destroy them, He will bring about inflation; shorten their
lives; bring loss to their trade; reduce the amount of fruit grown on
their trees; reduce the amount of water flowing in their streams;
withhold rain from them; and the wicked ones will overcome them.”

LOVE FOR THE PROPHET AND HIS HOUSEHOLD IS BENEFICIAL ON SEVEN OCCASIONS
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

7-50 Al-Hassan ibn Abdullah ibn Sa’id al-Askari narrated that Muhammad
ibn Ahmad ibn Hamdan al-Qushayri quoted Al-Muqayrih ibn Muhammad ibn
al-Muhlib, on the authority of Abdul Qaf’far Muhammad ibn Bakir al-

##### لايكون في السموات والارض شيء الا بسبعة

#### 7-47 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن زكريا بن عمران، عن أبي الحسن الاول عليه السلام قال: لاتكون شيء في السماوات والارض إلا بسبعة: بقضاء وقدر وإرادة ومشيئة وكتاب وأجل وإذن، فمن قال غير هذا فقد كذب على الله (أ) ورد على الله عز وجل.

##### كبر النبي صلى الله عليه وآله على النجاشى لما مات سبعا

#### 7-48 حدثنا محمد بن القاسم الاسترآبادي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني يوسف بن محمد، عن زياد، عن أبيه، عن الحسن بن علي، عن أبية، عن محمد بن علي، عن أبيه علي بن موسى الرضا، عن إبيه موسى بن جعفر، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: إن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله لما أتاه جبرئيل بنعي النجاشي بكا بكاء حزين عليه وقال: إن أخاكم أصحمةوهواسم النجاشيمات ثم خرج إلى الجبانة وصلى عليه وكبر سبعا فخفض الله له كل مرتفع حتى رأى جنازته وهو بالحبشة.

##### اذا غضب الله عز وجل على امة ولم ينزل بها العذاب أصابها بسبعة أشياء

#### 7-49 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن الحسن بن على الكوفي، عن العباس بن معروف، عن رجل، عن مندل بن علي العنزي، عن محمد بن مطرف، عن مسمع، عن الاصبغ بن نباتة، عن على عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إذا غضب الله عز وجل على امة ولم ينزل بها العذاب غلت أسعارها وقصرت أعمارها، ولم تربح تجارها،ولم تزك ثمارها، ولم تغزر أنهارها وحبس عنها أمطارها، وسلط عليها (أ) شرارها.

##### حب النبي وأهل بيتة عليهم السلام ينفع في سبعة مواطن

#### 7-50 حدثنا الحسن بن عبد الله بن سعيد العسكري قال: أخبرنا محمد بن أحمد بن حمدان القشيري قال: حدثنا المغيرة بن محمد بن المهلب قال: حدثنا عبدالغفار محمد

Kalabi al-Kufy, on the authority of Amr ibn Sabet, on the authority of
Jabir, on the authority of Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority
of Ali ibn al-Hussein as-Sajjad (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“Love for me and my Household would be beneficial on seven occasions:
time of death; in the grave; at the time of Resurrection; at the time of
receiving one’s Record of Deeds; at the time of Reckoning; at the time
of examining the good and bad deeds; and at the time of crossing the
Bridge**[[653]](footnotes_3.htm#b0653)** .”

WHAT HAS BEEN PASSED ON BY THE GENERAL PUBLIC SAYING THAT THE EARTH HAS BEEN CREATED FOR SEVEN
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7-51 Muhammad ibn Umar al-Baghdady al-Hafiz narrated that Ahmad ibn
Abdul-Karim Abu Abdullah quoted I’tab - that is ibn Saheeb, on the
authority of Isa ibn Abdullah al-Umari, on the authority of his father,
on the authority of his father, on the authority of his grandfather, on
the authority of Ali (MGB), “The Earth is created for seven persons. God
grants your daily bread, rain falls upon you, and you become triumphant
over your enemies due to them. They are Abuzar, Salman, Miqdad, Ammar
Yaser, Hazifeh, Abdullah ibn Masood and I am their leader. They were the
ones who were present for praying over the corpse of Fatimah (MGB).”

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “Saying
the Earth has been created for seven persons is not meant from the first
day of creation until the last day of creation. Rather its intention is
that those who said prayer over Fatimah’s corpse will benefit from the
Earth.”

THERE ARE SEVEN GATES FOR HELL
------------------------------

7-52 Ahmad ibn al-Hassan al-Qat’tan narrated that Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn
Zakariya al-Qat’tan quoted Bakr ibn Abdullah ibn Habib, on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Abdullah, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hikam, on the
authority of Aban ibn Uthman, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Fazeel
al-Rizqi, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), on the
authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his grandfather
(MGB), “There are seven gates for Hell. One gate is for Pharaoh,
Haman**[[654]](footnotes_3.htm#b0654)** and Qarun
(Korah)**[[655]](footnotes_3.htm#b0655)** to enter. The second gate is
for the polytheists and the atheists to enter Hell who did not believe
in God even for the twinkling of an eye. The third gate is especially
for the Umayyad clan to enter. No one else will be there. That is the
blazing gate. It is the burning gate. It is the swallowing gate which
takes them into a depth of seventy Kharives each of which equals eighty
years. It pulls them down into the depth of Hell. Once in the depth of
Hell there shall be a big smoldering in Hell and they will be thrown
back the same distance. This will be repeated continuously and they
shall abide therein forever. The fourth gate is especially for our
enemies; those who fought with us and those who refused to help us. This
gate is the greatest of all and it is the most aflame.”

#### بن بكير الكلابي الكوفي، عن عمرو بن ثابت، عن جابر، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام، عن علي بن الحسين عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: حبي وحب أهل بيتي نافع في سبعة مواطن، أهوالهن عظيمة: عند الوفاة، وفي القبر، وعند النشور، وعند الكتاب، وعند الحساب وعند الميزان، وعند الصراط. {.t0}

##### ماروى من طريق العامة ان الارض خلقت لسبعة

#### 7-51 حدثنا محمد بن عمر البغدادي الحافظ قال: حدثني أحمد بن الحسن بن عبدالكريم أبوعبد الله قال: حدثني عتاب يعني ابن صهيب قال: حدثنا عيسى بن عبد الله العمري قال: حدثني أبي، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: خلقت الارض لسبعة بهم يرزقون وبهم يمطرون وبهم ينصرون: أبوذر وسلمان والمقداد وعمار وحذيفة وعبد الله بن مسعود، قال علي عليه السلام: وأنا إمامهم وهم الذين شهدوا الصلاة على فاطمة عليها السلام.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: معنى قوله "خلقت الارض لسبعة نفر" ليس يعني من ابتدائها إلى انتهائها وإنما يعني بذلك أن الفائدة في الارض قدرت في ذلك الوقت لمن شهد الصلاة على فاطمة عليها السلام وهذا خلق تقدير لا خلق تكوين.

##### للنار سبعة أبواب

#### 7-52 حدثنا أحمد بن الحسن القطان قال: حدثنا أحمد بن يحيى بن زكريا القطان قال: حدثنا بكر بن عبد الله بن حبيب قال: حدثني محمدبن عبد الله قال: حدثني علي بن الحكم، عن أبان بن عثمان، عن محمد بن الفضيل الرزقي، عن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن جده عليهم السلام قال: للنار سبعة أبواب: باب يدخل منه فرعون وهامان وقارون، وباب يدخل منه المشركون والكفار ممن لم يؤمن بالله طرفة عين، وباب يدخل منه بنو أمية هو لهم خاصة، لا يزاحمهم فيه أحد، وهو باب لظى، هو باب سقر، وهو باب الهاوية تهوى بهم سبعين خريفا وكلما هوى بهم سبعين خريفا فاربهم فورة قذف بهم في أعلاها سبعين خريفا ثم تهوي بهم كذلك سبعين خريقا، فلا يزالون هكذا أبدا خالدين مخلدين، وباب يدخل منه مبغضونا ومحاربونا وخاذلونا وأنه لاعظم الابواب وأشد ها حرا.

Muhammad ibn al-Fazeel al-Rizqi added, “I told Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB), ‘Is the gate which you quoted your father on the authority of
your grandfather as saying that the Umayyads shall enter meant for those
who died as atheists or does it also include those of the Umayyads who
accepted Islam?’ The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘O may you lose your mother!
Did you not hear that there is an especial gate for the atheists and the
polytheists to enter! This gate is for every atheist and polytheist who
doesn’t believe in the Resurrection Day and the Reckoning of Deeds.
However, there is an especial gate for the Umayyad clan to enter. That
gate belongs to Abu Sufyan, Muawiyah and the household of Marvan. They
shall enter Hell from that gate and they shall be tortured by its fire
such that they cannot breathe. In fact, they are neither dead nor alive
there.”**[[656]](footnotes_3.htm#b0656)**

ON THE RESURRECTION DAY ALI (MGB) SHALL EVALUATE THE PEOPLE USING SEVEN CHARACTERISTICS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7-53 Ahmad ibn al-Hassan al-Qat’tan narrated that Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn
Zakaria al-Qat’tan quoted Bakr ibn Abdullah ibn Habib, on the authority
of Tamim ibn Buhlool, on the authority of Abdul Rahman ibn al-Aswad, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Abdul Rahman ibn Mu’amir, on
the authority of Am’mar ibn Yasir, on the authority of Jabir ibn
Abdullah that God’s Prophet (MGB) told Ali (MGB), “I shall reason with
you on the Resurrection Day using my Prophethood. You shall reason with
the people with the following seven things: establishment of prayers;
payment of the alms-tax; enjoining to do good; admonishing against evil;
just treatment of the people; fair division of the wealth; and being
careful to carry out the decrees of the Honorable the Exalted God. O
Ali! You should know that on the Resurrection Day, the Prophet Abraham
(MGB) will sit face to face with us. They will call him and place him on
the right side of the Empyrean**[[657]](footnotes_3.htm#b0657)** ; dress
him up with Heavenly attire; ornament him with Heavenly ornaments; a
Heavenly golden gutter will flow for him from which Heavenly water -
sweeter than honey, whiter than milk, and colder than snow - shall pour
from it. Then they will place me on the left side of the
Empyrean**[[658]](footnotes_3.htm#b0658)** and treat me just as they
treated Abraham. Then O Ali (MGB)! Then they shall call you and treat
you in the same way. Don’t you like it that they call you and ornament
you just as they do me. God has ordered me to always keep you near
myself and teach you gently. You must learn what I teach you. I must
obey the Blessed the Sublime God’s orders.”

7-54 Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Musa - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Hamzih ibn al-Qasim al-Alavi al-Ab’basi quoted Ja’far ibn Malik
al-Kufy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Hamid, on the authority of
Abdullah ibn Abdul Qoddoos, on the authority of Al-A’amash, on the
authority

#### قال محمد بن الفضيل الرزقي: فقلت لابي عبد الله عليه السلام: الباب الذي ذكرت عن أبيك عن جدك عليهما السلام أنه يدخل منه بنو امية يدخله من مات منهم على الشرك أو من أدرك منهم الاسلام؟ فقال: لا أم لك، ألم تسمعه يقول: وباب يدخل منه المشركون والكفار فهذا الباب يدخل فيه كل مشرك وكل كافر لا يؤمن بيوم الحساب وهذا الباب الآخر يدخل منه بنو امية لانه هولابي سفيان ومعاوية وآل مروان خاصة يدخلون من ذلك الباب فتحطمهم النار حطما لا تسمع لهم فيها واعية، ولا يحيون فيها ولايموتون.

##### يحاج علي الناس يوم القيامة بسبع خصال

#### 7-53 حدثنا أحمد بن الحسن القطان قال: حدثنا أحمد بن يحيى بن زكريا القطان قال: حدثنا بكر بن عبد الله بن حبيب قال: حدثنا تميم بن بهلول قال: حدثنا عبدالرحمن بن الاسود، عن محمد بن عبد الله بن عبدالرحمن بن معمر، عن عمار بن ياسر، وعن جابر بن عبد الله قالا: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله لعلي عليه السلام: احاجك يوم القيامة فاحاجك بالنبوة وتحاج قومك فتحاجهم بسبع خصال: إقام الصلاة وإتياء الزكاة والامر بالمعروف والنهي عن المنكر والعدل في الرعية والقسم بالسوية والاخذ بأمرالله عز وجل، أما علمت يا علي أن إبراهيم عليه السلام موافينا يوم القيامة فيدعى فيقام عن يمين العرش فيكسى كسوة الجنة، ويحلى من حليها، ويسيل له ميزاب من ذهب من الجنة فيهب من الجنة ما هو أحلى من الشهد وأبيض من اللبن وأبرد من الثلج، وادعى أنا فاقام عن شمال العرش فيفعل بي مثل ذلك، ثم تدعى أنت يا علي فيفعل بك مثل ذلك، أما ترضى يا علي أن تدعى إذا دعيت أنا وتكسى إذا كسيت أنا وتحلى إذا حليت أنا، إن الله عزذكره أمرني أن ادنيك فلا اقصيك، واعلمك فلا أجفوك، وحقا عليك أن تعي وحقا علي أن اطيع ربي تبارك وتعالى.

#### 7-54 حدثنا علي بن أحمد بن موسى رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا حمزة بن القاسم العلوي العباسي قال: حدثنا جعفر بن مالك الكوفي قال: حدثنا محمد بن حميد قال:

of Musa ibn Tarif, on the authority of Ababiat ibn Rub’ee Al-Asady that
Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) said, “On the Resurrection Day I shall reason
with the people with the following seven things: establishment of
prayers; payment of the alms-tax; enjoining to do good; admonishing
against evil; just treatment of the people; fair division of the wealth;
and being careful to carry out the decreed chastisements.”

7-55 Al-Hassan ibn Muhammad al-Sakoony al-Mazaki al-Kufy in Kufa
narrated that Muhammad ibn Abdullah al-Hazrami quoted Khalaf ibn Khalid
al-Abdi, on the authority of Bashr ibn Ibrahim al-Ansari, on the
authority of Soor ibn Yazid, on the authority of Khalid ibn Me’dan, on
the authority of Mu’az ibn Jebal that the Prophet (MGB) told Ali (MGB),
“I consider you to be in charge of my Prophethood as there shall be no
more Prophets after me. You shall argue with the people using the
following seven characteristics as none of the people from the Quraysh
except for you possess them. The first is faith; loyalty to God’s
pledge; adherence to God’s decrees; fair division of wealth; just
treatment with the people; wisdom in judgements; and having the most
reward near God.”

THE SEVEN SISTERS IN PARADISE
-----------------------------

7-56 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr
al-Bazanty, on the authority of Asim ibn Hamid, on the authority of Abi
Basir that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “God is kind to Heavenly
sisters.” Then he (MGB) said their names as follows: Asma’, the daughter
of Amis, from the Khasam clan and the wife of Ja’far ibn Abi Talib;
Salmi, the daughter of Amis, and the wife of Hamzih; and five from the
Hellal clan: Maymuna - the daughter of
Al-Harith**[[659]](footnotes_3.htm#b0659)** and the wife of the Prophet;
Umm Al-Fazl Hind - the wife of Abbas ibn Abdul Mutalib; Qamisa - the
mother of Khalid ibn Valid; Ezzat who was in the Saqif clan - the wife
of Hajjaj ibn Qalaz; and Hamideh who did not have any children.”

THE SEVEN MAJOR SINS
--------------------

7-57 Ahmad ibn al-Hassan al-Qat’tan narrated that Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn
Zakaria al-Qat’tan quoted Bakr ibn Abdullah ibn Habib, on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Abdullah, on the authority of Ali ibn Hisan, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn Kasir that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said,
“There are seven major sins which have been revealed regarding us (the
twelve Imams) and are associated with not honoring us. The first one of
them is associating partners with God; killing which God has forbidden;
devouring an orphan’s properties; damnation of parents; accusing pious
women

#### حدثنا عبد الله بن عبدالقدوس قال: حدثنا الاعمش، عن موسى بن طريف، عن عباية بن ربعي قال: قال علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام:احاج الناس يوم القيامة بسبع إقام الصلاة، وإيتاء الزكاة، والامر بالمعروف، والنهى عن المنكر، والقسم بالسوية والعدل في الرعية، وإقام الحدود. {.t0}

#### 7-55 حدثنا الحسن بن محمد السكوني المزكي الكوفي بالكوفة قال: حدثنا محمد بن عبد الله الحضرمي قال: حدثنا خلف بن خالد العبدي قال: حدثنا بشربن إبراهيم الانصاري، عن ثوربن يزيد، عن خالد بن معدان، عن معاذ بن جبل قال: قال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله لعلي عليه السلام:اخاصمك بالنبوة ولابني بعدي، وتخاصم الناس بسبع ولا يحاجك فيهن أحد من قريش لانك أنت أولهم إيمانا، وأوفاهم بعهد الله، وأقوامهم بأمر الله، وأقسمهم بالسوية، وأعدلهم في الرعية، وأبصرهم في القضية، وأعظمهم عند الله مزية.

##### الاخوات من أهل الجنة سبع

#### 7-56 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي، عن عاصم بن حميد، عن أبي بصير، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: سمعته يقول: رحم الله الاخوات من أهل الجنة فسماهن: أسما بنت عميس الخثعمية وكانت تحت جعفر بن أبي طالب عليه السلام، وسلمى بنت عميس الخثعمية وكانت تحت حمزة، وخمس من بني هلال: ميمونة بنت الحارث كانت تحت النبي صلى الله عليه وآله، وام الفضل عند العباس اسمها هند، والغميصاء ام خالد بن الوليد، وعزة كانت في ثقيف الحجاج بن غلاظ، وحميدة ولم يكن لها عقب.

##### الكبائر سبع

#### 7-57 حدثنا أحمد بن الحسن القطان قال: حدثنا أحمد بن يحيى بن زكريا القطان قال: حدثنا بكر بن عبد الله بن حبيب قال: حدثني محمد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني علي بن حسان، عن عبدالرحمن بن كثير، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إن الكبائر سبع فينانزلت ومنا استحلت، فأولها الشرك بالله العظيم، وقتل النفس التي حرم الله وأكل مال اليتيم، وعقوق الوالدين، وقذف المحصنات، والفرار من الزحف

of fornication; escaping from a holy war; and denying our rightfulness.
Regarding associating partners with God there are several verses
revealed by the Honorable the Exalted God regarding us, and the Prophet
(MGB) has also made clear announcements in this regard. They have denied
God and His Prophet and have thus associated partners with the Honorable
the Exalted God. They prescribed ‘killing’ which God has forbidden and
killed Al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB) and his companions. Regarding ‘devouring
the properties of an orphan’, they took the one-fifth share that was
ours and gave it to others. Regarding ‘damnation of parents’ we know
that the Honorable the Exalted God revealed the following in His Book,
‘The Prophet is closer to the Believers than their own selves, and his
wives are their mothers…’**[[660]](footnotes_3.htm#b0660)** And God’s
Prophet (MGB) damned them regarding his progeny, and their mother being
Khadijah damned them regarding her progeny. Regarding ‘accusing pious
women of fornication’, they surely accused Fatimah (MGB) of such acts
from their pulpits. Regarding ‘escaping from a holy war’, they first
pledged allegiance to the Commander of the Faithful Ali (MGB) with their
own free will and without being pressured, but then they fled from him
and abandoned him. And regarding ‘denying our rightfulness’ which is an
undisputable certainty.”

7-58 Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn al-Hassan al-Daylami
al-Juwhary narrated that Muhammad ibn Yaqoob Al-Asim quoted Al-Rabi’a
ibn Suleiman, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Wahab, on the authority
of Suleiman ibn Bilal, on the authority of Soor ibn Yazid, on the
authority of Abil Qays,**[[661]](footnotes_3.htm#b0661)** on the
authority of Abi Hurayrih, “God’s Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Avoid seven
destructive things.’ I asked him, ‘O Prophet of God! What are they?’ The
Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘Associating partners with God; practicing
witchcraft; killing which God has forbidden except in certain rightful
ways; usury; devouring an orphan’s properties; fleeing from a holy war;
and accusing pious women of fornication.’”

GOD WILL TEST THE TRUSTEES OF THE PROPHETS ON SEVEN OCCASIONS IN THE PROPHET’S LIFETIME AND SEVEN TIMES AFTER HIS DEATH
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7-59 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father and Muhammad
ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn
Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn al-Hussein ibn Sa’id, on the authority of
Ja’far ibn Muhammad al-Nowfali, on the authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on
the authority of Abu Abdullah Ja’far ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa ibn
Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Abdullah ibn Ja’far ibn Abi Talib, on the authority
of Yaqoob ibn Abdullah al-Kufy, on the authority of Musa ibn Ubaydah, on
the authority of Amr ibn Abil Miqdam, on the authority of Abi Ishaq, on
the authority of Al-Harith, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hanifa –

#### وأنكار حقنا، وأما الشرك بالله فقد أنزل الله فيناما أنزل وقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله فيناما قال، فكذبوا الله وكذا بوا رسوله فأشركوا بالله عز وجل، وأمنا قتل النفس التي حرم الله فقد قتلوا الحسين بن على عليهما السلام وأصحابه، وأما أكل مال اليتيم فقد ذهبوا بفيئنا الذي جعله الله لنا فأعطوه غيرنا، وأما عقوق الوالدين فقد أنزل الله عز وجل في كتابه "النَّبِيُّ أَوْلَى بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْ أَنْفُسِهِمْ وَأَزْوَاجُهُ أُمَّهَاتُهُمْ." فعقوا رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله في ذريته وعقوا امهم خديجة في ذريتها. وأما قذف المحصنة فقد قذفوا فاطمه عليها السلام على منابرهم وأما الفرار من الزحف فقد اعطوا أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام بيعتهم طائعين غير مكرهين ففروا عنه وخذلوه، وأما إنكار حقنا فهذا مما لا يتنازعون فيه. {.t0}

#### 7-58 حدثنا أبونصر محمد بن الحسين بن الحسن الديلمي الجوهري قال: حدثنا محمد بن يعقوب الاصم قال: حدثنا الربيع بن سليمان قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن وهب قال: أخبرنا سليمان بن بلال، عن ثور بن يزيد، عن أبي الغيث، عن أبي هريرة أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله قال: اجتنبوا السبع الموبقات قيل: يارسول الله وماهن؟ قال: الشرك بالله، والسحر، وقتل النفس التي حرم الله إلا بالحق، وأكل الربا، وأكل مال اليتيم، والتولي يوم الزحف، وقذف المحصنات الغافلات المؤمنات.

##### امتحان الله عز وجل أوصياء الانبياء في حياة الانبياء في سبعة مواطن وبعد وفاتهم في سبعة مواطن

#### 7-59 حدثنا أبي ومحمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا أحمد بن الحسين بن سعيد قال: حدثني جعفر بن محمد النوفلي، عن يعقوب بن يزيد قال: قال أبوعبد الله جعفر بن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى بن محمد بن علي ابن عبد الله بن جعفر بن أبي طالب قال: حدثنا يعقوب بن عبد الله الكوفي قال: حدثنا موسى بن عـبيدة، عن عـمرو بن أبي المقـدام، عن أبي إسـحاق، عـن

may God be pleased with him - and Umar ibn Abil Miqdam, on the authority
of Jabir al-Jo’afy, on the authority of Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB), “The
head of the Jews came to Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) when he (MGB) returned
from the Nahravan Battle. Ali (MGB) was sitting in the Kufa Mosque. He
said, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! I wish to ask you several questions
regarding things which only the Prophets or their Trustees would know.’
The Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘O Jewish brother! Ask
whatever you want to ask.’

The Jew said, ‘We have seen in our religious books that whenever the
Honorable the Exalted God appoints someone as a Prophet (MGB), He orders
him to choose a member of His Household as his Trustee to be in charge
of the affairs of his nation after him.

God tests the Prophets’ (MGB) Trustees during their life, and also tests
the Trustees (MGB) after the death of the Prophets (MGB). Tell me that
how many times are the Trustees tested during the Prophets' (MGB)
lifetimes, and how many times are they tested after their death. If the
Trustees do well in these testes, what will be their end?’

Ali (MGB) said, ‘I swear by the right of God who split the sea for the
Israelites and sent the Torah to Moses (MGB)! Will you confirm the truth
if I say it?’ The Jew replied, ‘Yes; I will.’

Again Ali (MGB) said, ‘I swear by the right of God who split the sea for
the Israelites and sent the Torah to Moses (MGB)! Will you submit to
Islam if I tell the truth?’ Again the Jew replied, ‘Yes; I will.’

Then Ali (MGB) said, ‘Indeed the Honorable the Exalted God would test
the Trustees of the Prophets on seven occasions during the lifetimes of
the Prophets in order to see their obedience. Then if God is pleased
with their obedience, God will advise the Prophets to establish their
Trustees as their friends during their lifetimes, and as their Trustees
after their demise. God will make it necessary for all the nations who
follow the Prophet to obey his Trustee as they obeyed the Prophet. Then
God would test the Trustees on seven occasions after the demise of the
Prophet in order to test their perseverance and tolerance. Then when God
is satisfied with them, they will have a prosperous ending and will join
the Prophets. Indeed they will attain perfect prosperity.’

The head of the Jews said, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! You are right!
Please tell me how many times did God test you during the lifetime of
Muhammad (MGB) and how many times will God test you after his death?
What will be your ending?’

#### الحارث، عن محمد بن الحنفية رضي الله عنه، وعمر بن أبي المقدام، عن جابر الجعفي، عن أبي جعفر قال: أتى رأس اليهود علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام عند منصرفة عن وقعة النهروان وهو جالس في مسجد الكوفة فقال: يا أمير المؤمنين إني اريد أن أسالك عن أشياء لا يعلمها إلا نبي أووصي نبي قال: سل عما بدالك يا أخا اليهود؟ قال: إنا نجد في الكتاب أن الله عز وجل إذا بعث نبيا أوحى إليه أن يتخذ من أهل بيته من يقوم بأمر امته من بعده وأن يعهد إليهم فيه عهدا يحتذي عليه ويعمل به في امته من بعده وأن الله عز وجل يمتحن الاوصياء في حياة الانبياء ويمتحنهم بعد وفاتهم فأخبرني كم يمتحن الله الاوصياء في حياة الانبياء؟ وكم يمتحنهم بعد وفاتهم من مرة؟ وإلى ما يصير آخر أمر الاوصياء إذا رضي محنتهم؟. {.t0}

#### فقال له علي عليه السلام: والله الذي لا إله غيره، الذي فلق البحر لبني إسرائيل وأنزل التوارة على موسى عليه السلام لئن أخبرتك بحق عما تسأل عنه لتقرن به؟ قال: نعم قال: والذي فلق البحر لبني إسرائيل وأنزل التوراة على موسى عليه السلام لئن أجبتك لتسلمن؟ قال: نعم،

#### فقال له علي عليه السلام: إن الله عز وجل يمتحن الاوصياء في حياة الانبياء في سبعة مواطن ليبتلي طاعتهم، فإذا رضي طاعتهم ومحنتهم الانبياء أن يتخذوهم أولياء في حياتهم وأوصياء بعد وفاتهم ويصير طاعة الاوصياء في أعناق الامم ممن يقول بطاعة الانبياء، ثم يمتحن الاوصياء بعدوفاة الانبياء عليهم السلام في سبعة مواطن ليبلو صبرهم، فإذا رضي محنتهم ختم لهم بالسعادة ليلحقهم بالانبياء، وقد أكمل لهم السعادة. قال له رأس اليهود: صدقت يا أميرالمؤمنين فأخبرني كم امتحنك الله في حياة محمد من مرة؟ وكم امتحنك بعد وفاته من مرة؟ وإلى ما يصير أخر أمرك؟

Ali (MGB) extended his hand; took the Jew’s hand and said, ‘O Jewish
brother! Please let’s go so that I may inform you about this subject.’ A
group of Ali (MGB)’s companions ran ahead and said, ‘O Commander of the
Faithful! Please let us be with him and hear the answer.’

The Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘I am afraid you cannot
tolerate to hear this.’ They said, ‘O Commander of the Faithful (MGB)!
Why?’ He (MGB) replied, ‘Since I have seen and heard a lot about you.’
Then Malik Ashtar stepped forward and said, ‘O Commander of the
Faithful! Please also inform us of the subject. I swear to God that we
believe that there is no Trustee on the Earth for the Prophet (MGB) but
you. We believe that God will not send a Prophet after our Prophet. It
is incumbent upon us to obey you and obeying you is connected to obeying
our Prophet (MGB).’ Ali (MGB) accepted Malik Ashtar’s request. Then Ali
(MGB) sat down facing the Jew and said, ‘O Jewish brother! Indeed the
Honorable the Exalted God tested me on seven occasions during the
lifetime of the Prophet (MGB). I say this without praising myself. God
found me obeying God’s blessing.’ The Jew said, ‘O Commander of the
Faithful! On what occasions did God test you?’

The Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘The first occasion was when
the Honorable the Exalted God sent down revelations to the Prophet (MGB)
and appointed him as the Prophet. As the youngest man in the house, I
was with him and served him by doing whatever he ordered me to do. He
(MGB) proposed to all the small and old men of the Abdul Mutalib
household to submit to Islam by bearing testimony that ‘There is no god
but God’ and that ‘He (MGB) is the Prophet of God’. They all rejected
this subject and confronted him. They cut off associating with him. They
turned away from and abandoned him. Other people also abandoned him and
argued with him. They considered what had been suggested to them too
great, since they could not tolerate it and their minds could not
understand it. I was the only man who rushed to accept him through my
belief and let no doubt in my heart. We had this belief for three years.
No one except the Prophet (MGB), me and Khadijah - the daughter of
Khuwaylid**[[662]](footnotes_3.htm#b0662)** existed on the Earth who
prayed and testified to the Prophethood.’

Then Ali (MGB) turned towards his companions and asked, ‘Was it not so?’
They replied, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Yes, it was so.’ Then the
Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘O Jewish brother! And about the
second occasion I should say that the Quraysh always plotted and tried
to find ways to kill the Prophet (MGB). Finally their decision was to
take part in a consultation session in one of the homes with the
presence of the damned

#### فأخذ علي عليه السلام بيده وقال: انهض بنا انبئك بذلك فقام إليه جماعة من أصحابه. فقالوا: يا أميرالمؤمنين أنبئنا بذلك معه.، فقال: إني أخاف أن لا تحتمله قلوبكم. قالوا: ولم ذاك يا أميرالمؤمنين؟ قال: لامور بدت لي من كثير منكم.

#### فقام إليه الاشتر فقال: يا أميرالمؤمنين أنبئنا بذلك، فوالله إنا لنعلم أنه ما على ظهر الارض وصي نبي سواك، وإنا لنعلم أن الله لا يبعث بعد نبينا صلى الله عليه وآله نبيا سواه وأن طاعتك لفي أعناقنا موصولة بطاعة نبينا.

#### فجلس علي عليه السلام وأقبل على اليهودي فقال: يا أخا اليهود إن الله عز وجل امتحنني في حياء نبينا محمد صلى الله عليه وآله في سبعة مواطن فوجدني فيهنمن غير تزكية لنفسي بنعمة الله له مطيعا قال: وفيم وفيم يا أميرالمؤمنين؟ قال أما أولهن فإن الله عز وجل أوحى إلى نبينا صلى الله عليه وآله وحمله الرسالة وأنا أحدث أهل بيتي سنا، أخدمه في بيته وأسعى في قضاء بين يديه في أمره، فدعا صغير بني عبدالمطلب وكبيرهم إلى شهادة أن لا إله إلا الله وأنه رسول الله فامتنعوا من ذلك وأنكروه عليه وهجروه، ونابذوه واعتزلوه واجتنبوه وسائر الناس مقصين له ومخالفين عليه، قد استعظموا ما أورده عليهم مما لم تحتمله قلوبهم وتدركه عقولهم،فأجبت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وحدي إلى مادعا إليه مسرعا مطيعا موقنا، لم يتخالجني في ذلك شك، فمكثنا بذلك ثلاث حجج وما على وجه الارض خلق يصلي أو يشهد لرسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله بما آتاه الله غيري وغير ابنة خويلد رحمها الله وقد فعل ثم أقبل عليه السلام على أصحابه فقال: أليس كذلك قالوا: بلى يا أميرالمؤمنين فقال عليه السلام: وأما الثانية يا أخا اليهود فإن قريشا لم تزل تخيل الاراء وتعمل الحيل في قتيل النبي صلى الله عليه وآله حتى كان آخرما اجتمعت في ذلك يوم الدار دار الندوة وإبليس الملعون حاضر

Satan who had participated there looking like a one-eyed man from the
Al-Saqaf. They collectively voted that each sect of the Quraysh should
dispatch one man as their representative. Each one should take a sword
and collectively attack the Prophet (MGB) and kill him. They thought
that this way each of the sects of the Quraysh would support its
representative and not surrender him to be punished and thus Muhammad’s
blood would be shed without any punishment for it. Then Gabriel (MGB)
descended down to the Prophet (MGB) and informed him of the plot of the
Quraysh and the night they plan to attack and the hour of their attack.
Gabriel ordered the Prophet (MGB) to leave his house at that time and go
and hide in a cave. God’s Prophet (MGB) called me in and told me the
news. He (MGB) ordered me to sleep in his bed and risk my life for him.
I immediately accepted this and was happy to be killed instead of him
(MGB). The Prophet (MGB) went away and I slept in his bed and
encountered the men of the Quraysh who thought they were going to kill
the Prophet (MGB). They entered the house and I unsheathed my sword when
I faced them in the house I was in, and fought them as God and the
people know.’

Then Ali (MGB) turned towards his companions and asked, ‘Was it not so?’
They replied, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Yes, it was so.’

Then the Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘O Jewish brother! And
about the third occasion I should say that the two sons of
Rabia**[[663]](footnotes_3.htm#b0663)** and the son of
Ataba**[[664]](footnotes_3.htm#b0664)** were from the strongest men of
the Quraysh. They entered the battlefield during the Battle of Badr and
challenged us, but no one from the Quraysh was able to face them. God’s
Prophet (MGB) sent me and two of my
friends**[[665]](footnotes_3.htm#b0665)** - may God be pleased with
them - to fight with them. I was the youngest of them and the least
experienced one in fighting. However, the Honorable the Exalted God had
Valid (Ibn Ataba) and Shayba (Ibn Rabia) killed by my hand. Moreover, I
killed and captured many more of the strong men of the Quraysh. Many
more than any of the other fighters were killed or captured on that day.
However, my cousin Ubayda ibn Harith was martyred on that day.’

Then Ali (MGB) turned towards his companions and asked, ‘Was it not so?’
They replied, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Yes, it was so.’

Then, the Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘O Jewish brother! And
about the fourth occasion I should say that all the people of Mecca set
out to attack us. They even used all the Arab and Quraysh tribes under
their influence in this attack in order to avenge for their losses in
the Battle of Badr. Gabriel descended upon the Prophet (MGB) and
informed him about

#### في صورة أعور ثقيف، فلم تزل تضرب أمرها ظهر البطن حتى اجتمعت آراؤها على أن ينتدب من كل فخذ من قريش رجل، ثم يأخذ كل رجل منهم سيفه ثم يأتي النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وهو نائم على فراشه فيضربونه جميعا بأسيافهم ضربة رجل واحد فيقتلوه، وإذا قتلوه منعت قريش رجالها ولم تسلمها فيمضي دمه هدرا، فهبط جبرئيل عيله السلام على النبي صلى الله عليه وآله فأنبأه بذلك وأخبره باليلة التي يجتمعون فيها والساعة التي يأتون فراشه فيها، وأمره بالخروج في الوقت الذي خرج فيه إلى الغار، فأخبرني رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله بالخبر، وأمرني أن أضطجع في مضجعه وأقيه بنفسي، فأسرعت إلى ذلك مطيعا له مسرورا لنفسي بأن اقتل دونه، فمضى عليه السلام لوجهه واضطجعت في مضجعه وأقبلت رجالات قريش موقنة في أنفسها أن تقتل النبي صلى الله عليه وآله فلما استوى بي وبهم البيت الذي أنا فيه ناهضتهم بسيفي فدفعتهم عن نفسي بما قد علمه الله والناس، ثم أقبل عليه السلام على أصحابه فقال: أليس كذلك؟ قالوا: بلى يا أمير المؤمنين، فقال عليه السلام: وأما الثالثة يا أخا اليهود فإن ابني ربيعة وابن عتبة كانوا فرسان قريش دعوا إلى البراز يوم بدر فلم يبرزلهم خلق من قريش فأنهضني رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله مع صاحبي رضي الله عنهما وقد فعل وأنا أحدث أصاحبي سنا وأقلهم للحرب تجربة فقتل الله عز وجل بيدي وليدا وشبية، سوى من قتلت من جحاجحة قريش في ذلك اليوم، وسوي من أسرت، وكان مني أكثر مما كان من أصحابي واستشهد ابن عمي في ذلك رحمة الله عليه، ثم التفت إلى أصحابه فقال: أليس كذلك قالوا: بلى يا أمير المؤمنين، {.t0}

#### فقال علي عليه السلام: وأما الرابعة يا أخا اليهود فإن أهل مكة أقبلوا ألينا على بكرة أبيهم قد استحاشوا من يليهم من قبايل العرب وقريش طالبين بثأر مشركي قريش في يوم بدر، فهبط جبرئيل عليه السلام على النبـي صـلى الله عليـه وآلـه

this issue. The Prophet (MGB) set out and set up his army in the valley
that is in front of the mountain of Uhud. The polytheists carried out a
surprise attack against us. Many Muslims were martyred and the rest
fled. I remained with the Prophet (MGB) while the Emigrants (Muhajerin)
and their Helpers (Ansar) returned to their homes in Medina. They all
said that the Prophet (MGB) and all his companions were killed. Then the
Honorable the Exalted God did not let the polytheists to success. I
suffered from more than seventy injuries several of which can be seen.’
Then he pushed his cloak aside, touched his injuries and said, ‘What I
did on that day is to be rewarded by the Honorable the Exalted God - if
He wills.’

Then Ali (MGB) turned towards his companions and asked, ‘Was it not so?’
They replied, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Yes, it was so.’

Then the Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘O Jewish brother! And
about the fifth occasion I should say that the people of the Quraysh
tribe and the Arabs gathered together and a covenant was established
between them not to stop fighting us until they kill the Prophet (MGB)
and all the Muslims of the household of Abdul Mutalib.

Then they came with all their weapons and armaments and laid siege to
Medina. They were sure they would win. Gabriel descended to the Prophet
(MGB) and informed him (MGB). The Prophet (MGB) dug a trench around
himself and those of the Emigrants (Muhajerin) and their Helpers (Ansar)
who were with us. The Quraysh tribe moved forward, and settled down
around the trench and surrounded us. They considered themselves to be
strong and considered us to be weak. Thus, they were roaming all around.
The Prophet (MGB) invited them to the Honorable the Exalted God’s
religion and beseeched their ties of kinship, but they did not listen
and refused his invitation. The Prophet’s invitation of them to Islam
made them more vicious. On that day the strong man of the Arabs was Amr
ibn ‘Abd Wudd who kept yelling like a drunk camel and challenging
someone to fight with him.**[[666]](footnotes_3.htm#b0666)** He showed
off his spears and sword but no one dared go fight him. God’s Prophet
(MGB) had me stand up, wrapped his turban around my head, and handed me
this sword.’ (At this time Ali (MGB) touched his sword). ‘Then I set out
to fight with him. All the women in Medina were crying since they were
worried about me getting killed in fighting with Amr ibn ‘Abd Wudd.
However, the Honorable the Exalted God had him killed by my hands. The
Arabs who considered no one but him to be a strong man hit me on the
head with this blow!’ (And Ali (MGB) pointed to his head). ‘God had all
the Arabs and the Quraysh run away due to the blow delivered to me.’

#### فأنبأه بذلك، فذهب النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وعسكر بأصاحبه في سد أحد، وأقبل المشركون إلينا فحملوا ألينا حملة رجل واحد، واستشهد من المسلمين من استشهد، وكان ممن بقي من الهزيمة، وبقيت مع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله ومضى المهاجرون والانصار إلى منازلهم من المدينة كل يقول: قتلى النبي صلى الله عليه وآله {.t0}

#### وقتل أصحابه ثم ضرب الله عز وجل وجوه المشركين وقد جرحت بين يدي رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله نيفا وسبعين جرحة منها هذه وهذه ثم ألقى عليه السلام رداء‌ه وأمر يده على جراحاته وكان مني في ذلك ما على الله عز وجل ثوابه إن شاء الله، ثم التفت عليه السلام إلى أصحابه فقال: أليس كذلك؟ قالوا: بلى يا أمير المؤمنين،

#### فقال عليه السلام: وأما الخامسة يا أخا اليهود فإن قريشا والعرب تجمعت وعقدت بينها عقدا وميثاقا لا ترجع من وجهها حتى تقتل رسول الله وتقتلنا معه معاشر بني عبدالمطلب، ثم أقبلت بحدها وحديدها حتى أناخت عليننا بالمدينة، واثقة بأنفسها فيما توجت له فهبط جبرئيل عليه السلام على النبي صلى الله عليه وآله فأنبأه بذلك فخندق على نفسه ومن معه من المهاجرين والانصار، فقدمت قريش فأقامت على الخندق محاصرة لنا، ترى في النفسها القوة وفينا الضعف ترعد وتبرق ورسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يدعوها إلى الله عز وجل ويناشدها بالقرابة والرحم فتأبى، ولا يزيدها ذلك إلا عتوا، وفارسها وفارس العرب يومئذ عمرو بن عبدود، يهدر كالبعير المغتلم يدعو إلى البراز ويرتجز ويخطر برمحه مرة وبسيفه مرة لا يقدم عليه مقدم، ولا يطمع فيه طامع، ولا حمية تهيجه ولا بصيرة تشجعه، فأنضني إليه رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وعممني بيده وأعطاني سيفه هذا، وضرب بيده إلى ذي الفقار، فخرجت إليه ونساء أهل المدينة بواك إشفاقا علي من ابن عبدود، فقتله الله عز وجل بيدي، والعرب لا تعدلها فارسا غيره، وضربني هذه الضربة وأومأ بيده إلى هامته - فهزم الله قريشا والعرب بذلك وبماكان مني فيهم من النكاية.

Then, Ali (MGB) turned towards his companions and asked, ‘Was it not
so?’ They replied, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Yes, it was so.’

Then, the Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘O Jewish brother! And
about the sixth occasion I should say that I accompanied God’s Prophet
(MGB) in an attack against your brethren in the oasis of
Khaybar**[[667]](footnotes_3.htm#b0667)** and other strong men from the
Quraysh tribe.**[[668]](footnotes_3.htm#b0668)** There appeared a lot of
men on horses and on foot with perfect armaments against us just like a
mountain. They possessed strong forts and were superior to us both in
terms of military power and their number. Each one of them attacked us
and challenged someone to go fight him. All my companions who went to
fight with them were killed. Gradually the war became heated; the eyes
became like bowls filled up with blood and everyone thought for himself.
Some of my companions looked at others and said, ‘O Abal-Hassan! O
Abal-Hassan! Move!’ Then God’s Prophet (MGB) dispatched me to the front
of their fort. I killed everyone who came out. I tore up all the strong
men who showed up to demonstrate their physical strength. I attacked
them just like a lion. Then they hid in the fort. I broke down the gate
of the fort and entered the fort by myself. I killed every man who
showed up, and captured every woman until I conquered the fort. There
was no one but God there to assist me.’ Then Ali (MGB) turned towards
his companions and asked, ‘Was it not so?’ They replied, ‘O Commander of
the Faithful! Yes, it was so.’

Then the Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘O Jewish brother! And
about the seventh occasion I should say that when God’s Prophet (MGB)
decided to conquer Mecca, he (MGB) did not wish to leave any excuses for
them. Therefore, he (MGB) wrote them a letter in which he (MGB) invited
them towards God just as he (MGB) had done on the very first day. The
Prophet (MGB) admonished them and frightened them about God’s torture.
He (MGB) gave them the glad tiding of becoming forgiven and assured them
of having hope for God’s forgiveness. He (MGB) wrote the Blessed Quranic
Chapter of Bara’at (Declaration of Immunity) for them to be read for
them at the end of the letter. He (MGB) suggested to his Companions to
take the letter. Everybody refrained from doing so until someone
accepted. The Prophet (MGB) sent the letter with him. Then Gabriel
descended and said, ‘O Muhammad! Either you or one of the members of
your household should deliver this letter.’ Then God’s Prophet (MGB) had
me deliver the letter. Therefore, I went to Mecca. You all know the
people of Mecca well. Each one of them was willing to spend all his
wealth, family and life to tear me up into pieces and place each part of
me on top of a different mountain. I delivered the letter of the Prophet
(MGB)

#### ثم التفت عليه السلام إلى أصحابه فقال: أليس كذلك؟ قالوا: بلى يا أمير المؤمنين.

#### فقال عليه السلام: وأما السادسة يا أخا اليهود فإنا وردنا مع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله مدينة أصحابك خيبر على رجال من اليهود وفرسانها من قريش وغيرها، فتلقونا بأمثال الجبال من الخيل والرجال والسلاح، وهم في أمنع دار وأكثر عدد، كل ينادي ويدعو ويبادر إلى القتال فلم يبرز إليهم من أصحابي أحد إلا قتلوه حتى إذا احمرت الحدق، ودعيت إلى النزال وأهمت كل امرئ نفسه. والتفت بعض أصحابي إلي بعض وكل يقول: يا أبا الحسن انهض. فأنهضني رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله إلى دارهم فلم يبرز إلي منهم أحد إلا قتلته، ولايثبت لي فارس إلاطحنته ثم شددت عليهم شدة الليث على فريسته، حتى أدخلتهم جوف مدينتهم مسددا عليهم، فاقتلعت باب حصنهم بيدي حتى دخلت عليهم مدينتهم وحدي أقتل من يظهر فيها من رجالها، وأسبي من أجد من نسائها حتى أفتتحها وحدي، ولم يكن لي فيها معاون إلا الله وحده ثم التفت عليه السلام إلى أصحابه فقال: أليس كذلك؟ قالوا: بلى يا أمير المؤمنين، فقال عيه السلام: وأما السابعة يا أخااليهود فإن رسول لله صلى الله عليه وآله لما توجه لفتح مكة أحب أن يعذر إليهم ويدعوهم إلى الله عز وجل آخرا كما دعاهم أو لا فكتب إليهم كتابا يحذرهم فيه وينذرهم عذاب الله ويعدهم الصفح ويمنيهم مغفرة ربهم، ونسخ لهم في آخره سورة براء‌ة ليقرأها عليهم، ثم عرض على جميع أصحابه المضي به فكلهم يرى التثاقل فيه، فلما رأى ذلك ندب منهم رجلا فوجهه به فأتاه جبرئيل فقال: يا محمد لا يؤدي عنك إلا أنت أو رجل منك فأنبأني رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله بذلك ووجهني بكتابه ورسالته إلى أهل مكة قأتيت مكة وأهلها من قد عرفتم ليس منهم أحد إلا ولو قدر أن يضع على كل جبل مني إربا لفعل، ولو أن يبذل في ذلك

to them and read it for them. Everybody answered me by threatening me
and giving me up in the air promises. All the men and the women were
suspicious of me and expressed their hatred and animosity. However, I
persisted as you all well know.’ Then Ali (MGB) turned towards his
companions and asked, ‘Was it not so?’ They replied, ‘O Commander of the
Faithful! Yes, it was so.’

Then the Commander of the Faithful Ali (MGB) said, ‘O Jewish brother!
These were the seven occasions on which the Honorable the Exalted God
tested me during the lifetime of His Prophet (MGB) and found me obedient
on every occasion due to the honor which He had granted me. No one else
is like me in this respect. I could praise myself for this but the
Honorable the Exalted God has admonished the people against this.’

Then the Jew said, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! You are right! I swear
by God that the Honorable the Exalted God has made you superior because
you are a relative of the Prophet (MGB). God has made you prosperous
because of being his brother and has credited you a position in relation
to him just like that of Aaron to Moses (MGB). He has also honored you
by examining you on these horrifying occasions which you mentioned on
which you superseded all the other Muslims. None of the Muslims was like
you on these frightening occasions in which you have participated, and
you were the most virtuous one in those frightening occasions in which
you participated. None of the Muslims is like you. Anyone who has seen
you with the Prophet (MGB) during his lifetime or has looked at you
after the death of the Prophet (MGB) has this same belief. O Commander
of the Faithful! Now please tell me how you were tested after the demise
of God’s Prophet and how you were patient and persevered. We more or
less know the answer and can report it, but want to hear it from
yourself as we heard those related to the lifetime of the Prophet
(MGB).’ Then the Commander of the Faithful Ali (MGB) said, ‘O Jewish
brother! Indeed God tested me on seven occasions after the demise of His
Prophet (MGB) and found me obedient and persevering on every occasion
due to the honor which He had granted me.

O Jewish brother! About the first occasion I should say that in this
world I had no one to associate with, be friends with, trust, rely upon
or make any pledges with amongst the Muslims, but the Prophet (MGB). The
Prophet (MGB) was my only shelter. He fostered me since my childhood and
supported me in my adulthood. He (MGB) did not let me grow up like an
orphan. He (MGB) alleviated my worries; made me needless of working to
seek my share of daily bread; prevented me from engaging in business by

#### نفسه وأهله وولده وماله، فبلغتهم رسالة النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وقرأت عليهم كتابه، فكلهم يلقاني بالتهدد والوعيد ويبدى لي البغضاء، ويظهر الشحناء من رجالهم ونسائهم، فكان مني في ذلك ما قد رأيتم، ثم التفت إلى أصحابه فقال: أليس كذلك؟ قالوا: بلى يا أمير المؤمنين. {.t0}

#### فقال عليه السلام: يا أخا اليهود هذه المواطن التي امتحنني فيه ربي عز وجل مع نبيه صلى الله عليه وآله فوجدني فيها كلها بمنه مطيعا، ليس لاحد فيها مثل الذي لي ولو شئت لو صفت ذلك ولكن الله عز وجل نهى عن التزكية. فقالوا: يا أمير المؤمنين: صدقت والله ولقد أعطاك الله عز وجل الفضيلة بالقرابة من نبينا صلى الله عيله وآله وسلم، وأسعدك بأن جعلك أخاه، تنزل منه بمنزلة هارون من موسى، وفضلك بالمواقف التي باشهرتها، والاهوال التي ركبتها، وذخر لك الذي ذكرت وأكثر منه ممالم تذكره، ومما ليس لاحد من المسلمين مثله، يقول ذلك من شهدك منا مع نبينا صلى الله عيله وآله ومن شهدك بعده، فأخبرنا يا أمير المؤمنين ما امتحنك الله عز وجل به بعد نبينا صلى الله عليه وآله فاحتملته وصبرت، فلو شئنا أن نصف ذلك لو صفناه علما منا به وظهورا منا عليه، إلا أنا نحب أن نسمع منك ذلك كما سمعنا منك ما امتحنك الله به في حياته فأطعته فيه.

#### فقال عليه السلام: يا أخا اليهود إن الله عز وجل امتحنني بعد وفاة نبيه صلى الله عليه وآله في سبعة مواطن فوجدني فيهن من غير تزكية لنفسي منه ونعمته صبورا.

#### واما أولهن يا أخا اليهود فانه لم يكن لي خاصة دون المسلمين عامة أحد آنس به أو أعتمد عليه أو أستنيم إليه أو أتقرب به غير رسول الله صلى الله علية وآله، هو رباني صغيرا وبوأني كبيرا، وكفاني العيلة، وجبرني من اليتم، وأغناني عن الطلب ووقاني المكسب. وعال لي النفس والولد والاهل هذا في تصاريف أمر الدنيا

providing for my family and me. These were only his worldly aids to me.
However, my spiritual gains and benefits from him through which I
attained high ranks near the Honorable the Exalted God are much greater
than this. When the Prophet (MGB) died I became so sad that I do not
suppose all the mountains could withstand. All the members of my
household became very impatient. They had lost their control. They could
not tolerate this heavy burden of grief because it had made them
impatient and put them out of their minds. They neither understood
anything nor demanded anything. They could neither hear or speak. Other
people were all influenced by this horrible situation. Some expressed
condolences and sympathized with us, while others were impatient and
mourned for us. I was the only one who did not lose my patience. I
controlled myself and carried out the orders of the Prophet (MGB). I
lifted his body; performed the ritual ablutions (wuzu) for the dead;
performed the embalmment; shrouded the corpse; performed the prayer for
the deceased; placed his body in the grave; and compiled the Quran and
God’s decrees regarding the people. A lot of weeping, heart-aching
mourning and the greatness of the calamity could not prevent me from
performing my duty. I fulfilled my duties towards the Honorable the
Exalted God and the Prophet (MGB) and completely performed whatever he
(MGB) had ordered me to do. I was patient and I persevered.’

Then Ali (MGB) turned towards his companions and asked, ‘Was it not so?’
They replied, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Yes, it was so.’

Then the Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘O Jewish brother! And
about the second occasion I should say that God’s Prophet (MGB)
established me as his Trustee during his lifetime. He (MGB) had all the
people who were present pledge allegiance to me so that they would
listen to and obey my orders. He (MGB) instructed all who were present
there to declare this to all who were absent. It was always me who
informed all others of his commands while I was with the Prophet (MGB).
It was always me who was the head of those who accompanied me when we
traveled. I never considered anyone to be more deserving than me for
anything during the lifetime of the Prophet (MGB) and after his demise.

When God’s Prophet (MGB) became ill which finally resulted in his
demise, he (MGB) ordered that an army be dispatched out of Medina under
the command of Usamah ibn Zayd. He (MGB) dispatched anyone from the
Quraysh; Aws and Khazraj etc. whom he thought might break their pledge
of allegiance to me; anyone who might be hostile with me since I had
killed their father, son, brother or a relative of theirs; the Emigrants
(Muhajerin)

#### مع ما خصني به من الدرجات التي قادتني إلى معالي الحق عند الله عز وجل فنزل بي من وفاة رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله مالم أكن أظن الجبال لو حملته عنوة كانت تنهض به فرأيت الناس من أهل بيتي ما بين جازع لا يملك جزعه، ولا بضبط نفسه، ولا يقوي على حمل فادح ما نزل به قد أذهب الجزع صبره، وأذهل عقله، وحال بينه وبين الفهم والافهام والقول والاسماع، وسائر الناس من غير بني عبدالمطلب بين معز يأمر بالصبر، وبين مساعد باك البكائهم،جازع لجزعهم، وحملت نفسي على الصبر عند وفاته بلزوم الصمت والاشتغال بما أمرنى به من تجهيزه، وتغسيله وتحنيطه وتكفينه، والصلاة عليه، ووضعه في حفرته، وجمع كتاب الله وعهده إلى خلقه، لا يشغلني عن ذلك بادر دمعة ولا هائج زفرة ولا لاذع حرقة ولا جزيل مصيبة حتى أديت في ذلك الحق الواجب لله عز وجل ولرسوله صلى الله عليه وآله علي، وبلغت منه الذي أمرني به، واحتملته صابرا محتسبا، ثم التفت عليه السلام إلى أصحابه فقال: أليس كذلك؟ قالوا: بلى يا أمير المؤمنين. {.t0}

#### فقال عليه السلام: وأما الثانية يا أخا اليهود،فإن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أمرني في حياته على جميع امته وأخذ على جميع من حضره منهم البيعة والسمع والطاعة لامري، وأمرهم أن يبلغ الشاهد الغائب ذلك، فكنت المؤدى إليهم عن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أمره إذا حضرته والامير على من حضرني منهم إذا فارقته، لا تختلج في نفسي منازعة أحد من الخلق لي في شيء من الامر في حياة النبي صلى الله عليه وآله ولا بعد وفاته، ثم أمر رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله بتوجيه الجيش الذي وجهه مع اسامة بن زيد عند الذي أحدث الله به من المرض الذي توفاه فيه، فلم يدع النبي أحدا من أفناء العرب ولا من الاوس والخزرج وغيرهم من سائر الناس ممن يخاف على نقضه ومنازعته ولا أحدا ممن يراني بعيـن

and the Helpers (Ansar) and anyone with a weak belief along with Usamah
Ibn Zayd. The Prophet (MGB) only kept a small group of sincere believers
with him so that no one may say something out of hatred to me or hinder
me from the Caliphate after the demise of the Prophet (MGB).

The last thing which the Prophet (MGB) said regarding the management of
his nation’s affairs was that the army of Usamah should be dispatched to
war and no one under his command should disobey his orders. He (MGB)
stressed this. However, once the Prophet (MGB) passed away, the very
same men under whom the Prophet (MGB) had dispatched with Usamah left
their posts; abandoned him; opposed the orders given by God’s Prophet
(MGB); and ignored all the recommendations of the Prophet (MGB) about
accompanying and helping Usamah’s army. They abandoned him and retreated
to Medina to break their pledge of allegiance to me which they had made
with the Prophet (MGB); break their pledge with the Honorable the
Exalted God and the Prophet (MGB); and yell out in order to choose a
leader for themselves without the participation or involvement of any of
the members of the household of Abdul Mutalib. Their main goal was to
break their pledge of allegiance which they had made to me. They were
doing this while I was busy with the burial rites and rituals for the
Prophet of God (MGB) and could not do anything else since attending to
the Prophet’s corpse was more important than anything else. O Jewish
brother! This act of the people abandoning me at this hard time burnt my
heart the most. I was patient although I was mourning and had suffered
from the great calamity of the loss of God’s Prophet (MGB) who was the
only one I could trust besides God. I persevered on this occasion which
happened immediately after the previous one.’

Then Ali (MGB) turned towards his companions and asked, ‘Was it not so?’
They replied, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Yes, it was so.’

Then the Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘O Jewish brother! And
about the third occasion I should say that the one who sat in the
Prophet’s (MGB) place was a fair man who came to see me everyday and
apologized saying that he was ashamed that he had broken his allegiance
to me, and had usurped my right. He respected me and asked for
forgiveness. Based on this, I thought to myself that my God-given rights
would be returned to me after him in a pleasant way. I thought that I
should not wage a war in the new Islamic society that is still suffering
from the remains of the ignorance of the past. I thought I should not
argue so as to have some side with me and others oppose me, since then
the quarrel may turn into a battle. A group of the special companions of
the Prophet whom I knew well and

#### البغضاء ممن قد وترته بقتل أبيه أو أخيه أوحميمه إلا وجهه في ذلك الجيش، ولا من المهاجرين والانصار والمسلمين وغيرهم والمؤلفة قلوبهم والمنافقين، لتصفو قلوب من يبقى معي بحضرته، ولئلا يقول قائل شيئا مما أكرهه، ولا يدفعني دافع من الولاية والقيام بأمر رعيته من بعده، ثم كان آخر ما تكلم به في شيء من أمر امته أن يمضي جيش اسامة ولا يتخلف عنه أحد ممن أنهض معه، وتقدم في ذلك أشد التقدم وأوعز فيه أبلغ الايعاز وأكد فيه أكثر التأكيد فلم أشعر بعد أن قبض النبي صلى الله عليه وآله إلا برجال من بعث اسامة بن زيد وأهل عسكره قد تركوا مراكزهم، وأخلوا مواضعهم، وخالفوا أمر رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله فيما أنهضهم له وأمرهم به وتقدم إليهم من ملازمة أميرهم مقيما في عسكره، وأقبلوا يتبادرون على الخيل ركضا إلى حل عقدة عقدها الله عز وجل لي ولرسول صلى الله عليه وآله في أعناقهم فحلوها، وعهد عاهدوا الله ورسوله فنكثوه، وعقدوا لانفسهم عقدا ضجت به أصواتهم واحتصت به آراؤهم من غير مناظرة لاحد من ابني عبدالمطلب أو مشاركة في رأي أو استقالة لما في أعناقهم من بيعتى، فعلو ذلك وأنا برسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله مشغول وبتجهيزه عن سائر الاشياء مصدود فإنه كان أهمها وأحق ما بدئ به منها، فكان هذا يا أخا اليهود أقرح ما ورد على قلبي مع الذي أنا فيه من عظيم الرزية، وفاجع المصيبة، وفقد من لاخلف منه إلا الله تبارك وتعالى، فصبرت عليها إذا أتت بعد أختها على تقاربها وسرعة اتصالها، ثم التفت عليه السلام إلى أصحابه فقال: أليس كذالك؟ قالوا: بلى ياأمير المؤمنين، {.t0}

#### فقال عليه السلام وأما الثالثة يا أخا اليهود فإن القائم بعد النبي صلى الله عليه وآله كان يلقاني معتذرا في كل أيامه ويلوم غيره ما ارتكبه من أخذ حقي ونقض بيعتي وسألني تحليله، فكنت أقول: تنقضي أيامه، ثم يرجع إلي حقي الذي جعله الله لى عفوا هنيئا من غير أن أحدث في الاسلام مع حدوثه وقرب عهده بالجاهلية حدثا في طلب حقي بمنازعة لعل فلانا يقول فيها: نعم وفلانا يقول: لا، فيؤول ذلك من القول إلى الفعل وجماعة من خواص أصحاب محمد صلى الله عليه وآله أعرفهم

are sincere believers in God, the Quran and the religion associated with
me, invited me to claim my right in public and private. They were ready
to sacrifice their lives so as to help me and honor their pledge of
allegiance to me. I advised them to be calm and patient and that God may
give back my due rights without any fighting or blood-shed. Many people
started to doubt the religion after the demise of the Prophet (MGB), and
many worthless greedy individuals were after the power to rule as the
Caliph. Each tribe vociferously announced that the Caliph should be
someone chosen from amongst them. What they all implied was that the
affairs of the state must be in the hands of someone other than me.

When the first Caliph (who is Abu Bakr) was about to die, he entrusted
the affairs to his friend to be in charge after him. This was another
hardship that pursued the previous one and usurped my God-given right to
the position of Caliphate for the second time. Again some of the
companions of the Prophet which are either dead or alive now gathered
around me and repeated their concerns about my Caliphate. Again I
invited them to patience and calmness so that the Islamic society may be
protected, and the society which the Prophet (MGB) had formed with a lot
of hardship not become disunited. The Prophet (MGB) had established the
Islamic society with a genuine policy. He (MGB) had been easy-going at
some times, and stern at other times. He (MGB) forgave sometimes and
unsheathed his sword at other times. The Prophet (MGB) was very
sympathetic with the people. He (MGB) fed them and pleased them just as
soon as they approached Islam and were about to run away from it. He
gave them clothing, carpets and beds even though we ourselves as the
members of the household lived in homes without roofs and doors. The
walls of our homes were made of date palm branches and leaves. We
neither had any carpets or any blankets. Several of us shared one dress
and took turns to pray with it. We remained hungry around the clock. The
Prophet (MGB) even gave away the one-fifth levy that was our
God-ordained rightful share to others and assisted the wealthy and
materialist Arabs with it. I had to maintain the society which had been
formed with this much hardship and could not lead it into the verge of
separation and dispute. If I uprose and invited the people to help me,
they had only one of two choices. They would either obey me and fight
the opponents on my behalf and get killed, or abandoned me and become
unbelievers for committing the sin of disobeying me. They all knew that
their position relative to me is like the position of the people of
Moses as opponents of Aaron. They knew that they would suffer a similar
catastrophe like that which the people of Moses suffered due to their
disobedience of Aaron. I thought that just being sorry and patient would
increase my reward near the Honorable God until God ordains what He
wills ‘…And the command of Allah is a decree
determined.’**[[669]](footnotes_3.htm#b0669)** This would also be easier
for the Islamic society which I described for you.

#### بالنصح لله ولرسوله ولكتابه ودينه الاسلام يأتوني عودا وبدء‌ا وعلانية وسرا فيدعوني إلى أخذ حقي، ويبذلون أنفسهم في نصرتي ليؤدوا إلى بذلك بيعتى في أعناقهم، فأقول رويدا وصبرا لعل الله يأتينى بذلك عفوا بلا منازعة ولا إراقة الدماء، فقد ارتاب كثير من الناس بعد وفاة النبي صلى الله عليه وآله، وطمع في الامر بعده من ليس له بأهل فقال كل قوم: منا أمير، وما طمع القائلون في ذلك إلا لتناول غيري الامر، فلما دنت وفاة القائم وانقضت أيامه صير الامر بعده لصاحبه، فكانت هذه اخت اختها، ومحلها مني مثل محلها وأخذامني ماجعله الله لي، فاجتمع إلى من أصحاب محمد صلى الله عليه وآله ممن مضى وممن بقي ممن أخره الله من اجتمع فقالوا لى فيها مثل الذي قالوا في اختها، فلم يعد قولي الثاني قولي الاول صبرا واحتسابا ويقينا وإشفاقا من أن تفنى عصبة تألفهم رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله بالين مرة وبالشدة اخرى، وبالنذر مرة وبالسيف اخرى حتى لقد كان من تألفه لهم أن كان الناس في الكر والفرار والشبع والري، واللباس والوطاء والدثار ونحن أهل بيت محمد صلى الله عليه وآله لا سقوف لبيوتنا، ولا أبواب ولاستور إلا الجرائد، وما أشبهها ولا وطاء لنا ولا دثار علينا، يتدوال الثوب الواحد في الصلاة أكثرنا، ونطوي الليالي والايام عامتنا، وربما أتا نا الشئ مما أفاء‌ه الله علينا وصيره لنا خاصة دون غير نا ونحن على ما وصفت من حالنا فيؤثر به رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أرباب النعم والاموال تألفا منه لهم، فكنت أحق من لم يفرق هذه العصبة التى ألفها رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله ولم يحملها على الخطة التي لاخلاص لها منها دون بلوغها أوفناء آجالها لاني لو نصبت نفسي فدعوتهم إلى نصرتي كانوا منى وفي أمري على إحدى منزلتين إما متبع مقاتل، وإما مقتول إن لم يتبع الجميع، وإما خاذل يكفر بخذلانه إن قصر في نصرتي أو أمسك عن طاعتي، وقد علم الله أني منه بمنزلة هارون من موسى، يحل به في مخالفتي والامساك عن نصرتي ما أحل قوم موسى بأنفسهم في مخالفة هارون وترك طاعته ورأيت تجرع الغصص ورد أنفاس الصعداء ولزوم الصبر حتى يفتح الله أو يقضى بما أحب أزيدلي في حظي وأرفق بالعصابة التي وصفت أمرهم "وَكَانَ أَمْرُ اللهِ قَدَراً مَقْدُوراً." {.t0}
