Section 2
=========

**Section 2**

O Jewish brother! It would have been right for me not to have paid
attention to these points and demanded my rights. All the companions of
the Prophet (MGB) including those who have now passed away and those who
are present here acknowledge that my power is more than others; my tribe
is nobler than all the other tribes; my followers are
loftier**[[670]](footnotes_3.htm#b0670)** and more obedient than others;
the motivation of my followers to support me is higher and their
nobilities and background are more outstanding as others as me myself
have a good background of association with the Prophet (MGB), closeness
to the Prophet (MGB), and I am the Trustee of the Prophet (MGB).
Moreover, I deserve to be in charge of the position of the Caliphate due
to the explicit will of the Prophet (MGB) and the pledge of allegiance
which they had made to me. When the Prophet (MGB) passed away, the rule
of the affairs was in the hands of his family - not their hands or that
of their families. The members of the household of the Prophet (MGB)
which had been purified by God deserved more to run the affairs of the
state than others. They possessed all the necessary characteristics for
the position of the Caliphate.’

Then Ali (MGB) turned towards his companions and asked, ‘Was it not so?’
They replied, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Yes, it was so.’ Then the
Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘O Jewish brother! And about the
fourth occasion I should say that the one was put in charge after Abu
Bakr consulted with me from the beginning to the end of everything he
wanted to do and issued all decrees according to my opinion. He always
sought my opinion regarding tough issues and acted accordingly. My
companions and I do not know of anyone else whose counsel he seeks. No
one but me was eager to become the Caliph after him. When he was
attacked and about to die without any previous illnesses, I had no
doubts that I was going to regain my right of Caliphate without any
problems; that the future would be as I wished it to be; and that God
would bring about a good future. However, he named six persons as
candidates for the position of the Caliphate at the end, and I was named
as the last one. He did not even consider me to be equal to them. He did
not remember the fact that I was the Prophet’s relative and Trustee. He
did not even remember that I was the Prophet’s groom. None of the
candidates had the brilliant background and good service to Islam as I
had. He let us consult amongst ourselves and chose one as the future
Caliph with the majority vote. He ordered his son to cut off our necks
if we disobeyed him or failed to choose one from amongst ourselves as
the future Caliph.

O Jewish brother! This was bitter enough for me! This group of
candidates tried as hard as they could to deliver lectures and lobby on
their own behalf

#### ولو لم أتق هذه الحالة يا أخا اليهود - ثم طلبت حقي لكنت أولى ممن طلبه لعلم من مضى من أصحاب رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله ومن بحضرتك منه بأني كنت أكثر عددا وأعز عشيرة وأمنع رجالا وأطوع أمرا وأوضح حجة وأكثر في هذا الدين مناقب وآثارا لسوابقي وقرابتي ووراثتي فضلا عن استحقاقي ذلك بالوصية التي لا مخرج للعباد منها والبيعة المتعدمة في أعناقهم ممن تناولها، وقد قبض محمد صلى الله عليه وآله وإن ولاية الامة في يده وفي بيته، لا في يد الاولى تناولوها ولا في بيوتهم، ولاهل بيته الذين أذهب الله عنهم الرجس وطهرهم تطهيرا أولى بالامر من بعده من غيرهم في جميع الخصال ثم التفت عليه السلام إلى أصحابه فقال: أليس كذلك؟ فقالو: بلى يا أمير المؤمنين. فقال عليه السلام: وأما الرابعة يا أخا اليهود فإن القائم بعد صاحبه كان يشاورني في موارد الامور فيصدرها عن أمري ويناظرني في غوامضها فيمضيها عن رأيي، أعلم أحدا ولايعلمه أصحابي يناظره في ذلك غيري، ولا يطمع في الامر بعده سواي، فلما (أن) أتته منيته على فجأة بلامرض كان قبله ولا أمر كان أمضاه في صحته من بدنه لم أشك أني قد استرجعت حقي في عافية بالمنزلة التى كنت أطلبها، والعاقبة التي كنت ألتمسها وإن الله سيأتي بذلك على أحسن مارجوت، وأفضل ما أملت، وكان من فعله أن ختم أمره بأن سمى قوما أنا سادسهم، ولم يستوني بواحد منهم، ولا ذكرلي حالا في وراثة الرسول ولا قرابة ولاصهر ولانسب، ولا لواحد منهم مثل سابقة من سوابقي ولاأثر من آثارى، وصير هاشورى بيننا وصير ابنه فيها حاكما علينا وأمره أن يضرب أعناق النفر الستة الذين صير الامر فيهم إن لم ينفذوا أمره، وكفى بالصبر على هذا يا أخا اليهود صبرا وبسط الايدي والالسن في الامر والنهي والركون إلى الدنيا والاقتداء بالماضين قبلهم إلى تناول ما لم يجعل

while they could. I remained silent until they asked my opinion. I then
presented my background and explained to them what they clearly knew. I
proved my rightfulness and their unrightfulness for them. I reminded
them of the Prophet’s will and their pledge of allegiance to me.
However, their love for getting into office; ordering the people around;
their attachment to this world; and following in the footsteps of the
previous Caliphs led them to demand an undue right for themselves.
Whenever I had a chance to be alone with any of them I reminded them of
the Reckoning on the Resurrection Day, and frightened them of the result
of their unjust demand. They would agree with me on the condition that I
turn the Caliphate position over to them after myself. They knew well
that I could not do so and act against the Quran and the decree of the
Prophet (MGB), and turn over to them what God had withheld from them.
Then one of the radical persons in the council made a radical move, took
the affairs out of my hands, and turned the position of the Caliphate
over to Uthman, although he never matched any of the members of the
council since he was a wealthy and materialist person. He never paid any
attention to the people’s noble character and religious beliefs. He
ignored all spiritual noble characteristics for which God had honored
the Prophet (MGB) and his Holy Household. I do not even think that the
very same members of the council who appointed Uthman to the position of
the Caliphate became sorry for their choice before the night of that
very same day, and started to blame one another. No long time passed
before they who had empowered the dictator denounced and abandoned him.
Uthman got worried. He went to his supporters and his other companions
and asked that they accept his resignation. He expressed his sorrow and
repentance. O Jewish brother! This was even a harder calamity than the
previous ones! I hoped it had never happened. I was under so much
pressure for this event that it cannot be described in words. However, I
had no choice but to be patient! On the very same day of pledging
allegiance to Uthman, the members of the council came to me and
apologized for having opposed me. They asked me to revolt against Uthman
and put him out of office. They all pledged allegiance to me and
promised that they would sacrifice their lives to achieve this end.
However, I put things off whenever they came by and had them attend to
something else. For example, once I asked them to go shave their heads
before we revolt. At another time I asked them to arrange for a private
meeting in such and such place. This way I kept them busy and divulged
their secrets.’

O Jewish brother! I swear to God that the very same considerations which
had prevented me from doing anything in the past were again obstacles
which

#### الله لهم، فمكث القوم أيامهم كلها كل يخطب لنفسه وأنا ممسك عن أن سألوني عن أمري فناظرتهم في أيامي وأيامهم وآثارى وآثارهم، وأوضحت لهم مالم يجهلوه من وجوه استحقاقي لها دونهم وذكر تهم عهد رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله إليهم وتأكيد ما أكده من البيعة لى في أعناقهم، دعاهم حب الامارة فاذا خلوت بالواحد ذكرته أيام الله وحذرته ما هوقادم عليه وصائر إليه، التمس مني شرطا أن اصيرهاله بعدي فلما لم يجدوا عندي إلا المحجة البيضاء، والحمل على كتاب الله عز وجل ووصية الرسول وإعطاء كل امرئ منهم ماجعله الله له، ومنعه مالم يجعل الله له أزالها عني إلى ابن عفان طمعا في الشحيح معه فيها، وابن عفان رجل لم يستوبه وبواحد ممن حضره حال قط فضلا عمن دونهم لاببدر التى هى سنام فخرهم ولا غيرها من المآثر التي أكرم الله بها رسوله ومن اختصه معه من أهل بيته عليه السلام ثم لم أعلم القوم أمسوا من يومهم ذلك حتى ظهرت ندامتهم ونكصوا على أعقابهم وأحال بعضهم على بعض، كل يلوم نفسه ويلوم أصحابه، ثم لم تطل الايام بالمستبد بالامر ابن عفان حتى أكفروه وتبرؤو امنه مشى إلى أصحابه خاصة وسائر أصحاب رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله عامة يستقيلهم من بيعته ويتوب إلى الله من فلتته، فكانت هذه ياأخا اليهود أكبر من اختها وأفظع وأحرى أن لا يصبر عليها، فنالني منها الذي لا يبلغ وصفه ولا يحد وقته، ولم يكن عندي فيها إلا الصبر على ما أمض وأبلغ منها، ولقد أتاني الباقون من الستة من يومهم كل راجع عما كان ركب مني يسألني خلع ابن عفان والوثوب عليه وأخذ حقي ويؤتيني صفقته وبيعته على الموت تحت رايتي أويرد الله عز وجل على حقي، فوالله يا أخا اليهود ما منعني منا إلا الذي منعني من اختيها قبلها، ورأيت الابقاء على من بقي من الطائفة أبهج لي وآنس لقلبي من فنائها، وعلمت أني إن حـملتها عـلى {.t0}

hindered me. I realized that isolation and patience is a more
appropriate approach for me. It was better for me to maintain my
supporters who agree with me than to revolt and have them get killed,
although they were all ready to sacrifice their lives. I was even more
ready to die since as those who are absent and those who are present all
know that to me death is just like a sip of cold water in the mouth on a
very hot day. My uncle Hamzih, my brother Ja’far, my cousin Ubaydah and
I have made a pledge to God and His Prophet (MGB) and will honor it.
Some of my companions went so far as to sacrifice their lives in this
way. I was held back due to God’s will. The Honorable the Exalted God
revealed the following verse about us, ‘Among the Believers are men who
have been true to their covenant with Allah. of them some have completed
their vow (to the extreme), and some (still) wait: but they have never
changed (their determination) in the
least:’**[[671]](footnotes_3.htm#b0671)** I swear by God that I am the
one referred to in this verse as the one who still waits.

O Jewish brother! I have not abandoned my pledge! The reason why I was
silent in front of Uthman and did not do anything is that he is going to
be punished by his own baseness and untrustworthiness which I found in
him and this would draw the people from near and afar to want to dismiss
and kill him. I just stayed on the side and waited until this happened.
I neither said ‘yes’ nor did I say ‘no.’

Then the nation rushed to the door of my house. God knows that I hated
the Caliphate, since I knew that the very same people who insist in
making me the Caliph are used to collecting worldly goods and having
fun. Although they well knew that I would be hard on them and not
fulfill their greediness, they had gotten used to rushing in doing
things and could not be soothed. They hurriedly chose me by insisting a
lot but when they realized that they could not gain anything from me
they started to oppose and criticize me.’

Then Ali (MGB) turned towards his companions and asked, ‘Was it not so?’
They replied, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Yes, it was so.’

Then the Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘O Jewish brother! And
about the fifth occasion I should say that when the ones who pledged
allegiance to me realized that I would not fulfill their personal aims,
they rebelled against me with the help of that woman (i.e. Ayesha). They
placed her on the back of a camel and turned her around in the
frightening deserts and wide valleys even though I was in charge of her
as the Trustee of the Prophet (MGB). The dogs at Huab barked at her and
she felt sorry Yet she followed a group of people who had pledged
allegiance to me both

#### دعوة الموت ركبتة، فأما نفسي فقد علم من حضر ممن ترى ومن غاب من أصحاب محمد صلى الله عليه وآله أن الموت عندي بمنزلة الشربة الباردة في اليوم الشديد الحر من ذي العطش الصدى،ولقد كنت عاهدت الله عز وجل ورسوله صلى الله عليه وآله أنا وعمي حمزة وأخي جعفر، وابن عمي عبيدة على أمر وفينا به لله عز وجل ولرسوله، فتقد مني أصحابي وتخلفت بعدهم لما أراد الله عز وجل فأنزل الله فينا "مِنْ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ رِجَالٌ صَدَقُوا مَا عَاهَدُوا اللَّهَ عَلَيْهِ فَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ قَضَى نَحْبَهُ وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ يَنْتَظِرُ وَمَا بَدَّلُوا تَبْدِيلاً." وأنا والله والمنتظر. {.t0}

#### يا أخا اليهود، وما بدلت تبديلا، وما سكتني عن ابن عفان وحثني على الامساك عنه إلا أني عرفت من أخلاقه فيما اختبرت منه بمالن يدعة حتى يستدعي الاباعد إلى قتله وخلعه فضلا عن الاقارب وأنا في عزلة، فصبرت حتى كان ذلك، لم أنطلق فيه بحرف من "لا"، ولا "نعم".

#### ثم أتاني القوم وأن اعلم الله كاره لمعرفتي بما تطاعموا به من اعتقال الامول والمرح في الارض وعلمهم بأن تلك ليست لهم عندي وشديد عادة منتزعة فلما لم يجدوا عندي تعللوا الاعاليل.

#### ثم التفت عليه السلام إلى أصحابه فقال: أليس كذلك؟ فقالوا: بلى يا أمير المؤمنين.

#### فقال عليه السلام: وأما الخامسة يا أخا اليهود فإن المتابعين لي لما لم يطمعوا في تلك مني وثبوا بالمرأة على وأنا ولي أمرها، والوصي عليها، فحملوها على الجمل وشدوها على الرحال، وأقبلوا بها تخبط الفيافي وتقطع البراري وتنبح عليها كلاب الحوأب، وتظهر لهم علامات الندم في كل ساعة وعند كل حال في عصبة قد بايعوني ثانية بعد بيعتهم الاولى في حيـاة النبـي صلى الله عليه وآله حتى أتت أهل

at the time of the Prophet (MGB) and later on, and continued opposing me
until she entered upon the people of Basra whose hands were short, their
beards were long, their intellectual capacity was low, and their
thoughts were corrupt. These people were light-headed desert dwellers.
This woman took control of these unwise people and they unsheathed their
swords, threw their spears and arrows without any knowledge. I had two
problems with them. If I did nothing in response to them, they would not
follow the intellect and put their rebellion and corruption aside. If I
fought with them, then there would be a lot of blood shedding which I
never wanted. I was both apologetic to them and gave an ultimatum by
threatening them. I suggested to that woman to go home. I also suggested
to the group who had brought her to honor their pledge of allegiance to
me and not to break their covenant with the Honorable the Exalted God.

I offered them as much as I had the power to. I even talked to some of
them**[[672]](footnotes_3.htm#b0672)** . He returned. I talked with
others in the same way but their ignorance, rebellion and deviation
became even more than before. I fought with them since they insisted on
that. I defeated them in the war and they became sorry. Many of them
were killed on the battlefield. I fought them since I had no other
choice. Had I postponed fighting, they would have done things which
would have prevented me from forgiving them as I did after the war.

If I had not blocked them I would have been disloyal to myself and the
nation and would have become a partner in the sins which they had
decided to commit as follows:

1- They had planned to extend their rebellion in the surroundings of the
Islamic country to whatever extent they could and do acts of corruption.

2- They had planned to kill and shed the blood of the citizens.

3- They had planned to subject the rules of Islam and the laws of
justice according to the opinions of a low-minded and unintelligent
women and follow the old Roman nation; Yemen and destroyed nations of
the past in this respect. Had I hesitated to fight, I would have
ultimately been forced to fight with them and would also be ashamed of
the evil deeds and crimes which that woman and her troops would have
committed. Still I did not start the battle without hesitation. First, I
gave them an ultimatum and postponed the war as much as possible. I was
calm. I negotiated with them several times. I even sent several
mediators to them. I made them several offers which were to their
benefit. However, they turned me down on every occasion. They made me
helpless, forced me to start a war, and end the issue as God willed.
Given all that was done before the war they had been given enough
ultimatum.’

#### بلدة قصيرة أيديهم، طويلة لحاهم، قليلة عقولهم عازبة آراؤهم، وهم جيران بدو ووراد بحر، فأخرجتهم يخبطون بسيوفهم من غير علم، ويرمون بسهامهم بغير فهم، فوقت من أمرهم على اثنتين كلتاهما في محلة المكروه ممن إن كففت لم يرجع ولم يعقل، وإن أقمت كنت قد صرت إلى التي كرهت فقدمت الحجة بالاعذار والانذار، ودعوت المرأة إلى الرجوع إلى بينها، والقوم الذين حملوها على الوفاء ببيعتهم لي، والترك لنقضهم عهدالله عز وجل في، وأعطيتهم من نفسي كل الذي قدرت عليه، وناظرت بعضهم فرجع وذكرت فذكر، ثم أقبلت على الناس بمثل ذلك فلم يزدادوا إلا جهلا وتماديا وغيا، فلما أبوا إلا هي، ركبتها منه فكانت عليهم الدبرة، وبهم الهزيمة، ولهم الحسرة، وفيهم الفناء والقتل، وحملت نفسي على التي لم أجد منها بدا،ولم يسعني إذ فعلت ذلك وأظهرته آخرا مثل الذي وسعني منه أولا من الاغضاء والامساك ورأيتني إن أمسكت كنت معينا لهم علي بامساكي على ماصاروا إليه وطمعوا فيه من تناول الاطراف، وسفك الدماء وقتل الرعية وتحكيم النساء النواقص العقول والحظوظ على كل حال، كعادة بنى الاصفر ومن مضى من ملوك سبأ والامم الخالية فأصير إلى ما كرهت أولا وآخرا، وقد أهملت المرأة وجندها يفعلون ما وصفت بين الفريقين من الناس، ولم أهجم على الامر إلا بعدما قدمت وأخرت، وتأنيت وراجعت، وأرسلت وسافرت، وأعذرت وأنذرت وأعطيت القوم كل شيء يلتمسوه بعد أن عرضت عليهم كل شيء لم يلتمسوه، فلما أبوا إلا تلك، أقدمت عليها، فبلغ الله بي وبهم ما أراد، وكان لي عليهم بما كان مني إليهم شهيدا. {.t0}

Then Ali (MGB) turned towards his companions and asked, ‘Was it not so?’
They replied, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Yes, it was so.’

Then the Commander of the Faithful Ali (MGB) said, ‘O Jewish brother!
And about the sixth occasion I should say that it was the arbitration
council and the Battle with the son of the
liver-eater**[[673]](footnotes_3.htm#b0673)** Hind (Muaviayh). This man
had been an enemy of God, His Prophet (MGB), and the believers from the
day on which God appointed Muhammad (MGB) to Prophethood until the city
of Mecca was conquered by the force of the Muslims’ swords.

Muaviayh and his father Abu Sufyan had pledged allegiance to me on that
very same day and on three other occasions. His father was the first
person who greeted me using the title of ‘the Commander of the
Faithful.’ He was the one who constantly encouraged me to fight for my
due rights and renewed his pledge of allegiance to me every time he met
me.

The strangest of all is that when Muawiyah realized that the Blessed the
Sublime God had returned my right to me and had strengthened my
position, he lost all hopes of becoming the fourth Caliph and ruling in
our government. He turned to the disobedient Amr al-As and was generous
with him so that he accepted his invitation. Amr became his fan when
Muawiyah entrusted the governorship of Egypt to him, although it is
forbidden for him to use even one Dirham of the taxes collected from
Egypt as it was so for Muawiyah to give him any more than his own share.
Then he rebelled and acted oppressively in the Islamic country. He was
kind to anyone who swore allegiance to him and fended away anyone who
opposed him.

He joined the perfidious party
(Nakiseen)**[[674]](footnotes_3.htm#b0674)** in an attack against
Islamic territories and looted the east, the west, the north and the
south. I received the news and the reports of their deeds until the
one-eyed Saqafy (Al-Muqayrih) proposed that I make peace with Muawiyah
and appoint him to the governorship of the territories that were under
his control. This opinion was a good one in terms of politics, but I
could not bring any excuses for doing this in God’s presence and could
not take responsibility for Muawiyah’s acts of oppression. I thought
about this proposal and consulted with reliable people who were
God-fearing and followed the Prophet (MGB). They had the same opinion as
I did regarding the son of the liver-eater lady. May God not bring the
day on which I use any of the oppressors as my aids.

I once dispatched Jarir al-Bajaly and dispatched Abu Musa al-Ash’ari to
him on another occasion. They both followed their worldly desires, their

#### ثم التفت عليه السلام إلى أصحابه فقال: أليس كذلك؟ قالوا: بلى يا أمير المؤمنين.

#### فقال عليه السلام: وأما السادسة يا أخا اليهود فتحكيمهم [الحكمين] ومحاربة ابن آكلة الاكباد وهو طليق معاند لله عز وجل ولرسوله والمؤمنين منذ بعث الله محمدا إلى أن فتح الله عليه مكة عنوة.

#### فاخذت بيعته وبيعة أبيه لي معه في ذلك اليوم وفي ثلاثة مواطن بعده، وأبوه بالامس أؤل من سلم على بإمرة المؤمنين، وجعل يحثني على النهوض في أخذ حقي من الماضين قبلى، ويجد دلي وبيعته كلما أتاني.

#### وأعجب العجب أنه لما رأى ربي تبارك وتعالى قد رد إليّ حقي وأقرفي معدنه، وانقطع طمعه أن يصير في دين الله رابعا وفي أمانة حملناها حكاما، كرا على العاصي ابن العاص فاستما له فمال إليه، ثم أقبل به بعد أن أطمعه مصر، وحرام عليه أن يأخذ من الفيء دون قمسه درهما، وحرام والانباء تأتيني والاخبار ترد علي بذلك، فأتاني أعور ثقيف فأشار علي أن أولي الراعي إيصال درهم إليه فوق حقه، فأقيل يخبط البلاد بالظلم ويطأها بالغشم، فمن بايعه أرضاه، ومن خالفه ناواه، ثم توجه إلي ناكثا علينا مغيرا في البلاد شرقا وغربا ويمينا وشمالا، ، والانباء تأتيني والاخبار ترد علي بذلك ، فأتاني أعور ثقيف فأشار علي أن اوليه البلاد التي هوبها لاداريه بما اوليه منها وفي الذي أشار به الراي في أمر الدنيا لو وجدت عند الله عز وجل في توليته لي مخرجا، وأصبت لنفسي في ذلك عذرا، فأعلمت الرأي في ذلك، وشاورت من أثق بنصيحته لله عز وجل ولرسوله صلى الله عليه وآله ولي وللمؤمنين فان رأيه في ابن آكلة الاكباد كرأيي، ينهاني عن توليته ويحذرني أن ادخل في أمر المسلمين يده، ولم يكن الله ليراني أتخذ المضلين عضدا.

#### فوجهت إليه أخا بجيلة مرة وأخا الاشعريين مرة كلاهما ركن إلى الدنيا وتابع هواه فيما أرضاه، فلما لم أراه [أن] يزداد فيما انتهك من محارم الله ألا تماديا شـــاورت

temptations, pleased him and were disloyal to me. I realized that they
were not act according to God’s command and they were becoming more and
more deviated and corrupt as time passed. I consulted with a group of
the chosen companions of the Prophet from the Badriyeen who were honored
by God and had participated in the pledge of allegiance at Rezvan and
other noble Muslims. They unanimously agreed that we go to war with him
and not let him take charge of the affairs of the Muslims.

My companions and I set out to fight with him. We wrote him letters from
every way-station. I sent him many representatives and invited him to
put aside his corruption and join me and the other Muslims. He answered
me with haughty letters; wished unsuitable wishes; and set conditions
which were not acceptable by God, the Prophet and the Muslims.

In one of his letters he made it a condition that we should surrender a
group of the Prophet’s best companions to him including Ammar Yasir so
that he could hang them in retaliation for the blood of Uthman. Where
can you find someone like Ammar? I swear by God that he was always the
sixth person present whenever five of us gathered around the Prophet
(MGB). He was also the fourth person present whenever four of us
gathered around the Prophet (MGB).

He wanted to retaliate for the blood of Uthman even though he, his
colleagues and his damned family who were branches of the Cursed Tree as
mentioned in the Holy Quran**[[675]](footnotes_3.htm#b0675)** made the
people rebel against Uthman and caused him to be killed. He attacked me
since I did not accept his unreasonable conditions and he was proud of
his rebellion. He gathered a group of the Homayr tribes who had neither
any intellect nor any insight in religion around himself and led them
astray so as to follow him. He fooled them with worldly possessions and
attracted them to himself.

We set the Honorable the Exalted God as the judge and set out to fight
him in order to stop him. We fought with him after giving him an
ultimatum, so that he may have no excuses left. God made us victorious
over His enemies and ours as usual.

We were holding the flag of God’s Prophet (MGB) under which God had
always killed the followers of Satan, but Muawiyah was holding the flag
of his father under which his father had fought with God’s Prophet
(MGB).

He was about to die with no way out. He rode his horse, saw that his
flag had fallen down and felt hopeless. He sought the help of Amr al-As.
Amr al-As advised him to bring out many copies of the Quran, place them
on top of their spears and to ask for the arbitration of the Quran. He
told Muawiyah that since the son of Abu Talib, his followers and the
rest of the

#### من معي من أصحاب محمد صلى الله عليه وآله البدريين والذين ارتضى الله عز وجل أمرهم ورضي عنهم بعد بيعتهم، وغيرهم من صلحاء المسلمين والتابعين فكل يوافق رأيه رأيي في غزوه ومحاربته ومنعه مما نالت يده، وإني نهضت إليه بأصحابى، أنفذ إليه من كل موضع كتبى وأوجه إليه رسلي أدعوه إلى الرجوع عما فو فيه، والدخول فيما فيه الناس معي، فكتب يتحكم علي ويتمنى علي الاماني ويشترط علي شروطا لا يرضاها الله عز وجل ورسوله ولا المسلمون، ويشترط في بعضها أن أدفع إليه أقواما من أصحاب محمد صلى الله عليه وآله أبرارا، فيهم عمار بن ياسر، وأين مثل عمار؟ والله لقد رأيتنا مع النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وما يعد منا خمسة إلا كان سادسهم، ولا أربعة إلا كان خامسهم، اشترط دفعهم إليه ليقتلهم ويصلبهم وانتحل دم عثمان، ولعمرد الله ما ألب على عثمان ولا جمع الناس على قتله إلا هو وأشباهه من أهل بيته أغصان الشجرة الملعونة في القرآن، فلما لم اجب إلى ما اشترط من ذلك كر مستعليا في نفسه بطغيانه وبغيه بحمير لاعقول لهم ولا بصائر، فموه لهم أمرا فاتبعوه، وأعطاهم من الدنيا ما أمالهم به إليه، فناجزناهم وحاكمناهم إلى الله عز وجل بعد الاعذار والانذار فلما لم يزده ذلك إلا تماديا وبغيا لقيناه بعادة الله التي عودناه من النصر على أعدائه وعدونا، وراية رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله بأيدنا، لم يزل الله تبارك وتعالى يفل حزب الشيطان بهاحتى يقضي الموت عليه، وهو معلم رايات أبيه التى لم أزل أقاتلها مع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله في كل المواطن، فلم يجدمن الموت منجى إلا الهرب فركب فرسه وقلب رايته، لا يدري كيف يحتال فاستعان برأي ابن العاص فأشار عليه بإظهار المصاحف ورفعها علي الاعلام والدعاء إلى ما فيها وقال: إن ابن أبي {.t0}

Household of the Prophet (MGB) are religious and had invited you to
arbitration of the Quran in the beginning, they would accept its
arbitration from you at the end.

Muawiyah accepted the idea proposed by Amr al-As since he was helpless
and had no way out of war and getting killed. He placed many copies of
the Quran on the spears and had them held up thinking that he was
inviting the people to abide by the Quran. I had lost many of my good
friends and sincere companions. The rest of the people were inclined to
accept the Quran’s arbitration and stop the war. They thought that since
the son of the liver-eater Hind (Muawiyah) is adhering to the rules of
the Quran, he would honor them. They welcomed his call and all accepted
his suggestion.

I announced to them that this was a deception which Muawiyah had plotted
using Amr al-As and that they would not adhere to it. However, they did
not believe me and did not obey my orders. They insisted on accepting
his suggestion. Whether I liked it or not, things became so bad that
some of them said that we should kill Ali just like Uthman or turn him
and his family over to Muawiyah if he doesn’t accept Muawiyah’s
suggestion.

God knows best that I did my best and tried as hard as I could to
convince them to follow me, but they would not obey me. I even asked
them to give me a little time - as much as milking a camel or running a
horse so that I may complete the work. However, they did not accept it
except for this man (while Ali (MGB) was pointing to Malik al-Ashtar),
his followers, and a group of my own household. I swear by God that what
hindered me from following my own idea was my fear of these two being
killed (while Ali (MGB) was pointing to Al-Hassan (MGB) and Al-Hussein
(MGB) with his hand), and the cessation of the lineage of God’s Prophet
(MGB). It was also due to my fear of these two being killed (while Ali
(MGB) was pointing to Abdullah ibn Ja’far and Muhammad ibn Hanifeh - may
God be pleased with them - with his hand), since I knew that they were
only endangered because of me. Therefore, I was forced to accept God’s
destiny and accept the demands of the people. Once the battle was
stopped and the swords were no long pointed at them, they demanded that
they themselves be the arbiters instead of the Quran. They took over the
rules of the Quran and put its decrees aside. I never considered anyone
to be able to arbitrate on behalf of God’s religion since man’s
arbitration in God’s religion is undoubtedly wrong. However, the people
did not accept anything but arbitration.

I wanted to have a knowledgeable person from my household or some of the
other tribes who was wise, reliable and religious to arbitrate on my
behalf. The son of Hind**[[676]](footnotes_3.htm#b0676)** disagreed with
whomever I named. He did not accept any

#### طالب وحزبه أهل بصائر ورحمة وتقيا وقد دعوك إلى كتاب الله أولا وهم مجيبوك إليه آخرا فأطاعه فيما أشاربه عليه إذا رأى أنه لا منجى له من القتل أو الهرب غيره، فرفع المصاحف يدعو إلى ما فيها بزعمه، فمالت إلى المصاحف قلوب ومن بقي من أصحابي بعدفناء أخيارهم وجهدهم في جها أعداء الله وأعدائهم على بصائر هم وظنوا أن ابن آكلة الاكباد له الوفاء بما دعا إليه، فأصغوا إلى دعوته وأقبلوا بأجمعهم في إجابته فأعلمتهم أن ذلك منه مكرو من ابن العاص معه وأنهما إلى النكث أقرب منهما إلى الوفاء، فلم يقبلوا قولي ولم يطيعوا أمري، وأبوا إلا أجابته كرهت أم هويت، شئت أو أبيت حى أخذ بعضهم يقول لبعض: إن لم يفعل فألحقوه بان عفان أو ادفعوه إلى ابن هند برمته. فجهد تعلم الله جهدي ولم أدع غلة في نفسى إلا بلغتها في أن يخلوني ورأيى فلم يفعلوا، وراودتهم على الصبر على مقدار فواق الناقة أو ركضة الفرس فلم يجيبوا ما خلاهذا الشيخ (وأو مأبيده إلى الاشتر) وعصبة من أهل بيتي، فوالله ما منعني أن أمضي على بصيرتي إلا مخافة أن يقتل هذان وأومأ بيده إلى الحسن والحسين عليه السلام - فينقطع نسل رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وذريته من أمته ومخافة أن يقتل هذا وهذا وأومأ بيده إلى عبد الله بن جعفر ومحمد بن الحنفية رضي الله عنهما فإني أعلم لو لا مكاني لم يقفا ذلك الموقف فلذلك صبرع على ما أراد القوم مع ما سبق فيه من علم الله عز وجل فلما رفعنا عن القوم سيوفنا تحكموا في الامور وتخيروا الاحكام والآراء وتركوا المصاحف وما دعوا إليه من حكم القرآن، وما كنت أحكم في دين الله أحدا إذا كان التحكيم في ذلك الخطأ الذي لا شك فيه ولا امتراء، فلما أبوا إلا ذلك أردت أن احكم رجلا من أهل بيتي أو رجلا ممن أرضي رأية وعقله وأثق بنصيحته ومودته ودينه. {.t0}

#### وأقبلت لا اسمي أحذا إلا امتنع منه ابن هند ولا أدعوه إلى شيء من الحق إلا أدبر عنه، وأقبل ابن هند يسومنا عسفا، وما ذاك إلا باتباع أصحابي له على ذلك فلمـا

of my rightful proposals. He oppressed us through my own companions.
When they insisted and wanted to force me to accept the arbitration, I
sought refuge in the Honorable the Exalted God and left this up to
themselves. Then they chose a man who was deceived by Amr As, and the
world got filled with the shame of this act. They themselves became
sorry about it.’ Then Ali (MGB) turned towards his companions and asked,
‘Was it not so?’ They replied, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Yes, it was
so.’

Then the Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘O Jewish brother! And
about the seventh I should tell you that in his will to me, God’s
Prophet (MGB) had informed me that I would fight with a tribe of my own
companions near the end of my life, although they fast during the days,
worship God at night and read the Quran but have put aside the religion
by arguing and fighting with me just like an arrow which flies from a
bow. Zul-Sadiyyeh is going to be amongst them. I will have a prosperous
end after killing them. When I returned after the arbitration, some of
the people started to blame each other as to why the Battle of Siffin
ended by arbitration.

They found themselves no solution but to except to criticize the leader
and said, ‘Our leader should not have obeyed our wrong opinion. Since he
was certain about our fault, he must kill either himself or those who
were faulty. Since he obeyed us, he has become an unbeliever. Therefore,
it is lawful for us to kill him and shed his blood now.’ They united
concerning this issue, left my army rapidly and yelled ‘There is no
arbiter but God!’

Then they divided up. One group of them stayed in Nakhileh while a
second group went to Hurura. Yet a third group of them went to the east
beyond the Dijla river. They tired every Muslim they ran into by forcing
him to deny me. If he argued with them, they would let him go. Otherwise
they killed him. I went to see the first and the second groups and
invited them to obey the Honorable the Exalted God, accept the truth and
to return towards God. They did not accept anything but fighting with
swords and they were not content with anything else. Since I found no
other solution, I surrendered the first two groups to God’s decree.
Therefore, I killed them. O Jewish Brother! I am so sorry about them.
Had they not chosen this destructive route they would have not been
killed. Then imagine how strong a castle could have been formed for
Islam. However, God willed no other end but this unpleasant one for
them. Then I wrote a letter to the third group and sent several
delegates. The delegates were chosen ones. They were all God-fearing and
ascetic. However, it was of no use. They did nothing but follow what the
other two groups did. They hurriedly

#### أبوا إلا غلبتي على التحكم تبرأت إلى الله عز وجل منهم وفوضت ذلك إليهم فقلدوه امرء‌ا فخدعه ابن العاص خديعة ظهرت في شرق الارض وغربها، وأظهر المخدوع عليها ندما. {.t0}

#### ثم أقبل عليه السلام على أصحابه فقال: أليس كذلك قالوا: بلى يا أميرالمؤمنين.

#### فقال عليه السلام وأما السابعة يا أخا اليهود فإن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله كان عهد إلى أن أقاتل في آخر الزمان من أيامي قوما من أصحابي يصومون النهار ويقومون الليل ويتلون الكتاب، يمرقون بخلافهم علي ومحاربتهم إياي من الدين مروق السهم من الرمية، فيهم ذوالثدية يختم لى بقتلهم بالسعادة فلما انصرفت إلى موضعي هذا يعني بعد الحكمين أقبل بعض القوم على بعض باللائمة فيما صاروا إليه من تحكيم الحكمين، فلم يجدوا لانفسهم من ذلك مخرجا إلا أن قالوا: كان ينبغي لاميرنا أن لا يبايع من أخطأ وأن يقضى بحقيقة رأيه على قتل نفسه وقتل من خالفه منا فقد كفر بمتابعته إيانا وطاعته لنا في الخطأ، وأحل لنا بذلك قتله وسفك دمه، فتجمعوا على ذلك وخرجوا راكبين رؤوسهم ينادون بأعلى أصواتهم: لا حكم إلا لله،ثم تفرقوا فرقة بالنخيلة واخرى بحروراء واخرى راكبة رأسها تخبط الارض شرقاحتى عبرت دجلة، فلم تمر بمسلم إلا امتحنته، فمن تابعها استحيته، ومن خالفها قتلته، فخرجت إلى الاوليين واحدة بعد اخرى أدعوهم إلى طاعه الله عز وجل ومتابعه الحق والرجوع إليه فأبيا إلا السيف لا يقنعهما غير ذلك، فلما أعيت الحيلة فيهما حاكمتهما إلى الله عز وجل فقتل الله هذه وهذه وكانوا - يا أخا اليهود لولا مافعلوا لكانوا ركنا قويا وسدا منيعا، فأبى الله إلا ما صاروا إليه، ثم كتبت إلى الفرقة الثالثة ووجهت رسلي تتـرى وكـانوا مـن

killed the Muslims who did not agree with them and continuously killed
good people. I attacked them myself and blocked off the Euphrates river
from their access. Again I sent trustworthy delegates and advisors to
them and made all attempts to accept their apologies by means of those
men (while Ali (MGB) was pointing at Malik Ashtar; Al-Ahnaf ibn Qays;
Sa’id ibn Qays al-Arhabi; and Al-Ash’as ibn Qays al-Kindi). O Jewish
Brother! Since they accepted no solution except fighting, I fought with
them until all of them were killed. O Jewish brother! They were all
killed - all being more than forty-thousand of them. Not even one of
them could flee. Then I pulled out the man who had breasts just like
women have**[[677]](footnotes_3.htm#b0677)** from amongst the dead
corpses in front of these very same men that you see. He had breasts
just like women do. Then Ali (MGB) turned towards his companions and
asked, ‘Was it not so?’ They replied, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Yes,
it was so.’

Then the Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘O Jewish brother! And
about the seventh. I was faithful to all seven and just one rank remains
which is undoubtedly near.’ Then the companions of Ali (MGB) cried. The
head of the Jews also cried and said, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Tell
us another one!’ Then the Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘And the
last is that this (while referring to his head) shall become filled with
the blood of this (while he was pointing to his crown)’. All of a sudden
all the people in the Jamea Mosque started to cry and mourned so loudly
that the people from all the houses in Kufa left their homes crying.
Then the head of the Jews accepted Islam right then by the hand of the
Commander of the Faithful (MGB) and lived in Medina until the Commander
of the Faithful (MGB) was murdered by Ibn Muljam’s sword - may God damn
Ibn Muljam.

When the head of the Jews heard the news, he went to Ali’s (MGB) house
and stood in front of Al-Hassan (MGB), while the people had gathered
around him (MGB). They brought Ibn Muljam with his hands tied there. The
head of the Jews said, ‘O Abu
Muhammad!**[[678]](footnotes_3.htm#b0678)** Kill him! May God kill him.
I have seen in the books which were revealed to Moses (MGB) that in the
sight of the Honorable the Exalted God this crime is much greater than
the crime committed by Adam’s son when he killed his brother, and the
crime of those who treated the she-camel of Thamud clan
wrongfully.’**[[679]](footnotes_3.htm#b0679)**

ON WHAT HAS BEEN SAID ABOUT THE DAYS OF THE WEEK
------------------------------------------------

7-60 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ali ibn
Abdullah ibn Ishaq al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn
Mahboob, on the authority of Habib al-Sejestani, on the authority of Aba
Abdullah as-

#### جلة أصحابي وأهل التعبد منهم والزهد في الدنيا فأبت إلا اتباع اختيها والاحتذاء على مثالهما وأسرعت في قتل من خالفهامن المسلمين وتتابعت إلى الاخبار بفعلهم، فخرجت حتى قطعت إليهم دجلة، أوجه السفراء والنصحاء وأطلب العتبي بجهدي بهذا مرة وبهذا مرة أو مأبيده إلى الاشتر، والاحنف بن قيس، وسعيد بن قيس الارحبي والاشعث بن قيس الكندي فلما أبوا إلا تلك ركبتها منهم فقتلهم الله يا أخا اليهودعن آخرهم، وهم أربعة آلاف أو يزيدون حتى لم يفلت منهم مخبر، فاستخرجت ذا الندية من قتلاهم بحضرة من ترى، له ثدي كثدي المرأة ثم التفت عليه السلام إلى أصحابه فقال، أليس كذلك؟ قالوا، بلى يا أمير المؤمين، فقال عليه السلام: قد وفيت سبعا وسبعا يا أخا اليهود، وبقيت الاخرى وأوشك بهافكان قد. فبكى أصحاب علي عليه السلام وبكى رأس اليهود وقالوا: يا أمير المؤنين أخبرنا بالاخرى فقال: الاخرى أن تخضب هذه وأو مأبيده إلى لحيتهمن هذه أو مأبيده إلى هامته، قال: وارتفعت أصوات الناس في المسجد الجامع بالضجة والبكاء حتى ليم يبق بالكوفة دار إلاخرج أهلها فزعا، وأسلم رأس اليهود على يدي علي عليه السلام من ساعته ولم يزل مقيما حتى قتل أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام وأخذ ابن ملجم لعنه الله فأقبل رأس اليهود حتى وقف على الحسن عليه السلام والناس حوله وابن ملجم لعنه الله بين يديه فقال له: يا أبا محمد اقتله قتله الله، فإني رأيت في الكتب التي انزلت على موسى عليه السلام أن هذا أعظم عند الله عز وجل جرما من ابن آدم قاتل أخيه ومن القدار عاقر ناقة ثمود. {.t0}

##### ما جاء في الايام السبعة وأسمائها

#### 7-60 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعدبن عبد الله قال: حدثنا علي ابن عبد الله بن إسحاق الاشعري، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن حبيب السجستاني، عـن

Sadiq (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Fridays are days of worship.
Thus, worship the Honorable the Exalted God. Saturdays are for the
members of the Holy Household. Sundays are for their followers. Mondays
are for the Umayyads. Tuesdays are easy days. Wednesdays are for the
Abbasids and their victory. Thursdays are blessed days. For my followers
its dawn is blessed.”

WHAT HAS BEEN SAID ABOUT SUNDAYS AND OTHER DAYS AFTER IT
--------------------------------------------------------

7-61 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
al-Hussein ibn Sa’id, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Asad al-Basry,
on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Sa’id, on the authority of someone
who narrated on the authority of Khalaf ibn Himmad, on the authority of
someone who quoted Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB) passed by a group of people who were having blood-letting done for
them. He (MGB) told them ‘What would have happened if you had postponed
it until Sunday night as that would be more effective in alleviating
one’s pains.’”

7-62 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Sahl
ibn Zyad al-Adamy, on the authority of Abul Hassan Amr ibn Sufyan
al-Gorjany who linked it up through a chain of narrators to Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB), “As-Sadiq (MGB) asked one of his friends, ‘O so and so!
Why you did you not go out today?’ He replied, ‘May I be your ransom!
Because it is Sunday.’ The Imam (MGB) asked him, ‘So what? What is wrong
with Sunday?’ The man said, ‘It has been narrated on the authority of
God’s Prophet (MGB) to have said, ‘Beware of Sundays as they are as
sharp as a sword!’ The Imam (MGB) said, ‘No that is not so. They have
lied about the Prophet (MGB) having said that since Ahad which means
Sunday is one of the Names of the Honorable the Exalted God.’ The man
said, ‘May I be your ransom! What about Mondays?’ The Imam (MGB) said,
‘It has been named after those two.’**<span
style="font-weight: 400">**[[680]](footnotes_3.htm#b0680)**</span>** The
man said, ‘But Monday was known as Monday before those two.’ Abu
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) told him, ‘Once you are told something try to
understand it! Indeed the Blessed the Sublime God already knew the day
on which He would appoint His Prophet (MGB), and the day on which the
Prophet’s Trustee (MGB) would be oppressed. Thus, it was named after
those two.’ The man said, ‘What about Tuesdays?’ The Imam (MGB) said,
‘God created Hell on a Tuesday as the Sublime God says, ‘(It will be
said,) ‘Depart ye to that which ye used to reject as false! Depart ye to
a Shadow (of smoke ascending) in three columns, (Which yields) no shade
of coolness, and is of no use against the fierce
Blaze.’”**[[681]](footnotes_3.htm#b0681)**

#### أبي عبد الله قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: يوم الجمعة يوم عبادة فتعبدوا الله عز وجل ويوم السبت لآل محمد عليهم السلام، ويوم الاحد لشيعتهم، ويوم الاثنين يوم بني امية، ويوم الثلثاء يوم لين، ويوم الاربعاء لبني العباس وفتحهم، ويوم الخميس يوم مبارك بورك لامتي لي بكورها فيه.

##### ماجاء في الاحد وما بعده

#### 7-61 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال، حدثني أحمد ابن الحسين بن سعيد، عن الحسين بن أسد البصري، عن الحسين بن سعيد، عم رواه عن خلف بن حماد، عن رجل، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام أنه مر بقوم يحتجمون فقال: ما كان عليكم لو أخرتموه إلى عشية الاحد فكان يكون أنزل للداء.

#### 7-62 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن سهل ابن زياد الادمي قال: حدثنا أبوالحسن عمر [و] بن سفيان الجرجاني رفع الحديث إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام أنه قال لرجل من مواليه: يا فلان مالك لم تخرج؟ قال: جعلت فداك اليوم الاحد، قال: وماللاحد؟ قال الرجل: للحديث الذي جاء عن النبي صل الله عليه وآله أنه قال: احذروا حد الاحد فإن له حدا مثل حد السيف، قال: كذبوا كذبوا ما قال ذلك رسول الله صلى الله علية وآله فإن الاحد اسم من أسماء الله عز وجل، قال: قلت: جعلت فداك فالاثنين؟ قال: سمي باسمهما، قال الرجل: فسمي باسمهما ولم يكونا، فقال له أبوعبد الله: إذا حدثت فافهم أن الله تبارك وتعالى قد علم اليوم الذي يقبض فيه نبيه صلى الله عليه وآله واليوم الذي يظلم فيه وصيه فسماه باسمهما،قال: قلت: فالثلثاء قال: خلقت يوم الثلثاء النار وذلك قوله تعالى "انطَلِقُوا إِلَى مَا كُنتُمْ بِهِ تُكَذِّبُونَ, انطَلِقُوا إِلَى ظِلٍّ ذِي ثَلاَثِ شُعَبٍ, لاَ ظَلِيلٍ وَلاَ يُغْنِي مِنْ اللَّهَبِ."

The man said, ‘What about Wednesdays?’ The Imam (MGB) said, ‘The four
pillars of Fire were made on a Wednesday.’

The man said, ‘What about Thursdays?’ The Imam (MGB) said, ‘God created
Paradise on a Thursday.’

The man said, ‘What about Fridays?’ The Imam (MGB) said, ‘The Honorable
the Exalted God gathered the people together on Fridays to acknowledge
our Mastery.’

The man said, ‘What about Saturdays?’ The Imam (MGB) said, ‘It was on a
Saturday that the angels attended to their Lord and realized that He has
always been the One.’”

7-63 Abul-Hassan Muhammad ibn Amr ibn Ali ibn Abdullah al-Basry in Ilaq
narrated that the preacher Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Ahmad
ibn Jabalat quoted Abul Qasim Abdullah ibn Ahmad ibn Amer al-Ta’ee, on
the authority of his father, on the authority of Ali ibn Musa al-Reza
(MGB), on the authority of Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB), on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hussein
as-Sajjad (MGB), on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB) that the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said, “Saturdays are for deceit
and trickery. Sundays are for planting and building. Mondays are for war
and bloodshed. Tuesdays are for traveling and making requests.
Wednesdays are for pessimism and bad omen. Thursdays are for visiting
the chiefs and Fridays are for proposing to marry and getting
married.”**[[682]](footnotes_3.htm#b0682)**

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, ‘Monday
is the day for traveling to where you pray to God for rain.’

7-64 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn
Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Ali ibn
al-Sindy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Amr ibn Sa’id, on the
authority of Yunus ibn Yaqoob that he had heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB) say, “God’s Prophet (MGB) had blood-letting performed on Mondays
and gave wheat to the person who performed the phlebotomy on him.”

7-65 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Al-Hassan ibn al-Hussein al-Lu’lu’ee, on the authority of
either or both Muhammad ibn Isma’il and Ahmad ibn al-Hassan al-Maysami,
on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Mihzam that someone had narrated that
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “God’s Prophet (MGB) had blood-letting
done on Monday afternoons.”

#### قال: قلت: فالاربعاء؟ قال: بنيت أربعاة أركان النار يوم الاربعاء، قال: قلت: فالخميس؟ قال: خلق الله الجنة يوم الخميس، قال: قلت: فالجمعة؟ قال: جمع الله عز وجل الخلق لولايتنا يوم الجمعة قال: قلت: فالسبت؟ قال: سبتت المللائكة لربها يوم السبت فوجدته لم يزل واحدا.

#### 7-63 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن عمرو بن علي بن عبد الله البصري بإيلاق قال: حدثنا أبوعبد الله محمد بن عبد الله بن أحمد بن جبلة الواعظ قال: حدثنا أبوالقاسم عبد الله بن أحمد بن عامر الطائي قال: حدثنا أبي قال: حدثنا علي بن موسى الرضا قال: حدثني موسى بن حعفر قال: حدثني جعفر بن محمد قال: حدثنا محمد بن علي قال: حدثني علي بن الحسين قال: حدثني الحسين بن علي عليه السلام قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: يوم السبت يوم مكرو وخديعة، ويوم الاحد يوم غرس وبناء، ويوم الاثنين يوم سفر وطلب، ويوم الثلثاء يوم حرب ودم، ويوم الاربعاء يوم شوم فيه يتطير الناس، ويوم الخميس يوم الدخول على الامراء وقضاء الحوائج، ويوم الجمعة يوم خطبة ونكاح.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: يوم اثنين يوم سفر إلى موضع الاستسقاء والطلب للمطر.

##### ما جاء في يوم الاثنين

#### 7-64 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أحمد ابن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، عن علي بن السندي، عن محمد بن عمرو بن سعيد، عن يونس بن يعقوب قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: احتجم رسول الله صلى لله عليه وآله يوم الاثنين وأعطى الحجام برا.

#### 7-65 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار قال: حدثني محمد بن أحمد، قال: حدثني الحسن بن الحسين اللؤلؤي، عن محمد بن إسماعيل، وأحمد بن الحسن الميثمي أو أحدهما، عن أبراهيم بن مهزم، عم ذكره عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: كان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يحتجم يوم الاثنين بعد العصر.

7-66 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid and Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn
Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority of
someone who had narrated that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “It was
the Prophet (MGB)’s custom was to have blood-letting done for him on
Monday afternoons. He (MGB) used to say, ‘Having phlebotomy done on
Monday afternoons would immediately relieves one’s pains.’”

7-67 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn
Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Al-Abbas ibn Ma’ruf, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Abi Hamzih, on
the authority of Aqabah ibn Bashir al-Azodi, “I went to see Abi Ja’far
al-Baqir (MGB) on a Monday. He (MGB) said, ‘Have something to eat.’ I
replied, ‘I am fasting.’ The Imam (MGB) said, ‘Why did you fast on this
day?’ I said, ‘Because the Prophet (MGB) was born on this day.’ He (MGB)
said, ‘You do not know on which day the Prophet (MGB) was born on. That
is the day on which the Prophet (MGB) perished. Therefore, you should
neither travel nor fast on that day.’”

7-68 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Musa ibn al-Qasim al-Bajaly, on
the authority of Ali ibn Ja’far (MGB), “A man had gone to see my brother
Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB) and said, ‘May I be your ransom! I have
planned to go on a trip. Please pray for me.’ The Imam (MGB) said, ‘On
which day are you planning to go?’ The man said, ‘On Monday.’ The Imam
(MGB) said, ‘Why do you go on Monday?’ The man said, ‘I go on that day
to seek blessings since that is the Prophet’s birthday.’ The Imam (MGB)
said, ‘No, they lie. The Prophet’s (MGB) birthday is on a Friday. No day
is more wicked than Monday. It was on that day the Prophet (MGB)
perished and heavenly revelations ceased to descend. It was on that day
that they usurped our rights by force. Do you want me to guide you to an
easy day on which God softened iron for David (MGB)?’ The man said, ‘May
I be your ransom! Yes.’ The Imam (MGB) said, ‘Go on a Tuesday.’”

ON WHAT HAS BEEN SAID ABOUT TUESDAYS
------------------------------------

7-69 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the
authority of Abil Khazraj (al-Hassan ibn al-Zebarqan al-Qumi), on the
authority of Suleiman, on the authority of Abi Nazrat, on the authority
of Abi

#### 7-66 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني يعقوب بن يزيد، ومحمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن حماد بن عيسى، عمن ذكره عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: الحجامة يوم الاثنين من آخر النهار تسل الداء سلا من البدن.

#### 7-67 حدثنا محمدبن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، عن العباس بن معروف، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن أبى حمزة، عن عقبة بن بشير الازدي قال: جئت إلى أبي جعفر عليه السلام يوم الاثنين فقال: كل، فقلت: إنى صائم فقال: وكيف صمت؟ قال: قلت: لان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله ولد فيه، فقال: أما ماولد فيه فلا تعلمون، وأما ما قبض فيه فنعم ثم قال: فلاتصم ولا تسافر فيه.

#### 7-68 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني أحمد ابن محمد بن عيسى، عن موسى بن القاسم البجلي، عن علي بن جعفر قال: جاء رجل إلى أخي موسى بن جعفر عليهما السلام فقال له: جعلت فداك إني اريد الخروج فادع لى فقال: ومتى تخرج؟ قال: يوم الاثنين؟ فقال له: ولم تخرج يوم الاثنين؟ قال: أطلب فيه البركة لان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله ولد يوم الاثنين، فقال: كذبوا ولد رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يوم الجمعة، وما من يوم أعظم شوما من يوم الاثنين، يوم مات فيه رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وانقطع فيه وحي السماء، وظلمنا فيه حقنا، ألا أدلك على يوم سهل لين ألان الله لداود عليه السلام فيه الحديد؟ فقال الرجل: بلى جعلت فداك، فقال: اخرج يوم الثلثاء.

##### ما جاء في يوم الثلثاء

#### 7-69 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبي الخزرج، عن سليمان، عن أبـي نضـرة

Sa’id al-Khidry that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Whoever has phlebotomy
done for him on the Tuesday of the seventeenth, nineteenth days or the
twenty-first day of each month shall be relieved of every ailment up
until the next year. If he does so on a different day, he shall be
relieved of headaches, toothaches, insanity, leprosy and
vitiligo.”**[[683]](footnotes_3.htm#b0683)**

7-70 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Qasim ibn Muhammad
al-Isfahani, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Davood al-Munqeri, on the
authority of Hafs ibn Qiyath al-Nakha’ee, on the authority of Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “Whoever wants to travel, it is better for him
to go on a trip on Saturdays because if a stone becomes separated from
the mountain, God will return it to its place on that day. It is better
for those who have some need, to ask for it on a Tuesday since that is
the day on which God softened iron for David (MGB).”

ON WHAT HAS BEEN SAID ABOUT WEDNESDAYS
--------------------------------------

7-71 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Yaqoob ibn
Yazid, on the authority of some friends, “I went to see Ali ibn
al-Hassan Al-Askari (MGB) on a Wednesday while he was having phlebotomy
performed. I told him, ‘The residents of the two Harams (implying Mecca
and Medina) narrate on the authority of God’s Prophet (MGB) that whoever
has phlebotomy done on Wednesdays shall suffer from white pigments and
has no one but himself to blame.’ The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘No, they lie.
This could only happen to those whose mothers got pregnant with them
when they were menstruating.’”

7-72 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Abdul Rahman ibn Amr ibn
Aslam, “I saw Abal-Hassan Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB) perform
phlebotomy on a Wednesday while he had a fever. The fever did not end
until Friday when he had the phlebotomy done again.”

7-73 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn
Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Al-Sayyari, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Daq’qaq al-Baghdady, “I wrote a letter to
Abal-Hassan - the second - that is Al-Reza (MGB) and asked him about
traveling on the last Wednesday of the month. He (MGB) replied, ‘Whoever
travels on the last Wednesday of the month in order to invalidate the
claim of those that this act has bad omen will be safe from all
calamities.

#### عن أبي سعيد الخدري قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله من احتجم يوم الثلثاء لسبع عشرة أو تسع عشرة أو لاحدى وعشرين من الشهر كانت له شفاء من كل داء من أدواء السنة كلها وكانت لماسوى ذلك شفاء من رجع الرأس والاضراس والجنون والجذام والبرص. {.t0}

#### 7-70 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد ابن عبدلله، عن القاسم بن محمد الاصبهاني، عن سليمان بن داود المنقري، عن حفص ابن غياث النخعي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من كان مسافرا فليسافر يوم السبت، فلو أن حجرا زال عن حجر يوم السبت لرده الله إلى مكانه، ومن تعذرت عليه الحوائج فليلتمس طلبها يوم الثلثاء فإنه اليوم الذي ألان الله فيه الحديد لداود عليه السلام

##### ماجاء في يوم الاربعاء

#### 7-71 حدثني أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبدلله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن بعض أصحابنا قال:دخلت على أبي الحسن على بن محمد العسكري عليهما السلام يوم الاربعاء وهو يحتجم فقلت له: إن أهل الحرمين يروون عن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال: من احتجم يوم الاربعاء فأصابه بياض فلا يلومن إلا نفسه، فقال: كذبوا إنما يصيب ذلك من حملته امة من طمث.

#### 7-72 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن عبدالرحمن بن عمرو بن أسلم قال: رأيت أبا الحسن موسى بن حعفر عليهما السلام احتجم يوم الاربعاء وهو محموم فلم تتركه الحمى فاحتجم يوم الجمعة فتركه الحمى.

#### 7-73 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار قال: حدثني محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري قال: حدثنا السياري، عن محمد بن أحمد الدقاق البغدادي قال: كتبت إلى أبي الحسن الثاني عليه السلام أسأله عن الخروج يوم الاربعاء لا يدور" فكتب عليه السلام من خرج يوم الاربعاء لا يـدور

God shall fulfill his needs.’ I wrote another letter to him (MGB) and
asked him about blood-letting on the last Wednesday of the month. He
(MGB) replied, ‘Whoever has phlebotomy done for him on the last
Wednesday of the month in order to invalidate the claim of those that
this act has bad omen will be safe from any calamities or ailments. The
place of blood-letting shall not turn green.’”

7-74 Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Baghdady al-Var’raq narrated that Ali ibn
Muhammad ibn Ja’far ibn Ahmad ibn Anbasta - the servant of Ar-Rashid
quoted Darim ibn Qabaysat narrated that Ali ibn Musa al-Reza
(MGB)**[[684]](footnotes_3.htm#b0684)** said that he (MGB) had heard his
father (MGB) quote on the authority of his grandfather (MGB), on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of his
father Ali ibn al-Hussein (MGB), on the authority of his father
Al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB), on the authority of his father Ali ibn Abi
Talib (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The last Wednesday of every
month is always one with bad omen.”

7-75 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Sa’id, on the
authority of Fuzalat, on the authority of Aban, on the authority of Abi
Ja’far al-Ahwal, on the authority of Bashar ibn Yasar, “I asked Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), ‘Why do you always fast on Wednesdays?’ The
Imam (MGB) replied, ‘Since the Fire (of Hell) was created on a
Wednesday.’”

7-76 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Abu
Sa’id al-Adamy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn
Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the authority
of Hazifat ibn Mansoor, “I saw Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) had
phlebotomy performed on him on a Wednesday afternoon.”

7-77 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran
al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Ishaq, on the authority of
Al-Qasim ibn Yahya, on the authority of his grandfather Al-Hassan ibn
Rashid, on the authority of Abi Basir, on the authority of Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority
of his forefathers (MGB), on the authority of the Commander of the
Faithful Imam Ali (MGB), “Do not perform phlebotomy or
depilatory**[[685]](footnotes_3.htm#b0685)** on Wednesdays since
Wednesdays are always with bad omen. Hell was created on a Wednesday.”

#### خلافا على أهل الطيرة وقى من كل آفة، وعوفي من كل داء وعاهة، وقضى الله له حاجته. وكتب إليه مرة اخرى أسأله عن الحجامة يوم الاربعاء لايدور، فكتب عليه السلام من احتجم في يوم الاربعاء لا يدور خلافا على أهل الطيرة عوفي من كل آفة، ووقي من كل عاهة، ولم تخضر محاجمه.

#### 7-74 حدثنا محمد بن أحمد البغدادي الوراق قال: حدثنا على بن محمد بن جعفر ابن أحمد بن عنبسة مولى الرشيد قال: حدثنا دارم بن قبيصة قال: حدثنا علي بن موسى الرضا قال: سمعت أبي يحدث، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن علي، عن أبيه علي بن الحسين، عن أبيه الحسين بن علي، عن أبيه على بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:آخرأربعاء في الشهر يوم نحس مستمر.

#### 7-75 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا أحمد ابن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسين بن سعيد، عن فضالة، عن أبان، عن أبي جعفر الاحوال عن بشار بن يسار قال: قلت لابي عبد الله عليه السلام:لاي شيء يصام يوم الاربعاء؟ قال: لان النار خلقت يوم الاربعاء.

#### 7-76 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار قال: حدثنا أبوسعيد الادمي قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن محمد بن سنان، عن حذيفة بن منصور، قال رأيت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام احتجم يوم الاربعاء بعد العصر.

#### 7-77 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن عمران الاشعري، عن أبراهيم بن إسحاق، عن القاسم بن يحيى عن جده الحسن بن راشد، عن أبي بصير، عن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن أمير المؤمنين عليهم السلام قال: توقوا الحجامة يوم الاربعاء والنورة: فإن يوم الاربعاء يوم نحس مستمر، وفيه خلقت جهنم.

7-78 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on
the authority of Ahmad ibn Isa al-Yaqtayni, on the authority of Al-Qasim
ibn Yahya, on the authority of his grandfather Al-Hassan ibn Rashid, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim, on the authority of Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) that the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said,
“Men should not apply depilatory**[[686]](footnotes_3.htm#b0686)** on
Wednesdays since it is a always an unlucky day.”

7-79 Abul-Hassan Muhammad ibn Amr ibn Ali ibn Abdullah al-Basry in Ilaq
narrated that the preacher Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Ahmad
ibn Jabalat quoted Abul Qasim Abdullah ibn Ahmad ibn Amer al-Ata’ee, on
the authority of his father, on the authority of Ali ibn Musa al-Reza
(MGB), on the authority of Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB), on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Ali (MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hussein (MGB), on the
authority of Al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB), “A man stood up in the Jamea
Mosque in Kufa and asked the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB),
‘O Commander of the Faithful (MGB)! Please tell me why Wednesday are
considered to be unlucky days and how serious is that? Which Wednesday
is meant?’

The Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘It was on the last Wednesday
of the month on which Abel killed Cane. Abraham (MGB) was cast into fire
on a Wednesday. The catapult**[[687]](footnotes_3.htm#b0687)** (with
which Abraham was thrown into the fire) was built on a Wednesday. God
drowned the Pharaoh on a Wednesday. On Wednesday the Honorable the
Exalted God destroyed the land of the people of Lot. On Wednesday the
Honorable the Exalted God sent the fiery winds to the people of Ad. On
Wednesday their gardens turned black and fell down. On Wednesday the
Honorable the Exalted God made a mosquito overcome Nimrood. On Wednesday
Pharaoh called in Moses (MGB) in order to kill him. On Wednesday the
roof collapsed over their head. On Wednesday Pharaoh ordered the boys of
the Israelites to be killed. On Wednesday the Holy Shrine (Bayt
ul-Muqadas) in Jerusalem was destroyed. On Wednesday the Mosque of
David - the son of Solomon (MGB) was put on fire. On Wednesday Yahya -
the son of Zakariya was killed. On Wednesday the first shadow of
punishment descended upon the people of Pharaoh. On Wednesday God had
Qarun (Korah)**[[688]](footnotes_3.htm#b0688)** sunk into the Earth. On
Wednesday God had Ayoob (MGB) suffer from the loss of wealth and
children. On Wednesday Joseph (MGB) entered jail. The Honorable the
Exalted God said on Wednesday ‘that We destroyed them and their people,
all (of them).’**[[689]](footnotes_3.htm#b0689)** On Wednesday they were
caught by the cries. On

#### 7-78 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن أحمد بن عيسى اليقطيني، عن القاسم بن يحيى، عن جده الحسن بن راشد، عن محمد بن مسلم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال أمير المؤمينن عليه السلام: ينبغي للرجل أن يتوفي النورة يوم الاربعاء فإنه يوم نحس مستمر.

#### 7-79 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن عمرو بن علي بن عبد الله البصري بايلاق قال حدثنا أبوعبد الله محمد بن عبد الله بن أحمد بن جبلة الواعظ قال: حدثنا أبوا القاسم عبد الله ابن أحمد بن عامر الطائي قال: حدثنا أبي قال: حدثنا علي بن موسى الرضا قال: حدثنا موسى بن جعفر قال: حدثنا جعفر بن محمد قال: حدثنا محمد بن علي قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين قال: حدثنا الحسين بن علي عليهم السلام قال:قام رجل إلى أميرالمؤمنين عليه السلام في الجامع بالكوفة فقال: يا أمير المؤمنين أخبرني عن يوم الاربعاء والتطير منه وثقله؟ وأي أربعاء هو؟ فقال عليه السلام: آخر أربعاء في الشهر وهو المحاق وفيه قتل قابيل هابيل أخاه، ويوم الاربعاء القي إبراهيم عليه السلام في النار،ويوم الاربعاء وضعوا المنجنيق ويوم الاربعاء غرق الله فرعون، ويوم الاربعاء جعل الله عز وجل أرض قوم لوط عاليها سافلها، ويوم الاربعاء أرسل الله عز وجل فيه الريح على قوم عاد، ويوم الاربعاء أصبحت كالصريم، ويوم الاربعاء سلط الله على نمرود البقة، ويوم الاربعاء طلب فرعون موسى ليقتله، ويوم الاربعاء خر عليهم السقف من فوقهم، ويوم الاربعاء أمر فرعون بذبح الغلمان، ويوم الاربعاء خرب بيت المقدس، ويوم الاربعاء أحرق مسجد سليمان بن داود عليهما السلام واصطخر من كورة فارس، ويوم الاربعاء قتل يحيى بن زكريا، ويوم الاربعاء ظل قوم فرعون أول العذاب، ويوم الاربعاء خسف الله عز وجل بقارون، ويوم الاربعاء ابتلى الله أيوب عليه السلام بذهاب ماله وولده ويوم الاربعاء ادخل يوسف السجن، ويوم الاربعاء قال الله عز وجل: "أَنَّا دَمَّرْنَاهُمْ وَقَوْمَهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ" ويوم الاربعاء أخدتـهم الصيحـة، ويـوم الاربعـاء

Wednesday they slaughtered the she-camel. On Wednesday ‘stones of baked
clay’ fell over them.**[[690]](footnotes_3.htm#b0690)** On Wednesday the
Prophet (MGB) was injured and his tooth broke. On Wednesday the
coffin**[[691]](footnotes_3.htm#b0691)** was stolen from the
Israelites.”

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “It is
fine for one who needs to travel to travel on Wednesday or one who has
to have phlebotomy done on Wednesday to have it done. There is no bad
omen in such an act especially for those who do so to discredit the
claim of those who consider this to be unlucky. However, it is better
not to go on a journey or have phlebotomy done on Wednesday, if it is
not absolutely necessary.”

ON WHAT HAS BEEN SAID ABOUT THURSDAYS
-------------------------------------

7-80 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Yaqoob ibn
Yazid, on the authority of Marvan ibn Ubayd, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Ma’tab ibn al-Mubarak, “Once I
went to see Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) on a Thursday. He was having
phlebotomy performed. I asked him, ‘O (grand)son of the Prophet! Are you
having phlebotomy done on a Thursday?’ He (MGB) replied, ‘Yes, It is
fine for anyone to have phlebotomy done on a Thursday since there is
some movement of blood on Friday nights due to the fear of the
Resurrection which doesn’t return to its original place until Thursday
morning.’ He (MGB) then faced his servant Rabih (who was performing the
phlebotomy) and told him, ‘O Rabih! Stick in the phlebotomy tool firmly,
cup slowly and cut lightly.’ Then he (MGB) said, ‘Pain would totally
leave the body of whoever has phlebotomy done early in the morning on
the last Thursday of the month.’”

7-81 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Al-Hussein ibn Aban quoted Al-Hussein ibn Sa’id, on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Abi Ayoob, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said,
“When the Prophet (MGB) had been appointed to Prophethood he (MGB)
fasted day after day so much that they thought he will no longer break
his fast. He (MGB) sometimes did not fast for so many days that they
thought he (MGB) will no longer fast. Then he (MGB) started to fast one
day and not fast the other days like the fasting of David (MGB). He
(MGB) later stopped this and fasted on two Thursdays and a Wednesday in
between them each month.”

7-82 By the same documentation it is narrated that Al-Hussein ibn Sa’id
quoted Al-Nazr ibn Soweed, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim, on the
authority of Al-Ahval that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “God’s
Prophet

#### عقروا النافة، ويوم الاربعاء امطرعليهم حجارة من سجيل، ويوم الاربعاء شج النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وكسرت رباعيته، ويوم الاربعاء أخذت العماليق التابوت. {.t0}

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: من اضطر إلى الخروج في سفر يوم الاربعاء أو تبيع به الدم في يوم الاربعاء فجائز له أن يسافر أو يحتجم فيه، ولا يكون ذلك شوما عليه لا سيما إذا فعل ذلك خلافا على أهل الطيرة، ومن استغني عن الخروج فيه أوعن إخراج الدم فالاولى أن يتوقى ولا يسافر فيه ولا يحتجم.

##### ما جاء في يوم الخميس

#### 7-80 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا يعقوب بن يزيد، عن مروان بن عبيد، عن محمد بن سنان، عن معتب بن المبارك قال: دخلت على أبي عبد الله عليه السلام في يوم الخميس وهو يحتجم فقلت له: يا ابن رسول الله أتحتجم في يوم الخميس؟ فقال: نعم من كان منكم محتجما فليحتجم في يوم الخميس فإن. عشية كل جمعة يبتدر الدم فرقا من القيامة ولا يرجع إلى وكره إلى غداة الخميس، ثم التفت إلى غلامه ربيح فقال: يا ربيح اشدد قصب الملازم، واجعل مصك رخيا، واجعل شرطك زحفا وقال أبوعبد الله: من احتجم في آخر خميس من الشهر في أول النهار سل منه الداء سلا.

#### 7-81 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا الحسين بن الحسن بن أبان، عن الحسين بن سعيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن أبي أيوب، عن محمد بن مسلم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: كان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أول ما بعث يصوم حتى يقال: لايفطر ويفطر حتي يقال: لا يصوم، ثم ترك ذلك وصام يوما وترك يوما وهو صوم داود عليه السلام ثم ترك ذلك، ثم قبض وهو يصوم خميسين بينهما أربعاء.

#### 7-82 وبهذا الاسناد، عن الحسين بن سعيد، عن النضر بن سويد، عن هشام بن سالم، عن الاحول، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله

(MGB) was questioned about fasting on two Thursdays and on the Wednesday
in between them He (MGB) replied, ‘Thursdays are the days when our deeds
are presented and Wednesday is the day on which Hell was created.
Fasting is an armor against the Fire.’”

7-83 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn
Ahmad, on the authority of Abu Abdullah Al-Razi, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abdullah, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Aqabah, on the
authority of Zakariya, on the authority of his father, on the authority
of Yahya that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “God would fend off
poverty from whoever cuts his nails on Thursdays and leaves one to be
cut off on Fridays.”

ON WHAT HAS BEEN SAID ABOUT FRIDAYS
-----------------------------------

7-84 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
Isa ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Zakaria al-Mumin, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ribah al-Qula, “I saw that Aba Ibrahim Al-Kazim (MGB) had
phlebotomy done on a Friday. I asked, ‘May I be your ransom! Are you
having phlebotomy done on a Friday?’ He (MGB) replied, ‘I recite the
verse of the Throne (Ayat al-Kursi)**[[692]](footnotes_3.htm#b0692)** .
You should have phlebotomy done whenever you have high blood pressure
and recite the verse of the Throne.’”

7-85 Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Baghdady al-Var’raq narrated that Ali ibn
Muhammad - the servant of Ar-Rashid - quoted Darim ibn Qabaysat narrated
that Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB) quoted on the authority of his father
Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB), on the authority of his father Ja’far
ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the authority of his father Muhammad ibn Ali
(MGB), on the authority of his father Ali ibn al-Hussein (MGB), on the
authority of his father Al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB), on the authority of
his father Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB), that the Prophet (MGB) said, “The
Resurrection Day shall come between the times of the noon and afternoon
prayers on a Friday.”

7-86 And Al-Sakoony narrated that Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB)
quoted his father (MGB), on the authority of his forefathers (MGB), on
the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “You should
take some meat and fruits to your family on Fridays so that they are
happy. The Prophet (MGB) used to leave his room to rest in the summer on
Thursdays. He (MGB) used to return to the room on Friday nights due to
the cold in the winter. It has also been narrated that he (MGB) always
left the room and returned to it on Fridays.”

#### سئل عن صوم خميسين بينهما أربعاء فقال: أما الخميس فيوم تعرض فيه الاعمال، وأما الاربعاء فيوم خلقت فيه النار، وأما الصوم فجنة. {.t0}

#### 7-83 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أحمد قال: حدثنا أبوعبد الله الرازى، عن محمد بن عبد الله، عن أبراهيم بن عقبة، عن زكريا، عن أبيه، عن يحيى قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام من قص أظافيره يوم الخميس وترك واحدة ليوم الجمعة نفى الله عنه الفقر.

##### ما جاء ‌فى يوم الجمعة

#### 7-84 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني محمد ابن عيسى بن عبيد، عن زكريا المؤمن، عن محمد بن رباح القلاء قال:رأيت أبا إبراهيم عليه السلام يحتجم يوم الجمعة فقلت: جعلت فداك تحتجم يوم الجمعة قال: أقرأ آية الكرسي. فإذا هاج بك الدم ليلا كان أو نهارا فاقرأ آية الكرسي واحتجم.

#### 7-85 حدثنا محمد بن أحمد البغدادي الوراق قال: حدثنا علي بن محمد مولى الرشيد قال: حدثنا دارم بن قبيصة قال: حدثنا علي بن موسى الرضا قال: حدثني موسى بن جعفر، عن أبيه جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه محمدبن علي، عن أبيه علي بن الحسين، عن أبيه الحسين بن علي، عن أبيه علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: تقوم الساعة يوم الجمعة بين صلاة الظهر والعصر.

#### 7-86 وعن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: اطرفوا أهاليكم في كل جمعة بشيء من الفاكهة واللحم حتى يفرحوا بالجمعة وكان النبي صلى الله عليه وآله إذا خرج في الصيف من بيت خرج يوم الخميس وإذا أراد أن يدخل البيت في الشتاء من البرد دخل يوم الجمعة، وقد روي أنه كان دخوله وخروجه يوم الجمعة.

7-87 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
al-Hussein ibn Abil Khattab, on the authority of Salih ibn Aqabah, on
the authority of Abi Kahmas, “I asked Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB),
‘Please teach me some supplications which would expedite the provision
of one’s sustenance.’ The Imam (MGB) told me, ‘Shave your moustache and
cut your nails. Do this on Fridays.’”

7-88 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
Isa, on the authority of Atibat, on the authority of Abi Ayoob
al-Madini, on the authority of Ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Hashim
ibn Salim that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Cutting the nails on
Fridays would protect one from leprosy,
vitiligo**[[693]](footnotes_3.htm#b0693)** and blindness. One can also
file them.”

Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Whoever cuts his nails and shaves his
moustache every Friday and says, ‘Bismillah va Billah va Ala Muhammad va
Ali Muhammad (In the name of God and by God and to Muhammad and the
Household of Muhammad) would be granted the reward of freeing as many
slaves from the progeny of Ishmael as the pieces of hair and nails cut
off.”

7-88 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Hisan al-Razi, on
the authority of Abi Muhammad al-Razi, on the authority of Al-Hussein
ibn Yazid, on the authority of Al-Sakoony, on the authority of Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB) that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “God would take away pain from the hands of whoever
cuts his nails on Fridays and would heal them.” It has also been
narrated that he would be immune from insanity, leprosy and
vitiligo**[[694]](footnotes_3.htm#b0694)** .

7-89 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Bakr ibn Salih, on the authority of Al-Ja’fari that he had
heard Abal-Hassan Al-Kazim (MGB) say, “Cut your nails off on Tuesdays,
go to the bath on Wednesdays and have phlebotomy done on Thursdays if
you wish. Put on your best perfume on Fridays.”

7-90 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Muawiyah ibn Hakim, on the
authority of Mu’amir ibn Khilad that Abil Hassan al-Reza (MGB) said, “It
is not good for man to abandon putting on perfume on himself. He should
at least put on perfume once every other day if he can. Or at least he
should put on perfume every Friday if he can. He should not abandon
this.”

#### 7-87 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن الحسين ابن أبي الخطاب، عن صالح بن عقبة، عن أبي كهمس قال: قلت لابي عبد الله عليه السلام: علمني دعاء أستنرل به الرزق فقال لي: خذ من شاربك وأظفارك وليكن ذلك في يوم الجمعة.

#### 7-88 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن عتيبة، عن أبي أيوب المديني، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن هاشم بن سالم عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: تقليم الاظفار يوم الجمعة يؤمن من الجذام والبرص والعمى وإن لم يحتج فحكها حكا، وقال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: من قلم أظفاره وقص شاربه في كل جمعة ثم قال: "بسم الله وبالله وعلى سنة محمد وآل محمد" اعطي بكل قلامة وجزازة عتق رقبة من ولد إسماعيل.

#### 7-88 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد قال: حدثنا محمدبن حسان الرازي، عن أبي محمد الرازي، عن الحسين بن يزيد، عن السكوني عن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: من قلم أظفاره يوم الجمعة أخرج الله من أنامله الداء وأدخل فيه الداوء. وروي أنه لا يصيبه جنون والجذام ولا برص.

#### 7-89 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن خالد، عن أبيه، عن بكر بن صالح، عن الجعفري قال: سمعت أبا الحسن عليه السلام يقول: قلموا أظفاركم يوم الثلثاء واستحموا يوم الاربعاء واصيبوا من الحجام حاجتكم يوم الخميس وتطيبوا بأطيب طيبكم يوم الجمعة.

#### 7-90 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد ابن أحمد، عن معاوية بن حكيم، عن معمر بن خلاد، عن أبي الحسن الرضا عليه السلام قال: لا يبغي للرجل أن يدع الطيب في كل يوم، فإن لم يقدر عليه فيوم ويوم لا، فان لم يقدر ففي كل جمعة، ولا يدع ذلك.

7-91 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Abi Ja’far Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Forat, on the
authority of Ali ibn Matar, on the authority of Al-Sokn al-Khazzaz that
he had heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, “It is the right of God
incumbent upon every mature man**[[695]](footnotes_3.htm#b0695)** to cut
off his nails, shave his moustache and put on perfume every Friday.”

7-92 Abu Ali al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Amr al-Attar
al-Qazvini in Balkh narrated that Abu Mus’ab Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn
Mus’ab ibn al-Qasim al-Salmy at Tramad quoted Abu Muhammad Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Ishaq ibn Harun al-Amoli in Amol, on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Qalib al-Basry in Baghdad, on the authority of Dinar -
the servant of Anas ibn Malik**[[696]](footnotes_3.htm#b0696)** , on the
authority of Anas**[[697]](footnotes_3.htm#b0697)** that the Prophet
(MGB) said, “Friday day and night is twenty-four hours. The Honorable
the Exalted God frees six-hundred thousand sinners from the Fire of Hell
each hour on Friday.”

7-93 Ahmad ibn Zyad al-Hamedany - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr and Ali ibn al-Hikam, on the authority of Hisham
ibn al-Hakam that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “In you want to do
some good deed such as giving charity, fasting or a similar deed it is
best to do it on a Friday since then it would be rewarded twice.”

7-94 Ahmad ibn Zyad ibn Ja’far al-Hamedany - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim quoted on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Ibrahim
ibn Abil Balad, who quoted that someone quoted on the authority of Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “Whoever recites a poem on Friday will receive
the same as reward for that day. God’s Prophet (MGB) said, ‘If you see a
Sheikh narrate a tradition of the Age of Ignorance on Friday you should
hit him on the head even if it be with just a small pebble.’”

7-95 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ayoob ibn
Nooh, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of
Abdullah ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB),
“Whoever says the following supplications at the end of the prostration
of the recommendable (Nafila) prayer after the eve of Friday night, ‘O
my Lord! I beseech you by your Noble Face and Grand Name that you send
blessings

#### 7-91 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن أبي جعفر أحمد بن أبي عبد الله قال: حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن الفرات، عن علي بن مطر، عن السكن الخزاز قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول:لله حق على كل محتلم في كل جمعة: أخذ شاربه وأظفاره، ومس شيء من الطيب.

#### 7-92 حدثنا أبوعلي الحسن بن علي بن محمد بن علي بن عمرو العطار القزويني ببلخ قال: حدثنا أبومصعب محمد بن أحمد بن مصعب بن القاسم السلمي بترمد قال: حدثنا أبومحمد أحمد بن محمد بن إسحاق بن هارون الآملي بآمل قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن غالب البصري الزاهد ببغداد قال: حدثنا دينار مولى أنس بن مالك، عن أنس، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: إن ليلة الجمعة ويوم الجمعة أربع وعشرون ساعة لله عز وجل في كل ساعة ستمائة ألق عتيق من النار.

#### 7-93حدثنا أحمدبن زياد الهمداني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثناعلي بن إبراهيم ابن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، وعلى بن الحكم جميعا، عن هشام بن الحكم عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام في الرجل يريد أن يعمل شيئا من الخير مثل الصدقة والصوم ونحو هذا، قال: يستحب أن يكون ذلك يوم الجمعة فإن العمل يوم الجمعة يضاعف.

#### 7-94 حدثنا أحمد بن زياد بن جعفر الهمداني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني علي بن ابراهيم، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن إبراهيم بن أبي البلاد، عمن رواه، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من أنشد بيت شعر يوم الجمعة فهو حظه من ذلك اليوم، وقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إذا رأيتم الشيخ يحدث يوم الجمعة بأحاديث الجاهلية فارموا رأسه [ولو] بالحصي.

#### 7-95 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعدبن عبد الله، عن أيوب بن نوح، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن عبد الله بن سنان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من قال في آخر سجدة من النافلة بعد المغرب ليلة الجمعة وإن قاله كـل ليلـة فهـو

upon Muhammad and his household and that you forgive my major sins’ for
seven times would be forgiven by God just when he lifts his head off
from the position of prostration.’”

Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) also said, “Angels who carry golden pens and
silver tablets descend to the Earth on Thursday nights and Fridays. They
only record the reward of sending blessings upon Muhammad and his
household on Thursday nights and Fridays. It is not recommendable to go
after your needs on Fridays before the Friday prayer, but it is fine to
do so afterwards.”

7-96 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi
Umayr, on the authority of Abi Ayoob Ibrahim, “Uthman al-Khazzaz asked
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) about the words of God the Honorable the
Exalted, ‘And when the prayer is finished, then may ye disperse through
the land, and seek of the Bounty of
God.’**[[698]](footnotes_3.htm#b0698)** The Imam (MGB) said, ‘What is
meant is to pray on Fridays and go after work on Saturdays.’ He (MGB)
added, ‘Shame on a Muslim who doesn’t allocate Fridays for his religious
affairs.’”

ON WHAT HAS BEEN SAID ABOUT SATURDAYS
-------------------------------------

7-97 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Qasim ibn
Muhammad al-Isfahani, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Davood
al-Munqeri, on the authority of Hafs ibn Qiyath al-Nakha’ee, on the
authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “Whoever wants to go on a
journey should start on Saturday since God would return any rocks that
may get loose and are about to separate from the hills to their original
location on Saturdays.”

7-98 Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Baghdady al-Var’raq narrated that Ali ibn
Muhammad ibn Ja’far ibn Anbasat - the servant of Ar-Rashid quoted Darim
ibn Qabaysat narrated that Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB), on the authority
of his father Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB), on the authority of his
father Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his
father Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of his father
Ali ibn al-Hussein as-Sajjad (MGB), on the authority of his father
Al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB) that he had heard his father Ali ibn Abi Talib
(MGB) say, “God’s Prophet (MGB) prayed and said, ‘O God! Please bless
Saturday mornings and Thursday mornings for my nation.”

#### أفضل: "اللهم إني أسالك بوجهك الكريم واسمك العظيم أن تصلي على محمد وآل محمد وأن تغفر لي ذنبي العظيم" سبع مرات انصرف وقد غفرله. قال: وقال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: إذا كانت عشية الخميس وليلة الجمعة نزلت ملائكة من السماء معها أقلام الذهب وصحف الفضة لا يكتبون عشية الخميس وليلة الجمعة ويوم الجمعة إلى أن تغيب الشمس إلا الصلاة على النبي صلى الله عليه وآله، ويكره السفر والسعي في الحوائج يوم الجمعة. يكره من أجل الصلاة فأما بعد الصلاة فجائز يتبرك به. {.t0}

#### 7-96 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن أبي أيوب إبراهيم ان عثمان الخزاز أنه قال: سألت أبا عبد الله عن قول الله عز وجل: "فَإِذَا قُضِيَتِ الصَّلَاةُ فَانتَشِرُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَابْتَغُوا مِن فَضْلِ اللَّهِ" قال: الصلاة يوم الجمعة والانتشار يوم السبت، وقال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام:اف للرجل المسلم أن لا يفرغ نفسه في الاسبوع يوم الجمعة لامر دينه فيسأل عنه.

##### ما جاء في يوم السبت

#### 7-97 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن القاسم بن محمد الاصبهاني، عن سليمان بن داود المنقري، عن حفص بن غياث النخعي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من كان مسافرا فليسافر يوم السبت، فلوأن حجرا زال عن جبل في يوم السبت لرده الله إلى مكانه.

#### 7-98 حدثنا محمد بن أحمد البغدادي الوراق قال: حدثنا علي بن محمد بن جعفر ابن أحمد بن عنبسة مولى الرشيد قال: حدثنا دارم بن قبيصة، ونعيم بن صالح الطبري قالا: حدثنا علي بن موسى الرضا، عن أبيه موسى، عن أبيه جعفر، عن أبيه محمد، عن أبيه علي، عن أبيه الحسين، عن أبيه علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: اللهم بارك لأمتي في بكورها يوم سبتها وخميسها.

7-99 By the same documentation, the Prophet (MGB) said, “Go after your
needs in the mornings since they will be easier to do then. Whenever you
write a letter throw some dirt over it so that it may be more
effective**[[699]](footnotes_3.htm#b0699)** . Seek good near the
beautiful ones.”

7-100 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Hisan, on the authority of Abi Muhammad al-Razi, on the
authority of Al-Hussein ibn Yazid al-Nawfaly, on the authority of
Al-Sakoony, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the
authority of his father (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Whoever
cuts off his nails and shaves his moustache on Saturdays or Thursdays
shall be immune from toothache and eye pains.”

7-101 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Yaqoob ibn
Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of
some other people that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Saturdays are
for us. Sundays are for our followers. Mondays are for our enemies.
Tuesdays are for the Umayyads. Wednesdays are the days for taking
medicine. Thursdays are for taking care of your needs. Fridays are for
leaning up and putting on perfume. Fridays are the holidays for the
Muslims. They are even better than the Eid ul-Fitr and Eid ul-Azha. The
Day of Eid ul-Qadir is the noblest of the holidays. It is on the
eighteenth day of the month of Dhul-Hijja. Our Riser (MGB) - the Riser
(MGB) from the Members of the Holy Household - will rise on a Friday.
The Resurrection Day will be on a Friday. No deeds are better on Fridays
than sending God’s Blessings upon Muhammad (MGB) and his Household.”

DO NOT BE HOSTILE WITH THE DAYS SO THAT THEY ARE NOT HOSTILE WITH YOU
---------------------------------------------------------------------

7-102 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted Abdullah ibn Ahmad
al-Mooseli, on the authority of Al-Seqr ibn Abi Delph al-Kurkhi, “When
al-Mutevakil arrested our master Abal-Hassan Al-Askari (MGB) and sent
him to jail, I went to find out some things about him. Razeqi who was
the gate-keeper for Al-Mutevakil looked at me and ordered that I be
taken to his presence. Once I entered, he asked me, ‘O Seqr! What do you
want?’ I said, ‘Sir. It is good!’ He said, ‘Be seated!’ I told myself
that I had made a mistake and was going to be captured, too. Once the
others present left and when he found some time he looked at me and
said, ‘How are you doing? What do you want here?’ I said, ‘I have come
for a good deed.’ He

#### 7-99 وبهذا الاسناد قال: قال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: باكروا بالحوائج فأنها ميسرة، وتربوا الكتاب فإنه أنجح للحاجة، واطلبوا الخير عند حسان الوجوه.

#### 7-100 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن محمد بن حسان، عن أبي محمد الرازي، عن الحسين بن يزيد النوفلي، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:من قلم أظفاره يوم السبت ويوم الخميس وأخذ من شاربه عوفي من وجع الاضراس ووجع العين.

#### 7-101 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن غير واحد، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: السبت لنا، والاحد لشيعتنا، والاثنين لاعدائنا، والثلثاء لبني امية، والاربعاء يوم شرب الدواء، والخميس تقضى فيه الحوائج، والجمعة للتنظف والتطيب، وهو عيد المسلمين وهو أفضل من الفطر والاضحى، ويوم الغدير أفضل الاعياد، وهو ثامن عشر من ذي الحجة وكان يوم الجمعة، ويخرج قائمنا أهل البيت يوم الجمعة، ويقوم القيامة يوم الجمعة، وما من عمل يوم الجمعة أفضل من الصلاة على محمد وآله.

##### معنى الحديث: لا تعادوا الايام فتعاديكم

#### 7-102حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن ابراهيم بن هاشم قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن أحمد الموصلي، عن الصقر بن أبي دلف الكرخي قال: لما حمل المتوكل سيدنا أباالحسن العسكري عليه السلام جئت أسأل عن خبره قال: فنظر إلي الرازقي وكان حاجبا للمتوكل فامر أن ادخل إليه فادخلت إليه فقال: يا صقر ماشأنك؟ فقلت: خير أيها الاستاد، فقال: اقعد فأخذني ما تقدم وما تأخر وقلت: أخطأت في المجيء. قال: فوحى الناس عنه ثم قال لي: مـا شأنـك،

said, ‘Perhaps you have come to ask about the news of your master?’ Then
I said, ‘Who is my master? My master the Commander of the Faithful
(Referring to Al-Mutevakil.)’ Then he said, ‘Be quiet! Your master is
the one who is rightful! Do not be afraid of me. I follow the same
beliefs as you do.’ Then I said, ‘Thanks God!’ He said, ‘Do you wish to
see him?’ He said, ‘Then be seated until the postman leaves him.’ Then I
sat down and waited until the postman left him. Then he told his
servant, ‘Take Seqr’s hand and guide him to the room in which that
Alavite**[[700]](footnotes_3.htm#b0700)** is imprisoned and leave them
alone.’ The servant took me to the jail and showed me the room. When I
entered the room, I saw that the Imam (MGB) was sitting on a piece of
straw mat with a dug up grave in front of him. I greeted and the Imam
(MGB) responded and asked me to sit down. I sat down. The Imam (MGB)
said, ‘O Seqr! Why have you come here?’ I said, ‘O my Master! I have
come here to get some news about you.’ I looked at the grave and cried.
The Imam (MGB) looked at me and said, ‘O Seqr! Do not worry! They cannot
mistreat me now.’ I said, ‘Praise be to God!’ Then I added, ‘There is a
narration on the authority of the Prophet (MGB), the meaning of which I
cannot understand.’ The Imam (MGB) asked, ‘Which one?’ I said, ‘The one
in which he (MGB) said, ‘Do not be enemies with the days so that they do
not be your enemies.’ The Imam (MGB) said, ‘We are the days and we shall
be for as long as the heavens and the Earth are there! Sunday refers to
the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB). Monday refers to Al-Hassan
(MGB) and Al-Hussein (MGB). Tuesday refers to Ali ibn al-Hussein
as-Sajjad (MGB), Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB) and Ja’far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq (MGB). Wednesday refers to Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB), Ali
ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB), Muhammad ibn Ali al-Jawad (MGB), and I. Thursday
refers to my son Al-Hassan ibn Ali (MGB) and Friday refers to my
grandson who shall gather all the followers of the truth together as a
single party and fill the Earth with justice after it has become full of
oppression. This is what ‘days’ refers to. Do not be our enemies so that
we may not be your enemies in the Hereafter!’

The he (MGB) said, ‘Say goodbye and leave. You are not secure here.’”

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “The days
of the week are not really the same as the Divine Leaders. Here the
Prophet (MGB) has used it as a symbolic reference to the Divine Leaders
just as the Imam (MGB) said so that those who are not on the right path
do not understand it. This is similar to the use of ‘By the Fig and the
Olive, And the Mount of Sinai, And this City of
security’**[[701]](footnotes_3.htm#b0701)** by the Honorable the Exalted
God in reference to the Prophet (MGB), Ali (MGB), Al-Hassan (MGB) and
Al-Hussein (MGB). This is similar to when the Honorable the

#### وفيم جئت؟ قلت: لخير ما فقال: لعلك تسأل عن خبر مولاك؟ فقلت له: ومن مولاي؟ مولاي أمير المؤمنين فقال: أسكت مولاك هو الحق فلا تحتشمني فإني على مذهبك، فقلت: الحمد لله قال: أتحب أن تراه؟ قلت: نعم، قال: اجلس حتى يخرج صاحب البريد من عنده قال: فجلست فلما خرج، قال لغلام له: خذ بيد الصقر وأدخله إلى الحجرة التي فيها العلوي المحبوس وخل بينه وبينه قال: فأدخلني إلى الحجرة [التي فيه العلوي] فأومأ إلى بيت فدخلت فإذا عليه السلام جالس على صدر حصير وبحذاه قبر محفور، قال: فسلمت فرد، ثم أمرني بالجلوس، ثم قال لي:يا صقر ما أتي بك؟ قلت: ياسيدي جئت أتعرف خبرك؟ قال: ثم نظرت إلى القبر فبكيت، فنظر إلي فقال: يا صقر لا عليك لن يصلوا إلينا بسوء الآن، فقلت: الحمدلله، ثم قلت: ياسيدي حديث يروي عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله لاأعرف معناه، قال: وما هو؟ فقلت: قوله: "لاتعادوا الايام فتعاديكم" ما معناه؟ {.t0}

#### فقال: نعم الايام نحن ما قامت السماوات والارض فالسبت اسم رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله، والاحد كناية عن أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام، والاثنين الحسن والحسين والثلثاء علي بن الحسين ومحمد ابن علي وجعفر بن محمد، والاربعاء موسى بن جعفر وعلي بن موسى ومحمد بن علي وأنا، والخميس ابني الحسن بن علي، والجمعة ابن ابني وإليه تجتمع عصابة الحق وهو الذي يملاها قسطا وعدلا كما ملئت ظلما وجورا، فهذا معنى الايام فلا تعادوهم في الدنيا فيعادوكم في الآخرة، ثم قال عليه السلام: ودع واخرج فلا آمن عليك.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: الايام ليست بأئمة ولكن كنى بها عليه السلام عن الائمة لئلا يدرك معناه غير أهل الحق كما كنى الله عز وجل بالتين والزيتون وطور سينين وهذا لبلد الامين عن النبـي صـلى الله عليـه وآلـه وعلي

Exalted God used ‘sheep’ in reference to ‘women’ as supported by some
interpreters in the story of David and the two who went to see him. This
is also similar to the use of ‘travel through the Earth’ in the Quran.
As-Sadiq (MGB) was asked about the following words of the Honorable the
Exalted God, ‘Do they not travel through the
Earth?’**[[702]](footnotes_3.htm#b0702)** He (MGB) replied, ‘What is
meant is would you not delve into the meaning of the Quran as in the
following verse the Honorable the Exalted God has used ‘a secret
covenant’ to refer to having sex, ‘But do not make a secret contract
with them’**[[703]](footnotes_3.htm#b0703)** or used ‘to eat’ to refer
to having to go to the toilet in ‘They had both to eat their (daily)
food’**[[704]](footnotes_3.htm#b0704)** when referring to Jesus (MGB)
and his mother Mary (MGB) or used ‘the Bee’ in ‘And thy Lord taught the
Bee’**[[705]](footnotes_3.htm#b0705)** to refer to the Prophet (MGB).
There are many similar instances.”

ADAM AND EVE WERE IN PARADISE FOR SEVEN HOURS
---------------------------------------------

7-103 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father and Muhammad
ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn
Abdullah and Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy and Muhammad
ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn
Mahboob, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ishaq, on the authority of Abi
Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of his
forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “Adam and Eve dwelled in Paradise for seven hours according
to our time before God sent them down to the Earth on that very same
day.”

THERE ARE SEVEN CHARACTERISTICS IN A SHIITE
-------------------------------------------

7-104 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Al-Abbas ibn Ma’ruf, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Faz’zal,
on the authority of Zarif ibn Nasih, on the authority of Amr ibn Abil
Miqdam that Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB) said, “Indeed our followers
are those who sacrifice their lives for loving us; become friends with
each other due to loving us; visit each other to revive our traditions;
do not oppress anyone if they get angry; do not go beyond bounds if they
like some thing; do not waste; are blessings for their neighbors; and
are a source of peace and comfort for those with whom they associate.”

I have explained this in more detail in Sifat ul-Shia.

THE PROPHET CURSED ABU SUFYAN ON SEVEN OCCASIONS
------------------------------------------------

7-105 Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Musa - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Musa al-Daq’qaq quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn

#### والحسن والحسين عليهم السلام وكما كنى عز وجل بالنعاج عن النساء على قول من روى ذلك في قصة داود والخمصين، وكما كنى بالسير في الارض عن النظر في القرآن، سئل الصادق عليه السلام عن قول الله عز وجل: "أَوَلَمْ يَسِيرُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ" قال: معناه أولم ينظروا في القرآن. وكما كنى عز وجل بالسر عن النكاح في قوله عز وجل: "وَلَكِنْ لاَ تُوَاعِدُوهُنَّ سِرًّا" وكما كنى عز وجل بأكل الطعام عن التغوط فقال في عيس وامه: "كَانَا يَأْكُلاَنِ الطَّعَامَ" ومعناه أنهما كانا يتغوطان، وكما كنى بالنحل عن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله في قوله "وَأَوْحَى رَبُّكَ إِلَى النَّحْل" ومثل هذا كثير. {.t0}

##### كان لبث آدم وحواء عليهما السلام في الجنة حتى أخرجهما منها سبع ساعات

#### 7-103حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله وعبد الله بن جعفر الحميري قالا: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، وأحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، ومحمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب قالوا: حدثنا الحسن بن محبوب، عن محمد ابن إسحاق، عن أبي جعفر محمد بن علي، عن آبائه، عن على عليهم السلام عن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله قال: إنما كان لبث آدم وحواء في الجنة حتى اخرجا منها سبع ساعات من أيام الدنيا حتى أهبطهما الله من يومهما ذلك.

##### في الشيعة سبع خصال

#### 7-104 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار قال: حدثنا العباس بن معروف، عن الحسن بن علي بن فضال، عن ظريف بن ناصح، عن عمرو بن أبي المقدام، عن محمدبن على عليهما السلام قال: إنما كانت شيعة علي المتباذلون في ولايتنا، والمتحابون في مودتنا، المتزاورون لاحياء أمرنا إن غضبوا لم يظلموا، وأن رضوا لم يسرفوا بركة لمن جاوروا، سلم لمن خالطوا. وقد أخرجت مارويته في هذا المعنى في كتاب صفات الشيعة.

##### لعن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أباسفيان في سبعة مواطن

#### 7-105حدثنا علي بن أحمد بن موسى رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن موسى الدقاق قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن داود الحنظلي قال: حدثنا الحسين بن عبد الله

Davood al-Hanzali, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Abdullah
al-Jo’afy, on the authority of Al-Hikam ibn Meskin, on the authority of
Abil Jarud, on the authority of Abil Tufayl Amer ibn Vasele’, “God’s
Prophet (MGB) cursed Abu Sufyan on seven occasions. He should not have
done anything else. The first occasion on which God and the Prophet
(MGB) cursed Abu Sufyan was when the Prophet (MGB) was emigrating to
Medina. Abu Sufyan cursed the Prophet (MGB), and wanted to hit the
Prophet (MGB) when he ran into the Prophet (MGB) on his way back from
Syria. However, God fended off his attack.

The second occasion was on the day of the Battle of Badr in which he
fled from the Badr well, and God and the Prophet (MGB) cursed him.

The third occasion was on the day of the Battle of Uhud when after the
Battle Abu Sufyan shouted, ‘Show your superiority,
Hubal’**[[706]](footnotes_3.htm#b0706)** and the Prophet of God (MGB)
replied, ‘God is the Most High and the Most
Glorious.’**[[707]](footnotes_3.htm#b0707)** Then Abu Sufyan said, ‘We
have Uzza and you do not.’ Then the Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘God is our
friend but you have no friends.’

The fourth occasion was on the day of the Battle of the Trench when Abu
Sufyan had come to fight the Muslims accompanied by all of the Quraysh
tribe. However, the Honorable the Exalted God had them return angry and
defeated. They had no gains from this Battle and the Honorable the
Exalted God revealed two verses to the Prophet (MGB) from the Holy Quran
in the Al-Ahzab Chapter.**[[708]](footnotes_3.htm#b0708)** Abu Sufyan
and his companions were called atheists, and Muawiyah was called a
polytheist and an enemy of God.

The fifth occasion was on the day of the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah in which
the Quraysh intercepted the Muslims who wanted to offer animals for
sacrifice and did not let them reach the place of offering. They also
did not let the Prophet (MGB) reach the Holy House. Thus, they had to
abandon their sacrificial animals, and the Prophet (MGB) had to return
without having performed the circumambulations of the Ka'ba. Then the
Honorable the Exalted God and the Prophet (MGB) cursed Abu Sufyan.

The sixth occasion was on the day of the Battle of
Confederates**[[709]](footnotes_3.htm#b0709)** when Abu Sufyan leading
the Quraysh, Amer ibn al-Tofeyl leading the Havazan and Ayineh ibn Hasin
leading the invaded Medina with the Ghatafans assisted by the Jewish
Qurayzah**[[710]](footnotes_3.htm#b0710)** and Nadir
tribes,**[[711]](footnotes_3.htm#b0711)** and attacked Medina. The
Prophet (MGB) cursed their leaders and their followers and said, ‘If
there are any believers amongst those who follow them, they shall not be
cursed. However, there are no believers or noble ones amongst the
leaders of this group and there are none to be saved.’

The seventh occasion was on the day on which they plotted and attacked
the Prophet (MGB) in a group of twelve people from the Umayyads headed
by Abu Sufyan and five other ones. Thus, the Prophet (MGB) cursed them.
Moreover, the camel, its leader, and its rider also cursed them.’

#### الجعفي، عن حكم بن مسكين قال: حدثنا أبوالجارود، عن أبي الطفيل عامر بن واثلة قال: إن رسول لله صلى الله عليه وآله لعن أباسفيان في سبعة مواطن في كلهن لا يستطيع إلا أن يلعنه. {.t0}

#### أولهن يوم لعنه الله ورسوله وهو خارج من مكة إلى المدينة مهاجرا وأبوسفيان جائي من الشام فوقع فيه أبوسفيان يسبه ويوعده وهم أن يبطش به فصرفه الله عن رسوله.

#### والثانية يوم العير إذا طردها ليحرزها عن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله فلعنه الله ورسوله.

#### والثالثة يوم احد قال أبوسفيان: اعل هبل، فقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الله أعلى وأجل، فقال أبو سفيان: لنا عزى ولا عزى لكم، فقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الله مولانا ولامولى لكم.

#### والرابعة يوم الخندق يوم جاء أبوسفيان في جميع قريش فرد هم الله بغيظهم لم ينالوا خيرا، وأنزل الله عز وجل في القرآن آيتين في سورة الاحزاب فسمى أبا سفيان وأصحابه كفارا، ومعاوية مشرك عدو لله ولرسوله.

#### والخامسة يوم الحديبية والهدى معكوفا أن يبلغ محله وصد مشركوا قريش رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله عن المسجد الحرام وصدوا بدنه أن تبلغ النمحر فرجع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله لم يطف بالكعبة ولم يقض نسكه فلعنه الله ورسوله.

#### والسادسة يوم الاحزاب يوم جاء أبوسفيان بجمع قريش وعامر بن الطفيل بجمع هوازن وعيينة بن حصن بقطفان، وواعدلهم قريظه والنضير أن يأتوهم فلعن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله القادة والاتباع وقال: أما الاتباع فلا تصيب اللعنة مؤمنا، وأما القادة فليس فيهم مؤمن ولا نجيب ولاناج.

#### والسابعة يوم حملوا على رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله في العقبة وهم اثنا عشر رجلا من بني امية وخمسة من سائر الناس فلعن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله من على العقبة غير النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وناقته وسائقه وقائده.

The complier of this book said, “This narration has been cited as above.
However, there were fourteen people who attacked the Prophet (MGB).”

ON THE SEVEN CASES WHICH ARE IN HELL
------------------------------------

7-106 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ebad
ibn Suleiman, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Suleiman, on the
authority of his father Suleiman al-Daylami, on the authority of Ishaq
ibn Am’mar al-Sayrafi, on the authority of Abil Hassan Musa ibn Ja’far
al-Kazim (MGB) that in a long narration he (MGB) said, “O Ishaq! Indeed
there is a desert called Seqr in Hell. It has not breathed since the day
in which God created it. Should the Honorable the Exalted God order it
to breathe, it would burn everything that is on the Earth even if it
breathes through a small hole the size of the head of a needle. The
residents of Hell try to find protection against the burning; the bad
scent; the evilness and the tortures of this area. There is a mountain
in that desert in which those who want to find protection from its
burning; bad scent; evilness and tortures go. There is a valley in that
mountain in which those who want to find a protection from its burning;
bad scent; evilness and tortures go. There is a well in that valley in
which those who want to find a protection from its burning; bad scent;
evilness and tortures go. There is a snake in that well to which those
who want to find a protection from its burning; bad scent; evilness and
tortures go. There are seven cases in the belly of that snake which
contain five people from the former nations and two of the people of
this nation.”

Ishaq (ibn Am’mar al-Sayrafi) added, “I asked the Imam (MGB), ‘May I be
your ransom! Who are those five people and who are the two from this
nation?’ The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘The five people are Cain who killed
Abel; Nimrood who argued with Abraham (MGB) regarding God and claimed
that he was the one who gave life and death; Pharaoh who claimed ‘I am
your Lord, Most High’**[[712]](footnotes_3.htm#b0712)** ; the Jew who
innovated Judaism; Bolis who innovated
Christianity**[[713]](footnotes_3.htm#b0713)** and the two people from
this nation who are two Arab Bedouins.’”

JOB SUFFERED FOR SEVEN YEARS WITHOUT HAVING COMMITTED ANY SINS
--------------------------------------------------------------

7-107 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Khazzaz, on
the authority of Fazl al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn
al-Mukhtar, on the authority of Abi Basir that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB) said, “Job (MGB) suffered for seven years without having committed
any sins.”**[[714]](footnotes_3.htm#b0714)**

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: جاء هذا الخبر هكذا والصحيح أن أصحاب العقبة كانوا أربعة عشرالحديث.

##### الصناديق السبعة في النار

#### 7-106 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار قال: حدثنا عباد بن سليمان، عن محمد بن سليمان، عن أبيه سليمان الديلمي، عن إسحاق بن عمار الصيرفي، عن أبي الحسن موسى بن جعفر عليهما السلام في حديث طويل يقول فيه: يا إسحاق إن في النار لواديا يقال له: سقر، لم يتنفس منذ خلقه الله، ولو أذن الله عز وجل له في التنفس بقدر مخيط لاحرق ما على وجه الارض وإن أهل النار ليتعوذون من حرذلك الوادي ونتنه وقذره وما أعد الله فيه لاهله، وإن في ذلك الوادي لجبلا يتعوذ جميع أهل ذلك الوادي من حر ذلك الجبل ونتنه وقذره وما أعد الله فيه لاهله، وإن في ذلك الجبل لشعبا يتعوذ جميع أهل ذلك الجبل من حر ذلك الشعب ونتنه وقذره وما أعد الله فيه لاهله، وإن في ذلك الشعب لقليبا يتعوذ أهل ذلك الشعب من حر ذلك القليب ونتنه وقذره وما أعد لله فيه لاهله، وإن في ذلك القليب لحية يتعوذ جميع أهل ذلك القليب من خبث تلك الحية ونتنها وقذرها وما أعد الله في أنيابها من السم لاهلها، وإن في جوف تلك الحية لسبعة صناديق فيها خمسة من الامم السالفة واثنان من هذه الامة قال: قلت جعلت فداك ومن الخمسة؟ ومن الاثنان؟ قال: وأما الخمسة فقابيل الذي قتل هابيل ونمرود الذي حاج إبراهيم في ربه، فقال أن احيى واميت، وفرعون الذي قال: أنا ربكم الاعلى، ويهود الذي هود اليهود، وبولس الذي نصر النصارى، ومن هذه الامة أعرابيان.

##### ابتلى أيوب عليه السلام سبع سنين بلا ذنب

#### 7-107 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن علي الخزاز، عن فضل الاشعري، عن الحسين ابن المختار، عن أبي بصير، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ابتلى أيوب عليه السلام سبع سنين بلاذنب.

7-108 Ahmad ibn al-Hassan al-Qat’tan narrated that Al-Hassan ibn Ali
al-Askari quoted Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Juwhary, on the authority of
Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Am’marat, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB) that his father Al-Baqir
(MGB) said, “Job (MGB) suffered for seven years without having committed
any sins. The Prophets (MGB) do not commit any sins, since they are
immaculate and pure. They have no deviations. They do not even think of
committing any sins whether it be a minor or a major one. Job (MGB) did
not look bad or smell bad even though he suffered from a lot of
calamities. He did not even have any puss or bleeding, even as small as
the size of the tip of a pen. No one found him filthy and no one was
afraid of him (MGB). There were no insects growing anywhere in or on his
body. This is how the Honorable the Exalted God treats His dear Prophets
(MGB) and noble friends in times of hardship. The people did not
associate with Job (MGB) because he (MGB) was poor and weak and out of
their ignorance. They did not know what a great rank he (MGB) had near
his Sublime Lord! The Prophet (MGB) said, “The people who suffer the
worst hardships are the Prophets, then those next in rank, then those
after them, and so forth.”

The Honorable the Exalted God had Job (MGB) suffer so much that he was
belittled in the eyes of the people so that they would not worship him
(MGB) when they see the endless blessings of God in his hands. This was
done so that the people realize that there are two kinds of rewards and
punishments from the Sublime God: One in an especial way as a grant and
the second way due to worthiness and servitude. This was done so that
the people never belittle the poor or the ill. This was done so that the
people realize that God would make ill anyone whom He wills and treats
anyone whom He wills by any means which He wills. This was done so that
it may serve as a lesson to learn from for some people; as a means of
destitute and hardship for some other people; and as a means of
prosperity for some other people. He is Just in all of his Judgements
and Wise in all of his Deeds. He would not do anything to any of His
servants unless it was the best thing for them. There is no power save
in Him.”

THE SEVEN GROUPS OF ANGELS AND THE SEVEN TYPES OF VEILS
-------------------------------------------------------

7-109 Ahmad ibn al-Hassan al-Qat’tan narrated that Ahmad ibn Zakariya
al-Qat’tan quoted Bakr ibn Abdullah ibn Habib, on the authority of Tamim
ibn Buhlool, on the authority of Nasr ibn Mozahim al-Menqari, on the
authority of Umar ibn Sa’ed, on the authority of Abi Mikhnaf Lot ibn
Yahya, on the authority of Abi Monsoor, on the authority of Zayd ibn
Wahab,

#### 7-108 حدثنا أحمد بن الحسن القطان قال: حدثنا الحسن بن علي السكري قال حدثنا محمد بن زكريا الجوهري قال: حدثنا جعفر بن محمد بن عمارة عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهم السلام قال: إن أيوب عليه السلام ابتلى من غير ذنب، وإن الانبياء لا يذنبون لانهم معصومون مطهرون، لا يذنبون ولا يزيغون ولا يرتكبون ذنبا، صغير ولا كبيرا. وقال عليه السلام: إن أيوب عليه السلام مع جميع ما ابتلى به لم ينتن له رائحة، ولا قبحت له صورة، ولاخرجت منه مدة من دم ولا قيح ولا استقذره أحد رآه، ولا استوحش منه أحد شاهده، ولايدود شيء من جسده، وهكذا يصنع الله عز وجل بجميع من يبتليه من أنبيائه وأوليائه المكرمين عليه، وإنما اجتنبه الناس لفقره وضعفه في ظاهر أمره لجهلهم بماله عند ربه تعالى ذكره من التأييد والفرج، وقد قال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: "أعظم الناس بلاء الانبياء، ثم الامثل فالامثل" وإنما ابتلاه الله عز وجل بالبلاء العظيم الذي يهون معه على جميع الناس لئلا يدعواله الربوبية إذا شاهدواما أراد الله أن يوصله إليه من عظائم نعمه متى شاهدوه ليستدلوا بذلك على أن الثواب من الله تعالى ذكره على ضربين استحقاق واختصاص ولئلا يحتقروا ضعيفا لضعفه، ولا فقيرا لفقره ولامريضا لمرضه وليعلموا أنه يسقم من يشاء ويشفي من يشاء، متى شاء كيف شاء بأي سبب شاء، ويجعل ذلك عبرة لمن يشاء وشقاوة لمن يشاء وسعادة لمن يشاء، وهو في جميع ذلك عدل في قضائه وحكيم في أفعاله، لا يفعل بعباده إلا الاصلح لهم ولا قوة لهم إلابه.

##### الملائكة على سبعة اصناف والحجب سبعة

#### 7-109حدثنا أحمد بن الحسن القطان قال: حدثنا أحمد بن زكريا القطان قال: حدثنا بكربن عبد الله بن حبيب، عن تميم بن بهلول، عن نصر بن مزاحم المنقري عن عمر بن سعد عن أبي مخنف لوط بن يحيى، عن أبي منصور، عن زيد بن وهب

“They asked the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) about the power
of the Honorable the Exalted God - may His Majesty be Exalted. Then he
stood up and delivered a sermon. He praised God, expressed God’s
glorifications and said, ‘The Blessed the Sublime God has many angles.
Some of them are so big that if any of them comes down to Earth, the
Earth cannot house them in it due to their extensive size and great
amount of feathers and large wings. Some of the angels are so stout and
handsome that if all the genies and men cooperate with each other, they
cannot describe them. Some of the angles are so big that it would take
seven-hundred years to travel the distance between their two shoulders
or the distance between their two earlobes. Some of the angels are so
large that they can block off the whole horizon with just one of their
wings, and their body is very large in size. Some of the angels are so
tall that when they stand up the heavens are below their belly buttons.
Some of them are such that they can step on no support on the inner
layers of the Earth and all of the Earth is only as high as their knee.
Some of them are so large that just the back of their large nail can
house all the waters in the oceans of the Earth. Some of the angels are
so large that they can house as many ships as there ever will be in
their eyes and they can sail there forever. Blessed be the Best of the
Creators.” Then he (MGB) was asked about the veils. He (MGB) said,
“There are seven types of veils. The thickness of each veil is the
distance of a five-hundred year journey, and the distance from one veil
to the next is five-hundred years. The second veil includes
seventy-thousand veils with the distance from one veil to the next is
five-hundred years, and the thickness of each veil is the distance of a
five-hundred year journey. There are seventy-thousand angels as the
gate-keepers for each veil each as powerful as all the genies and the
men. Some of the veils are darkness, some are light. Some of the veils
are fire, some are smoke. Some of the veils are clouds, some are
lightening. Some of the veils are thunder, some are illumination. Some
of the veils are pebbles, some are hills. Some of the veils are dust.
Some of the veils are water and some are creeks. They are a variety of
veils the thickness of each is the distance of a seventy-thousand year
journey.

Then there are the pavilions of majesty which are sixty in number. There
are seventy-thousand angels in each pavilion. The distance between each
pavilion is the distance of a five-hundred year journey. Then there is
the pavilion of glory. Then there is the pavilion of grandeur. Then
there is the pavilion of magnificence. Then there is the pavilion of
holiness. Then there is the pavilion of almightiness. Then there is the
pavilion of pride. Then there is the pavilion of white light. Then there
is the pavilion of Unity which is as large as a square each side of
which measures the distance of a seventy-thousand journey. Then there is
the Imperial Veil.”

#### قال: سئل أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام عن قدرة الله عز وجل جلت عظمته، فقام خطيبا فحمد الله وأثنى عليه، ثم قال: إن لله تبارك وتعالى ملائكة لو أن ملكا منهم هبط إلى الارض ماوسعته لعظم خلقه وكثرة أجنحته، ومنهم من لو كلفت الجن والانس على أن يصفوه ماوصفوه لبعد مابين مفاصله وحسن تركيب صورته، وكيف يوصف من ملائكته من سبع مائة عام ما بين منكبيه وشحمة اذنيه، منهم من يسد الافق بجناح من أجنحته دون عظم بدنه، ومنهم من السماوات إلى حجزته، ومنهم من قدمه على غير قرار في جو الهواء الاسفل والارضون إلى ركبتيه، ومنهم من لوالقي في نقرة إبهامه جميع المياه لوسعتها، ومنهم من لو القيت السفن في دموع عينيه لجرت دهر الداهرين فتبارك الله أحسن الخالقين. {.t0}

#### وسئل عليه السلام عن الحجب فقال عليه السلام: الحجب سبعة، غلظ كل حجاب [منها] مسيرة خمسمائة عام، وبين كل حجابين مسيرة خمسمائة عام، والحجاب الثاني سبعون حجابا، بين كل حجابين مسيرة خمسمائة عام وطوله خمسمائة عام، حجبة كل حجاب منها سبعون ألف ملك، قوة كل ملك منهم قوة الثقلين، منها ظلمة ومنها نور ومنها نار ومنهادخان ومنها سحاب ومنهابرق ومنهامطر ومنها رعد ومنها ضوء ومنها رمل ومنها جبل ومنها عجاج ومنها ماء ومنها أنهار وهي حجب مختلقة، غلظ كل حجاب مسيرة سبعين ألف عام، ثم سرادقات الجلال وهي ستون سرادقا، وفي كل سرادق سبعون ألف ملك، بين كل سرادق وسرادق مسيرة خمسمائة عام، ثم سرادق العز، ثم سرادق الكبريا، ثم سرادق العظمة، ثم سرادق القدس، ثم سرادق الجبروت، ثم سرادق الفخر، ثم [سرادق] النور الابيض، ثم سرادق الوحدانية، وهو مسيرة سبعين ألف عام في سبعين ألف عام، ثم الحجاب الاعلى.

Then, Ali (MGB) ended his speech and stopped talking. Umar said, “O
Abal-Hassan! I could not survive even for one day without you.”

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “These
veils are not covering up the Honorable the Exalted God since the
Sublime God cannot be said to be confined in a place. However, they are
placed upon the great world which He has created and no one but the
Blessed the Sublime God knows its size.”

IMAM ALI IBN ABI TALIB PRAYED SEVEN YEARS BEFORE OTHERS
-------------------------------------------------------

7-110 Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bandar al-Furqany in Furqan
narrated that Abu Bakr Mosadat ibn Asma’ quoted Ibrahim ibn Ishaq
al-Zahri, on the authority of Ubaydullah ibn Musa, on the authority of
Israel, on the authority of Abi Ishaq, on the authority of Al-Minhal ibn
Amr, on the authority of Ebad ibn Abdullah (Al-Asady al-Kufy), on the
authority of Ali (MGB), “I am God’s servant and the Prophet (MGB)’s
brother. I am the greatest friend. No one will claim that he has this
rank after me unless he is a liar. I have prayed for seven years before
other people did.”

THE EVIL ONES DESCEND UPON SEVEN OF THE BOASTERS **[[715]](footnotes_3.htm#b0715)**
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7-111 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father and Muhammad
ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with them - narrated that Muhammad
ibn Yahya al-Attar and Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn
Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the
authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Faz’zal, on the authority of Davood
ibn Abi Yazid, on the authority of someone who narrated that Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said the following regarding the following words
of the Honorable the Exalted God, ‘Shall I inform you, (O people!), on
whom it is that the evil ones descend? They descend on every lying,
wicked person.’**[[716]](footnotes_3.htm#b0716)** “The evil ones
descended upon seven people as follows: Al-Muqayrih, Binan, Sa’ed,
Hamzih ibn Am’marat al-Barbari, Al-Harith al-Shami, Abdullah ibn
al-Harith and Abul Khat’tab.”

SEVEN CHARACTERISTICS GOD GRANTED TO THE FOLLOWERS OF ALI
---------------------------------------------------------

7-112 Abu Muhammad Am’mar ibn al-Hussein - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Ismat quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad
al-Tabary in Mecca, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn al-Lays al-Razi,
on the authority of Shayban ibn Farookh al-Abali, on the authority of
Homam ibn Yahya, on the authority of Al-Qasim ibn Abdul Vahid, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn Muhammad ibn Aqil, on the authority of Jabir
ibn Abdullah al-Ansari, “One day I was with the Prophet (MGB). Then
suddenly he turned his face towards Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) and said, ‘O
Father of Hassan! Do you want me to give you glad tidings?’ (Imam) Ali
(MGB)

#### وانقضى كلامه عليه السلام وسكت.

#### فقال له عمر: لابقيت اليوم لا أراك فيه يا أبا الحسن.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: ليست هذه الحجب مضروبة على الله عزو جل، تعالى الله عن ذلك لانه لا يوصف بمكان ولكنها مضروبة على العظمة العليا من خلقه التي لا يقادر قدرها غيره تبارك وتعالى.

##### صلى أمير المؤمنين على بن أبي طالب قبل الناس بسبع سنين

#### 7-110 حدثنا أبوأحمد محمد بن جعفر البندار قال: حدثنا أبوبكر مسعدة بن أسمع قال: حدثنا إبراهيم بن إسحاق الزهري قال: حدثنا عبيدالله بن موسى قال: أخبرنا إسرائيل، عن أبي إسحاق، عن المنهال بن عمرو، عن عباد بن عبد الله ، عن علي عليه السلام أنه قال: أنا عبد الله وأخو رسوله وأنا الصديق الاكبر، لايقولها بعدي إلا كذاب، صليت قبل الناس بسبع سنين.

##### تنزلت الشياطين على سبعة من الغلاة

#### 7-111 أبي، ومحمدبن الحسن رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار وأحمد بن إدريس جميعا، عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، عن يعقوب ابن يزيد، عن الحسن بن علي بن فضال، عن داود بن أبي يزيد، عن رجل، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام في قوله عز وجل: "هَلْ أُنَبِّئُكُمْ عَلَى مَنْ تَنَزَّلُ الشَّيَاطِينُ تَنَزَّلُ عَلَى كُلِّ أَفَّاكٍ أَثِيمٍ" قال: هم سبعة: المغيرة، وبنان، وصائد، وحمزة بن عمارة البربري، والحارث الشامي، وعبد الله بن الحارث، وأبوالخطأب.

##### أخبر جبرئيل عن الله أنه قد أعطى شيعة على بن أبي طالب ومحبيه سبع خصال

#### 7-112 حدثنا أبومحمد عمار بن الحسين رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن محمد ابن عصمة قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد الطبري بمكة قال: حدثنا الحسن بن الليث الرازي عن شيبان بن فروخ الابلي، عن همام بن يحيى، عن القاسم بن عبدالواحد، عن عبد الله بن محمد بن عقيل، عن جابر بن عبد الله الانصاري قال: كنت ذات يوم عند النبي إذا أقبل بوجهه على علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام فقال: ألا ابشرك يا أبا الحسن؟ قال: بلى يا رسول الله، قال: هذا جبرئيل يخبرني عن الله جـل

said, ‘Yes, O Prophet of God!’ The Prophet (MGB) continued, ‘God - may
His Majesty be Exalted - informed me by Gabriel that He granted seven
things to your lovers and your followers. They will have: 1- gentle
treatment at the time of death, 2- a companion at times of fear, 3-
light at times of darkness, 4- security at the time of Resurrection, 5-
justice at the time of Reckoning, 6- permission to pass through the
passage (to Heaven), 7- entry to Heaven before other people, with the
light (of their faith) shining in front of them and on their right
side.’”

ONE SAID THERE WERE SEVEN PEOPLE PRESENT WHEN THE VERSE OF PURIFICATION WAS REVEALED
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7-113 (The compiler of the book narrated that) my father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abdullah ibn al-Hassan al-Mo’adab
quoted Ahmad ibn al-Isbahany, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Muhammad
al-Saqafy, on the authority of Mukhaval ibn
Ibrahim**[[717]](footnotes_3.htm#b0717)** , on the authority of Abdul
Jab’bar ibn Ab’bas al-Hamedany, on the authority of Am’mar ibn Muawiyah
al-Dahani, on the authority of Umrat ibn Af’ee that he had heard Umma
Salma say, “The following verse (of Purification) was revealed in my
house, ‘…And God only wishes to remove all abomination from you, ye
members of the Family, and to make you pure and
spotless.’**[[718]](footnotes_3.htm#b0718)** There were seven people
present as follows: God’s Prophet (MGB), Gabriel,
Michael**[[719]](footnotes_3.htm#b0719)** , Ali (MGB), Fatimah (MGB),
Al-Hassan (MGB) and Al-Hussein (MGB) and I was standing at the door.
Then I asked, ‘O Prophet of God (MGB)! Am I not one of the members of
the Family?’ The Prophet (MGB) told me, ‘You are one of the Prophet’s
wives.’ He (MGB) did not say, ‘You are one of the members of my
Family.’”

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “This is
a strange narration which has not been cited anywhere except here. What
is generally known is that when the verse of purification was revealed,
five members of the Prophet’s Household were present (including the
Prophet (MGB)) and Gabriel was the sixth one there.”

SEVEN GROUPS OF PEOPLE SHOULD NOT SHORTEN THEIR PRAYERS
-------------------------------------------------------

7-114 Ja’far ibn Ali ibn al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih
al-Kufy - may God be pleased with him - narrated that his grandfather
Al-Hassan ibn Ali quoted on the authority of his great grandfather
Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih, on the authority of Isma’il ibn Abi
Zyad**[[720]](footnotes_3.htm#b0720)** , on the authority of Ja’far ibn
Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), “Seven
groups of people should not shorten their prayers as follows: Those who
collect tax; the commanders who move around in the province under their
command; merchants who go from town to town; shepherds;
Bedouins**[[721]](footnotes_3.htm#b0721)** who are always looking for
water and plants; men who go to hunt as a hobby and
bandits**[[722]](footnotes_3.htm#b0722)** who steal from travelers.”

#### جلاله أنه قد أعطى شيعتك ومحبيك سبع خصال: الرفق عند الموت، والانس عند الوحشة، والنور عند الظلمة والامن عند الفزع، والقسط عند الميزان، والجواز على الصراط، ودخول الجنة قبل الناس، نورهم يسعى بين أيديهم وبأيمانهم. {.t0}

##### من روى أن أهل البيت الذين نزلت فيهم آية التطهير سبعة

#### 7-113 أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن الحسن المؤدب، عن أحمد ابن علي الاصبهاني، عن إبراهيم بن محمد الثقفي قال: أخبرنا مخول بن إبراهيم قال: حدثنا عبدالجبار بن العباس الهمداني، عن عمار بن معاوية الدهني، عن عمرة بنت أفعي قالت: سمعت ام سلمة رضي الله عنها تقول: نزلت هذه الآية في بيتي "...إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا" قالت: وفي البيت سبعة رسول الله وجبرئيل وميكائيل وعلي وفاطمة والحسن والحسين صلوات الله عليهم، قالت: وأنا على الباب فقلت: يارسول الله ألست من أهل البيت؟ قال: إنك من أزواج النبي صلى الله عليه وآله.وما قال، إنك من أهل البيت.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: هذا حديث غريب لا أعرفه إلا بهذا الطريق والمعروف أن أهل البيت الذين نزلت فيهم أية التطهير خمسة وسادسهم جبرئيل عليه السلام.

##### سبعة لا يقصرون الصلاة

#### 7-114 حدثنا جعفر بن علي بن الحسن بن علي بن عبد الله بن المغيرة الكوفي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني جدي الحسن بن علي، عن جده عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن إسماعيل بن أبي زياد، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: سبعة لا يقصرون الصلاة الجابي الذي يدور في جبايته، والامير الذي يدور في إمارته، والتاجر الذي يدور في تجارته من سوق إلى سوق، والراعي، والبدوي الذي يطلب مواضع القطر ومنبت الشجر، والرجل الذي يطلب الصيد يريد به لهو الدنيا، والمحارب الذي يقطع السبيل.

REMEMBRANCE OF GOD IS ENTRUSTED TO SEVEN PARTS IN THE BODY
----------------------------------------------------------

7-115 There are seven parts of the body entrusted with remembrance of
God: the tongue, the soul, the spirit, the intellect, the wisdom, the
head, and the heart one of which needs to persevere. The tongue's
perseverance is attained through honesty in uttering words. The soul's
perseverance is attained through presence of one's mind. The spirit's
perseverance is attained through sincerity in repentance. The heart's
perseverance is attained through properly begging for pardon. The
intellect's perseverance is attained through properly learning from
one's mistakes. The wisdom's perseverance is attained through proper
pride, and the head's perseverance is attained through awareness of the
secrets of the world. Thus, the remembrance of God is equal to uttering
praises of God for the tongue; struggling and hard work for the spirit;
fear and hope for the soul; honesty and sincerity for the heart;
exaltation and shyness for the intellect; submission and contentment for
the wisdom; and witnessing to and approaching God for the head."

This has been narrated by Abu Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Hamid who has
linked it up to some of the good-doers - may God bless them.

THERE ARE SEVEN CHILDREN FOR THE PROPHET OF GOD (MGB)
-----------------------------------------------------

7-116 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father and Muhammad
ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn
Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Ali ibn
Abi Hamzih, on the authority of Abi Basir, on the authority of Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “The Prophet brought six offspring from
Khadijah - two boys named Qasim and Tahir who was also called Abdullah
and four daughters who are Umm Kulthum, Ruqayah, Zaynab and Fatimah. Ali
ibn Abi Talib (MGB) married Fatimah (MGB). Abul As ibn Rabia, who was
one of the Umayyads, married Zaynab. Uthman ibn Affan married Umm
Kulthum but she died before the marriage was consummated. When Uthman
went to the Battle of Badr, the Prophet (MGB) married off Ruqayah to
him. The Prophet (MGB) also had a son named Ibrahim from Maria
al-Qibyiyya who is also called Umma Ibrahim and Um'ma
Valad**[[723]](footnotes_3.htm#b0723)** .”

7-117 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, on the authority of Abu Ali al-Vaseti, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn Ismat, on the authority of Yahya ibn Abdullah,
on the authority of Amr ibn Abil Miqdam, on the authority of his father,
on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “Once when

##### الذكر مقسوم على سبعة أعضاء

#### 7-115 الذكر مقسوم على سبعة أعضاء اللسان والروح والنفس والعقل والمعرفة والسر والقلب.وكل واحدمنها يحتاج إلى الاستقامة، فأما استقامة اللسان فصدق الاقرار، واستقامة الروح صدق الاستغفار، واستقامة القلب صدق الاعتذار، واستقامة العقل صدق الاعتبار، واستقامة المعرفة صدق الافتخار، واستقامة السر السرور بعالم الاسرار، واستقامة القلب صدق اليقين ومعرفة الجبار، فذكر اللسان الحمد والثناء، وذكر النفس الجهد والعناء، وذكر الروح الخوف والرجاء، وذكر القلب الصدق والصفاء، وذكر العقل التعظيم والحياء، وذكر المعرفة التسليم الرضاء،، وذكر السر على رؤية القاء. حدثنا بذلك أبو محمد بن عبد الله بن حامد رفعه إلى بعض الصالحين عليهم السلام.

##### كان لرسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله سبعة أولاد

#### 7-116 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن علي بن أبي حمزة، عن أبي بصير، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ولد لرسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله من خديجة القاسم والطاهر وهو عبد الله، وأم كلثوم، ورقية، وزينب، وفاطمة. وتزوج علي ابن أبي طالب عليه السلام فاطمة عليها السلام، وتزوج أبوالعاص بن الربيع وهو رجل من بني امية زينب، وتزوج عثمان بن عفان ام كلثوم فماتت ولم يدخل بها، فلما ساروا إلى بدر زوجه رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله رقية. وولد لرسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله إبراهيم من مارية القبطية وهي ام إبراهيم ام ولد.

#### 7-117 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد قال: حدثني أبوعلي الواسطي، عن عبد الله بن عصمة، عن يحيى بن عبد الله، عن عمرو بن أبي المقدام، عن أبيه، عـن

God’s Prophet (MGB) entered his house, he (MGB) heard that Ayesha was
yelling at Fatimah (MGB). She was saying, ‘O Khadijah’s daughter! I
swear by God that you believe that your mother was better than us. What
was in her that made her nobler than us?’ Fatimah who was listening to
her cried when she saw the Prophet (MGB). The Prophet (MGB) looked at
her and asked, ‘O daughter of Muhammad! Why are you crying?’ She
replied, ‘Ayesha mentioned my mother’s name with disrespect and I
cried.’ The Prophet of God (MGB) became angry, turned to Ayesha and
said, ‘O Homeyra! Be silent. The Blessed the Sublime God has honored
kind women who give birth to children. Khadijah - may God may have mercy
upon her - has brought two sons from me. The first one is called Tahir,
Abdullah or Mutah’har. The second one is called Qasim. Khadijah has
delivered four daughters for me who are Fatimah (MGB), Ruqayah, Umm
Kulthum and Zaynab. However, you are one whom God has made barren and
have not given birth to any child for me.”

#### أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: دخل رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله منزله فإذا عائشة مقبلة على فاطمة تصايحها وهي تقول: والله يابنت خديجة ما ترين إلا أن لامك علينا فضلا وأي فضل كان لها علينا ما هي إلا كبعضنا. فسمع مقالتها فاطمة فلما رأت فاطمة رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله بكت فقال لها: ما يبكيك يا بنت محمد؟ قالت: ذكرت امي فتنقصتها فبكيت. فغضب رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله ثم قال: مه يا حميراء، فإن الله تبارك وتعالى بارك في الولود الودود وإن خديجة رحمها الله ولدت مني طاهرا وهو عبد الله وهو المطهر، وولدت مني القاسم وفاطمة ورقية وام كلثوم وزينب وأنت ممن أعقم الله رحمه فلم تلدي شيئا. {.t0}
