Part 8-on Eight-numbered Characteristics
========================================

A BELIEVER SHOULD HAVE EIGHT CHARACTERISTICS
--------------------------------------------

8-1 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of Jameel ibn Salih, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Qalib
that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “A believer should have eight
characteristics: 1- He should maintain his dignity when calamities
befall him. 2- He should be patient when he is in trouble. 3- He should
be grateful when he has plenty of blessings. 4- He should be content
with his share of God-given daily bread. 5- He should not oppress his
enemies. 6- He should not be a burden on his friends. 7- He should use
his body (to perform his duties). 8- The people should be safe from him.
Knowledge is like a believer's friend. Patience is like his prime
minister, and perseverance is like the head of his army. Kindness is
like his brother, and gentleness is like his father."

8-2 Abul-Hussein Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Shah al-Faqih narrated that Abu
Hamid Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn al-Hussein quoted on the
authority of Abu Yazid Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Khalidy, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Salih al-Tamimy, on the authority of his father,
who quoted on the authority of his father, on the authority of Muhammad

###### باب الثمانية

##### ينبغي أن يكون في المؤمن ثمان خصال

#### 8-1 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن جميل بن صالح، عن عبد الله بن غالب، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال:ينبغي للمؤمن أن يكون فيه ثمان خصال: وقور عند الهزاهز صبور عند البلاء، شكور عند الرخاء، قانع بما رزقه الله، لا يظلم الاعداء، ولا يتحامل للاصدقاء بدنه منه في تعب، والناس منه في راحة، إن العلم خليل المؤمن، والحلم وزيره، والصبر أمير جنوده، والرفق أخوه، واللين والده.

#### 8-2 حدثنا أبوالحسين محمد بن علي بن الشاه الفقيه قال: حدثني أبوحامد أحمد بن محمد بن أحمد بن الحسين قال: حدثنا أبويزيد أحمد بن خالد الخالدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن صالح التميمي قال حدثنا أبي قال: حدثنا أبي قال: حدثنا محمد بن

ibn Hatam al-Qat’tan, on the authority of Hammad ibn Amr, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his
father (MGB), on the authority of his grandfather (MGB), on the
authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) that in his will to Ali (MGB),
God’s Prophet (MGB) told him, “O Ali! A believer should have eight
characteristics: 1- He should maintain his dignity when calamities
befall him. 2- He should be patient when he is in trouble. 3- He should
be grateful when he has plenty of blessings. 4- He should be content
with his share of God-given daily bread. 5- He should not oppress his
enemies. 6- He should not be a burden on his friends. 7- He should use
his body (to perform his duties). 8- The people should be safe from
him.”

EIGHT GROUPS OF PEOPLE WHOSE PRAYERS ARE NOT ACCEPTED
-----------------------------------------------------

8-3 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris and Muhammad ibn Yahya
al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari, on
the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid who linked it up through
a chain of narrators to Aba Abdullah (MGB) who narrated that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “There are eight groups of people whose prayers are
not accepted by God; 1. A run-away slave until he returns to his master,
2. A woman who doesn’t give in to her husband and he is not happy with
her, 3. One who doesn’t pay the alms-tax, 4. One who doesn’t make
ablutions, 5. An adult girl who prays without a veil, 6. A prayer leader
whose followers consider him not to be trustworthy, 7. One who has to go
to the toilet, but doesn’t do so, and 8. One who is drunk.”

EIGHT WILL CARRY THE THRONE
---------------------------

8-4 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Qasim ibn Muhammad
al-Isfahani, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Davood al-Munqeri, on the
authority of Hafs ibn Qiyath al-Nakha’ee that he had heard Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) say, “There are eight who will carry God’s Throne. Each
one of them has eight eyes each of which equals all this world.”

8-5 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
As-Sadiq (MGB) as having said, “There are four who will carry God’s
Throne. One of them is like a human being who asks God for the daily
bread of Adam’s offspring (the people). The second one is like a rooster
who asks God for the daily bread for birds. The third one is like a lion
who asks God for the daily bread for beasts. The fourth one is like a
cow

#### بن حاتم القطان، عن حماد بن عمرو، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال في وصيته له: يا علي ينبغي أن يكون في المؤمن ثمان خصال: وقارعند الهزاهز، وصبر عند البلاء، وشكر عند الرخاء وقنوع بما رزقه الله لا يظلم الاعداء، ولا يتحامل للاصدقاء، وبدنه منه في تعب والناس منه في راحه. {.t0}

##### ثمانية لا تقبل لهم صلاة

#### 8-3 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، ومحمد بن يحيى العطار جميعا، عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد بإسناده رفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ثمانية لا يقبل الله لهم صلاة: العبد الآبق حتى يرجع إلى مولاه، والناشزة عن زوجها وهو عليها ساخط ومانع الزكاة، وتارك الوضوء، والجارية المدركة تصلي بغير خمار، وإمام قوم يصلي بهم وهم له كارهون، والزبين قالوا: يارسول الله وما الزبين؟ قال: الذى يدافع الغائط والبولوالسكران، فهولاء ثمانية لاتقبل منهم الصلاة.

##### حملة العرش ثمانية

#### 8-4 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد ابن عبد الله، عن القاسم بن محمد الاصبهانى، عن سليمان بن داود المنقري، عن حفص ابن غياث النخعي قال: سمعت ابا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: إن حملة العرش ثمانية، لكل واحد منهم ثمانية أعين، كل عين طباق الدنيا.

#### 8-5 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار مرسلا قال: قال الصادق عليه السلام:إن حملة العرش ثمانية أحدهم على صورة ابن آدم يسترزق الله لولد آدم، والثاني على صـورة الديك يسترزق

who asks God for the daily bread for quadrupeds. The cow that carries
God’s Threshold has held his head down due to shame, since the
Israelites worshipped a calf. The ones who carry God’s Threshold shall
be eight on the Resurrection Day.”

EIGHT PAIRS
-----------

8-6 Davood al-Ruqi narrated, “One of the
Kharajites**[[724]](footnotes_3.htm#b0724)** asked me about the meaning
of the following verse from the Honorable the Exalted God’s Book,
‘(Take) eight (head of cattle) in (four) pairs: of sheep a pair, and of
goats a pair; say, hath He forbidden the two males, or the two females,
or (the young) which the wombs of the two females enclose? Tell me with
knowledge if ye are truthful: Of camels a pair, and oxen a pair;”
**[[725]](footnotes_3.htm#b0725)**

His question was, ‘Which of these has God made lawful and which of them
are forbidden.’ I did not know the answer to his question. Therefore, I
went to see Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) during my Hajj pilgrimage trip
and asked him about it. The Imam (MGB) said, ‘The Blessed the Sublime
God has allowed the offering of an oxen or a domestic sheep at Mina, but
has forbidden their offering of a wild cow or sheep. And regarding
camels and cows, the Sublime God has allowed the offering of Arab camels
at Mina but has forbidden the offering of wild camels. God has allowed
the offering of a domesticated cow but He has forbidden the offering of
a wild cow.’

I delivered this reply to the man who had asked about it from me upon my
return. He said, ‘You have learned this from
Hijaz**[[726]](footnotes_3.htm#b0726)** .’

THE EIGHT GATE TO PARADISE
--------------------------

8-7 Ahmad ibn al-Hassan al-Qat’tan narrated that Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn
Zakaria al-Qat’tan quoted Bakr ibn Abdullah ibn Habib, on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Abdullah, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hikam, on the
authority of Aban ibn Uthman, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Fuzayl
al-Rezqi, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), on the
authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his grandfather (MGB)
that Ali (MGB) said, “There are eight gates for Paradise. One of these
gates is for the Prophets (MGB) and the honest ones. One is for the
martyrs and the good ones. Five of them are for our Shiites and those
who like us. I will always be standing at the Bridge, praying and asking
God, ‘O My Lord! Please grant peace and health to my followers, friends
and those who have recognized my Mastery on the Earth.’ There shall be a
reply from within God’s Threshold which says, ‘Indeed your supplications
are fulfilled.’ Anyone of my followers, those who have accepted my
Mastery, helped me, or fought with my enemies - verbally or physically -
may intercede on behalf of seventy-thousand of his relatives or
neighbors. The last gate is for the entry of all other Muslims who bear
testimony that ‘There is no god but God’ and there is not the least bit
of hatred of the members of our Holy Household in their hearts.’”

#### الله للطير، والثالث على صورة الاسد يسترزق الله للسباع، والرابع على صورة الثور يسترزق الله للبهائم، ونكس الثور رأسه منذ عبد بنو إسرائيل العجل، فإذا كان يوم القيامة صاروا ثمانية. {.t0}

#### 8-6 عن داود الرقي قال سألني بعض الخوارج عن هذه الاية من كتاب الله عز وجل ثَمَانِيَةَ أَزْوَاجٍ مِّنَ الضَّأْنِ اثْنَيْنِ وَمِنَ الْمَعْزِ اثْنَيْنِ قُلْ آلذَّكَرَيْنِ حَرَّمَ أَمِ الأُنثَيَيْنِ أَمَّا اشْتَمَلَتْ عَلَيْهِ أَرْحَامُ الأُنثَيَيْنِ نَبِّؤُونِي بِعِلْمٍ إِن كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ وَمِنَ الإِبْلِ اثْنَيْنِ وَمِنَ الْبَقَرِ اثْنَيْنِ..." ما الذي أحل الله تعالى من ذلك وما الذي حرم؟ فلم يكن عندي فيه شيء ، فدخلت على أبي عبد الله عليه السلام وأنا حاج فأخبرته بما كان فقال: ان الله تعالى أحل في الاضحية بمنى الضأن والمعز الاهلية وحرم أن يضحى فيه بالجبلية وأما قوله "وَمِنَ الإِبْلِ اثْنَيْنِ وَمِنَ الْبَقَرِ اثْنَيْنِ..."فان الله أحل في الاضحية بمنى من الابل العراب وحرم فيه البخاتي ، وأحل من البقر الاهلية أن يضحى فيها وحرم الجبلية. فانصرفت إلى الرجل الخارجي الذي سألني عن تلك الاية فأخبرته بهذا الجواب فقال: هذا شيء حملته الابل من الحجاز.

##### للجنة ثمانية أبواب

#### 8-7 حدثنا أحمد بن الحسن القطان قال: حدثنا أحمد بن يحيى بن زكريا القطان قال: حدثنا بكر بن عبد الله بن حبيب قال: حدثنا محمد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا علي بن الحكم، عن أبان بن عثمان، عن محمد بن الفضيل الرزقي، عن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: إن للجنة ثمانية أبواب باب يدخل منه النبيون والصديقون، وباب يدخل منه الشهداء والصالحون، وخمسة أبواب يدخل منها شيعتنا ومحبونا، فلا أزال واقفا على الصراط أدعو وأقول: رب سلم شيعتي ومحبي وأنصاري ومن تولاني في دار الدنيا فإذا النداء من بطنان العرش قد اجيبت دعوتك وشفعت، في شيعتك ويشفع كل رجل من شيعتي ومن تولاني ونصرني وحارب من حاربني بفعل أوقول في سبعين إلف من جيرانه وأقربائه، وباب يدخل منه سائر المسلمين ممن شهد أن لا أله إلا الله ولم يكن في قلبه مقدار ذرة من بغضنا اهل البيت.

8-8 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Ahmad ibn al-Nazr al-Khazzaz, on the authority of Amr ibn Shimr, on the
authority of Jabir al-Jo’afy that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “Have
a good opinion about God and know that there are eight gates for
Paradise each of which has a width which would take forty years to
traverse.”

THE HEIGHT OF A RESIDENTIAL UNIT SHOULD NOT EXCEED EIGHT ZAR’AS **[[727]](footnotes_3.htm#b0727)**
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8-9 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn
Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority
of Abi Muhammad al-Ansari, on the authority of Aban ibn Uthman, “A man
complained to Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) and said, ‘The genies bother
my family.’ The Imam (MGB) asked him, ‘How tall is the ceiling of your
house?’ He answered, ‘It is ten Zar’as.’ The Imam (MGB) said, ‘You
should not build a house with a ceiling higher than eight Zar’as. You
should have the verse of the Throne (Ayat
al-Kursi)**[[728]](footnotes_3.htm#b0728)** inscribed as a decoration
around it. Any room that is taller than eight Zar’as would be occupied
by genies.’”

EIGHT WHO ARE NOT CONSIDERED TO BE OF THE PEOPLE
------------------------------------------------

8-10 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father and Muhammad
ibn al-Hassan- may God be pleased with them - narrated that Muhammad ibn
Yahya al-Attar and Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn Yahya ibn Imran
al-Ash’ari, on the authority of some companions that is Ja’far ibn
Muhammad ibn Ubaydullah, on the authority of Abi Yahya al-Vaseti,
“Someone asked Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), ‘Do you consider all who are
created to be of the people?’ The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘I do not consider
the following to be of the people: those who do not brush their teeth;
those who sit with their legs crossed in a narrow place; those who
interfere in affairs which are none of their business; those who argue
over what they are not knowledgeable about; those who pretend to be ill;
those who are worried without being in hardship; those who unduly oppose
their friends; and those who are proud of their fathers without having
benefited from any of the good characteristics of their fathers. Such
people are similar to a plant which should be peeled off until you reach
the meat. They are an example of those referred to by the Honorable the
Exalted God in the following verse, ‘Or thinkest thou that most of them
listen or understand? They are only like cattle; nay, they are worse
astray in Path.**[[729]](footnotes_3.htm#b0729)** ’”

#### 8-8 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن أحمد بن النضر الخزاز، عن عمرو بن شمر، عن جابر الجعفي، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال:أحسنوا الظن بالله، واعلموا أن للجنة ثمانية أبواب عرض كل باب منها مسيرة اربعين سنة.

##### لايجوز أن يكون سمك البيت فوق ثمانية أذرع

#### 8-9 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن أبي محمد الانصاري، عن أبان بن عثمان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: شكا إليه رجل عبث أهل الارض بأهل بيته وبعياله، فقال: كم سمك بيتك؟ قال: عشرة أذرع، فقال: اذرع ثمانية أذرع كما تدور، واكتب عليه آية الكرسي فان كل بيت سمكه أكثر من ثمانية أذرع فهو محتضر يحضره الجن ويسكنونه

##### ثمانية ليسوا من الناس

#### 8-10 حدثنا أبي ومحمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، وأحمد بن إدريس جميعا قالا: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري قال: حدثني بعض أصحابنا يعني جعفر بن محمد بن عبيد الله، عن أبي يحيى الواسطي، عمن ذكره أنه قال لابي عبد الله عليه السلام: أترى هذا الخلق كله من الناس؟ فقال: الق منهم التارك للسواك، والمتربع في موضع الضيق، والداخل فيما لايعنيه، والمماري فيما لا علم له، والمتمرض من غير علة، والمتشعث من غير مصيبة، والمخالف على أصحابه في الحق وقد اتفقوا عليه، والمفتخر يفتخر بآبائه وهو خلو من صالح أعمالهم فهو بمنزلة الخلنج يقشر لحاء عن لحاء حتى يوصل إلى جوهريته وهو كما قال الله عز وجل: "إِنْ هُمْ إِلاَّ كَالأَنْعَامِ بَلْ هُمْ أَضَلُّ سَبِيلاً."

THOSE WHO GO TO THE MOSQUE OFTEN SHALL ACQUIRE ONE OF EIGHT CHARACTERISTICS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

8-11 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Yaqoob ibn
Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of
Ibrahim ibn Abdul-Hamid, on the authority of Sa’ed al-Iskaf, on the
authority of Zyad ibn Isa, on the authority of Abil Jarud, on the
authority of Asbaq ibn al-Nobatat that the Commander of the Faithful
Imam Ali (MGB) said, “Those who go to the mosque often shall acquire one
of the following eight characteristics: brotherhood for the sake of God;
new knowledge; certain verses; awaited Mercy or words to save them from
destruction; hear words of guidance; and abandon sins out of fear of God
or shame.”

8-12 In what Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Hamzih ibn Am’marat al-Hafiz wrote
me, he narrated that Hussein ibn Abdullah quoted Musa ibn Marvan, on the
authority of Marvan ibn Muawiyah, on the authority of Sa’ed ibn Tarif,
on the authority of Umayr ibn Ma’moon, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn
Ali (MGB) that he had heard God’s Prophet (MGB) say, “Those who go to
the mosque often shall acquire one of the following eight
characteristics: brotherhood for the sake of the Honorable the Exalted
God; new knowledge or words of guidance; or some thing which may save
them from destruction; awaited Mercy; or shyness or fear due to which
they abandon sins.’”

THE EIGHT CLASSES OF PEOPLE WHO SHOULD BLAME NO ONE BUT THEMSELVES IF THEY ARE INSULTED
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8-13 Abul-Hussein Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Shah al-Faqih, the
jurisprudent in Marv al-Ruz - narrated that Abu Hamid Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Ahmad ibn al-Hussein quoted Abu Yazid Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Khalidy,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Salih al-Tamimy, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Hatam
al-Qat’tan, on the authority of Hammad ibn Amr, on the authority of
Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on the
authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) that in his will to him God’s
Prophet (MGB) told him, “O Ali! The following eight have no one but
themselves to blame if they are insulted: those who attend a banquet
without being invited; those who order their hosts around in a party;
those who expect goodness from their enemies; those who seek favors from
lowly people; those who interfere in other people’s private affairs
without being asked to do so; those who mock at rulers; those who sit in
a position which they do not deserve; and those who converse with people
who do not listen to them.”

##### من اختلف إلى المسجد أصاب احدى ثمان خصال

#### 8-11 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن إبراهيم بن عبدالحميد، عن سعد الاسكاف، عن زياد ابن عيسى، عن أبي الجارود، عن الاصبغ بن نباته، عن أميرالمومنين عليه السلام قال: كان يقول: من اختلف إلى المساجد أصاب إحدى الثمان أخا مستفاد في الله أو علما مستظرفا أو آية محكمة أو رحمة منتظرة أو كلمة ترده عن ردى اويسمع كلمة تدله على هدى أويترك ذنبا خشية أو حياء.

#### 8-12 أخبرني إبراهيم بن محمد بن حمزة بن عمارة الحافظ فيما كتب إلي قال: حدثني حسين بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا موسى بن مروان قال: حدثنا مروان بن معاوية عن سعد بن طريف، عن عمير بن مأمون قال: سمعت الحسن بن علي عليهما السلام يقول: سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يقول: من أدمن الاختلاف إلى المساجد أصاب إحدى الثمان أخا مستفادا في الله عز وجل، أو علما مستظرفا، أو كلمة تدله على هدى، أو اخرى تصرفه عن الردى، أو رحمة منتظرة، أو ترك الذنب حياء أو خشية.

##### ثمانية ان اهينوا فلا يلوموا الا أنفسهم

#### 8-13 حدثنا أبوالحسين محمد بن علي بن الشاه الفقيه بمرور الروذ قال: حدثنا أبوحامد أحمد بن محمد بن أحمد بن الحسين قال: حدثنا أبويزيد أحمد بن خالد الخالدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن صالح التميمي قال: حدثني أبي قال: حدثنا محمد بن حاتم القطان، عن حماد بن عمرو، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال في وصيته له: ياعلي ثمانية إن اهينوا فلا يلوموا إلا أنفسهم: الذاهب إلى مائدة لم يدع إليها، والمتأمر على رب البيت، وطالب الخير من أعدائه، وطالب الفضل من اللئام، والداخل بين اثنين في سر لهم لم يدخلاه فيه، والمستخف بالسلطان، والجالس في مجلس ليس له بأهل، والمقبل بالحديث على من لا يسمع منه.

GUARD THE MOSQUES FROM THE FOLLOWING EIGHT THINGS
-------------------------------------------------

8-14 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Al-Hassan ibn Musa al-Khishab, on the authority of Ali ibn Asbat, on the
authority of some men who narrated that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
said, “Guard your mosques from the following eight things: selling
goods; buying goods; insane people; children; feeble ones; making
judgements; executing punishments; and speaking in a loud voice.”

FAITH CONSISTS OF EIGHT CHARACTERISTICS
---------------------------------------

8-15 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ali ibn
Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Uthman, on the authority of Abi Basir, “Once
when I was with Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) a man told him, ‘May God
improve you! There are some people in Kufa who have certain beliefs
which they relate to you.’ The Imam (MGB) asked him, ‘What are those
beliefs?’ The man said, ‘They say that belief is different from Islam.’
The Imam (MGB) said, ‘Yes. That is true.’ The man asked, ‘How come?’ The
Imam (MGB) said, ‘Anyone who bears testimony that ‘There is no god but
God. Muhammad is God’s Prophet’; believes in what Muhammad (MGB) has
brought from God; establishes prayers; gives the alms; fasts in the
month of Ramazan and goes on pilgrimage to Hajj is a Muslim.’ I (Abu
Basir) asked, ‘Then what is belief?’ The Imam (MGB) said, ‘Anyone who
bears testimony that ‘There is no god but God. Muhammad is God’s
Prophet’; believes in what Muhammad (MGB) has brought from God;
establishes prayers; gives the alms; fasts in the month of Ramazan; goes
on pilgrimage to Hajj; and doesn’t meet God with a sin for which the
punishment of the Fire (of Hell) has been declared is a believer.’ I
(Abu Basir) asked, ‘May I be your ransom! How could we find someone who
meets God without having committed a sin for which the punishment of the
Fire has been declared?’ The Imam (MGB) said, ‘It is not so. The
intention from this saying is that he commits a sin which for which the
Punishment of the Fire has been declared and he doesn’t repent for
committing it.’”

THE EIGHT MAJOR SINS
--------------------

8-16 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan and my father - may God be pleased with
them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the authority of
Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority of Al-Hikam
ibn Meskin al-Saqafy, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Zarif, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim, “I asked Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB),
‘May I be your ransom! Why do we believe that our opponents are

##### تجنب المساجد ثمانية أشياء

#### 8-14 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن الحسن بن موسى الخشاب، عن علي بن أسباط، عن بعض رجاله قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام:جنبوا مساجدكم والبيع والمجانين والصبيان الضالة والاحكام والحدود ورفع الصوت.

##### الايمان ثماني خصال

#### 8-15 حدثني أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله عن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن جعفر بن عثمان، عن أبي بصير قال: كنت عند أبي جعفر عليه السلام فقال له رجل: أصلحك الله إن بالكوفة قوما يقولون مقالة ينسبونها إليك فقال: وماهي؟ قال: يقولون: الايمان غير الاسلام، فقال أبوجعفر عليه السلام: نعم، فقال الرجل: صفه لي قال: من شهد أن لاإله إلا الله وأن محمدا رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وأقر بما جاء من عند الله وأقام الصلاة وآتى الزكاة وصام شهر رمضان وحج البيت فهو مسلم، قلت: فالايمان؟ قال: من شهد أن لا إله إلا الله وأن محمدا رسول الله وأقر بما جاء من عند الله وأقام الصلاة وآتى الزكاة وصام شهر رمضان وحج البيت ولم يلق الله بذنب أو عد عليه النار فهو مؤمن.

#### قال أبو بصير: جعلت فداك، وأينا لم يلق الله بذنب أو عد عليه النار؟

#### فقال: ليس هو حيث تذهب إنما هو لم يلق الله بذنب أو عد عليه النار ولم يتب منه.

##### الكبائر ثمان

#### 8-16 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن، وأبي رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن الحكم بن مسكين الثقفي، عن سليمان بن ظريف، عن محمد بن مسلم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قلت له: جعلت

atheists and will go to Hell, but we do not believe that we ourselves
and our companions are going to go to Paradise?’ The Imam (MGB) replied,
‘That is due to your own weakness. You should know that you will go to
Paradise, if you do not commit any major sins.’ I asked, ‘What are the
major sins?’ The Imam (MGB) said, ‘The greater of the major sins are
associating others as partners with the Honorable the Exalted God;
emigration from an Islamic environment; damnation of parents; accusing
pious women of fornication; fleeing from a holy war; oppressively
devouring the properties of an orphan; usury after having clear proof of
its forbiddance**[[730]](footnotes_3.htm#b0730)** ; and murdering a
believer.’ I asked the Imam (MGB), ‘What about adultery and stealing?’
The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘They are not like the above.’”

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “The
various narrations in this book which differ in the quantity of major
sins are not really that different from each other, although some state
that there are five major sins, while others have stated that there are
seven, eight and even more major sins. However, these are not different
from each other since after the sin of associating partners with God
which is the greatest major sin, the other sins are somewhat greater
than the following ones, and every other major sin is less than the sin
of associating a partner with God.”

THE EIGHT CHARACTERISTICS OF ALI (MGB)
--------------------------------------

8-17 Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Taleqani - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Abu Sa’id al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Ado’we quoted
Umar ibn al-Mukhtar, on the authority of Yahya
al-Himani**[[731]](footnotes_3.htm#b0731)** , on the authority of Qays
ibn al-Rabi’a, on the authority of Al-A’amash, on the authority of
Ababiat ibn Rub’ee Al-Asady, on the authority of Ayoob al-Ansari,
“Fatimah (MGB) visited the Prophet (MGB) when he (MGB) became so ill
that he was about to die. When she saw that he (MGB) was so ill, tears
poured down her cheeks from her eyes. The Prophet (MGB) told her (MGB),
‘O Fatimah! God - Exalted is His Remembrance - took a close look at the
Earth and chose your father (MGB) from amongst all of the people on it.
Then He took another close look at the Earth and chose your husband Ali
(MGB) and inspired me to marry you off to him (MGB). O Fatimah! You
should know that out of God’s generosity He joined you in marriage to
the one whose belief is the greatest of all people; who is the most
patient of all; and whose knowledge is the most of all.’ Fatimah (MGB)
became happy after hearing this. Then the Prophet (MGB) decided to tell
her about the best thing which God had granted Muhammad (MGB)

#### فداك مالنا نشهد على من خالفنا بالكفر وبالنار، ولا نشهد لانفسنا ولاصحابنا أنهم في الجنة قال: من ضعفكم إن لم يكن فيكم شيء من الكبائر فاشهدوا أنكم في الجنة، قلت: فأي شيء الكبائر جعلت فداك،قال: أكبر الكبائر الشرك، وعقوق الوالدين، والتعرب بعد الهجرة، وقذف المحصنة، والفرار من الزحف، وأكل مال اليتيم ظلما، والربا بعد البينة، وقتل المؤمن، فقلت له: الزنا والسرقة فقال: ليسا من ذاك. {.t0}

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: الاخبار في الكبائر ليست بمختلفه وإن كان بعضها ورد بأنها خمس وبعضها بسبع وبعضها بثمان وبعضها بأكثر لان كل ذنب بعد الشرك كبير بالاضافة إلى ماهو أصغر منه، وكل صغير من الذنوب كبير بالاضافة إلى ماهو اصغر منه، وكل كبير صغير بالاضافة إلى الشرك بالله العظيم.

##### لعلي عليه السلام ثماني خصال

#### 8-17 حدثنا محمد بن إبراهيم بن إسحاق الطالقاني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أبوسعيد الحسن بن علي العدوي قال: حدثنا عمر بن المختار قال: حدثنا يحيى الحماني قال: حدثنا قيس بن الربيع، عن الاعمش، عن عباية بن ربعي الاسدي، عن أبي أيوب الانصاري قال: إن رسول الله مرض مرضة فأتته فاطمة عليها السلام تعوده وهو ناقه من مرضه فلما رأت مابرسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله من الجهد والضعف خنقتها العبرة حتى جرت دمعتها على خدها، فقال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله لها: يا فاطمة إن الله جل ذكره اطلع على الارض اطلاعة فاختار منها أباك واطلع ثانية فاختار منها بعلك، فأوحى إلي فأنكحتكه، أما علمت يافاطمة أن لكرامة الله إياك زوجك أقدمهم سلما أعظمهم حلما وأكثرهم علما قال: فسرت بذلك فاطمة واستبشرت بما قال لها رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله فأراد رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أن يزيدها مزيد الخير كله من الذي قسمه الله له ولمحمـد

and his Holy Household. Thus, he (MGB) added, ‘O Fatimah! Ali (MGB) has
eight characteristics as follows: his belief in God and His Prophet
(MGB); his knowledge; his wisdom; his wife (MGB); his two sons who are
Al-Hassan (MGB) and Al-Hussein (MGB); his (MGB) enjoining other people
to do good deeds; his (MGB) admonishing other people against evil; and
his (MGB) judgement which is based upon God's Book. O Fatimah! We are
the Members of a Holy Household and have been given seven
characteristics as follows which has never been granted to anyone in the
past and will not be given to anyone in the future. Our Prophet (MGB)
who is your father is the best of all the Prophets (MGB); his Trustee
who is also your husband is the best of all the Trustees; our martyrs
are the Master of the Martyrs (MGB) who are your father’s uncle Hamzih,
and Ja’far who will have two wings with which to fly in Paradise; the
sons of this nation who are your two sons are from us.’”

#### صلى الله عليه وآله وآل محمد، فقال عليه السلام: يافاطمة لعلي عليه السلام ثمان خصال: إيمانه بالله ورسوله، وعلمه وحكمته، وزوجته، وسبطاه حسن وحسين، وأمره بالمعروف ونهيه عن المنكر، وقضاؤه بكتاب الله، يا فاطمة إنا أهل بيت اعطينا سبع خصال لم يعطها أحد من الاولين قبلنا ولايدركها أحد من الآخرين بعدنا: نبينا خير الانبياء وهو أبوك، ووصينا خير الاوصياء وهو بعلك، وشهيدنا سيد الشهداء وهو حمزة عم أبيك، ومنا من له جناحان يطير بهما في الجنة وهو جعفر، ومنا سبطا هذه الامة وهما ابناك. {.t0}
