Part 9-on Nine-numbered Characteristics
=======================================

NINE CHARACTERISTICS WHICH GOD GRANTED HIS PROPHET
--------------------------------------------------

9-1 Isma’il ibn Mansoor al-Qas’sar narrated that Abu Abdullah Muhammad
ibn al-Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn al-Hassan ibn Ja’far ibn
al-Hassan (ibn al-Hassan) ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) quoted Suleiman
ibn Abdul Rahman al-Dameshqi, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Aban, on the
authority of Abdul Aziz ibn Muhammad ibn Musa ibn Ubaydat, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn Dinar, on the authority of Umma Hani - the
daughter of Abi Talib that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The Blessed the
Sublime God propagated Islam by me. God descended the Quran to me. And
the Ka’ba was conquered with my hands. And God honored me above all His
creatures. And God established me as the Master of the Children of Adam
in this world. And God established me as the adornment of the Hereafter.
And God forbade the entry of all the Prophets into Paradise before my
entry. God forbade the entry into Paradise for all nations until after
my nation enters Paradise. God established the Caliphate after me in my
Household until the Trumpet is blown.**[[732]](footnotes_3.htm#b0732)**
Whoever denies what I said has indeed denied the Majestic God.”

GOD GRANTED THE FOLLOWERS OF ALI NINE CHARACTERISTICS
-----------------------------------------------------

9-2 Abu Muhammad Am’mar ibn al-Hussein al-Asrooshani - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Ismat quoted on
the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Tabary in Mecca, on the authority

###### باب التسعة

##### تسع خصال أعطاها الله عز وجل نبيه محمد صلى الله عليه وآله

#### 9-1 حدثنا إسماعيل بن منصور القصار قال: حدثنا أبوعبد الله محمد بن القاسم ابن محمد بن عبد الله بن الحسن بن جعفر بن الحسن [بن الحسن] بن علي بن أبي طالب عليهما السلام قال: حدثنا سليمان بن عبدالرحمن الدمشقي قال: حدثنا أحمد بن أبان قال: حدثنا عبدالعزيز بن محمد بن موسى بن عبيدة، عن عبد الله بن دينار، عن ام هاني بنت أبي طالب قالت: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أظهر الله تبارك وتعالى الاسلام على يدي، وأنزل الفرقان علي، وفتح الكعبة على يدي، وفضلني على جميع خلقه، وجعلني في الدنيا سيد ولد آدم، وفي الآخرة زين القيامة، وحرم دخول الجنة على الانبياء حتى أدخلها أنا، وحرمها على اممهم حتى تدخلها امتي، وجعل الخلافة في أهل بيتي من بعدي إلى النفخ في الصور، فمن كفر بما أقول فقد كفر بالله العظيم.

##### أعطي شيعة علي عليه السلام ومحبوه تسع خصال

#### 9-2 حدثنا عمار بن الحسين الاسروشني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن محمد بن عصمة قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد الطبري بمكة قال: حدثنا الحسـين بن الليث

of Al-Hassan ibn al-Lays al-Razi, on the authority of Shayban ibn
Farookh al-Abali, on the authority of Homam ibn Yahya, on the authority
of Al-Qasim ibn Abdul Vahid, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Muhammad
ibn Aqil, on the authority of Jabir ibn Abdullah al-Ansari, “One day I
was with the Prophet (MGB). Then suddenly he turned his face towards Ali
ibn Abi Talib (MGB) and said, “O Father of Hassan! Do you want me to
give you glad tidings?" (Imam) Ali (MGB) said, “Yes, O Prophet of God!”
The Prophet (MGB) continued, “God - may His Majesty be Exalted -
informed me through Gabriel that He granted nine things to your lovers
and your followers. They will have: 1- gentle treatment at the time of
death, 2- a companion at times of fear, 3- light at times of darkness,
4- security at the time of Resurrection, 5- justice at the time of
Reckoning, 6- permission to pass through the passage (to Heaven), 7-
entry to Heaven before other people, 8- with the light (of their faith)
shining in front of them and 9- on their right side.”
**[[733]](footnotes_3.htm#b0733)**

THE DAUGHTER OF MUHAMMAD (MGB) - FATIMAH (MGB) - HAS NINE NAMES NEAR GOD
------------------------------------------------------------------------

9-3 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn al-Hussein al-Sa’ed Abady quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of Abdul Azeem ibn Abdullah
al-Hassani - may God be pleased with him, on the authority of Al-Hassan
ibn Abdullah ibn Yunus, on the authority of Yunus ibn Zabyan that Abu
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “There are nine names near the Honorable
the Exalted God for Fatimah (MGB). They are Fatimah, Sadiqa, Mobaraka,
Tahera, Zakiya, Razia, Marzia, Mohadesa, and Zahra.” He (MGB) then
continued, “Do you understand the interpretation of the name Fatimah?” I
(Al-Hassan ibn Abdullah ibn Yunus) said, “No. My Master! Please let me
know.” The Imam (MGB) said, “She has been totally purified from
wickedness.”**[[734]](footnotes_3.htm#b0734)** The Imam (MGB) continued,
“Had not the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) married her, no
one else would have been found to match her (MGB) on the Earth until the
Resurrection Day.”

GOD HAS GIVEN NINE THINGS TO IMAM ALI WHICH HE HAS NOT GIVEN TO ANYONE OTHER THAN MUHAMMAD
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9-4 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
al-Hussein ibn Sa’id, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Ibrahim and Ahmad
ibn Zakariya, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Na’eem, on the authority
of Yazdad ibn Ibrahim, on the authority of some companions, on the
authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that the Commander of the
Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said, “I swear by God that the Blessed the
Sublime

#### الرازي، عن شيبان بن فروخ الابلي عن همام بن يحيى، عن القاسم بن عبدالواحد عن عبد الله بن محمد بن عقيل، عن جابر بن عبد الله الانصاري قال: كنت ذات يوم عند النبي صلى الله عليه وآله إذ أقبل بوجهه على علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام فقال: ألا أبشرك ياأبا الحسن فقال: بلى يارسول الله، فقال: هذا جبرئيل يخبرني عن الله جل جلاله أنه قد أعطى شيعتك ومحبيك تسع خصال: الرفق عند الموت، والانس عند الوحشة، والنور عند الظلمة، والامن عند الفزع، والقسط عند الميزان، والجواز على الصراط، ودخول الجنة قبل سائر الناس، ونورهم يسعى بين أيديهم وبأيمانهم. {.t0}

##### لفاطمة عليها السلام عند الله تسعة أسماء

#### 9-3 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين السعد آبادي، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي قال: حدثني عبدالعظيم بن عبد الله الحسني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني الحسن بن عبد الله بن يونس عن يونس بن ظبيان قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام لفاطمة عليه السلام تسعة أسماء عند الله عز وجل فاطمة، والصديقة والمباركة، والطاهرة، والزكية، والراضية، والمرضية، والمحدثة، والزهراء ثم قال عليه السلام: أتدري أي شيء تفسير فاطمة؟ قلت: أخبرني ياسيدي، قال: فطمت من الشر. قال: ثم قال: لولا أن أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام تزوجها لما كان لها كفو إلى يوم القيامة على وجه الارض آدم فمن دونه.

##### اعطى الله أمير المؤمنين تسعة أشياء لم يعطها أحدا قبله سوى محمد

#### 9-4 أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني أحمد بن الحسين بن سعيد قال: حدثني أحمد بن إبراهيم، وأحمد بن زكريا، عن محمد بن نعيم عن يزداد بن إبراهيم عمن حدثه من أصحابنا، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: سمعته يقول: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: والله لقد أعطاني الله تبـارك وتعالـى

God has granted me nine things which He has not given to anyone other
than the Prophet (MGB) as follows: All the roads are open for me; I know
all the races; the clouds would flow for me; I know about the deaths and
the calamities; and the Divine Decrees. Once I look at the heavens, I
know about everything from the past to the future with the Permission of
God; And that through my Mastery (of the religion) God has perfected the
religion of this nation and perfected His Blessings upon them and wished
their Islam for them. As on the Day of Mastery (Day of Qadir Khum) He
said, ‘O Muhammad! Inform them that today I have perfected their
religion and have wished for them Islam as their religion. I have
completed my Blessings for them. All of these are honors from God
bestowed upon those who praise Him.’”

ALI (MGB) HAS BEEN GRANTED NINE CHARACTERISTICS
-----------------------------------------------

9-5 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi
Umayr, on the authority of Ibrahim al-Karkhi, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Muslim, on the authority of Abi Hamzih al-Somali, on the
authority of Al-Hassan ibn Atiye, on the authority of Atiye, on the
authority of Zayd ibn Arqam that God’s Prophet (MGB) told Ali (MGB), “O
Ali ! God has granted me nine things due to you: three are for this
world; three are for the Hereafter; two are for you and one is what I
fear for you. And the three for this world are: you are my Trustee; you
are my Caliph reigning over my people; and you are the judge of my
religion. And the three for the Hereafter are: when I am given the Flag
of Praise (‘Leva ul-Hamd)**[[735]](footnotes_3.htm#b0735)** in the
Hereafter, I will place it in your hand and Adam and his progeny will be
under my flag; you will assist me at the gates of Paradise; and you will
ask me to intercede on behalf of whomever loves you. The two that are
for you are that you will not become an unbeliever nor will you go
astray after me. O Ali! What I fear for you is that the Quraysh will act
treacherously with you after me.”

9-6 Al-Hussein ibn Yahya al-Bajaly narrated that Abu Zar’at quoted Ahmad
ibn al-Qasim, on the authority of Qatn ibn Naseer, on the authority of
Ja’far**[[736]](footnotes_3.htm#b0736)** , on the authority of Yaqoob
ibn al-Fazl, on the authority of Sharik ibn Abdullah ibn Abdul Rahman
al-Mozani, on the authority of his father that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“I have been granted nine characteristics due to Ali (MGB): three are
for this world; three are for the Hereafter; two are for him and one is
what I fear for him. And the three for this world are: he will be the
one to cover up my private parts**[[737]](footnotes_3.htm#b0737)** ; he
will be the one in charge

#### تسعة أشياء لم يعطها أحدا قبلي خلا النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: لقد فتحت لي السبل، وعلمت الانساب، وأجرى لي السحاب، وعلمت المنايا والبلايا وفصل الخطاب، ولقد نظرت في الملكوت بإذن ربي فما غاب عني ما كان قبلي وما يأتي بعدي. وأن بولايتي أكمل الله لهذه الامة دينهم وأتم عليهم النعم ورضي إسلامهم إذ يقول يوم الولاية لمحمد صلى الله عليه وآله: يا محمد أخبرهم أني أكملت لهم اليوم دينهم ورضيت لهم الاسلام دينا وأتممت عليهم نعمتي كل ذلك من من الله علي فله الحمد. {.t0}

##### أعطى النبي صلى الله عليه وآله في علي تسع خصال

#### 9-5 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن إبراهيم الكرخي، عن محمد بن مسلم، عن أبي حمزة الثمالي عن الحسن بن عطية، عن عطية، عن زيد بن أرقم قال: رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله لعلي عليه السلام: اعطيت فيك يا علي تسع خصال: ثلاث في الدنيا وثلاث في الآخرة واثنتان لك وواحدة أخافها عليك، فأما الثلاثة التي في الدنيا فإنك وصيي وخليفتي في أهلي وقاضي ديني، وأما الثلاث التي في الآخرة فاني اعطى لواء الحمد فأجعله في يدك وآدم وذريته تحت لوائي، وتعينني على مفاتيح الجنة، وأحكمك في شفاعتي لمن أحببت، وأما اللتان لك فانك لن ترجع بعدي كافرا ولاضالا،وأما التي أخافها عليك فغدرة قريش بك بعدي يا علي.

#### 9-6 حدثنا الحسين بن يحيى البجلي قال: حدثنا أبي قال أبوزرعة قال: حدثنا أحمد بن القاسم قال: حدثنا قطن بن نسير قال: حدثنا جعفر قال: حدثنا يعقوب بن الفضل، عن شريك بن عبد الله بن عبدالرحمن المزني عن أبيه قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: اعطيت في علي تسع خصال: ثلاثا في الدنيا وثلاثا في الآخرة، واثنتين أرجوهما له، وواحدة أخافها عليه: وأمـا الثلاثة التـي في الدنيـا فسـاتر

of the affairs of my Household; and he will be my Trustee in my family.
And the three for the Hereafter are: when I am given the Flag of Praise
(‘Leva ul-Hamd)**[[738]](footnotes_3.htm#b0738)** ’ in the Hereafter, I
will grant it to him to carry and I will lean on it at the time of the
Rising for Intercession; and he will assist me at the gates of Paradise.
The two that are for him are that he will not turn into an unbeliever or
go astray after me. And the one I fear for him is that the Quraysh will
act treacherously with him after me.”

NINE THINGS CORRUPT NINE
------------------------

9-7 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah and Abdullah ibn
Ja’far al-Homayry quoted Harun ibn Muslim, on the authority of Mus’adat
ibn Sadaqe al-Rub’ee, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq
(MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his
forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “What corrupts speech is lying. What corrupts knowledge is
forgetting. What corrupts patience is foolishness. What corrupts
worshipping is laziness. What corrupts circumstances is boasting. What
corrupts bravery is transgression. What corrupts generosity is
mentioning it. What corrupts beauty is haughtiness. What corrupts
lineage is pride.”

9-8 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Abu
Sa’id al-Adamy, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Zyat, on the authority of
Ubaydullah ibn Abdullah, on the authority of someone who linked it up to
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali
(MGB) said, “I was with the Prophet (MGB) when Abdul Qays’s
representatives came with a sac full of dates and placed it in front of
the Prophet (MGB). Then the Prophet (MGB) asked, ‘Is this charity or a
gift?’ They replied, ‘O Prophet of God! It is a gift.’ He (MG) asked
them, ‘What kind of dates is it?’ They said, ‘It is Al-Barni dates.’
Then the Prophet (MGB) said, ‘There are nine characteristics in dates.
Indeed Gabriel informed me that eating dates has nine benefits: 1. It
eliminates pain. 2. It makes your breath smell good. 3. It helps digest
food. 4. It improves hearing and vision. 5. It increases sex drive. 6.
It strengthens the back. 7. It cuts off the hands of Satan. 8. It brings
man closer to God. 9. It takes man farther away from Satan.’”

THE DECREES FOR NINE THINGS HAVE BEEN SAID FOR THIS NATION
----------------------------------------------------------

9-9 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the authority of Yaqoob
ibn Yazid, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority of
Hurayz

#### عورتي، والقائم بأمر أهل بيتي، ووصيي في أهلي. وأما الثلاثة التي في الآخرة فاني اعطي لواء الحمد فاعطيه يحمله وأتكئ عليه عند قيام الشفاعة، ويعينني على مفاتيح الجنة. وأما الاثنتان اللتان أرجوهما له فانه لا يرجع بعدي كافرا ولا ضالا، وأما الواحدة التي أخافها عليه فغدر قريش به بعدي. {.t0}

##### تسعة أشياء لها تسع آفات

#### 9-7 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، وعبد الله بن جعفر الحميري جميعا، عن هارون بن مسلم، عن مسعدة بن صدقة الربعي، عن جعفر بن محمد عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: آفة الحديث الكذب وآفة العلم النسيان، وآفة الحلم السفه، وآفة العبادة الفترة، وآفة الظرف الصلف، وآفة الشجاعة البغي، وآفة السخاء المن، وآفة الجمال الخيلاء، وآفة الحسب الفخر.

#### 9-8 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار قال: حدثنا أبوسعيد الادمي قال: حدثنا علي بن الزيات عن عبيد الله بن عبد الله، عمن ذكره عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: بينما نحن عند رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله إذ ورد عليه وفد عبدالقيس فسلموا ثم وضعوا بين يديه جلة تمر فقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أصدقة أم هدية؟ قالوا: بل هدية يارسول الله قال: أي تمراتكم هذه؟ قالوا: البرني فقال عليه السلام: في تمرتكم هذه تسع خصال: إن هذا جبرئيل يخبرني أن فيه تسع خصال: يطيب النكهة، ويطيب المعدة، ويهضم الطعام، ويزيد في السمع والبصر، ويقوي الظهر، ويخبل الشيطان، ويقرب من الله عز وجل، ويباعد من الشيطان.

##### رفع عن هذه الامة تسعة أشياء

#### 9-9حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن حماد بن عيسى، عن حريز بن عبد الله، عن أبي عبـد

ibn Abdullah, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “Nine things have been removed for my nation: error;
forgetfulness; an abominable deed done by force; what they do not know
about; what they cannot tolerate; what makes them anxious; jealousy; bad
omen; and having tempting thoughts about the world's creation as long as
it is not verbally expressed in words.”

ADMONISHMENT AGAINST DOING NINE THINGS
--------------------------------------

9-10 Abu Ishaq Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Hamzih ibn Am’marat al-Hafiz
said in what he wrote me that Salim ibn Salim and Abu Aroobat narrated
that Abul-Khat’tab quoted Harun ibn Muslim, on the authority of Al-Qasim
ibn Abdul Rahman al-Ansari, on the authority of Abdul Rahman al-Ansari,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ali Al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of
his father (MGB), on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB), “When
the Prophet (MGB) conquered the Fort at Khaybar, he (MGB) asked them to
fetch his bow and leaned on its handle. Then he praised God and recited
God’s glorifications. He mentioned that God had brought this victory and
triumph. Then the Prophet (MGB) admonished us against doing nine things:
dowry of the fornicatress**[[739]](footnotes_3.htm#b0739)** ; renting a
male quadruped to copulate with female quadrupeds; wearing gold rings
(for men); money paid for buying dogs; and violet saddles for riding
animals (which Abu Aroobat has said, ‘red saddles’); wearing certain
clothes called Al-Qasi which were made in Syria; eating the meat of
beasts of prey; exchanging some gold with more gold and silver with more
silver**[[740]](footnotes_3.htm#b0740)** ; and looking at the stars.”

A SINNER IS GIVEN NINE HOURS
----------------------------

9-11 Al-Hassan ibn Muhammad ibn Sa’id al-Hashimi narrated that Forat ibn
Ibrahim ibn Forat al-Kufy quoted Muhammad ibn Zahir, on the authority of
Al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Abdi known as Ibn al-Qari, on the authority of Sahl
ibn abdul vah’hab, on the authority of Abdul Qod’doos, on the authority
of Suleiman ibn Mihran that Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB) said,
“When a person intends to do a good deed, a good deed is recorded for
him. Once he engages in doing that good deed, ten good deeds are
recorded for him. Once a person intends to do an evil deed, nothing is
recorded for him. If he acts upon an evil deed he has nine hours. If he
gets sorry, asks for forgiveness and repents within nine hours, nothing
will be recorded for him. However, if he doesn’t get sorry and doesn’t
repent within nine hours, then one evil deed is recorded for him.”

NINE DIVINE LEADERS FROM THE PROGENY OF AL-HUSSEIN
--------------------------------------------------

9-12 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his
father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of
Sa’id ibn Qazvan, on the authority of Abi Basir that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir
(MGB) said, “There will be nine Divine Leaders after Al-Hussein ibn Ali
(MGB). The ninth one of them will be their Riser (MGB).”

#### الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: رفع عن امتي تسعة: الخطأ، والنسيان، وما اكرهوا عليه، وما لا يعلمون وما لا يطيقون، وما اضطروا إليه، والحسد، والطيرة، والتفكر في الوسوسة في الخلق ما لم ينطبق بشفة. {.t0}

##### النهي عن تسعة أشياء

#### 9-10 أخبرني أبوإسحاق إبراهيم بن محمد بن حمزة بن عمارة الحافظ فيما كتب إلي قال: حدثني سالم بن سالم، وأبوعروبة قالا: حدثنا أبوالخطاب قال: حدثنا هارون بن مسلم قال: حدثنا القاسم بن عبدالرحمن الانصاري، عن محمد بن علي، عن أبيه، عن الحسين بن علي عليهم السلام قال: لما افتتح رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله خيبر دعا بقوسه فاتكأ على سيتها ثم حمدالله وأثنى عليه وذكر مافتح الله له ونصره به ونهى عن خصال تسعة: عن مهر البغي، وعن كسب الدابة يعني عسب الفحل وعن خاتم الذهب، وعن ثمن الكلب، وعن مياثر الارجوان قال أبوعروبة: عن مياثر الحمر وعن لبوس ثياب القسي وهي ثياب تنسج بالشام، وعن أكل لحوم السباع وعن صرف الذهب بالذهب والفضة بالفضة بينهما فضل وعن النظر في النجوم.

##### يؤجل المذنب تسع ساعات

#### 9-11 حدثنا الحسن بن محمد بن سعيد الهاشمي قال: حدثنا فرات بن إبراهيم ابن فرات الكوفي قال: حدثني محمد بن ظهير قال: حدثنا الحسن بن علي العبدي المعروف بابن القارئ قال: حدثنا سهل بن عبدالوهاب قال: حدثنا عبد القدوس عن سليمان بن مهران، عن جعفر محمد عليهما السلام أنه قال: إذا هم العبد بحسنة كتبت له حسنة، فاذا عملها كتبت له عشر حسنات، وإذا هم بسيئة لم تكتب عليه فإذا عملها اجل تسع ساعات، فإن ندم عليها واستغفر وتاب لم يكتب عليه، وإن لم يندم ولم يتب منها كتبت عليه سيئة واحدة.

##### الائمة من ولد الحسين بن على تسعة عليهم السلام

#### 9-12 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن سعيد بن غزوان، عن أبي بصير، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال:تكون تسعة أئمة بعد الحسين بن علي عليهما السلام تاسعهم قائمهم.

THE PROPHET HAD NINE WIVES WHEN HE DIED
---------------------------------------

9-13 Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Taleqani - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn al-Hussein al-Sokri
quoted Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Juwhary, on the authority of Ja’far ibn
Muhammad ibn Ammarat, on the authority of his father, on the authority
of Aba Abdullah Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), “God’s Prophet (MGB)
married fifteen women, and consummated the marriage with thirteen of
them.**[[741]](footnotes_3.htm#b0741)** He (MGB) had nine wives when he
(MGB) died. The two with whom he had not slept with were Omra and
Sina**[[742]](footnotes_3.htm#b0742)** . The thirteen wives with whom he
(MGB) consummated his marriage were: first Khadijah - the daughter of
Khuwaylid**[[743]](footnotes_3.htm#b0743)** ; second Sorat - the
daughter of Zam’a**[[744]](footnotes_3.htm#b0744)** ; third Umma Salma
whose name was Hind - the daughter of Abi
Umayya**[[745]](footnotes_3.htm#b0745)** ; fourth Umma Abdullah Ayesha -
the daughter of Abu Bakr; fifth Hafsah - the daughter of
Umar**[[746]](footnotes_3.htm#b0746)** ; sixth Zaynab - the daughter of
Khuzayma ibn al-Harith - Umma
al-Masakin**[[747]](footnotes_3.htm#b0747)** ; seventh Zaynab - the
daughter of Jahsh**[[748]](footnotes_3.htm#b0748)** ; eighth Umma Habiba
Ramlat - the daughter of Abu Sufyan**[[749]](footnotes_3.htm#b0749)** ;
ninth Maymuna - the daughter of
Al-Harith**[[750]](footnotes_3.htm#b0750)** ; tenth Zaynab - the
daughter of Amees; eleventh Jowayreeyat - the daughter of
Al-Harith**[[751]](footnotes_3.htm#b0751)** ; twelfth Safiyya - the
daughter of Huyayy ibn Akhtab.**[[752]](footnotes_3.htm#b0752)** And the
wife who had devoted herself to the Prophet (MGB) was Khule - the
daughter of Hakim al-Salmy. He (MGB) also had two slave-wives called
Maryam Qibtiyah**[[753]](footnotes_3.htm#b0753)** and Rayhana
al-Khandaqiya**[[754]](footnotes_3.htm#b0754)** with whom he took turns
sleeping every so many nights just like his other wives. And the nine
who were still alive when he (MGB) died were: Ayesha; Hafsah; Umma
Salma; Zaynab - the daughter of Jahsh; Maymuna - the daughter of
Al-Harith; Umma Habiba - the daughter of Abu Sufyan; Safiyya - the
daughter of Huyayy ibn Akhtab; Jowayreeyat - the daughter of Al-Harith
and Sorat - the daughter of Zam’a. Their noblest one was Khadijah - the
daughter of Khuwaylid**[[755]](footnotes_3.htm#b0755)** . Then the next
noble one was Umma Salma - the daughter of Al-Harith.”

THE NINE THINGS SAID BY THE COMMANDER OF THE FAITHFUL
-----------------------------------------------------

9-14 Abu Muhammad al-Hassan ibn Hamzih al-Alavi - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Yusuf ibn Muhammad al-Tabary quoted Sahl abi
Umar, on the authority of Vaki’a, on the authority of Zakariya ibn Abi
Za’edeh, on the authority of Amer al-Sha’abi, “The Commander of the
Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) has said nine sayings which have amazed many
eloquent ones. You wonder what jewels of wisdom are include in these
pearls which none of the masters of eloquence could not even say some
thing similar to them. Three of these are in the form of supplications;
three are words of wisdom and the other three are about culture. The
three words of wisdom are as follows: ‘The value of each person is based
on what

##### قبض النبي صلى الله عليه وآله عن تسع نسوة

#### 9-13 حدثنا محمد بن إبراهيم بن إسحاق الطالقاني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا الحسين بن علي بن الحسين السكري قال: حدثنا محمد بن زكريا الجوهري، عن جعفر ابن محمد بن عمارة عن أبيه، عن أبي عبد الله جعفر بن محمد الصادق عليه السلام قال: تزوج رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله بخمس عشرة امرأة، ودخل بثلاث عشرة منهن، وقبض عن تسع، فأما اللتان لم يدخل بهما فعمرة والسنى، وأما الثلاث عشرة اللاتي دخل بهن فأولهن خديجة بنت خويلد، ثم سورة بنت زمعة، ثم ام سلمة واسمها هند بنت أبي امية، ثم ام عبد الله عائشة بنت أبي بكر، ثم حفصة بنت عمر،ثم زينب بنت خزيمة بن الحارث ام المساكين، ثم زينب بنت جحش، ثم ام حبيبة رملة بنت أبي سفيان، ثم ميمونة بنت الحارث، ثم زينب بنت عميس، ثم جويرية بنت الحارث، ثم صفية بنت حيي بن أخطب. والتي وهبت نفسها للنبي صلى الله عليه وآله خولة بنت حكيم السلمي، وكان له سريتان يقسم لهما مع أزواجه: مارية، وريحانة الخندقية، والتسع اللاتي قبض عنهن: عائشة، وحفصة، وام سلمة، وزينب بنت جحش، وميمونة بنت الحارث، وام حبيبة بنت أبي سفيان، وصفية بنت حيي بن أخطب، وجويرية بنت الحارث، وسورة بنت زمعة.وأفضلهن خديجة بنت خويلد، ثم ام سلمة بنت الحارث.

##### تسع كلمات تكلم بهن أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام

#### 9-14حدثنا أبومحمد الحسن بن حمزة العلوي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني يوسف ابن محمد الطبري، عن سهل أبي عمر قال: حدثنا وكيع، عن زكريا بن أبي زائدة عن عامر الشعبي قال: تكلم أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام بتسع كلمات ارتجلهن ارتجالا، فقأن عيون البلاغة وأيتمن جواهر الحكمة، وقطعن جميع الانام عن اللحاق بواحدة منهن، ثلاث منها في المناجاة، وثلاث منها في الحكمة، وثلاث منها في الادب،وأمـا اللاتـي في الحكمة فقال: "قيمة كل امريء ما يحسنه، وما هلك امرء

he has learned. Whoever recognizes himself shall not be destroyed. Man
is known by what he says.’ The three sayings which are about culture
are: ‘Whoever treats someone well will become his master. You become a
slave of whoever who you ask to fulfill your needs. You are equal to
whoever you are not needy of.’ And the three which are in the form of
supplications are as follows: ‘O My God! It is enough of an honor for me
to worship Thee. It is enough of a source of pride for me to be
nourished by You. You are just as I wish. Thus, make me just as perfect
as you wish.’”

A WOMAN REACHES PUBERTY AT NINE
-------------------------------

9-15 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Safvan ibn Yahya, on the authority of Musa ibn Bakr, on the
authority of Zurarah that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “Do not
consummate (the marriage with your) female slave until she reaches the
age of nine or ten.” He added, “I either heard nine or ten.”

9-16 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Yaqoob
ibn Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority
of Hammad ibn Uthman, on the authority of Ubaydullah ibn Ali al-Halabi
that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Whoever has sexual intercourse
with his woman before she reaches nine years old and she gets hurt is
responsible for it.”

9-17 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his
father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of
several others that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “The age of
puberty for women is nine.”

ONE WHO DIVORCED FOR NINE TIMES CAN NEVER BE RE-MARRIED
-------------------------------------------------------

9-18 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Barqy,
on the authority of Al-Qasim ibn Muhammad al-Juwhary, on the authority
of Ali ibn Abi Hamzih, on the authority of Abi Basir, “I asked Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) about one who divorces (his wife), then returns
to her and divorces her again. The Imam (MGB) said, ‘She will no longer
be permissible for remarrying him until after she marries someone
else.**[[756]](footnotes_3.htm#b0756)** And a woman whose husband
divorces for the third time, and she marries another man and gets
divorced from him and re-marries her

#### عرف قدره، والمرء مخبو تحت لسانه". وأما اللاتي في الادب فقال: "امنن على من شئت تكن أميره، واحتج إلى من شئت تكن أسيره، واستغن عمن شئت تكن نظيره". فأما اللاتي في المناجاة فقال: "إلهي كفى لي عزا أن أكون لك عبدا وكفى بي فخرا إن تكون لي ربا أنت كما احب فاجعلني كما تحب". {.t0}

##### حد بلوغ المرأة تسع سنين

#### 9-15 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن أحمد ابن محمد بن عيسى، عن أبيه، عن صفوان بن يحيى، عن موسى بن بكر، عن زرارة، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: لاتدخل بالجارية حتى يتم لها تسع سنين أوعشر سنين. وقال: أنا سمعته يقول: تسع أو عشر.

#### 9-16 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن حماد بن عثمان عن عبيد الله بن علي الحلبي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من وطئ امرأته قبل تسع سنين فأصابها عيب فهو ضامن.

#### 9-17 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن غير واحد، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: حد بلوغ المرأة تسع سنين.

##### المطلقة للعدة لا تحلل لزوجها بعد تسع تطليقات أبدا

#### 9-18حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن محمد بن خالد البرقي، عن القاسم ابن محمد الجوهري، عن علي بن أبي حمزة، عن أبي بصير، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: سألته عن التي تطلق ثم تراجع ثم تطلق؟ قال: لا تحل له حتـى

first husband; and gets divorced by him thrice and marries another man;
gets divorced again and re-marries her first husband again and gets
divorced thrice and gets married again, can never again re-marry with
her first husband.**[[757]](footnotes_3.htm#b0757)** And one can never
marry with a women who has taken the oath of
condemnation**[[758]](footnotes_3.htm#b0758)** after she has taken it.”

ALMS-TAX ON NINE THINGS
-----------------------

9-19 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn
Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Musa ibn Umar,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Abi Sa’id
al-Qimat, on the authority of someone who linked it up to Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB), “God’s Prophet (MGB) established the alms-tax upon nine
things and he forgave other things. They are: wheat, barley, dates,
raisins, gold, silver, cows, sheep and camels.’ Someone asked, ‘How
about corn?’ The Imam (MGB) became angry and said, ‘I swear by God that
in the Prophet's (MGB) lifetime sesame seeds, corn and birds’ seeds were
all available.’ He was told, ‘It is said that these did not exist at the
time of the Prophet (MGB). That is why he (MGB) has only established the
alms-tax on those nine items.’ The Imam (MGB) became angry again and
said, ‘They lie. The Prophet's (MGB) explicit order was to forgive
everything else. One may only forgive what exists. I swear by God that
the alms-tax has been made obligatory on nothing else but these nine
things. Whoever wishes can accept it and anyone who doesn’t wish can
deny it and become an atheist.’”

9-20 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr
al-Bazanty, on the authority of Jameel, “I asked Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
about how many items require alms-tax. The Imam (MGB) said, “Nine things
require alms-tax which God’s Prophet (MGB) has established. He (MGB) has
forgiven tax on other things.” One of those present called al-Tayyar
said, “We plant some thing which we call rice.” The Imam (MGB) said, “We
plant a lot of things, too.” He asked, “Is there any alms-tax on rice?”
The Imam (MGB) said, “Did I not say that God’s Prophet (MGB) has
forgiven tax on anything else. These nine things include gold and
silver. They also include three animals that are camels, sheep and cows.
The rest are from things which grow on the Earth and are wheat, barley,
raisins and dates.”

#### تنكح زوجا غيره، والتي يطلقها الرجل ثلاثا فيتزوجها رجل آخر فيطلقها على السنة، ثم ترجع إلى زوجها الاول فيطلقها ثلاث مرات وتنكح زوجا غيره فيطلقها ثم ترجع إلى زوجها الاول فيطلقها ثلاث مرات على السنة، ثم تنكح فتلك التي لاتحل له أبدا، والملاعنة لا تحل له أبدا. {.t0}

##### الزكاة على تسعة أشياء

#### 9-19 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، عن موسى بن عمر عن محمد بن سنان، عن أبي سعيد القماط، عمن ذكره، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: وضع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله الزكاة على تسعة وعفا عما سوى ذلك: الحنطة والشعير والتمر والزبيب والذهب والفضة والبقر والغنم والابل. فقال السائل: فالذرة؟ فغضب ثم قال: كان والله علي عهد رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله السماسم والذرة والدخن وجميع ذلك فقيل: إنهم يقولون: لم يكن ذلك على عهد رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وإنما وضع على التسعة لما لم يكن بحضرته غير ذلك، فغضب وقال: كذبوا فهل يكون العفو إلا عن شيء قد كان ولا والله ما أعرف شيئا عليه الزكاة غير هذا فمن شاء فليؤمن ومن شاء فليكفر.

#### 9-20 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي، عن جميل قال: سألت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام في كم الزكاة؟ فقال: في تسعة أشياء وضعها رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وعفا عما سوى ذلك فقال الطيار: إن عندنا حبا يقال له الارز؟ فقال له أبوعبد الله عليه السلام وعندنا أيضا حب كثير فقال له: عليه شيء؟ قال: ألم أقل لك إن رسول اله صلى الله عليه وآله عفا عما سوى ذلك، منها الذهب والفضة، وثلاث من الحيوان: الابل والغنم والبقر، ومما أنبتت الارض: الحنطة والشعير والزبيب والتمر.

NINE DO NOT HAVE TO SAY THE FRIDAY PRAYERS
------------------------------------------

9-21 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Abdul Rahman ibn Abi Najran
and al-Hussein ibn Sa’id, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the
authority of Hurayz, on the authority of Zurarah ibn A’ayn that Abi
Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “Indeed the Honorable the Exalted God has
made thirty-five prayers obligatory from one Friday to another Friday
one of which must be said in an assembly that is the Friday prayer.
However, the following nine groups of people are permitted not to say
their Friday prayers: children; old men; the insane; the travelers; the
slaves; women; the ill; the blind; and those who are two
Farsakhs**[[759]](footnotes_3.htm#b0759)** away from the location of the
Friday prayer. Two Quranic Chapters (Al-Fatiha and one of the Chapters)
must be recited aloud in the Friday prayer. It is incumbent to do the
major ritual ablutions (ghusl)**[[760]](footnotes_3.htm#b0760)** for
that prayer. And the prayer leader should say the
Qunut**[[761]](footnotes_3.htm#b0761)** twice. One should be said in the
first unit of prayer before bowing down and one should be said in the
second unit of prayer after bowing down.”

NINE THINGS CAUSE FORGETFULNESS
-------------------------------

9-22 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
Isa, on the authority of Ubaydullah ibn Abdullah al-Dihqan, on the
authority of Durost ibn Abi Mansoor, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn
Abdul-Hamid, on the authority of Abil Hassan - the first (i.e. Al-Kazim)
(MGB), “Nine things cause forgetfulness: eating sour apples; eating
coriander and cheese; eating remainders of mice; urinating in stagnant
water; reading the writings on the tombs; going in between two women;
killing lice; and cupping at the pit of the head.”

9-23 Abul Hassan Muhammad ibn Ali ibn ash-Shah narrated that Abu Hamid
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hussein quoted Abu Yazid Ahmad ibn Khalid
al-Khalidy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Salih al-Tamimy,
on the authority of his father, on the authority of Anas ibn Muhammad
Abu Malik, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Ja’far
ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on
the authority of his grandfather (MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn Abi
Talib (MGB) that in his will to him God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “O Ali!
Nine things will cause forgetfulness: eating sour apples; eating
coriander and cheese; eating remainders of mice; urinating in stagnant
water; reading the writings on the tombs; going in between two women;
killing lice; and cupping at the pit of the head.”

##### وضعت الجمعة عن تسعة

#### 9-21حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار قال: حدثني أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن عبدالرحمن بن أبي نجران، والحسين بن سعيد، عن حماد بن عيسى، عن حريز، عن زرارة بن أعين، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: إنما فرض الله عز وجل من الجمعة خمسا وثلاثين صلاة فيها صلاة واحدة فرضها الله في جماعة وهي الجمعة ووضعها عن تسعة عن الصغير والكبير والمجنون والمسافر والعبد والمرأة والمريض والاعمى ومن كان على رأس فرسخين. والقراء‌ة فيها جهار، والغسل فيها واجب، وعلى الامام فيها قنوتان قنوت في الركعة الاولى قبل الركوع وفي الثانية بعد الركوع.

##### تسعة أشياء تورث النسيان

#### 9-22 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن عيسى عن عبيد الله بن عبد الله الدهقان، عن درست بن أبي منصور عن إبراهيم بن عبدالحميد، عن أبي الحسن الاول عليه السلام قال:تسعة يورثن النسيان: أكل التفاح يعني الحامض، والكزبرة والجبن، وأكل سؤر الفأر، والبول في الماء الواقف، وقراء‌ة كتابة القبور، والمشي بين امرأتين، وطرح القملة، والحجامة في النقرة.

#### 9-23 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن علي بن الشاه قال: حدثنا أبوحامد أحمد بن محمد بن الحسين قال: حدثنا أبويزيد أحمد بن خالد الخالدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد ابن صالح التميمي قال: حدثنا أبي قال: حدثنا أنس بن محمد أبومالك، عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال: في وصيته له: ياعلي تسعة أشياء يورثن النسيان: أكل التفاح الحامض، وأكل الكزبرة، والجبن، وسؤر الفأرة، وقراء‌ة كتابة القبور، والمشي بين امرأتين وطرح القملة، والحجامة في النقرة، والبول في الماء الراكد.

THE NINE MIRACLES GOD GRANTED TO MOSES
--------------------------------------

9-24 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority of Abu Ishaq - whose
nickname was al-Yazid ibn Ishaq She’r, on the authority of Harun ibn
Hamzih al-Qanavi al-Sayrafi, “I asked Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) about
the nine signs given to Moses (MGB). The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘They were
the locusts; the lice; the frogs; the blood (in the Nile); the storm;
(the splitting of) the sea (so that Israel clan could pass through it);
the stone; the cane (which turned into a snake); and his hand (which
shone like the moon).’”

9-25 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn al-Nue’man, on the authority of Salam ibn
al-Mostanir, on the authority of Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) regarding the
following words of the Honorable the Exalted God, ‘To Moses We did give
Nine Clear Signs’**[[762]](footnotes_3.htm#b0762)** The Imam (MGB) said,
‘They were the storm; the locusts; the lice; the frogs; the blood (in
the Nile); the stone; (the splitting of) the sea (so that Israel clan
could pass through it); the cane (which turned into a snake); and his
hand (which shone like the moon).’”

WHEN THE RISER (MGB) IMAM APPEARS, NINE TRIBES WILL JOIN HIM
------------------------------------------------------------

9-26 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Yaqoob ibn
Yazid, on the authority of Mus’ab ibn Yazid, on the authority of Al-Awam
ibn Zubayr that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “The Riser (MGB) shall
come with forty-five men who are from nine tribes. There will be one
from one tribe; two from a second tribe; three from a third tribe; four
from a fourth tribe; five from a fifth tribe; six from a sixth tribe;
seven from a seventh tribe; eight from an eighth tribe, and finally nine
from a ninth tribe which adds up to forty-five.”

##### ذكر التسع الايات التي أعطى الله عز وجل موسى عليه السلام

#### 9-24 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب قال: حدثنا أبوإسحاق ولقبه يزيد بن إسحاق شعر قال: حدثني هارون بن حمزة الغنوي الصيرفي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: سألته عن التسع الآيات التي أوتي موسى عليه السلام فقال: الجراد والقمل والضفادع والدم والطوفان والبحر والحجر والعصا ويده.

#### 9-25 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا أحمد ابن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن محمد بن النعمان، عن سلام بن المستنير عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام في قول الله عز وجل: " وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا مُوسَى تِسْعَ آيَاتٍ بَيِّنَاتٍ" قال: الطوفان والجراد والقمل والضفادع والدم والحجر والبحر والعصا ويده.

##### الذين يقبلون مع القائم إلى أن يجتمع له العدد يكونون من تسعة أحياء

#### 9-26 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا يعقوب ابن يزيد، عن مصعب بن يزيد، عن العوام بن الزبير قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: يقبل القائم عليه السلام في خمسة وأربعين رجلا من تسعة أحياء: من حي رجل، ومن حي رجلان ومن حي ثلاثة، ومن حي أربعة، ومن حي خمسة، ومن حي ستة، ومن حي سبعة، ومن حي ثمانية، ومن حي تسعة، ولايزال كذلك حتى يجتمع له العدد.
