Part 11-on Eleven-numbered Characteristics
==========================================

NAMES OF THE ELEVEN STARS WHICH JOSEPH SAW PROSTRATING TO HIM
-------------------------------------------------------------

11-1 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority of
Ali ibn Muhammad, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Zyad al-Minqari, on
the authority of Amr ibn Shimr, on the authority of Isma’il ibn al-Sadi,
on the authority of Abdul Rahman ibn Sabit al-Qurashi, on the authority
of Jabir ibn Abdullah al-Ansari, “Regarding what God said about Joseph
(MGB)

###### أبواب الاحد عشر

##### أسماء الكواكب الاحد عشر التى رآها يوسف عليه السلام في المنام له ساجدين مع الشمس والقمر

#### 11-1حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، عن علي بن محمد، عن رجل، عن سليمان بن زياد المنقري عن عمرو بن شمر، عن إسماعيل السدي، عن عبدالرحمن بن سابط القرشي، عن جابر بن عبد الله الانصاري، في قول الله عز وجل حكاية عن يوسف

we read the following in the Holy Quran, ‘I did see eleven stars and the
sun and the moon: I saw them prostrate themselves to me!(12:4)’ Then he
started to name those stars: that were Al-Tariq, Jirban, Al-Zial,
Zul-Kanafan, Zul-Qar’e, Qabis, Vas’sab, Amoodan, Faylaq, Misbah,
Al-Zaruh, Al-Zia’e and Al-Nur implying the sun and the moon. All the
stars are encompassed by the sky.”

11-2 Abu Muhammad Abdullah ibn Hamid narrated that Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn
Ja’far quoted ibn Arafat, i.e. Al-Hassan, on the authority of Al-Hikam
ibn Zahir, on the authority of Al-Sadi, on the authority of Abdul Rahman
ibn Sabit al-Qurashi, on the authority of Jabir ibn Abdullah, “A Jew
called Bostan went to see the Prophet (MGB). Bostan asked the Prophet
(MGB), “O Muhammad! Can you tell me the names of the stars which Joseph
(MGB) saw prostrating to him?” The Prophet (MGB) did not respond to him
on that day until Gabriel (MGB) descended down and informed the Prophet
(MGB) about the names of the stars. Then the Prophet (MGB) called Bostan
in. When he came in, the Prophet (MGB) asked him, ‘Will you submit to
Islam if I inform you about the names (of the stars)?’ Bostan replied,
‘Yes.’ Then the Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Jirban, Al-Tariq, Al-Zial,
Zulkanafan, Qabis, Vas’sab, Amoodan, Al-Faylaq, Al-Misbah, Al-Zaruh,
Zul-Qar’e, Al-Zia’e and Al-Nur were the stars which he (MGB) saw in the
sky prostrating to him. When Joseph (MGB) told Jacob (MGB) about that,
Jacob (MGB) replied, ‘This is an affair which Honorable the Exalted God
shall take care of in the future.’ The Jew called Bostan said, ‘I swear
by God that these were the names of those stars.’”

THE ELEVEN NAMES OF ZAMZAM
--------------------------

11-3 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr
al-Bazanty, on the authority of Aiman ibn Mohraz, on the authority of
Muawiyah ibn Am’mar that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “The names of
Zamzam are Rokzat Gabriel; Hafirat Ishmael; Hafirat Abdul Mutalib;
Zamzam; Berat; Al-Mazmounat; Al-Rava’e; Shob’at; Ta’am; Mot’am; and
Shafa Saqam.”

#### "إِنِّي رَأَيْتُ أَحَدَ عَشَرَ كَوْكَبًا وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ رَأَيْتُهُمْ لِي سَاجِدِينَ." {.t0}

#### فقال في تسمية النجوم: وهو الطارق وجربان، والذيال، وذو الكنفان، وذو القرع، وقابس، ووثاب، وعمودان وفيلق، ومصبح، والضروح، والضياء والنور يعني الشمس والقمر، وكل هذه الكواكب محيطة بالسماء.

#### 11-2 حدثنا أبو محمد عبد الله بن حامد قال: أخبرنا أبوبكر محمد بن جعفر قال: حدثنا ابن عرفة يعني الحسن قال: حدثنا الحكم بن ظهير، عن السدي، عن عبد الرحمن بن سابط القرشي، عن جابر بن عبد الله قال: أتى النبي صلى الله عليه وآله رجل من اليهود يقال له بستان اليهودي، فقال: يا محمد، أخبرني عن الكواكب التي رآها يوسف عليه السلام أنها ساجدة ما أسماؤها؟

#### فلم يجبه نبي الله صلى الله عليه وآله يومئذ في شيء. ونزل جبرائيل عليه السلام بعد فأخبر النبي صلى الله عليه وآله بأسمائها.

#### قال: فبعث نبي الله صلى الله عليه وآله إلى بستان فلما أن جاء‌ه قال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: هل أنت تسلم إن أخبرتك بأسمائها؟

#### قال: فقال له: نعم.

#### فقال له النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: جربان، والطارق، والذيال، وذو الكنفان، وقابس، ووثاب، وعمودان والفيلق، والمصبح، والضروح، وذوالقرع، والضياء والنور رآها في افق السماء ساجدة له فلما قصها يوسف عليه السلام على يعقوب عليه السلام قال يعقوب: هذا أمر مشتت يجمعه الله عز وجل بعد.

#### قال: فقال بستان: والله إن هذه لاسماؤها.

##### أسماء زمزم احدى عشر

#### 11-3 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي، عن أيمن بن محرز، عن معاوية ابن عمار، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: أسماء زمزم: ركضة جبرئيل وحفيرة إسماعيل وحفيرة عبدالمطلب وزمزم وبرة والمضمونة والرواء، وشبعة وطعام ومطعم وشفاء سقم.
