Part 13-on Thirteen-numbered Characteristics
============================================

THE THIRTEEN TRANSMUTED GROUPS
------------------------------

13-1 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn al-Hussein, on the
authority of Ali ibn Asbat, on the authority of Ali ibn Ja’far, on the
authority of Muqayrih, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB),
on the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his
grandfather (MGB), “The transmuted Children of Adam (i.e. the people)
are in thirteen groups. They include monkeys, swine, bats, lizards,
bears, elephants, leeches, seals, scorpions, Canopus, Venus, spiders,
and porcupines. The ‘monkeys’ refers to a tribe from the Children of
Israel who lived by the sea. They violated the
Shabbat**[[866]](footnotes_3.htm#b0866)** and fished on Saturdays. Then
God transmuted them into monkeys. The ‘swine’ refers to a group of the
Children of Israel who were cursed by Jesus - the son of Mary (MGB).
Then God transmuted them into swine. The ‘bat’ refers to a woman who
exploited her wet-nurse by using magic. Then God transmuted her into a
bat. And ‘lizard’ refers to a Bedouin Arab who killed anyone he saw.
Then God transmuted him into a lizard. And ‘bear’ refers to a man who
robbed the pilgrims. Then God transmuted him into a bear. And ‘elephant’
refers to a man who made love to beasts. Then God transmuted him into an
elephant. And ‘leech’ refers to an adulterer who did not forsake of
anything. Then God transmuted him into a leech. And ‘seal’ refers to a
man who was a slanderer. Then God transmuted him into a seal. And
‘scorpion’ refers to a man who was a backbiter. Then God transmuted him
into a scorpion. And ‘Canopus’**[[867]](footnotes_3.htm#b0867)** refers
to a tax collector whom God transmuted into a star. And
‘Venus’**[[868]](footnotes_3.htm#b0868)** refers to a woman with whom
Harut and Marut practiced black
witchcraft.**[[869]](footnotes_3.htm#b0869)** And ‘spider’ refers to an
ill-natured woman who disobeyed her husband. Then God transmuted her
into a spider. And ‘porcupine’ refers to an ill-natured man. Then God
transmuted him into a porcupine.

13-2 Abul Hassan Ali ibn Abdullah ibn Ahmad al-Aswari al-Mozak’kar
narrated that Maki ibn Ahmad ibn Sa’duyeh al-Barza’ee quoted Abu
Muhammad Zakariya ibn Yahya ibn Ubayd ul-Attar in Damietta, on the
authority of Al-Qalanesi, on the authority of Abdul Aziz ibn Abdullah
al-Owaysi**[[870]](footnotes_3.htm#b0870)** , on the authority of Ali
ibn Ja’far, on the authority of Ma’tab - the servant of Ja’far, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his
father (MGB), on the authority of his grandfather (MGB),

###### أبواب الثلاثة عشر

##### المسوخ ثلاثة عشر صنفا

#### 13-1حدثنا محمد بن علي ما جيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار‘ عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسين، عن علي بن أسباط، عن علي بن جعفر، عن مغيرة، عن أبى عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن جده عليهم السلام قال: المسوخ من بني آدم ثلاثة عشر صنفا، منهم القردة والخنازير والخفاش والضب والدب والفيل والدعموص والجريث والعقرب وسهيل والقنفذ والزهرة والعنكبوت.

#### فأما القردة فكانوا قوما من بني إسرائيل كانوا ينزلون على شاطئ البحر اعتدوا في السبت فصادوا الحيتان فمسخهم الله قردة، وأما الخنازير فكانوا قوما من بني اسرائيل دعا عليهم عيسى بن مريم عليه السلام فمسخهم الله خنازير، وأما الخفاش فكانت امرأة مع ظئرلها فسخرتها فمسخها الله خفاشا، وأما الضب فكان أعرابيا بدويا لا يدع عن قتل من مربه من الناس فمسخه الله ضبا، وأما الدب فكان رجلا يسرق الحاج فمسخه الله دبا. وأما الفيل فكان رجلا ينكح البهائم فمسخه الله فيلا، وأما الدعموص فكان رجلا زاني الفرج لا يدع من شيء فمسخه الله دعموصا. وأما الجريث فكان رجلا نماما فمسخه الله جريثا. وأما العقرب فكان رجلا همازا لمازا فمسخه الله عقربا. وأما سهيل فكان رجلا عشارا صاحب مكاس فمسخه الله كوكبا. وأما الزهرة فكانت امرأة فتنت هاروت وماروت فمسخها الله. وأما العنكبوت فكانت امرأة سيئة الخلق عاصية لزوجها مولية عند فمسخها الله عنكبوتا. وأما القنفذ فكان رجلا سيئ الخلق فمسخه الله قنفذا.

#### 13-2 حدثنا أبوالحسن علي بن أحمد الاسواري المذكر قال: حدثنا مكي ابن أحمد بن سعدويه البرذعي قال: حدنيا أبومحمد زكريا بن يحيى بن عبيد العطار بدمياط قال: حدثنا القلانسي قال: حدثنا عبدالعزيز بن عبد الله الاويسي قال: حدثنـا علي

on the authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB), “I asked God’s Prophet
(MGB) about the transmuted ones. The Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘They are in
thirteen groups. They are elephant, bear, swine, monkey, seal, lizard,
bat, leech, scorpion, spider, rabbit, Canopus and Venus. Then I said, ‘O
Prophet of God! What was the reason they were transmuted?’ The Prophet
(MGB) replied, ‘The one who was transmuted into an elephant was a man
who made love to almost anything.

The one who was transmuted into a bear was a
shemale**[[871]](footnotes_3.htm#b0871)** who invited men to herself.

And the ones that were transmuted into swine were a Christian tribe who
asked their Lord to descend water for them. Then when it rained, they
blasphemed more and denied God more strongly than before.

And the ones that were transmuted into monkeys were a tribe who violated
the Shabbat**[[872]](footnotes_3.htm#b0872)** .

And the one that was transmuted into a seal was a pimp who invited men
to make love to his own wife.

And the one that was transmuted into a lizard was a Bedouin Arab who
robbed the pilgrims’ crosiers**[[873]](footnotes_3.htm#b0873)** .

And the one that was transmuted into a bat was a man who robbed the
fruits from the top of palm trees.

And the one that was transmuted into a leech was a slanderer who caused
disunion between loved ones.

And the one who was transmuted into a scorpion was a vulgar man who
bothered everyone with his tongue.

And the one who was transmuted into a spider was a woman who was
disloyal to her husband.

And the one that was transmuted into a rabbit was a woman who would not
purify herself after menstruation etc.

And the one who was transmuted into Canopus was a tax-collector in
Yemen.

And the one who was transmuted into Venus was a Christian woman who was
from some of the Israel monarchs with whom Harut and Marut practiced
black witchcraft.**[[874]](footnotes_3.htm#b0874)** Her name was Naheel
but the people called her Naheed.

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “The
people made a mistake about Venus and Canopus and said that they were
stars while it was not so. They were transmuted into two aqueous
creatures

#### بن جعفر، عن معتب مولى جعفر، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام قال: سألت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله عن المسوخ، فقال: هم ثلاثة عشر: الفيل والدب والخنزير والقرد والجريث والضب والوطواط والدعموص والعقرب والعنكبوت والارنب وسهيل والزهرة {.t0}

#### فقيل: يا رسول الله ما كان سبب مسخهم؟

#### فقال: اما الفيل فكان رجلا لوطيا لا يدع رطبا ولا يابسا.

#### وأما الدب فكان رجلا مؤنثا يدعو الرجال إلى نفسه.

#### وأما الخنازير فكانوا قوما نصارى سألوا ربهم إنزال المائدة عليهم فلما انزلت عليهم كانوا أشد ما كانوا كفرا وأشد تكذيبا،

#### وأما القردة فقوم اعتدوا في السبت.

#### وأما الجريث فكان رجلا ديوثا يدعو الرجال إلى حليلته.

#### وأما الضب فكان رجلا أعرابيا يسرق الحاج بمحجنه.

#### وأما الوطواط فكان رجلا يسرق الثمار من رؤوس النخل.

#### وأما الدعموص فكان نماما يفرق بين الاحبة.

#### وأما العقرب فكان رجلا لذاعا لا يسلم على لسانه أحد.

#### وأما العنكبوت فكانت امرأة تخون زوجها.

#### وأما الارنب فكانت امرأة لا يتطهر من حيض ولا غيره.

#### وأما سهيل فكان عشارا باليمن.

#### وأما الزهرة فكانت امرأة نصرانية وكانت لبعض ملوك بني إسرائيل وهي التي فتن بها هاروت وماروت وكان اسمها ناهيل والناس يقولون: ناهيد.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: الناس يغلطون في الزهرة وسهيل فيقولون إنهما نجمان وليسا كما يقولون، ولكنهما دابتان من دواب البحر سميتا باسمي نجمين

from the sea which were named after two stars from the sky: just as some
of the stars in the sky are named after some of the animals on the Earth
such as Aries (the Ram), the Taurus (the Bull), Betelgeuse, Cancer (the
Raven), Scorpion (the stag), Neptune (the Whale), Capricorn (the goat).

Thus, a mistake was made regarding Venus and Canopus since the people
cannot see them given that they are two aqueous creatures which exist in
the sea and the Honorable the Exalted God would not distort His enemies
into the form of bright stars which would illuminate forever. The
perverted would not live for more than three days. They will not
reproduce either. There are no perverted creatures on the Earth these
days. Animals like monkeys, pigs, bears or other similar animals are not
perverted themselves, but are similar to those who were cursed and
transmuted by the Honorable the Exalted God for denying the Unity of God
and denouncing the Prophets. The Blessed the Sublime God has made it
forbidden to eat their flesh. I heard this narration from Abil Hussein
Muhammad ibn Ja’far Al-Asady - May God be pleased with him.

BOYS ATTAIN PUBERTY AT THIRTEEN
-------------------------------

13-3 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr
al-Bazanty, on the authority of Abil Hussein al-Khadim - the pearl
seller, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Sin’an that Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “My father asked the following question from the
Imam (MGB) in my presence, ‘When would an orphan attain the age of
puberty?’ The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘When he reaches sexual maturity.’ My
father asked, ‘What is the decree in case a boy more or less reaches
eighteen but doesn’t attain sexual maturity?’ The Imam (MGB) replied,
‘He will be held responsible for his actions as soon as he attains
thirteen years of age whether or not he attains sexual maturity, unless
he is retarded or insane.”

13-4 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali
al-Vasha, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Sin’an that Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “When a boy reaches thirteen years of age and goes
into his fourteenth year, whatever is incumbent upon the sexually mature
individual will become incumbent upon him whether or not he is sexually
mature. His good and bad deeds shall be recorded. He is also allowed to
control whatever is in possession, unless he is retarded or insane.”

#### في السماء كما سمت بروج في السماء بأسماء حيوان في الارض مثل الحمل والثور والجوزاء والسرطان والعقرب والحوت والجدي، وكذلك الزهرة وسهيل وإنما غلط الناس فيهما دون غيرهما لتعذر مشاهدتهما والنظر إليهما لانهما دابتان في البحر المطيف بالدنيا بحيث لا تبلغه سفينة ولا تعمل فيه حيلة وما كان الله عز وجل ليمسخ العصاة أنوارا مضيئة يهتدى بها في البر والبحر، ثم يبقيهما ما بقيت السماء والارض والمسوخ لم تبق أكثر من ثلاثة أيام حتى ماتت ولم تتوالد وهذه الحيوانات التي تسمى المسوخ فالمسوخية لها اسم مستعار مجازي بل هي مثل ما مسخ الله عز وجل على صورتها قوما عصوه واستحقوا بعصيانهم تغيير ما بهم من نعمة وحرم الله تبارك وتعالى لحومها لكيلا ينتفع بها ولا يستخف بعقوبتها حكيت لي هذه الحكاية عن أبي الحسين محمد بن جعفر الاسدي رضي الله عنه. {.t0}

##### حد بلوغ الغلام ثلاث عشرة سنة إلى اربع عشرة سنة

#### 13-3 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي، عن أبي الحسين الخادم بياع اللؤلؤ، عن عبد الله بن سنان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: سأله أبي وأنا حاضر عن اليتيم متى يجوز أمره قال: حتى يبلغ أشده، قال: وما أشده قال: الاحتلام، قال: قلت: قد يكون الغلام ابن ثمان عشرة سنة أو أقل أو أكثر ولا يحتلم؟ قال: إذا بلغ وكتب عليه الشئ جاز أمره إلا أن يكون سفيها أو ضعيفا.

#### 13-4 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن علي الوشاء، عن عبد الله بن سنان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إذا بلغ الغلام أشده ثلاث عشرة سنة ودخل في الاربع عشرة سنة وجب عليه ما وجب على المحتلمين احتلم أم لم يحتلم، وكتبت عليه السيئات وكتبت له الحسنات، وجاز له كل شيء من ماله إلا أن يكون ضعيفا أو سفيها.

THIRTEEN NOBILITIES OF THE COMMANDER OF THE FAITHFUL ALI
--------------------------------------------------------

13-5 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abdullah ibn al-Hassan al-Mo’adab
quoted Ahmad ibn Ali al-Isbahany on the authority of Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad al-Saqafy, on the authority of Ja’far ibn al-Hassan ibn
Ubaydullah ibn Musa al-Abasi, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ali
al-Salami, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Muhammad ibn Aqeel, on the
authority of Jabir ibn Abdullah al-Ansari, “I heard God’s Prophet (MGB)
mention several nobilities of Ali (MGB). If anyone had even one of those
nobilities, it would suffice for his mastery over the other people.
God’s Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Whoever I am a Master of, Ali is the Master
of.’ God’s Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Ali’s position relative to me is the
same as Aaron’s position relative to Moses.’ God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
‘Ali is from me and I am from Ali.’ God’s Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Ali to me
is like me myself. Obeying him equals obeying me and disobeying him
equals disobeying me.’ God’s Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Fighting with Ali
equals fighting with God and making peace with Ali equals making peace
with God.’ God’s Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Ali’s friends are God’s friends
and Ali’s enemies are God’s enemies.’ God’s Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Ali is
God’s Proof, and His Caliph reigning over His servants.’ God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, ‘The love for Ali constitutes faith and the hatred for Ali
constitutes atheism.’ God’s Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Ali’s party is God’s
Party. The party of the enemies of Ali is Satan’s party.’ God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, ‘Ali is with the truth and truth is with him. They will not
separate from each other until they meet me (God’s Prophet (MGB)) at the
Pool**[[875]](footnotes_3.htm#b0875)** .’ God’s Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Ali
(MGB) is the Qasim or the one who divides up Paradise and Hell?’ God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Whoever cuts off from Ali (MGB) has cut off from
me. Whoever cuts off from me has indeed cut off from the Honorable the
Exalted God.’ God’s Prophet (MGB) said, ‘The followers of Ali shall all
be prosperous on the Resurrection Day.’”

##### ثلاث عشرة خصلة من فضائل أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام

#### 13-5 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن الحسن المؤدب قال: حدثنا أحمد بن علي الاصبهاني، عن إبراهيم بن محمد الثقفي قال: حدثنا جعفر بن الحسن بن عبيدالله بن موسى العبسي، عن محمد بن علي السلمي، عن عبد الله بن محمد بن عقيل، عن جابر بن عبد الله الانصاري قال: لقد سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يقول في علي عليه السلام خصالا لو كانت واحدة منها في جميع الناس لاكتفوا بها فضلا قوله صلى الله عليه وآله: "من كنت مولاه فعلي مولاه"، وقوله صلى الله عليه وآله: "علي مني كهارون من موسى"، وقوله صلى الله عليه وآله: "علي مني وأنا منه"، وقوله صلى الله عليه وآله "علي مني كنفسي، طاعته طاعتي ومعصيته معصيتي"، وقوله صلى الله عليه وآله: "حرب علي حرب الله، وسلم علي سلم الله"،و قوله صلى الله عليه وآله: "ولي علي ولي الله، وعدو علي عدو الله " وقوله صلى الله عليه وآله: "علي حجة الله، وخليفته على عباده"، وقوله صلى الله عليه وآله: "حب علي إيمان وبغضه كفر"، وقوله صلى الله عليه وآله: "حزب علي حزب الله أعدائه حزب الشيطان" وقوله صلى الله عليه وآله: "علي مع الحق والحق معه، لا يفترقان حتى يردا علي الحوض"، وقوله صلى الله عليه وآله: "علي قسيم الجنة والنار"، وقوله صلى الله عليه وآله: "من فارق عليا فقد فارقني، ومن فارقني فقد فارق الله عز وجل"، وقوله صلى الله عليه وآله: "شيعة علي هم الفائزون يوم القيامة".
