Part 14- On Fourteen-numbered Characteristics
=============================================

THE FOURTEEN CHARACTERISTICS OF DYE
-----------------------------------

14-1 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his father quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn
Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Nahavandi, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baghdadi, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Abdullah ibn al-Mobarak, on the authority of
Abdullah ibn

###### أبواب الاربعة عشر

##### في الخضاب أربع عشرة خصلة

#### 14-1 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أبي، عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، عن إبراهيم بن إسحاق النهاوندي، عن محمد بن علي البغدادي عن أبيه، عن عبد الله بن المبارك، عن عبد الله بن زيد

Zayd who linked it up through a chain of narrators to the Prophet (MGB),
“It is better to spend a single Dirham for dye than to spend
one-thousand Dirhams for the sake of God, since it has fourteen
characteristics. It releases the wind from the ears, it improves the
sight. It softens the nasals. It makes your breath smell fresh,
strengthens the gums, and eliminates weakness. It lessens Satanic
inspirations, gladdens the angels, delivers glad tidings to the
believers, and enrages the disbelievers. It is both one’s ornament and
scent. It would make the questioning angels (Nakir and
Munkar**[[876]](footnotes_3.htm#b0876)** ) feel shy.”

14-2 Muhammad ibn Ali ibn ash-Shah narrated that Abu Hamid quoted Abu
Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Salih al-Tamimy, on
the authority of his father, on the authority of Anas ibn Muhammad Abu
Malik, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Ja’far ibn
Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on the
authority of his grandfather (MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn Abi
Talib (MGB), that in his will to Ali (MGB), God’s Prophet (MGB) told
him, “O Ali! It is better to spend a single Dirham for dye than to spend
one-thousand Dirhams for the sake of Allah since it has fourteen
characteristics. It releases the wind from the ears, it improves the
sight. It softens the nasals. It scents the flavor, strengthens the
gums, and eliminates weakness. It lessens Satanic inspirations, gladdens
the angels, delivers glad tidings to the believers, and enrages the
disbelievers. It is both one’s ornament and scent. It would make the
questioning angels (Nakir and Munkar**[[877]](footnotes_3.htm#b0877)** )
feel shy. That would constitute one’s innocence in the grave.”

14-3 Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bandar al-Shafe’ee al-Furqany in
Furqan narrated that Abu Bakr Mosadat ibn Asma’ quoted Abu Amr Ahmad ibn
Hazim ibn Muhammad ibn Yunus ibn Muhammad ibn Hazim Abi Qarzat
al-Qaffari - a companion of the Prophet of God, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Kanasah Abu Yahya Al-Asady, his father, on the authority of
Hisham ibn Urwah**[[878]](footnotes_3.htm#b0878)** , on the authority of
Uthman ibn Urwah, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Az-Zubayr ibn al-Awam that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Dye your hair in
such a way that you do not look like the Christians or the Jews.”

14-4 Abu Muhammad - Muhammad ibn Abdullah al-Shafe’ee in Furqana
narrated that Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Ash’as quoted Abu Hatam
Muhammad ibn Idris, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abdullah al-Ansari,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Amr ibn Al-Qamat, on the authority of
Abi Salma, on the authority of Abi Hurayrih that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “Dye your hair in such a way that you do not look like the
Christians or the Jews.”

#### رفع الحديث إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال: درهم في الخضاب أفضل من نفقة ألف درهم في سبيل الله، وفيه أربع عشرة خصلة: يطرد الريح من الاذنين، ويجلو الغشاوة عن البصر، ويلين الخياشيم، ويطيب النكهة، ويشد اللثة، ويذهب بالضنى ويقل وسوسة الشيطان، وتفرح به الملائكة. ويستبشر به المؤمن، ويغبظ به الكافر، وهو زينة وطيب، وبراء‌ة في قبره، ويستحيى منه منكر ونكير. {.t0}

#### 14-2 حدثنا محمد بن علي بن الشاه قال: حدثنا أبوحامد قال: حدثنا أبويزيد قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن صالح التميمي، عن أبيه قال: حدثنا أنس بن محمد بن أبومالك، عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي ابن أبي طالب عليهم السلام عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال في وصيته له: يا علي درهم في الخضاب أفضل من ألف درهم ينفق في سبيل الله، وفيه أربع عشرة خصلة: يطرد الريح من الاذنين، ويجلو البصر، ويلين الخياشيم، ويطيب النكهة، ويشد اللثة، ويذهب بالضنى، ويقل وسوسة الشيطان، وتفرح به الملائكة، ويستبشر به المؤمن، ويغيظ به الكافر، وهو زينة وطيب، ويستحيى منه منكر ونكير، وهو براء‌ة له في قبره.

#### 14-3حدثنا أبوأحمد محمد بن جعفر البندار الشافعي الفرغاني بفرغانة قال: حدثنا أبوبكر مسعدة بن أسمع قال: حدثنا أبوعمرو أحمد بن حازم بن محمد بن يونس ابن محمد بن حازم أبي غرزة الغفاري صاحب رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله قال أحمد: أخبرنا محمد ابن كناسة أبويحيى الاسدي قال: حدثنا هشام بن عروة، عن عثمان بن عروة، عن أبيه، عن الزبير بن العوام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: غيروا الشيب ولا تتشبهوا باليهود والنصارى.

#### 14-4 حدثنا أبومحمد محمد بن عبد الله الشافعي بفرغانة قال: أخبرنا أبوجعفر محمد ابن جعفر الاشعث قال: حدثنا أبوحاتم محمد بن إدريس قال: حدثنا محمد بن عبد الله الانصاري، عن محمد بن عمرو بن علقمة، عن أبي سلمة عن أبي هريرة قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: غيروا الشيب ولا تتشبهوا باليهود والنصارى.

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “I heard
these two last traditions regarding the use of dye from Zubayr (ibn
al-Awam) and Abi Hurayrih. The
Nasabites**[[879]](footnotes_3.htm#b0879)** denounce this act of the
Shiites in use of dye for the hair. However, they cannot deny these two
narrations that are cited from themselves.

PERFORM MAJOR ABLUTIONS IN FOURTEEN CIRCUMSTANCES
-------------------------------------------------

14-5 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr
al-Bazanty, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Sin’an, on the authority of
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “One should make major ritual ablutions
(ghusl) in fourteen circumstances: 1- For the deceased. 2- After
becoming impure due to sexual intercourse. 3- Once you perform the major
ritual ablutions (ghusl) for the deceased and shroud the corpse, or when
you touch the corpse after if gets cold. 4- On Fridays. 5- On the day of
Eid ul-Azha. 6- On the day of Eid ul-Fitr. 7- On the day of
Arafat.**[[880]](footnotes_3.htm#b0880)** 8- On the day of wearing the
Ihram (Taharrum)**[[881]](footnotes_3.htm#b0881)** and entering the
House of God. 9- Upon entering the Ka’ba. 10- Upon entering the Shrines
in Mecca and Medina. 11- On the pilgrimage day. 12- On the night of the
19th of Ramazan (on which one’s destiny is recorded). 13- On the night
of the 21st of Ramazan (on which the Trustees of the Prophets have died,
Jesus - the son of Mary (MGB) was raised up to Heaven and Moses (MGB)
died). 14- On the night of the 23rd of Ramazan (which is hoped to be the
Night of Power). ”**[[882]](footnotes_3.htm#b0882)**

14-6 Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Haysam al-Ajali - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Zakaria al-Qat’tan quoted Bakr
ibn Abdullah ibn Habib, on the authority of Tamim ibn Buhlool, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Abdullah ibn al-Fazl
al-Hashemi, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Zyad ibn
al-Monzar, on the authority of a group of the elders, on the authority
of Haziqat ibn al-Yaman, “Those who startled the Prophet’s she-camel
upon his return from the Battle of
Tabuk**[[883]](footnotes_3.htm#b0883)** were the following fourteen:

Abul Sharur, Abul Davahi, Abul Ma’azif and his father, Talha, Sa’ed ibn
Abi Vaqas, Abu Ubayda, Abul Oar, Al-Muqayrih, Salim - the servant of Ibn
Haziqat, Khalid ibn Valid, Amr ibn As, Abu Musa al-Ash’ari, and Abdul
Rahman ibn Oaf. They are the ones about whom the Honorable the Exalted
God revealed the following, ‘…and they meditated a plot which they were
unable to carry out:’**[[884]](footnotes_3.htm#b0884)**”

#### قال: مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: إنما أوردت هذين الخبرين في الخضاب أحدهما عن الزبير والآخر عن أبي هريرة لان أهل النصب ينكرون على الشيعة استعمال الخضاب ولا يقدرون على دفع ما يصح عنهما وفيهما حجة لنا عليهم.

##### الغسل في أربعة عشر موطنا

#### 14-5 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمدبن محمد بن عيسى، عن أحمدبن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي قال: حدثني عبد الله بن سنان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إن الغسل في أربعة عشرموطنا: غسل الميت، وغسل الجنب، وغسل من غسل الميت، وغسل الجمعة، والعيدين، ويوم عرفة، وغسل الاحرام ودخول الكعبة، ودخول الكعبة، ودخول الحرم، والزيارة، وليلة تسع عشرة، وإحدى وعشرين، وثلاث وعشرين من شهر رمضان.

##### اصحاب العقبة أربعة عشر رجلا

#### 14-6 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن الهيثم العجلي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن يحيى بن زكريا القطان، قال: حدثنا بكر بن عبد الله بن حبيب، قال: حدثنا تميم ابن بهلول، عن أبيه، عن عبد الله بن الفضل الهاشمي، عن أبيه، عن زياد بن المنذر قال: حدثني جماعة من المشيخة، عن حذيفة بن اليمان أنه قال: الذين نفروا برسول الله ناقته في منصرفه من تبوك أربعة عشر: أبوالشرور، وأبوالدواهي، وأبوالمعازف، وأبوه، وطلحة، وسعد بن أبي وقاص، وأبوعبيدة، وأبو الاعور، والمغيرة، وسالم مولى أبي حذيفة، وخالد بن وليد، وعمرو بن العاص، وأبو موسى الاشعري، وعبدالرحمن بن عوف، وهم الذين أنزل الله عز وجل فيهم "وَهَمُّوا بِمَا لَمْ يَنَالُوا."
