Part 15-on Fifteen-numbered Characteristics
===========================================

CALAMITIES WILL COME IF THE PEOPLE DO FIFTEEN THINGS
----------------------------------------------------

15-1 Al-Hassan ibn Abdullah ibn Sa’id al-Askari narrated that Muhammad
ibn Abdullah al-Baz’zaz quoted on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Ibrahim al-Ar’tar, on the authority of Abul-Rabi’a Suleiman ibn
Davood, on the authority of Faraj ibn Fuzalat, on the authority of Yahya
ibn Sa’id, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hanafyat, on the
authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “My
nation may experience serious trouble if they practice fifteen things.”
He (MGB) was asked, “O Prophet of God! What are these things?” He (MGB)
replied, “They are the following: the nation's capital is controlled by
a few special people; people do not honor what they are entrusted with;
people consider the payment of the alms-tax as a form of loss; men obey
their wives but they disobey their mothers; people are kind to their
friends but they hurt their fathers; the worst people in the society run
the affairs of the people and the best of the people fear the one who
runs the affairs and his wicked deeds; the mosques get filled with loud
(forbidden) sounds; people wear silk clothes; people play musical
instruments and hire singers; the latter people in the nation curse the
former ones. In this situation you can expect red winds,
landslides**[[885]](footnotes_3.htm#b0885)** , and drastic changes in
the people.

15-2 Abu Sa’id Muhammad ibn al-Fazl ibn Muhammad ibn Ishaq al-Mozakir
narrated that Abu Yahya l-Baz’zaz al-Neishaboory, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Hisan ibn Imran al-Balkhi, on the authority of Qutaybat ibn
Sa’id, on the authority of Faraj ibn Fuzalat, on the authority of Yahya
ibn Sa’id, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB), on the
authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib
(MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “My nation may experience serious
trouble if they practice fifteen things.” He (MGB) was asked, “O Prophet
of God! What are these things?” He (MGB) replied, “They are the
following: the nation's capital is controlled by a few special people;
people do not honor what they are entrusted with; people consider the
payment of the alms-tax as a form of loss; men obey their wives, and
disobey their mothers; people are kind to their friends, but they hurt
their fathers; the mosques get filled with loud (forbidden) sounds; the
worst people in the society run the affairs of the people; people play
musical instruments; and those of the latter ones of this nation curse
those of the former ones. In this situation you can expect red winds,
landslides**[[886]](footnotes_3.htm#b0886)** , and drastic changes in
the people.”

###### أبواب الخمسة عشر

##### اذا عملت الامة خمس عشرة خصلة حل بها البلاء

#### 15-1 حدثنا الحسن بن عبد الله بن سعيد العسكري قال: حدثنا محمد بن عبد الله البزاز قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن إبراهيم العطار قال: حدثنا أبوالربيع سليمان ابن داود قال: حدثنا فرج بن فضالة، عن يحيى بن سعيد، عن محمد بن الحنفية، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إذا عملت امتي خمس عشرة خصلة حل بها البلاء، قيل: يا رسول الله وما هي؟ قال: إذا كانت المغانم دولا ، والامانة مغنما، والزكاة مغرما، وأطاع الرجل زوجته، وعق امه، وبر صديقه، وجفا أباه، وكان زعيم القوم أرذلهم وأكرمه القوم مخافة شره، وارتفعت الاصوات في المساجد، ولبسوا الحرير، واتخذوا القينات وضربوا بالمعازف ولعن آخر هذه الامة أولها فليرتقب عند ذلك الريح الحمراء أو الخسف أو المسخ.

#### 15-2 حدثنا أبوسعيد محمد بن الفضل بن محمد بن إسحاق المذكر قال: حدثنا أبويحيى البزاز النيسابوري فيما أجازه لنا قال: حدثنا محمد بن حسان بن عمران البلخي قال: حدثنا قتيبة بن سعيد قال: حدثنا فرج بن فضالة، عن يحيى بن سعيد عن محمد بن علي، عن أبيه علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:إذا عملت امتي خمسة عشر خصلة حل بها البلاء، قيل: وماهي يا رسول الله؟ قال: إذا كان المغنم دولا، والامانة مغنما، والزكاة مغرما، وأطاع الرجل زوجته، وعق امه وبر صديقه، وجفا أباه، وارتفعت الاصوات في المساجد، وكان زعيم القوم أرذلهم وضربوا بالمعازف، ولعن آخر الامة أولها فليرتقبوا عند ذلك ريحا حمراء أو خسفا أو مسخا.

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “What the
Prophet (MGB) meant by saying ‘those of the latter ones of this nation
curse those of the former ones’ is the
Kharajites**[[887]](footnotes_3.htm#b0887)** who cursed the Commander of
the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) who was the first of the nation who believed
in the Honorable the Exalted God and His Prophet (MGB).”

A CHILD SHOULD BE INSTRUCTED TO FAST WHEN HE IS FIFTEEN OR SIXTEEN
------------------------------------------------------------------

15-3 Ja’far ibn Ali ibn al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih
al-Kufy - may God be pleased with him - narrated that his father Ali ibn
al-Hassan quoted his father Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abdullah ibn
al-Muqayrih al-Kufy, on the authority of Al-Ab’bas ibn Amer al-Qasbani,
on the authority of someone who quoted Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “A
child should be instructed to fast when he is fifteen or sixteen years
old.”

SAYING TAKBIRS IN MINA AFTER FIFTEEN UNITS OF PRAYERS ON THE DAYS OF AL-TASHRIQ **[[888]](footnotes_4.htm#b0888)**
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15-4 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Al-Abbas ibn Ma’ruf, on the authority of Ali ibn Mahzyar, on the
authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Hurayz ibn Abdullah, on
the authority of Zurarah ibn A’ayn, “I asked Abi Ja’far As-Sadiq, ‘Are
the Takbirs**[[889]](footnotes_4.htm#b0889)** on the days of
Tashriq**[[890]](footnotes_4.htm#b0890)** to be said after fifteen units
of prayers?’ The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘You must say the Takbirs after
fifteen units of prayers in Mina and after ten units of prayers
elsewhere. On the day of the offering and after the noon prayer you must
say, ‘Allahu akbarullahu akbarullahu akbar, La ilaha illallah Allahu
akbar Allahu akbar va lillahi-hamd Allahu akbar Ala mahadana Vallahu
Akbar Ala Ma Razaqna Men Bahimat al-An’am.’ This is to be said after ten
units of prayers elsewhere since the people start to move from Mina (on
the 12th day of Dhul-Hijja) and those who are at Mina should say these
Takbirs until the last person.”

15-5 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Al-Hussein ibn Ishaq - the merchant, on the authority of Ali ibn
Mahzyar, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa and Fuzalat, on the
authority of Muawiyah ibn Ammar that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) was
questioned about the saying of Takbirs on days of
Al-Tashriq**[[891]](footnotes_4.htm#b0891)** for the people not in Mina.
The Imam (MGB) said, ‘On the day of the offering, the Takbirs must be
said after the noon prayer and for those at Mina the Takbirs must be
said after fifteen units of prayers.”

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: يعني بقوله ولعن آخر هذه الامة أولها الخوارج الدين يلعنون أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام وهو أول الامة إيمانا بالله عز وجل وبرسوله صلى الله عليه وآله.

##### يؤدب الصبي على الصوم ما بين خمس عشرة سنة إلى ست عشرة سنة

#### 15-3 حدثنا جعفر بن علي بن الحسن بن علي بن عبد الله بن المغيرة الكوفي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أبي علي بن الحسن، عن أبيه الحسن بن علي بن عبد الله بن المغيرة الكوفي: عن العباس بن عامر القصباني عمن ذكره، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: يؤدب الصبي على الصوم ما بين خمس عشرة سنة إلى ست عشرة سنة.

##### التكبير في أيام التشريق بمنى في دبر خمس عشرة صلاة

#### 15-4 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن العباس بن معروف، عن علي بن مهزيار، عن حماد بن عيسى عن حريز بن عبد الله، عن زرارة بن أعين قال: قلت لابي جعفر عليه السلام: التكبير أيام التشريق في دبر الصلوات، قال: التكبير بمنى في دبر خمس عشرة صلاة وبالامصار في دبر عشر صلوات أول التكبير في دبر صلاة الظهر يوم النحر تقول: "الله أكبر، الله أكبر، لا إله إلا الله والله أكبر، الله أكبر، ولله الحمد، الله أكبر، على ما هدانا، والله أكبر على ما رزقنا من بهيمة الانعام" وإنما جعل في سائر الامصار في دبر عشر صلوات التكبير أنه إذا نفر الناس في النفر الاول أمسك أهل الامصار، عن التكبير وكبر أهل منى ماداموا بمنى إلى النفر الاخير.

#### 15-5 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن الحسين ابن إسحاق التاجر، عن علي بن مهزيار، عن حماد بن عيسى، وفضالة، عن معاوية ابن عمار قال:سألت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام عن التكبير أيام التشريق لاهل الامصار، فقال: يوم النحر صلاة الظهر إلى انقضاء عشر صلوات، ولاهل منى في خمس عشرة صلاة، فإن أقام إلى الظهر والعصر كبر.

THE REWARDS OF FASTING IN THE MONTH OF RAJAB
--------------------------------------------

15-6 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi
Nasr al-Bazanty, on the authority of Aban ibn Uthman, on the authority
of Kasir al-Nava that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Noah (MGB) rode
his Ark on the first day of Rajab. He ordered everyone who was with him
to fast on that day and said, ‘The Fire shall go to a distance of ten
years away from whoever fasts on this day. Seven gates of Hell shall be
closed for anyone who fasts for seven days during this month. Eight
gates of Paradise shall open up to anyone who fasts for eight days
during this month. The Honorable the Exalted God will grant more rewards
to whoever fasts more than this.”

15-6 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Al-Hassan ibn al-Hussein ibn Abdul Aziz ibn al-Mohtadi quoted Sayf
ibn al-Mobarak ibn Yazid - the servant of Abil Hassan Musa (MGB), on the
authority of his father Al-Mobarak, on the authority of Abil Hassan
(MGB), “Noah (MGB) boarded his ark on the first day of Rajab.” He
continued the rest of the tradition just as in the above tradition. I
have included what I have found on the rewards for fasting in the month
of Rajab in the book Faza’el Rajab.

APPLYING DEPILATORY ONCE EVERY FIFTEEN DAYS
-------------------------------------------

15-7 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father and Muhammad
ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased with them -
narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of some
friends that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Applying
depilatory**[[892]](footnotes_4.htm#b0892)** once every fifteen days is
a tradition. You should borrow money for doing so, if you cannot apply
depilatory for twenty-one days. You are neither a Muslim nor a believer,
if you do not apply depilatory for more than forty days. You are not
honorable either.”

##### ثواب من صام خمسة عشر يوما من رجب

#### 15-6 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي، عن أبان بن عثمان، عن كثير النواء، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إن نوحا عليه السلام ركب السفينة أول يوم من رجب فأمر من كان معه أن يصوموا ذلك اليوم، وقال: من صام ذلك اليوم تباعدت النار عنه مسيرة [عشيرة] سنة، فمن صام سبعة أيام أغلقت عنه أبواب النيران السبعة،ومن صام ثمانية أيام فتحت له أبواب الجنان الثمانية ومن صام خمسة عشر يوما اعطي مسألته، ومن زاد زاده الله عز وجل.

#### 15-6 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني الحسن بن الحسين بن عبدالعزيز بن المهتدي، عن سيف بن المبارك بن يزيد مولي أبي الحسن موسى عليه السلام عن أبيه المبارك، عن أبي الحسن عليه السلام قال: إن نوحا ركب السفينة أول يوم من رجب، وذكر الحديث مثله سواء، وقد أخرجت ما رويته في ثواب صوم رجب في كتاب فضائل رجب.

##### السنة في النورة في كل خمسة عشر يوما

#### 15-7 حدثنا أبي ومحمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن بعض أصحابنا، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: السنة في النورة في كل خمسة عشر يوما، فمن أتت عليه إحدى وعشرين يوما فليستدين على الله عز وجل وليتنور، ومن أتت عليه أربعون يوما ولم يتنور فليس بمؤمن ولا مسلم ولا كرامة.
