Part 16- On Sixteen-numbered Characteristics
============================================

THE SIXTEEN RIGHTS OF A SCHOLAR
-------------------------------

16-1 Abul Qasim al-Hassan ibn Muhammad ibn Sa’id al-Hashemi al-Kufy in
the Kufa Mosque narrated that Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Qat’tani quoted
Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Hisham al-Warraq, on the authority of the

###### أبواب الستة عشر

##### من حق العالم ست عشرة خصلة

#### 16-1 حدثنا أبوالقاسم الحسن بن محمد بن سعيد الهاشمي الكوفي في مسجده بالكوفة قال: حدثنا محمد بن إبراهيم القطفاني قال: حدثنا جعفر بن محمد بن هشـام

jurisprudent - Ali ibn Muhammad al-Sadoosi, on the authority of
Al-Hussein ibn Alvan, on the authority of Abdullah ibn al-Hassan ibn
al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of his grandfather, on the authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib
(MGB), “The rights of a scholar include the following: You should not
ask him too many questions. You should not rush to answer questions
before he does. You should not insist when he doesn’t want to respond.
You should not be pushy with him (pull on his clothes) when he gets
tired. You should not point at him with your fingers. You should not
wink at him. You should not whisper in someone’s ears in his class. You
should not seek his faults. You should not talk too much or argue with
him saying that others have said things opposite to his views. You
should not divulge his secrets. You should not gossip about anyone in
front of him. You should support him both in his presence and in his
absence. When you go to see him with some people present there, you
should greet all of them and express especial greetings for him. You
should sit in front of him. You should rush to supersede others in
fulfilling his needs whenever he needs something. Do not get upset if
you have to wait a while to talk with him, since his case is similar to
the case of a palm tree. That is, you have to wait for a while before
you can get some dates. A scholar is just like one who fasts, stays up
at night and strives in the way of God. Once a scholar dies it causes a
gap in Islam which can never be filled up until the Resurrection Day. In
fact, there are seventy-thousand special heavenly angels appointed to
follow those who seek knowledge.

SIXTEEN CHARACTERISTICS CAUSE POVERTY AND SIXTEEN CHARACTERISTICS CAUSE AN INCREASED SHARE OF DAILY BREAD
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16-2 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted Muhammad ibn Ali
al-Qurashi al-Kufy, on the authority of Abu Zyad Muhammad ibn Zyad
al-Basry, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Abdul Rahman al-Madani, on
the authority of Sabit ibn Abi Sofayat al-Somali, on the authority of
Soor ibn Sa’id, on the authority of his father Sa’id ibn Alaqat, “I
heard the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) say, ‘The following
deeds are all causes of poverty: not dusting off the spider webs from
the walls of the house; peeing in the bath; eating food before
purification of the body after having sex; associating with people who
always waste their time with vain talk; combing hair while standing up;
not taking the trash out of the house; false swearing; fornication;
greed; sleeping between the evening and the night prayer; sleeping
before sunset; becoming a liar; listening to music too much; chiding
away a poor man who remembers God at night; improper spending; and
cutting off relations from relatives.’

#### الوراق قال: حدثنا علي بن محمد السدوسي الفقيه قال: حدثنا الحسين بن علوان، عن عبد الله بن الحسن بن الحسن بن علي بن أبي طالب، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي ابن أبي طالب عليهم السلام قال: إن من حق العالم أن لا تكثر السؤال عليه، ولا تسبقه في الجواب، ولاتلح عليه إذا أعرض، ولا تأخذ بثوبه إذا كسل، ولا تشير إليه بيدك، ولا تغمزه بعينك، ولا تساره في مجلسه، ولا تطلب عوراته، وأن لا تقول: قال فلان خلاف قولك، ولا تفشي له سرا، ولا تغتاب عنده أحدا، وأن تحفظ له شاهدا وغائبا،و أن تعم القوم بالسلام وتخصه بالتحية، وتجلس بين يديه، وإن كانت له حاجة سبقت القوم إلى خدمته،ولا تمل من طول صحبته فإنما هو مثل النخلة، فانتظر متى تسقط عليك منها منفعة. والعالم بمنزلة الصائم القائم المجاهد في سبيل الله، وإذا مات العالم انثلم في الاسلام ثلمة لا تسد إلى يوم القيامة، وإن طالب العلم ليشيعة سبعون ألف ملك من مقر بي السماء. {.t0}

##### ست عشرة خصلة تورث الفقر وسبع عشرة خصلة تزيد في الرزق

#### 16-2 حدثنا محمد بن علي بن ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عمي محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن محمد بن علي القرشي الكوفي قال: حدثنا أبوزياد محمد بن زياد البصري قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن عبدالرحمن المدني قال: حدثنا ثابت بن أبي صفية الثمالي، عن ثور بن سعيد، عن أبيه سعيد بن علاقة قال: سمعت أمير المؤمنين علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام يقول: ترك نسج العنكبوت في البيت يورث الفقر، والبول في الحمام يورث الفقر، والاكل على الجنابة يورث الفقر، والتخلل بالطرفاء يورث الفقر، والتمشط من قيام يورث الفقر، وترك القمامة في البيت يورث الفقر، واليمين الفاجرة تورث الفقر، والزنا تورث الفقر، وإظهار الحرص يورث الفقر، والنوم بين العشائين يورث الفقر، والنوم قبل طلوع الشمس يورث الفقر، وترك التقدير في المعيشة يورث الفقر، وقطيعة الرحم يورث الفقر، واعتياد الكذب يورث الفقر، وكثرة الاستماع إلى الغناء يورث الفقر، ورد السائل الذكر بالليل يورث الفقر.

Imam Ali (MGB) then said, ‘Do you want me to tell you what will increase
your share of daily bread?’

The people said, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Yes.’

He (MGB) said, ‘The following deeds will increase your share of daily
bread: saying your noon and afternoon, or evening and night prayers one
right after the other; saying some supplications after the night and
morning prayer; visiting the relatives; sweeping the entrance of the
house; sympathizing with your believing brothers; getting up early in
the morning and going out to work to earn the daily bread; asking God
for forgiveness; being trustworthy; saying what is right; going to pray
when the call to prayer is announced; not talking in the toilet; not
being greedy; being grateful to the Owner of the blessings; avoiding
false swearing; making ablution before eating; eating what might fall
off of the table-cloth**[[893]](footnotes_4.htm#b0893)** . In addition,
God the Almighty will fend off seventy types of calamities from whoever
praises God thirty times each day - the simplest of which being
poverty.’”

SIXTEEN CHARACTERISTICS DUE TO WISDOM
-------------------------------------

16-3 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar and Ahmad
ibn Idris quoted Abu Sa’id Sahl ibn Zyad al-Adamy, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Zayd al-Zyat, on the authority of Amr ibn
Uthman al-Khazzaz, on the authority of Sabit ibn Dinar, on the authority
of Sa’ed ibn Tarif al-Khifaf, on the authority of Al-Asbaq ibn
al-Nobatat that the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said,
“Honesty equals faithfulness. Lying equals treason. Politeness equals
nobility. Determination equals accomplishment. Wastefulness equals
destruction. Frugality equals being wealthy. Greed equals lowness.
Lowness equals debasement. Generosity equals friendship. Meanness equals
loneliness. Kindness equals humbleness. Disability equals debasement.
Following aspirations equals deviation. Loyalty equals manliness.
Selfishness equals destruction. Perseverance equals prosperity.”

SIXTEEN GROUPS FROM THE NATION OF MUHAMMAD (MGB) WHO DO NOT LOVE THE MEMBERS OF THE HOLY HOUSEHOLD BUT DESPISE THEM AND HAVE ANIMOSITY TOWARDS THEM **[[894]](footnotes_4.htm#b0894)**
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16-4 The following tradition has been narrated by Ahmad ibn al-Hassan
al-Qat’tan and Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Musa - may God be pleased with them -
who narrated that Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Zakaria al-Qat’tan quoted Abu
Bakr - Bakr ibn Abdullah ibn Habib, on the authority of Tamim ibn
Buhlool, on the authority of Abu Muawiyah al-Zarir, on the authority of
Al-A’amash, on

#### ثم قال عليه السلام: ألا أنبئكم بعد ذلك بما يزيد في الرزق قالوا: بلى يا أمير المؤمنين فقال: الجمع بين الصلاتين يزيد في الرزق، والتعقيب بعد الغداة وبعد العصر يزيد في الرزق، وصلة الرحم تزيد في الرزق، وكسح الفنا يزيد في الرزق، ومواساة الاخ في الله عز وجل يزيد في الرزق، والبكور في طلب الرزق يزيد في الرزق، والاستغفار يزيد في الرزق، واستعمال الامانة يزيد في الرزق، وقول الحق يزيد في الرزق، وإجابة المؤذن يزيد في الرزق، وترك الكلام في الخلاء يزيد في الرزق، وترك الحرص يزيد في الرزق، وشكر المنعم يزيد في الرزق، واجتناب اليمين الكاذبة يزيد في الرزق، والوضوء قبل الطعام يزيد في الرزق، وأكل ما يسقط من الخوان يزيد في الرزق، ومن سبح الله كل يوم ثلاثين مرة دفع الله عز وجل عنه سبعين نوعا من البلاء أيسرها الفقر.

##### ست عشرة خصلة من الحكم

#### 16-3 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، وأحمد بن إدريس جميعا قالا: حدثنا أبوسعيد سهل بن زياد الآدمي، عن محمد بن الحسين بن زيد الزيات عن عمرو بن عثمان الخزاز، عن ثابت بن دينار، عن سعد بن طريف الخفاف، عن الاصبغ بن نباتة قال: كان أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام يقول: الصدق أمانة، والكذب خيانة، والادب رئاسة، والحزم كياسة، والسرف متواة، والقصد مثراة، والحرص مفقرة، والدناء‌ة، محقرة، والسخاء قربة، واللؤم غربة، والرقة استكانة، والعجز مهانة، والهوى ميل، والوفاء كيل، والعجب هلاك، والصبر ملاك.

##### ستة عشر صنفا من أمة محمد صلى الله عليه وآله لا يحبون أهل بيته ويبغضونهم ويعادونهم

#### 16-4 حدثنا أحمد بن الحسن القطان، وعلي بن أحمد بن موسى رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا أحمد بن يحيى بن زكريا القطان قال: حدثنا أبو بكر بكر بن عبد الله بن حبيب، قال: حدثنا تميم بن بهلول قال: حدثنا أبو معاوية الضرير، عن الاعمش عن

the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB). The same has also
been narrated by Bakr ibn Abdullah ibn Habib who quoted Abdullah ibn
Muhammad ibn Nataviat, on the authority of Ali ibn Abdul Mumin
al-Zaferan al-Kufy, on the authority of Muslim ibn Khalid al-Zanji, on
the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq(MGB), on the authority of
his father (MGB), on the authority of his grandfather (MGB). The same
tradition has been narrated by Bakr ibn Abdullah ibn Habib, on the
authority of Al-Hassan ibn Sanán, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Barqy, on the authority of Muslim
ibn Khalid that Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB) said:

“Thirteen groups (Tamim said sixteen groups) of the nation of my
grandfather (MGB) do not like us. They do not teach the people to love
us. They detest us. They do not follow us. They abandon us and advise
the people to abandon us. They are truly our enemies and they deserve
the Fire of Hell.”

He was asked, ‘O (grand)son of God’s Prophet (MGB)! May God fend them
off from you. Who are they?’

He (MGB) said, “They are the following:

(1) Those who have an extra organ. You cannot find any one who has an
extra organ but that he is an enemy of us and he does not show loyalty
to us.

(2) Those who are born defective. There are none whom the honorable the
Exalted God has created to be defective who are not opposed to us in
their hearts.

(3) Those who are one-eyed from birth (the right eye in specific). You
will not find anyone whom God has created to be blind but that he fights
against us and he is on peaceful terms with our enemies.

(4) The men with ever-lasting black hair - those whose hair never turns
grey no matter how long they live. Their beard stays black like the neck
of a crow. They always raly the people against us and increase the
number of our enemies.

(5) Men who are really dark. You will not find anyone of them but that
he curses at us and praises our enemies.

(6) Bald men. You do not see any bald men but that he slanders, defames,
and goes about with slander against us.

(7) The men who are greenish. Although they are many, no one of such men
but that he welcomes us in our presence but defames us in our absence
(i.e. two-faced), seeking to betray us.

#### جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام. قال بكر بن عبد الله بن حبيب: وحدثني عبد الله بن محمد بن ناطويه قال: حدثنا علي بن عبدالمؤمن الزعفراني الكوفي قال: حدثنا مسلم بن خالد الزنجي قال: حدثنا جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده عليهم السلام. قال: بكر بن عبد الله بن حبيب: وحدثني الحسن بن سنان قال: حدثني أبي، عن محمد بن خالد البرقي، عن مسلم بن خالد، عن جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام قالوا كلهم: ثلاثة عشر، وقال تميم: ستة عشر، صنفا من امة جدي صلى الله عليه وآله لا يحبوننا، ولا يحبوننا إلى الناس، ويبغضوننا ولا يتولننا، ويخذلوننا ويخذلون الناس عنا، فهم أعداؤنا حقا لهم نار جهنم ولهم عذاب الحريق. {.t0}

#### قال: قلت: بينهم لي يا بن رسول الله وقاك الله شرهم.

#### قال: الزائد في خلقه فلا ترى أحدا من الناس في خلقه زيادة إلا وجدته لنا مناصبا، ولم تجده لنا مواليا.

#### والناقص الخلق من الرجال، فلا ترى لله عز وجل خلقا ناقصة الخلقة إلا وجدت في قلبه علينا غلا.

#### والاعور باليمين للولادة، فلا ترى لله خلقا ولد أعور اليمين إلا كان لنا محاربا، ولاعدائنا مسالما.

#### والغربيب من الرجال، فلا ترى لله عز وجل خلقا غربيبا وهو الذي قد طال عمره فلم يبيض شعره وترى لحيته مثل حنك الغراب إلا كان علينا مؤلبا ولاعدائنا مكاثرا.

#### والحلكوك من الرجال، فلا ترى منهم أحدا إلا كان لنا شتاما ولاعدائنا مداحا.

#### والاقرع من الرجال، فلا ترى رجلا به قرع إلا وجدته همازا لمازا مشاء بالنميمة علينا.

#### والمفصص بالخضرة من الرجال فلا ترى منهم أحدا وهم كثيرون إلا وجدته يلقانا بوجهه ويستدبرنا بآخر يبتغي لنا الغوائل.

(8) The ostracized men. Whenever you meet any of them, you will find
them incurring the animosity of us and openly misleading the people.

(9) The leprous men. Whenever you meet any of them, you will find them
waylaying us and ambushing our followers and us, intending to mislead us
from the straight path.

(10) The leucodermic ones, who are the firewood of Hell. They will
inevitably be lodged there.

(11) The sodomized ones. Whenever you meet any of them, you will find
them chanting with dispraise of us and rallying others against us.

(12) The people of a twon called Sejestan. They are our enemies and
antagonists. They are verily the wickedest of all people and creatures.
May the chastisement that is decided for Pharaoh, Haman, and Korah be
decided for them.

(13) The people of a city called Ray. They are the enemies of Allah, His
Messenger, and the Messenger’s Household. They consider waging war
against the Prophet’s Household as holy war and they consider their
properties to be spoils of war. May the chastisement of disgrace inflict
them in this world and in the Hereafter and may endless torture be
inflicted upon them.

(14) The people of a city called Mosul. They are the most vicious
inhabitants of this earth.

(15) The people of a city called al-Zawra, which will be built in the
future. They quench their thirst with our blood and flatter the rulers
by means of showing hatred against us. They show loyalty to our enemies,
consider fighting against us as an obligatory duty, and consider waging
war agaisnt us as inevitable necessity.

O son, beware of these peoples. Beware of them! If two of them can put a
hand on one of us, they will definitely intend to kill him. ”
**[[895]](footnotes_4.htm#b0895)**

#### والمنبوذ من الرجال، فلا تلقى منهم أحدا إلا وجدته لنا عدوا مضلا مبينا.

#### والابرص من الرجال فلا تلقى منهم أحدا إلا وجدته يرصد لنا المراصد، ويقعد لنا ولشيعتنا مقعدا ليضلنا بزعمه عن سواء السبيل.

#### والمجذوم وهم حصب جهنم هم لها واردون، والمنكوح فلا ترى منهم أحدا إلا وجدته يتغنى بهجائنا ويؤلب علينا.

#### وأهل مدينة تدعى سجستان هم لنا أهل عداوة ونصب وهم شر الخلق والخليقة، عليهم من العذاب ما على فرعون وهامان وقارون.

#### وأهل مدينة تدعى الري هم أعداء الله وأعداء رسوله وأعداء أهل بيته يرون حرب أهل بيت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله جهادا، ومالهم مغنما، فلهم عذاب الخزي في الحياة الدنيا والآخرة ولهم عذاب مقيم.

#### وأهل مدينة تدعى الموصل هم شر من على وجه الارض.

#### وأهل مدينة تسمى الزوراء تبنى في آخر الزمان يستشفون بدمائنا ويتقربون ببغضنا، يوالون في عداوتنا ويرون حربنا فرضا وقتالنا حتما.

#### يا بني فاحذر هؤلاء، ثم احذرهم، فإنه لا يخلو اثنان منهم بأحد من أهلك إلا هموا بقتله. واللفظ لتميم من أول الحديث إلى آخره.
