Part 17-on Seventeen-numbered Characteristics
=============================================

ONE SHOULD MAKE GHUSL FOR SEVENTEEN OCCASIONS
---------------------------------------------

17-1 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his
father, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Hurayz
ibn Abdullah, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim, on the authority
of Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB), “One should make major ritual ablutions
(ghusl)

###### باب السبعة عشر

##### الغسل في سبعة عشر موطنا

#### 17-1حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه عن حماد بن عيسى، عن حريز بن عبد الله قال: قال محمد بن مسلم، عن أبي جعفـر عليه السلام: الغسل في سبعة عشر موطنا: ليلة سبع عشرة من شهر رمضان وهي ليلة التقاء الجمعين ليلة بدر وليلة تسع عشر، وفيها يكتب الوفد وفد السنة، وليلة

for seventeen occasions: 1. On the night of the 17th of Ramazan which is
the night on which the army of Islam encountered the army of Quraysh in
the Battle of Badr. 2. On the night of the 19th of Ramazan on which
one’s destiny is recorded. 3. On the night of the 21st of Ramazan on
which the Trustees of the Prophets have died, Jesus - the son of Mary
(MGB) was raised up to Heaven and Moses (MGB) died. 4. The night of the
23rd of Ramazan which is hoped to be the Night of Power.
**[[896]](footnotes_4.htm#b0896)**

In another tradition narrated by Abdurrahman Ibn Aba Abdullah Basry we
read that he had heard Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, “You should also
make major ritual ablutions (ghusl) on the night of the 24th of Ramazan.
It is best to perform the major ritual ablutions (ghusl) on both
nights.”

Now returning to the tradition above narrated by Muhammad ibn Muslim, on
the authority of Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB): 6- On the day of Eid
ul-Azha. 7- On the day of Eid ul-Fitr. 8 and 9 - Upon entering the
shrines in Mecca and Medina. 10- On the day of wearing the Ihram
(Taharrum).**[[897]](footnotes_4.htm#b0897)** 11- On the pilgrimage day.
12- On the day of entering the House of God. 13- On the day of
Al-Tarviat. **[[898]](footnotes_4.htm#b0898)** 14- On the day of
Arafat.**[[899]](footnotes_4.htm#b0899)** 15- Upon performing the major
ritual ablutions (ghusl) for the deceased. Once you perform the major
ritual ablutions (ghusl) for the deceased and shroud the corpse, or when
you touch the corpse after if gets cold. 16- On Fridays. 17- If on total
eclipse of the sun you wake up and you had not said the prayers for the
eclipse of the sun, then you should make major ritual ablutions (ghusl)
and say the prayers.

#### إحدى وعشرين وهي الليلة التى مات فيها أوصياء النبيين عليهم السلام، وفيها رفع عيسى بن مريم، وقبض موسى عليهما السلام، وليلة ثلاث وعشرين يرجى فيها ليلة القدر. {.t0}

#### وقال عبدالرحمن بن أبي عبد الله البصري: قال لي أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: اغتسل في ليلة أربعة وعشرين ما عليك أن تعمل في الليلتين جميعا.

#### رجع الحديث إلى محمد بن مسلم في الغسل ويوم العيدين، وإذا دخلت الحرمين، ويوم تحرم، ويوم الزيارة، ويوم تدخل البيت، ويوم التروية، ويوم عرفة، وغسل الميت، وإذا غسلت ميتا وكفنته أو مسسته بعد ما يبرد، ويوم الجمعة، وغسل الكسوف إذا احترق القرص كله فاستيقظت ولم تصل فاغتسل واقض الصلاة.
