Part 20-on Twenty and Above-numbered Characteristics
====================================================

TWENTY CHARACTERISTICS IN LOVE FOR THE HOLY HOUSEHOLD
-----------------------------------------------------

20-1 Muhammad ibn al-Fazl ibn Zaydoye al-Jalab al-Hamedany in Hamedan
narrated that Ibrahim ibn Amroos al-Hamedany quoted Al-Hassan ibn
Isma’il, on the authority of Sa’id ibn al-Hikam, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Al-O’za’ee, on the authority of Yahya ibn
Abi Kasir, on the authority of Abi Salma (who is Abu Salma ibn Abdul
Rahman), on the authority of Abi Sa’ed al-Khidry that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “Whomever God has bestowed with the love of the Divine
Leaders (MGB) from my Household has received the prosperity of this
world and the Hereafter. He should have no doubt that he will go to
Heaven. There are twenty properties in the love of my Household: ten for
this world and ten for the Hereafter. The ten for this world are:
abstinence;

###### ابواب العشرين وما فوقه

##### في حب أهل البيت عليهم السلام عشرون خصل

#### 20-1حدثنا محمد بن الفضل بن زيدويه الجلاب الهمداني بهمدان قال: حدثنا إبراهيم بن عمروس الهمداني قال: حدثنا الحسن بن إسماعيل، عن سعيد بن الحكم عن أبيه، عن الاوزاعي، عن يحيى بن أبي كثير، عن أبي سلمة، عن أبي سعد الخدري قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: من رزقه الله حب الائمة من أهل بيتي فقد أصاب خير الدنيا والآخرة، فلا يشكن أحد أنه في الجنة فإن في حب أهل بيتـي عشرون خصلة، عشر منها في الدنيا وعشر منها في الآخرة، أما التي في الدنيا

eagerness to acquire knowledge; piety in religion; inclination to
worship; repentance before death; pleasure with staying up at night (for
praying or supplications); not being envious of what other people own;
abiding by what is divinely right and wrong; dislike of this world; and
generosity. And the ten for the Hereafter are: there will be no
Reckoning for him; his deeds will not be measured; his record of deeds
will be given to his right hand (implying that he is saved); freedom
from the Fire of Hell will be promised for him; his face will be white;
he will be wearing Heavenly garments; he will be given the right to
intercede on behalf of one-hundred members of his family; God the
Almighty will look upon him with His Mercy; he will be wearing a crown -
one of the Heavenly Crowns; and he will enter Heaven without any
Reckoning. Then blessed be**[[910]](footnotes_4.htm#b0910)** those who
love the Members of my Household.”

TWENTY CHARACTERISTICS OF ONE WHO BELIEVES IN GOD
-------------------------------------------------

20-2 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Mihran,
on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hussein ibn Ubaydullah al-Yashkari, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Masna al-Hazrami, on the authority of
Uthman ibn Zayd, on the authority of Jabir ibn Yazid that Abi Ja’far
al-Baqir (MGB) said, “There are twenty rights for a believer incumbent
upon the Honorable the Exalted God. It is incumbent upon the Blessed the
Sublime God not to put him through such a trial which would force him
out of the religion. It is incumbent upon God not to leave him without
any food or clothing. It is incumbent upon God not to let him be blamed
by his enemies. It is incumbent upon God not to debase or belittle him.
It is incumbent upon God not to divulge his secrets. It is incumbent
upon God not to take away his life by drowning or burning. It is
incumbent upon God not to have anything overtake him or for him to
overtake something. It is incumbent upon God to help him out of the
plots of those who plot. It is incumbent upon God to safeguard him from
being overpowered by the oppressors. It is incumbent upon God to
associate him with us in this world and the Hereafter. It is incumbent
upon God not to give him a disease that would make His creation look
bad. It is incumbent upon God to safeguard him from
vitiligo**[[911]](footnotes_4.htm#b0911)** and leprosy. It is incumbent
upon God not to take away his life after having done a major sin. It is
incumbent upon God to remind him of his sins so that he may repent. It
is incumbent upon God not to deny him of the knowledge of His Proof. It
is incumbent upon God not to make what is wrong dear in his heart. It is
incumbent upon God to resurrect him along with us on the Resurrection
Day with the light of his

#### فالزهد والحرص على العمل، والورع في الدين، والرغبة في العبادة، والتوبة قبل الموت، والنشاط في قيام الليل، واليأس مما في أيدي الناس، والحفظ لامر الله ونهيه عز وجل، والتاسعة بغض الدنيا، والعاشرة السخا، وأما التي في الآخرة فلا ينشر له ديوان، ولا ينصب له ميزان، ويعطى كتابه بيمينه، ويكتب له براء‌ة من النار، ويبيض وجهه، ويكسى من حلل الجنة، ويشفع في مائة من أهل بيته، وينظر الله عز وجل إليه بالرحمة ويتوج من تيجان الجنة، والعاشرة يدخل الجنة بغير حساب فطوبى لمحبي أهل بيتي. {.t0}

##### للمؤمن على الله عز وجل عشرون خصلة

#### 20-2 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي قال: حدثني محمد بن عبد الله بن مهران قال: حدثني علي بن الحسين ابن عبيدالله اليشكري قال: حدثني محمد بن المثنى الحضرمي، عن عثمان بن زيد، عن جابر بن يزيد، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: للمؤمن على الله عز وجل عشرون خصلة يفي له بها، على الله تبارك وتعالى أن لا يفتنه ولا يضله، وله على الله أن لا يعريه ولا يجوعه، وله على الله أن لا يشمت به عدوه، وله على الله أن لا يخذله ويعزله،وله على الله أن لا يهتك ستره، وله على الله أن لا يميته غرقا ولا حرقا، وله على الله أن لا يقع على شيء ولا يقع عليه شيء، وله على الله أن يقيه مكر الماكرين، وله على الله أن يعيذه من سطوات الجبارين، وله على الله أن يجعله معنا في الدنيا والآخرة، وله على الله أن لا يسلط عليه من الادواء ما يشين خلقته، وله على الله أن يعيذه من البرص والجذام وله على الله أن لا يميته على كبيرة، وله على الله أن لا ينسيه مقامه في المعاصي حتى يحدث توبة، وله على الله أن لا يحجب عنه معرفته بحجته، وله على الله أن لا يعـزز في قـلبه الباطل، وله على الله

faith shining in front of him. It is incumbent upon God to make him
succeed in all good affairs. It is incumbent upon God not to make him
subdued by his enemies and be belittled. It is incumbent upon God to
have him end up securely and with faith and join him up with us in the
Highest Paradise. These are the Honorable the Exalted God’s conditions
for believers.”

THE REWARD FOR PERFORMING HAJJ PILGRIMAGE TWENTY TIMES
------------------------------------------------------

20-3 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn
Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Yahya al-Mu’azi, on the authority of Muhammad Khalid al-Tayalesi, on the
authority of Sayf ibn Umayrih, on the authority of Abu Bakr al-Hazrami
that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “A person who has gone on the
Hajj pilgrimage for twenty times will not see Hell nor will he hear its
roaring sounds.”

TWENTY-THREE PRAISEWORTHY CHARACTERISTICS OF AS-SAJJAD
------------------------------------------------------

20-4 Al-Muzaf’far ibn Ja’far (ibn al-Muzaf’far) ibn al-Alavi
al-Samarqandi - may God be pleased with him - narrated that Ja’far ibn
Muhammad ibn Mas’ood al-Ayashi quoted his father, on the authority of
Abdullah ibn Muhammad Khalid al-Tayalesi, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Zyad al-Azodi, on the authority
of Hamzih ibn Himran, on the authority of his father Humran ibn A’ayn,
on the authority of Abi Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB), “Ali ibn
al-Hussein (MGB) said one-thousand units of prayers each day and night
as the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) did. He (MGB) had
five-hundred date palms and used to say two units of prayers under each
of them.

When he (MGB) prayed, he stood very humbly and his color changed due to
his fear of God. He prayed as if a lowly servant was praying in front of
a Majestic King. His organs shook as he prayed out of fear of the
Honorable the Exalted God. He prayed like one who was saying farewell to
praying and that this was going to be his last prayer. One day his cloak
fell off his shoulder as he was praying. He did not correct this until
after he finished saying his prayers.

Some of his companions asked him about the reason for this. He (MGB)
replied, ‘Woe to you! Do you know who I was standing before? Indeed only
as much of a person’s prayer is accepted that he concentrates on.’ Then
the man said, ‘O thus we are all ruined!’

Then, the Imam (MGB) said, ‘No! Indeed the Honorable the Exalted God
would perfect your prayers with the recommendable (Nafila) prayers which

#### أن يحشره يوم القيامة ونوره يسعى بين يديه، وله على الله أن يوفقه لكل خير، وله على الله أن لا يسلط عليه عدوه فيذله، وله على الله أن يختم له بالامن والايمان ويجعله معنا في الرفيق الاعلى. هذه شرائط الله عز وجل للمؤمنين. {.t0}

##### ثواب من حج عشرين حجة

#### 20-3 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد ابن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى المعاذي، عن محمد بن خالد الطيالسي، عن سيف بن عميرة، عن أبي بكر الحضرمي قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: من حج عشرين حجة لم ير جهنم ولم يسمع شهيقها ولا زفيرها.

##### ذكر ثلاث وعشرين خصلة من الخصال المحمودة التى وصف بها على بن الحسين زين العابدين عليهما السلام

#### 20-4 حدثنا المظفر بن جعفر [بن المظفر] بن العلوي السمرقندي رضي الله عنه حدثنا جعفر بن محمد بن مسعود العياشي، عن أبيه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن محمد خالد الطيالسي قال: حدثني أبي، عن محمد بن زياد الازدي، عن حمزة بن حمران، عن أبيه حمران بن أعين، عن أبي جعفر محمد بن علي الباقر عليهما السلام قال: كان علي بن الحسين عليهما السلام يصلي في اليوم والليلة ألف ركعة كما كان يفعل أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام كانت له خمس مائة نخلة فكان يصلي عند كل نخلة ركعتين، وكان إذا قام في صلاته غشي لونه لون آخر، وكان قيامه في صلاته قيام العبد الذليل بين يدي الملك الجليل، كانت أعضاؤه ترتعد من خشية الله عز وجل، وكان يصلي صلاة مودع يرى أنه لا يصلي بعدها أبدا، ولقد صلى ذات يوم فسقط الرداء عن إحدى منكبيه فلم يسوه حتى فرغ من صلاته فسأله بعض أصحابه عن ذلك فقال: ويحك أتدري بين يدي من كنت، إن العبد لا يقبل من صلاته إلا ما أقبل عليه منها بقلبه، فقال الرجل: هلكنا فقال: كلا إن الله عز وجل متمم ذلك بالنوافل. وكان عليه السلام ليخرج في الليلة الظلماء فيحمل الجراب على

you perform.’ The Imam (MGB) often went out in the darkness of the night
with a bag on his back in which he (MGB) carried coins. He even carried
food and wood on his back. He (MGB) went to the doors, knocked on them
and gave things to whoever came out of the house. The Imam (MGB) covered
up his face when he (MGB) gave something to the poor so that they could
not recognize him. Only when the Imam (MGB) died, did they recognize
that it had been him who brought the stuff for them. Once they put his
corpse down to perform the ritual ablutions (wuzu) for the deceased,
they looked at his back and noticed that it had become rough like a
camels’ knees due to carrying heavy loads on his back to the doors of
the needy and the poor. One day he went out and he was carrying a fur
cloak. A beggar came and hanged onto it. He (MGB) gave it to him and
left. He (MGB) bought fur clothes in the winter and sold them it the
summer and gave away the money in charity. He (MGB) saw a group of
people who were begging on the day of Arafat. He (MGB) said, ‘Woe to
you! You should not ask for things from anyone other than God on such a
day! Even babies in their mother’s wombs are hoped to be fortunate on
this day.’ He (MGB) abstained from eating food with his mother. They
asked him (MGB), ‘O son of God’s Prophet (MGB)! You always do good deeds
and have good relationships with your next of kin. How come you do not
eat any food with her?’ He (MGB) replied, ‘I do not like to reach out
for what her eyes may have sought.’ A man asked him (MGB), ‘O son of
God’s Prophet! Indeed I really like you for God’s sake, while you
despise me.’ He (MGB) went on the Hajj pilgrimage twenty times riding a
female camel, and he (MGB) never cracked the whip at it! When the female
camel died, he (MGB) ordered that it be buried under the ground so that
the beasts do not eat it. Once they asked his female slave about him
(MGB). She said, ‘Should I give you a short answer or a long one?’ They
said, ‘Give a short reply.’ She said, ‘I never fed him during the day,
and never spread out his bed for him at night.’ He ran into a group of
people who were gossiping about him. He (MGB) stood in front of them and
told them, ‘May God forgive me if you are saying the truth, and may God
forgive you if you are lying.’ Whenever a seeker of knowledge came to
him, he (MGB) said, ‘Hail to what is recommended by God’s Prophet.’ Then
he (MGB) said, ‘Indeed when a seeker of knowledge leaves his house and
walks on wet or dry things, everything as deep down as the seventh level
beneath the Earth will say glorifications for him.’ He (MGB) used to
feed one-hundred poor families in Medina. He (MGB) liked the orphans,
the helpless ones, the weak and the helpless beggars to sit at his
table-cloth**[[912]](footnotes_4.htm#b0912)** . He fed them with his own
hand and gave the married ones some food to take for the wives. He (MGB)

#### ظهره وفيه الصرر من الدنانير والدراهم، وربما حمل على ظهره الطعام أو الحطب حتى يأتي بابا بابا فيقرعه ثم يناول من يخرج إليه، وكان يغطي وجهه إذا ناول فقيرا لئلا يعرفه فلما توفي عليه السلام فقدوا ذلك فعلموا أنه كان علي بن الحسين عليهما السلام، ولما وضع عليه السلام على المغتسل نظروا إلى ظهره وعليه مثل ركب الابل مما كان يحمل على ظهره إلى منازل الفقراء والمساكين، ولقد خرج ذات يوم وعليه مطرف خز فعرض له سائل فتعلق بالمطرف فمضى وتركه، وكان يشتري الخز في الشتاء، فإذا جاء الصيف باعه فتصدق بثمنه، ولقد نظر عليه السلام يوم عرفة إلى قوم يسألون الناس، فقال: ويحكم أغير الله تسألون في مثل هذا اليوم إنه ليرجى في هذا اليوم لما في بطون الحبالى أن يكونوا سعداء ولقد كان عليه السلام يأبى أن يؤاكل امه فقيل له: يا ابن رسول الله أنت أبر الناس وأوصلهم للرحم فكيف لا تؤاكل امك؟ فقال: إني أكره أن تسبق يدي إلى ما سبقت عينها إليه، ولقد قال له عليه السلام رجل: يا ابن رسول الله إني لاحبك في الله حبا شديدا فقال: اللهم إني أعوذ بك أن احب لك وأنت لي مبغض، ولقد حج على ناقة له عشرين حجة فما قرعها بسوط، فلما توفت أمر بدفنها لئلا تأكلها السباع، ولقد سئلت عنه مولاة له فقالت: أُطنب أو اختصر ؟ فقيل لها: بل اختصري ، فقالت: ما أتيته بطعام نهاراً قط ، وما فرشت له فراشاً بليلٍ قط. ولقد انتهى ذات يوم إلى قوم يغتابونه فوقف عليهم ، فقال لهم: إن كنتم صادقين فغفر الله لي ، وإن كنتم كاذبين فغفر الله لكم. وكان إذا جاءه طالب علم فقال: مرحباً بوصيِّ رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله. ثم يقول: إن طالب العلم إذا خرج من منزله لم يضع رجلَيه على رَطب ولا يابس من الأرض ، إلاّ سبَّحت له إلى الأرضين السابعة ، ولقد كان يعول مئة أهل بيت من فقراء المدينة. وكان يعجبه أن يحضر طعامه اليتامى والأضرار والزّمنى والمساكين الذين لا حيلة لهم. وكان يناولهم {.t0}

never ate anything unless he (MGB) gave the equal of it in charity. He
(MGB) prayed so much that the places of his body where he prostrated
peeled off seven times each year. He collected them and these were
buried with him when he died. He (MGB) cried twenty years for his father
Al-Hussein (MGB). He cried every time they brought him some food. Once
his servant said, ‘O son of God’s Prophet! Your sorrow is endless and I
am afraid that you may die.’ He (MGB) said, ‘Woe to you! Indeed the
Prophet Jacob (MGB) had twelve sons. God made one of them absent. He
(MGB) cried so much for him that his eyes turned white and all the hair
on his head got white due to grief. Moreover, his back was bent in his
sorrow while his son was alive in this world. However, I have seen my
father, my brother, my uncle and seventy members of my family get
killed. How can I overcome my grief.’

WHAT HAS COME ABOUT THE 21ST AND 23RD NIGHTS OF RAMAZAN
-------------------------------------------------------

20-5 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his
father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of
Hammad ibn Uthman, on the authority of Al-Fuzayl ibn Yasar, “On the 21st
and 23rd nights of the month of Ramazan, Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said
supplications from the beginning of the night until midnight, and then
started to pray from midnight.”

20-6 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Al-Hussein ibn al-Hassan ibn Aban quoted
Al-Hassan ibn Sa’id, on the authority of Suleiman al-Ja’fari that Abul
Hassan Al-Kazim (MGB) said, “Say one-hundred units of prayers on the
21st and 23rd nights of the month of Ramazan. Say the Opening Chapter
(Al-Fatiha**[[913]](footnotes_4.htm#b0913)** ) once in each unit and say
the Al-Ikhlas**[[914]](footnotes_4.htm#b0914)** Chapter ten times in
each unit of these prayers.”

20-7 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority of Ibn
Faz’zal, on the authority of Abi Jamileh, on the authority of Refa’at
that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “The Night of Power is the
beginning of the next year and the end of the current year. Our elders -
may God be pleased with them - all agree that the Night of Power is the
night of the 23rd of the month of Ramazan. On that night ritual bathing
may be performed from the beginning of the night up until the end of the
night.”

20-8 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hikam, on the authority
of Sayf ibn Umayrih, on the authority of Hisan ibn Mihran, “I asked Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) about the Night of Power. The Imam (MGB) said,
‘Seek it on the nights of the twenty-first and the twenty-third of
Ramazan.’”

#### بيده، ومن كان له منهم عيال حمل له إلى عياله من طعامه ، وكان لا يأكل طعاماً حتى يبدأ فيتصدق بمثله. ولقد كان تسقط منه كل سنة سبع ثفنات من مواضع سجوده لكثرة صلاته ، وكان يجمعها ، فلما مات دُفنت معه.ولقد كان بكى على أبيه الحسين عليه السلام عشرين سنة، وما وضع بين يديه طعام إلا بكى حتى قال له مولى له: يا ابن رسول الله أما آن لحزنك أن تنقضي؟! فقال له: ويحك إن يعقوب النبي عليه السلام كان له اثنا عشر ابنا فغيب الله عنه واحدا منهم فابيضت عيناه من كثرة بكائه عليه،وشاب رأسه من الحزن، واحدودب ظهره من الغم، وكان ابنه حيا في الدنيا وأنا نظرت إلى أبي وأخي وعمي وسبعة عشر من أهل بيتي مقتولين حولي فكيف ينقضي حزني. {.t0}

##### ما جاء في ليلة احدى وعشرين وثلاث وعشرين من شهر رمضان

#### 20-5 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن حماد بن عثمان، عن فضيل بن يسار، قال: كان أبوجعفر عليه السلام إذا كانت ليلة إحدى وعشرين وثلاث وعشرين أخذ في الدعاء حتى يزول الليل فاذا زال الليل صلى.

#### 20-6 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا الحسين ابن الحسن بن أبان، عن الحسن بن سعيد، عن سليمان الجعفري قال: قال أبوالحسن عليه السلام: صل ليلة إحدى وعشرين وليلة ثلاث وعشرين مائة ركعة، تقرأ في كل ركعة "الحمد" مرة، و"قل هو الله أحد" عشر مرات.

#### 20-7حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن ابن فضال، عن أبي جميلة، عن رفاعة، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ليلة القدر هي أول السنة وهي آخرها. واتفق مشايخنا رضي الله عنهم على أنها ليلة ثلاث وعشرين من شهر رمضان والغسل فيها من أول الليل وهو يجزي إلى آخره.

#### 20-8 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن علي بن الحكم، عن سيف بن عميرة، عن حسان بن مهران، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: سألته، عن ليلة القدر فقال: التمسها ليلة إحدى وعشرين وليلة ثلاث وعشرين.

20-9 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ibrahim ibn
Hashim, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn al-Hassan al-Qurashi, on the
authority of Suleiman ibn Hafs al-Basry, on the authority of Abdullah
ibn al-Hussein ibn Zayd ibn Ali ibn al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib
(MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of Ja’far
ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the authority of his forefathers (MGB), on the
authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “O my nation! The
Honorable the Exalted God dislikes twenty-four characteristics in you
and admonishes you against them. He detests that you play when you pray;
to mention it when you give charity; to laugh in the graveyards; to spy
on houses; and to look at women’s genitals, for this may cause
blindness**[[915]](footnotes_4.htm#b0915)** . He detests that you talk
when you make love, and said that it could lead to dumbness in the
child. He detests that you dose off before the last night prayer. He
detests that you talk after the last night prayer. He detests that you
bathe in the open without a towel. He detests that you engage in sexual
intercourse in the open. He detests that you go into the river without
any clothes. He said that there are constructors and angels who reside
in the rivers. He detests that you go into the bath without any clothes.
He detests that you talk between the
general**[[916]](footnotes_4.htm#b0916)** and the specific
calls**[[917]](footnotes_4.htm#b0917)** to the morning prayer until
after the prayers end. He detests that you sail at sea when it is
stormy. He detests that you sleep on unfenced roofs and said, ‘No one is
to be held responsible for whoever sleeps on unfenced roofs.’ He detests
a man to sleep alone in the house. He detests a man to approach his wife
while she is having her menstruation, since that would lead to a child
who has leprosy or vitiligo**[[918]](footnotes_4.htm#b0918)** and there
would be no one but himself to blame. He detests a man who has had a wet
dream to have intercourse with his wife before washing himself, since
then a child might be born who is insane and then there will be no one
but himself to blame. He detests a man to talk to a man infected with
leprosy, unless there is a distance of an arms length between him and
the infected man. He said, ‘Escape from a person infected with leprosy
as you would escape from a lion.’ He detests that you urinate in a river
or flowing creek. He detests building a toilet under fruit trees which
bear fruits. He detests a man to put his shoes on while he is standing
up. He detests a man to enter a dark house, unless he has a light to see
his way. He detests blowing at the place of the prayer.”

CONGREGATIONAL PRAYERS ARE TWENTY-FIVE RANKS HIGHER THAN INDIVIDUAL PRAYERS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

20-10 Abul Qasim Abdullah ibn Ahmad, the jurisprudent in Balkh -
narrated that Abu Harb quoted Muhammad ibn Aheed, on the authority of

##### النهي عن أربع وعشرين خصلة

#### 20-9 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن إبراهيم بن هاشم عن الحسين بن الحسن القرشي، عن سليمان بن حفص البصري، عن عبد الله بن الحسين ابن زيد بن علي بن الحسين بن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام، عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد عن أبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:إن الله عز وجل كره لكم أيتها الامة أربعا وعشرين خصلة، ونهاكم عنها:كره لكم العبث في الصلاة، وكره المن في الصدقة، وكره الضحك بين القبور، وكره التطلع في الدور، وكره النظر إلى فروج النساء وقال: يورث العمى، وكره الكلام عند الجماع وقال: يورث الخرس يعني في الولد، وكره النوم قبل العشاء الآخرة، وكره الحديث بعد العشاء الآخرة، وكره الغسل تحت السماء بغير مئزر، وكره المجامعة تحت السماء، وكره دخول الانهار إلا بمئزر وقال: في الانهار عمار وسكان من الملائكة، وكره دخول الحمامات إلا بمئزر، وكره الكلام بين الاذان والاقامة في صلاة الغداة حتى تقضي الصلاة، وكره ركوب البحر في هيجانه،وكره النوم في سطح ليس بمحجر، وقال: من نام على سطح غير ذي محجر فقد برئت منه الذمة، وكره أن ينام الرجل في بيت وحده، وكره للرجل أن يغشى امرأته وهي حائض فإن غشيها فخرج الولد مجذوما أو أبرص فلا يلومن إلا نفسه،وكره أن يغشى الرجل امرأته وقد احتلم حتى يغتسل من احتلامه الذي رأى، فان فعل فخرج الولد مجنونا فلا يلومن إلا نفسه، وكره أن يكلم الرجل مجذوما إلا أن يكون بينه وبين المجذوم قد ذراع، وقال: فر من المجذوم فرارك من الاسد، وكره البول على شط نهر جاري، وكره أن يحدث الرجل تحت شجرة قد أينعت يعني أثمرت، وكره أن يتنعل الرجل وهو قائم، وكره أن يدخل الرجل البيت المظلم إلا أن يكون بين يديه نار، وكره النفخ في موضع الصلاة.

##### صلاة الجماعة أفضل من صلاة الفرد بخمس وعشرين درجة

#### 20-10 أخبرني أبو القاسم عبد الله بن أحمد الفقيه ببلخ فيما أجازه لي قال: حدثنا أبو حرب قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحيـد عن ابن أبي عيسـى الحـافظ قال: أخبرنا أبو

Ibn Abi Isa al-Hafiz, on the authority of Abul Qasim Muhammad ibn
Ibrahim, on the authority of Ibn Bakir, on the authority of Al-Lays, on
the authority of Ibn al-Had, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Khabab, on
the authority of Abi Sa’id al-Khidry that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“Congregational prayers are twenty-five times better than individual
prayers.”

He added, “In his writings to me, my father - may God be pleased with
him - said, ‘Congregational prayers have twenty-five higher ranks in
Paradise over individual prayers.’”

THERE ARE TWENTY-NINE CHARACTERISTICS IN PRAYERS
------------------------------------------------

20-11 Abul Abbas Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Taleqani - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Sa’id al-Hamedany - a
servant of the Hashemites**[[919]](footnotes_4.htm#b0919)** - quoted
Al-Monzar ibn Muhammad, on the authority of Ja’far (ibn Soma’at), on the
authority of Aban al-Ahmar, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Alvan, on
the authority of Amr ibn Sabet, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Zamrat ibn Habib, “I asked the Prophet (MGB) about praying.
The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Praying is one of the religious principles.
There lies the Honorable the Exalted God’s Pleasure in it. It is the way
of the Prophets. There is the love of the angels for the prayer niche.
The following are the results of praying: guidance; faith; light of
recognition; increase in daily sustenance; comfort for the body; hatred
of Satan; an armor against the atheists; acceptance of supplications;
acceptance of deeds; something put aside for the Hereafter; an
intercession between one and the angel of death; a companion in the
grave; a resting place in one’s grave; an answer for the questioning
angels (Nakir and Munkar**[[920]](footnotes_4.htm#b0920)** ); a crown on
a believers head and a light upon his face at the time of Resurrection;
a dress upon a believer’s body at the time of Resurrection; a veil
between a believer’s body and the Fire; a proof between a believer and
his Lord - may His Majesty be Exalted; a savior of one’s body from the
Fire; a certificate to go over the
Bridge**[[921]](footnotes_4.htm#b0921)** ; one’s key to Paradise; a
believer’s nuptial gift for the
Houries**[[922]](footnotes_4.htm#b0922)** ; the price (paid by a
believer) for Paradise; the means by which a servant can attain high
ranks, since prayers consist of glorifications, praises, saying ‘God is
Great’, and saying ‘There is no god but God’, sanctifications, promises
and calls.’”

KNOWLEDGE HAS TWENTY-NINE CHARACTERISTICS
-----------------------------------------

20-12 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd al-Yaqtayni who narrated a group
of friends who linked it up to the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali

#### القاسم محمد بن إبراهيم قال: حدثنا ابن بكير قال: حدثنا الليث، عن ابن الهاد، عن عبد الله بن خباب، عن أبي سعيد الخدري قال: إن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله قال:صلاة الجماعة أفضل من صلاة الفرد بخمس وعشرين درجة. وقال أبي رضي الله عنه في رسالته إلي: لصلاة الرجل في جماعة على صلاة الرجل وحده خمس وعشرين درجة في الجنة. {.t0}

##### في الصلاة تسع وعشرون خصلة

#### 20-11حدثنا محمد بن إبراهيم بن إسحاق الطالقاني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد الهمداني مولى بني هاشم، قال: أخبرنا المنذر بن محمد قال: حدثنا جعفر، عن أبان الاحمر قال: حدثنا الحسين بن علوان، عن عمرو بن ثابت، عن أبيه، عن ضمرة بن حبيب، قال: سئل النبي صلى الله عليه وآله عن الصلاة، فقال عليه السلام: الصلاة من شرايع الدين، وفيها مرضات الرب عز وجل، وهي منهاج الانبياء، وللمصلي حب الملائكة، وهدى وإيمان، ونور المعرفة، وبركة في الرزق، وراحة للبدن، وكراهة للشيطان، وسلاح على الكافر، وإجابة للدعاء، وقبول للاعمال، وزاد للمؤمن من الدنيا إلى الآخرة، وشفيع بينه وبين ملك الموت، وانس في قبره، وفراش تحت جنبه، وجواب لمنكر ونكير، وتكون صلاة العبد عند المحشر تاجا على رأسا ونورا على وجهه، ولباسا على بدنه، وسترا بينه وبين النار،وحجة بينه وبين الرب جل جلاله، ونجاة لبدنه من النار، وجوازا على الصراط، ومفتاحا للجنة، ومهورا لحورالعين، وثمنا للجنة، بالصلاة يبلغ العبد إلى الدرجة العليا لان الصلاة تسبيح وتهليل وتحميد وتكبير وتمجيد وتقديس وقول ودعوة.

##### في العلم تسع وعشرون خصلة

#### 20-12حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن عيسى ابن عبيد اليقطيني قال: حدثنا جماعة من أصحابنا رفعوه إلى أميـر المؤمنيـن عليـه

(MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Acquire knowledge since learning
is a good deed, teaching equals saying God’s glorifications, and
discussing about knowledge equals participating in a holy war. Teaching
knowledge to the one who doesn’t know it is giving charity. Granting
knowledge to the proper persons brings God’s pleasure, since one knows
the lawful and the unlawful using knowledge and knowledge would lead its
seeker to Paradise. Knowledge is a guide in case of fear; it is a
companion in case of loneliness; it is a guide in case of hardships; it
is a weapon against the enemies; and an ornament in the presence of
friends. God promotes some people by means of knowledge to such a high
rank that they are the leaders of goodness and must be obeyed. Their
deeds must be taken into consideration and their works must be followed.
The angels are inclined to be their friends and they anoint them with
their own wings while they pray. Everything including the fish in the
sea, the beasts in the desert and the quadrupeds ask for forgiveness for
them since knowledge brings life to the hearts and light to the eyes and
power against sluggishness. God opens the doors to the homes of the good
people for the learned men. He grants them association with the good
ones in this world and in the Hereafter. God is obeyed and served by
means of knowledge. God is recognized as One by means of knowledge. The
bonds of relationship are fastened by means of knowledge. What is lawful
and unlawful is recognized by means of knowledge. Knowledge is the
prelude to action. Any action follows knowledge. God inspires it to the
blessed ones and deprives the miserable ones from it.’

WHAT ABUZAR ASKED THE PROPHET OF GOD
------------------------------------

20-13 Abul Hassan Ali ibn Abdullah ibn Ahmad al-Asvari narrated that Abu
Yusuf Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Qays
al-Sejezi**[[923]](footnotes_4.htm#b0923)** al-Mozakar quoted Abul
Hassan Amr ibn Hafs, on the authority of Abu Muhammad Ubaydullah ibn
Muhammad ibn Asad in Baghdad, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Ibrahim
Abu Ali, on the authority of Yahya ibn Sa’id al-Basry, on the authority
of Ibn Jarih, on the authority of Ata, on the authority of Ubayd ibn
Umar al-Laysee, on the authority of Abuzar, “I went to see God’s Prophet
(MGB). He (MGB) was sitting alone in the mosque. The Prophet (MGB) was
alone so I enjoyed his company in private. He (MGB) told me, ‘O Abuzar!
The mosque has certain salutations.’ I asked, ‘What is the mosque’s
salutation?’ He (MGB) said, ‘Two units of prayers.’ I said, ‘O Prophet
of God! You are ordering me to say prayers. What are prayers?’ He (MGB)
said, ‘It is the best thing. Anyone who wants to say more of it can do
so and anyone who wishes to say less of it can do so.’ I said, ‘O
Prophet of God! What is most loved by the Honorable the Exalted God?’ He
said,

#### السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:تعلموا العلم فإن تعلمه حسنة، ومدراسته تسبيح، والبحث عنه جهاد، وتعليمه من لا يعلمه صدقة، وبذله لاهله قربة، لانه معالم الحلال والحرام، وسالك بطالبه سبيل الجنة، وهو أنيس في الوحشة، وصاحب في الوحدة، ودليل على السراء والضراء، وسلاح على الاعداء، وزين للاخلاء، يرفع الله به أقواما يجعلهم في الخير أئمة يقتدى بهم، ترمق أعمالهم، وتقتبس آثارهم، وترغب الملائكة في خلتهم، يمسحونهم في صلاتهم بأجنحتهم، ويستغفر لهم كل شيء حتى حيتان البحور وهوامها، وسباع البر وأنعامها، لان العلم حياة القلوب، ونور الابصار من العمى، وقوة الابدان من الضعف، ينزل الله حامله منازل الاخيار، ويمنحه مجالس الابرار في الدنيا والآخرة، بالعلم يطاع الله ويعبد، وبالعلم يعرف الله ويؤخذ، وبالعلم توصل الارحام، وبه يعرف الحلال والحرام،والعلم امام العمل والعمل تابعه، يلهمه الله السعداء ويحرمه الاشقياء. {.t0}

##### الخصال التى سأل عنها ابوذر - رحمه الله - رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله

#### 20-13حدثنا أبوالحسن علي بن عبد الله بن أحمد الاسواري المذكر قال: حدثنا أبويوسف أحمد بن محمد بن قيس السجزي المذكر قال: حدثنا أبوالحسن عمر ابن حفص قال: حدثني أبومحمد عبيدالله بن محمد بن أسد ببغداد قال: حدثنا الحسين ابن إبراهيم أبوعلي قال: حدثنا يحيى بن سعيد البصري قال: حدثني ابن جريج عن عطاء، عن عبيد بن عمير الليثي، عن أبي ذر رحمة الله عليه قال: دخلت على رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وهو جالس في المسجد وحده، فاغتنمت خلوته فقال لي: يا أباذر للمسجد تحية، قلت: وما تحيته؟ قال: ركعتان تركعهما، فقلت: يا رسوالله إنك أمرتني بالصلاة فما الصلاة قال: خير موضوع فمن شاء أقل ومن شاء أكثر. قلـت: يـا رسول الله أي الاعمال أحب إلي الله عز وجل؟ فقال: إيـمان بالله،

‘Believing in God and participating in a holy war in His way.’ I asked,
‘What is the best time to pray?’ The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘In the
darkness of the night.’ I asked, ‘What is the best part of praying?’ The
Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘The lengthening of the Qunut
**[[924]](footnotes_4.htm#b0924)**. I asked, ‘What is the best form of
giving charity?’ The Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘The little bit of charity
that a poor man gives an old needy person.’ I asked, ‘What is fasting?’
The Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘It is an obligatory act which has a reward
near God and is reckoned several-fold by God.’ I asked, ‘Which is the
best form of freeing a slave?’ The Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘Freeing one
who is more expensive and dearer to his family.’ I asked, ‘What is the
best form of holy war?’ The Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘The one in which one
rides his own horse and fights until his blood is shed.’ I asked, ‘Which
of the verses of the Holy Quran which God has sent upon you is greater?’
The Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘The verse of the Throne (Ayat
al-Kursi).’**[[925]](footnotes_4.htm#b0925)** Then The Prophet (MGB)
added, ‘O Abuzar! The seven heavens compared to the Throne are like a
ring that has fallen in a broad region of space and the size of the
Empyrean Heaven**[[926]](footnotes_4.htm#b0926)** compared to the Throne
is like that of a desert in comparison with a ring.

I asked, ‘O Prophet of God! How many Prophets were there?’ The Prophet
(MGB) replied, ‘There have been one-hundred twenty-four thousand
Prophets.’ I asked, ‘How many of them were Messengers?’ The Prophet
(MGB) replied, ‘Three-hundred and thirteen of them that is a large
number.’ I asked, ‘Who was the first Prophet?’ The Prophet (MGB)
replied, ‘Adam.’ I asked, ‘Was he one of the Messengers?’ The Prophet
(MGB) replied, ‘Yes. God created him with His own Hand and gave to him
of His own Spirit.’ Then the Prophet (MGB) added, “O Abuzar! Four of the
Prophets spoke in Syriac language**[[927]](footnotes_4.htm#b0927)**
namely Adam (MGB); Shees (MGB); Akhnookh - that is Idris (MGB) who is
the first to inscribe with a pen and Noah (MGB). Four of the Prophets
have been Arabs. They were Hood, Salih, Shoayb and your Prophet
Muhammad! The first of the Prophets from the Children of Israel was
Moses (MGB) and the last of them was Jesus (MGB). Six-hundred Prophets
were from the Children of Israel.’ I asked, ‘O Prophet of God! How many
Books did God reveal?’

The Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘God revealed one-hundred and four Books. God
revealed fifty leafs (Sahifa’s) to Shees, thirty leafs (Sahifa’s) to
Idris, twenty leafs (Sahifa’s) to Abraham. God also revealed the Torah,
the Bible, the Psalms of David and the Quran.’ I asked, ‘O Prophet of
God! What was the leaf sent to Abraham about?’ The Prophet (MGB)
replied, ‘It all contained proverbs and pieces of advice such as ‘O
proud king! I did not appoint you to collect worldly wealth! Rather I
appointed you so that you do

#### وجهاد في سبيله قلت: فأي [وقت] الليل أفضل؟ قال: جوف الليل الغابر، قلت: فأي الصلاة أفضل؟ قال: طول القنوت، قلت: وأي الصدقة أفضل؟ قال: جهد من مقل إلى فقير ذي سن، قلت: ما الصوم؟ قال: فرض مجزي وعند الله أضعاف كثيرة، قلت: فأي الرقاب أفضل؟ قال: أغلاها ثمنا وأنفسها عند أهلها، قلت: فأي الجهاد أفضل قال: من عقر جواده واهريق دمه، قلت: فأي آية أنزلها الله عليك أعظم؟ قال: آية الكرسي. ثم قال: يا أباذر ما السماوات السبع في الكرسي إلا كحلقة ملقاة في أرض فلاة، وفضل العرش على الكرسي كفضل الفلاة على تلك الحلقة، قلت: يا رسول الله كم النبيون؟ قال: مائة ألف وأربعة وعشرون ألف نبي، قلت: كم المرسلون منهم؟ قال: ثلاثمائة وثلاثة عشر جماء غفيراء قلت: من كان أول الانبياء؟ قال: آدم، قلت: وكان من الانبياء مرسلا، قال: نعم خلقه الله بيده ونفخ فيه من روحه. ثم قال صلى الله عليه وآله: يا أباذر أربعة من الانبياء سريانيون: آدم شيث واخنوخ، وهو إدريس عليهم السلام وهو أول من خط بالقلم ونوح عليه السلم. وأربعة من الانبياء من العرب: هود وصالح وشعيب ونبيك محمد. وأول نبي من بني إسرائيل موسى، وآخرهم عيسى، وستمائة نبي، قلت: يا رسول الله كم أنزل الله من كتاب؟ قال: مائة كتاب وأربعة كتب، أنزل الله على شيث خمسين صحيفة، وعلى إدريس ثلاثين صحيفة، وعلى إبراهيم عشرين صحيفة، وأنزل التوراة والانجيل والزبور والفرقان، قلت: يا رسول الله فما كانت صحف إبراهيم؟ قال: كانت أمثالا كلها وكان فيها "أيها الملك المبتلى المغرور إني لم {.t0}

not let the oppressed ask me for their needs! I shall not turn down the
prayers of the oppressed even if they are atheists. A wise man whose
mind has not been overwhelmed should divide up his time into three
portions. He should supplicate to his Honorable and the Exalted Lord in
one portion of his time. He should reckon his deeds in another portion
of his time. And in the third portion he should ponder over what the
Honorable the Exalted God has created. He should also spent some time in
private to enjoy the lawful pleasures. This would assist him in the
performance of what he has to do in the other portions of his time. It
would calm his heart and prepare him for the rest of his deeds.

A wise man should see his life’s condition, recognize his own position
and keep his tongue in his mouth. One who considers what he says as a
part of his deeds would speak a little and only when it would benefit
him. A wise man should always seeks three things. He should either
improve his life, provide the savings for the Hereafter, or enjoy the
lawful things.’

I asked, ‘O Prophet of God! What was the leaf revealed to Moses about?’
The Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘It was all in Hebrew. It contained advice
such as, ‘I wonder how one who believes in death can be happy! I wonder
how one who believes in the Reckoning and the Resurrection Day can
laugh! I wonder how one who has seen this world and its vicissitudes can
trust it! I wonder how one who believes in destiny can exert useless
efforts! I wonder how one who believes in the Reckoning of deeds doesn’t
do anything for his eternity?’

I asked, ‘O Prophet of God! Do we have any of what God revealed to Moses
and Abraham in what God has revealed to you?’ The Prophet (MGB) replied,
‘O Abuzar! Read: ‘He is successful who growth, And remembereth the name
of his Lord, so prayeth. But ye prefer the life of the world although
the Hereafter is better and more lasting. Lo! This is in the former
scrolls: The Book of Abraham and Moses.’
**[[928]](footnotes_4.htm#b0928)**

I said, ‘O Prophet of God! Please give me some advice.’

The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘I advise you to fear God as that is the utmost
important issue.’ I said, ‘O Prophet of God! Give me more advice.’

The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘I advise you to recite the Quran, remember God
often as possible, since then you will be remembered in the Heavens and
your light shall shine upon the Earth.’

I said, ‘O Prophet of God! Please give me more advice.’

The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘I advise you to be as quiet as possible, since
that would fend off Satan who is the main enemy of your religion.’

#### أبعثك لتجمع الدنيا بعضها إلى بعض ولكن بعثتك لترد عني دعوة المظلوم، فإني لا أردها وإن كانت من كافر، وعلى العاقل ما لم يكن مغلوبا على عقله أن يكون له ساعات: ساعة يناجي فيها ربه عز وجل، وساعة يحاسب نفسه، وساعة يتفكر فيما صنع الله عز وجل إليه، وساعة يخلو فيها بحظ نفسه من الحلال، فإن هذه الساعة عون لتلك الساعات واستجمام للقلوب، وتوزيع لها، وعلى العاقل أن يكون بصيرا بزمانه، مقبلا على شأنه، حافظا للسانه، فإن من حسب كلامه من عمله قل كلامه إلا فيما يعنيه، وعلى العاقل أن يكون طالبا لثلاث: مرمة لمعاش أو تزود لمعاد أو تلذذ في غير محرم". {.t0}

#### قلت: يا رسول الله فما كانت صحف موسى؟ قال: كانت عبرانية كلها، وفيها "عجبت لمن أيقن بالموت كيف يفرح، ولمن أيقن بالنار لم يضحك، ولمن يرى الدنيا وتقلبها بأهلها لم يطمئن إليها، ولمن يؤمن بالقدر كيف ينصب ولمن أيقن بالحساب لم لا يعمل".

#### قلت: يا رسول الله هل في أيدينا مما أنزل الله عليك شيء مما كان في صحف إبراهيم وموسى؟ قال: يا أباذر اقرأ "قَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَنْ تَزَكَّى. وَذَكَرَ اسْمَ رَبِّهِ فَصَلَّى. بَلْ تُؤْثِرُونَ الْحَيَوةَ الدُّنْيَا. وَالآخِرَةُ خَيْرٌ وَأَبْقَى. إِنَّ هَذَا لَفِي الصُّحُفِ الأُولَى. صُحُفِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَمُوسَى."

#### قلت: يا رسول الله: أوصني، قال: اوصيك بتقوى الله فإنه رأس الامر كله، قلت: زدني قال: عليك بتلاوة القرآن، وذكر الله كثيرا، فإنه ذكر لك في السماء، ونور لك في الارض،قلت: زدني، قال: عليك بطول الصمت فإنه مطردة للشياطين، وعون لـك علـى أمـر دينـك. قلـت: زدنـي.، قال: إياك وكثرة الضحك فإنه يميت القلب

I said, ‘O Prophet of God! Give me more advice.’ The Prophet (MGB) said,
‘I admonish you against laughing a lot, since that would cause the heart
to perish and the light of your face to fade.’ I said, ‘O Prophet of
God! Please give me more advice.’ The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘I advise you
to always consider the situation of the people who are in an inferior
position than you are, not those who are in a better position than you
are. This way you will be more grateful for what God has bestowed upon
you.’ I said, ‘O Prophet of God! Please give me more advice.’ The
Prophet (MGB) said, ‘I advise you to visit your relations of kin even if
they may have cut off from you.’ I said, ‘O Prophet of God! Please give
me more advice.’ The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘I advise you to like the poor
and associate with them.’ I said, ‘O Prophet of God! Please give me more
advice.’ The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘I advise you to tell the truth even
though it may be unpleasant.’ I said, ‘O Prophet of God! Please give me
more advice.’ The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘I advise you not to fear the
blame of those who blame you for the sake of God.’ I said, ‘O Prophet of
God! Please give me more advice.’ The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘I advise you
that what you know about yourself should hinder you from finding faults
with others.’ Then the Prophet (MGB) said, ‘It is bad enough for one to
have three characteristics: to know faults in others while he himself
has them and is unaware of them; to feel ashamed of what others do while
he himself has those characteristics to be ashamed of; and unduly hurt
his companions.’ Then the Prophet (MGB) added, ‘There is no intellect
better than moderation; there is no piety like abstinence from the acts
that God has forbidden; and there is no good thing like being
good-tempered.’

#### ويذهب بنور الوجه، قلت: يا رسول الله زدني، قال: انظر إلى من هو تحتك ولا تنظر إلى من هو فوقك فانه أجدر أن لا تزدري نعمة الله عليك، قلت: يا رسول الله زدني، قال: صل قرابتك وإن قطعوك، قلت: زدني، قال: احب المساكين ومجالستهم، قلت: زدني، قال: قل الحق وإن كان مرا، قلت: زدني قال: لا تخف في الله لومة لائم، قلت: زدني، قال: ليحجزك عن الناس ما تعلم من نفسك، ولا تجد عليهم فيما تأتي [مثله].ثم قال: كفى بالمرء عيبا أن يكون فيه ثلاث خصال: يعرف من الناس ما يجهل من نفسه، ويستحيي لهم مما هو فيه، ويؤذي جليسه بما لا يعنيه، ثم قال عليه السلام: لا عقل كالتدبير، ولا ورع كالكف، ولا حسب كحسن الخلق.
