Preface
=======

Al-Khisal is a collection of religious and moral precepts from reliable
works on the subject compiled by Sheikh Sadooq. Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn
Ali ibn al-Hussein ibn Musa ibn Babooyeh Al-Qumi nicknamed Sheikh
Sadooq**[[1]](footnotes_1.htm#b0001)** was a jurist and a prominent
scholar on Shiite traditions. Sheikh Tousi in his Al-Istibsar which is
one of the four major Shiite reference books has nicknamed him Imad
Al-Din that means the pillar of religion. About his date and place of
birth there is no exact information. Ibn Babooyeh was brought up in a
learned family in Qum and in his youth was educated by famous teachers
of the city. On an unknown date Ibn Babooyeh left Qum for Ray which was
the capital of the Buwahids and settled in that city. In 352 A.H. (963
A.D.) with the permission of Rukn ad-Dawlah the governor of Ray, he left
for the holy city of Mashhad to perform the pilgrimage to the holy
shrine of Imam Reza (MGB**[[2]](footnotes_1.htm#b0002)** ). The main
characteristic of Ibn Babooyeh is that by stressing on traditions, he
explains and proves theological arguments. His jurisprudence is also
based on traditions. He considers analogy and deduction not permissible.

Ibn Babooyeh traveled extensively to collect traditions. He met many
masters of traditions and he has left behind many works in tradition.
His nickname ‘Sadooq’ was due to his authenticity in narrating the
traditions. The first person who nicknamed Ibn Babooyeh as ‘Sadooq’ was
Ibn Idris.

Ibn Babooyeh was a voluminous writer. He himself mentions that he has
compiled more than 245 books. Some of his works are as follows:
Al-Iteqadat, Al-Amali, Man La Yahzaroh Al-Faqih, Uyun Akhbar Al-Reza,
Al-Faqih, Al-Amali, Illal Ash-Sharayeh, Al-Tawhid, Thawab Al-Amaal va
Uqab al-Amaal, Al-Khisal and a few other manuscripts which are present
in several libraries. About 200 books ascribed to him are mentioned in
Rijal-i-Najashi and the works of Tousi and Ibn Shahr Aashub.

Sheikh Al-Sadooq, who authored one of the four basic works on Shiite
traditions, compiled dozens of authoritative collections of traditions,
each of which usually follows a particular theme. His Al-Tawhid collects
traditions which illustrate the profession of monotheism. His Uyun
Akhbar Al-Reza gathers together everything that has been related about
Imam Reza (MGB); the eighth Imam, whose tomb in Mashhad is the holiest
pilgrimage site in Iran. The work contains such things as descriptions
of the Imam's mother; explanations of the reason why his name was
chosen; all the sayings which have been recorded from him; and
traditions concerning his death and the miracles which have occurred at
his tomb.

The present work that is Sheikh Al-Sadooq's Al-Khisal demonstrates the
importance of numbers in the traditions. This has led to a valuable
collection of traditions that is very interesting to study. Each part of
this book contains several traditions on various issues. His main theme
in this book is on ethics, manners and good characteristics. This book
covers numbered characteristics. It starts with one and ends with one
million. The traditions are presented with a complete record of
transmission. This is the first book of this kind. Sheikh Sadooq himself
presented his motivation for compiling Al-Khisal as follows, “I noticed
that the previous Sheikhs and scholars have already compiled books on
various aspects of knowledge. However, they have neglected to compile a
book on numbers and good and bad characteristics. Since this topic is
very useful for those who seek knowledge, I decided to compile this book
in order to get closer to God, attain divine rewards, prosperity and the
Almighty God’s Mercy. I ask God not to turn my hopefulness into
hopelessness, since He has power over all things.” Al-Khisal is a great
encyclopedia on Islamic knowledge, the forbidden and the allowed acts,
historical topics, interpretations on the Holy Quran, philosophical
points and political issues. It is one of the most valuable sources of
traditions from the members of the Holy Household of the Prophet of God
(MGB). It is an authentic source and many authoritative works on Shiite
traditions such as Bihar Al-Anwar have cited it as a reference. We have
tried to enrich it with many footnotes which explain the concepts and
words presented in the text after doing a lot of research so that the
interested readers can gain as much benefit from the book as possible.
