Part 21-on Thirty and Above-numbered Characteristics
====================================================

THE THIRTY SIGNS OF A DIVINE LEADER
-----------------------------------

21-1 Abul Abbas Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Taleqani - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Sa’id al-Kufy quoted Ali
ibn al-Hassan Ibn Faz’zal, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Abil Hassan Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB), “There are certain
signs designating the Imam. He is the most knowledgeable, the wisest,
the most pious, the most patient, the bravest, the most generous, and
the person who worships the most among the people. He was born
circumcised. He is pure and clean. He sees the back as well he sees the
front. He has no shadow. When he fell out of his mother's uterus onto
the ground, he fell onto the palms of his hands and loudly declared the
two

###### أبواب الثلاثين وما فوقه

##### للامام ثلاثون علامة

#### 21-1 حدثنا محمد بن إبراهيم بن إسحاق الطالقاني رضي الله عنه قال: أخبرنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد الكوفي قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسن بن فضال، عن أبيه، عن أبي الحسن علي بن موسى الرضا عليهما السلام قال: للامام علامات يكون أعلم الناس، وأحكم الناس، وأتقى الناس، وأحلم الناس، وأشجع الناس، وأسخى الناس، وأعبد الناس، ويولد مختونا، ويكون مطهرا، ويرى من خلفه كما يرى من بيـن يديـه، ولا يكون لـه ظل، وإذا وقـع على الارض من [بطن] امه وقع على

testimonial declarations (that there is no god but God, and that
Muhammad is God’s Messenger). He has no nocturnal pollution. His eyes go
to sleep, but his heart will not go to sleep. He is
inspired**[[929]](footnotes_4.htm#b0929)** . The armor of God's Prophet
(MGB) fits him. His urine and feces cannot be seen since the Almighty
God has appointed the Earth to swallow whatever he
excretes**[[930]](footnotes_4.htm#b0930)** even though it smells like
musk. He has power over the people, although he is kinder to them than
their own parents are. He is the humblest of all people before the
Almighty God. He acts upon what he advises the people to do more than
anyone else. He abstains from what he admonishes the people against. His
prayers are accepted such that if he wishes a rock to be divided into
two parts, it will. He has the weapon of the Prophet of God (MGB). He
has his sword - the Zul-Faqar**[[931]](footnotes_4.htm#b0931)** . He has
a list of the names of his followers up until the Resurrection Day. He
has a list of the names of his enemies up until the Resurrection Day. He
possesses Al-Jame’a - that is a nearly thirty-five meter long text which
encompasses all of the needs of the human beings. He also possesses the
Jafr-i-Akbar and Jafr-i-Asqar that are a goat-skin and a ram-skin which
include all knowledge - even the punishment for a scratch or one, a half
or a third of a crack of a whip. He also possesses the Blessed Fatimah's
(MGB) Mushaf. **[[932]](footnotes_4.htm#b0932)**

21-2 And in another tradition we read, “The Imam is certified by the
Holy Spirit. There is a column of light between him and God with which
he sees the deeds of the people. He is informed about what he needs by
it.

As-Sadiq (MGB) said, “This column of light is sometimes opened up to us
and we get to know and it sometimes gets closed and we no longer know.
The Imam is born. He also has children. He gets ill and he gets cured.
He eats and drinks. He urinates and defecates. He gets sad. He laughs
and cries. He lives and then dies. He is buried and the people go to
visit his shrine. These conditions for him are general. There are two
specific and important signs for him: his knowledge and the fulfillment
of his prayers. He has heard the news that he gives about the events in
the future from his grandfathers and they do so from the Prophet of God
(MGB). The Prophet of God (MGB) has heard them from Gabriel. Gabriel has
heard them from the Almighty God. All the eleven Imams after the Prophet
(MGB) were martyred. Some were martyred by the sword - that is the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) and Al-Hussein (MGB). The rest
of them were poisoned by the disobedient rulers of their time. The
martyrdom of the Imams has been a real issue - not the way the
Boasters**[[933]](footnotes_4.htm#b0933)** believe and those who believe
in turning over the authority
believe**[[934]](footnotes_4.htm#b0934)** - May God's Curse Be on Them.
They say, ‘In fact, they**[[935]](footnotes_4.htm#b0935)** were not
killed. The people thought they were. They are liars. May God's Wrath be
upon them. There are

#### راحتيه رافعا صوته بالشهادة، ولا يحتلم،وتنام عينه ولا ينام قلبه، ويكون محدثا ويستوي عليه درع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله، ولا يرى له بول ولا غائط لان الله عز وجل قد وكل الارض بابتلاع ما يخرج منه،ويكون له رائحة أطيب من رائحة المسك، ويكون أولى الناس منهم بأنفسهم وأشفق عليهم من آبائهم، وامهاتهم، ويكون أشد الناس تواضعا لله عز وجل، ويكون آخذ الناس بما يأمرهم به وأكف الناس عما ينهى عنه، ويكون دعاؤه مستجابا حتى لو أنه دعا على صخرة لانشقت نصفين، ويكون عنده سلاح رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسيفه ذوالفقار، ويكون عنده صحيفة فيها أسماء شيعته إلى يوم القيامة وصحيفة فيها أسماء أعدائهم إلى يوم القيامة، ويكون عنده الجامعة وهي صحيفة طولها سبعون ذراعا فيها جميع ما يحتاج إليه ولد آدم، ويكون عنده الجفر الاكبر والاصغر إهابماعز وإهاب كبش فيهما جميع العلوم حتى أرش الخدش وحتى الجلدة ونصف الجلدة وثلث الجلدة، ويكون عنده مصحف فاطمة عليها السلام. {.t0}

#### 21-2 وفي حديث آخر إن الامام مؤيد بروح القدس وبينه وبين الله عز وجل عمود من نور يرى فيه أعمال العباد وكلما احتاج إليه لدلالة اطلع عليه.

#### وقال الصادق عليه السلام: يبسط لنا فنعلم، ويقبض عنا فلا نعلم، والامام يولد ويلد، ويصح ويمرض، ويأكل ويشرب، ويبول ويتغوط، ويفرح ويحزن، ويضحك ويبكي، ويموت ويقبر، ويزاد فيعلم، ودلالته في خصلتين: في العلم واستجابة الدعوة، وكلما أخبر به من الحوادث التي تحدث قبل كونها كذلك بعهد معهود إليه من رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله توارثه من آبائه عليهم السلام. وكون ذلك مما عهده إليه جبرئيل عن علام الغيوب، وجميع الائمة الاحد عشر بعد النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قتلوا، منهم بالسيف، وهو أميرالمؤمنين والحسين عليهما السلام، والباقون عليهم السلام قتلوا بالسم، وجرى ذلك عليهم على الحقيقة والصحة، لا كما يقوله الغلاة والمفوضة لعنهم الله بأنهم يقولون: إنهم لم يقتلوا على الحقيقة، وإنما شبه للناس أمرهم، وكذبـوا ما شبـه أمر أحـد من أنبيـاء الله وحججـه على

no cases of the Prophets and the Imams in which the people just thought
they were killed, but they were not; except for Jesus the son of Mary
(MGB), since he was taken up alive from the Earth. His spirit was taken
away in between the heavens**[[936]](footnotes_4.htm#b0936)** and the
Earth. Then he was taken up to the heavens where his spirit was returned
to him. The followings Words of the Almighty God refer to this, “Behold!
God said, O Jesus! I will take thee and raise thee to Myself and clear
thee (of the falsehoods) of those who
blaspheme.”**[[937]](footnotes_4.htm#b0937)** The Almighty God also
expressed what Jesus (MGB) will say on the Resurrection Day as follows,
“... And I was a witness over them whilst I dwelt amongst them. When
Thou didst take me up, Thou was the Watcher over them, and Thou art a
witness to all things.”**[[938]](footnotes_4.htm#b0938)** And the people
who have transgressed beyond bounds regarding the Immaculate Imams (MGB)
say, “If it is allowed for the people to think Jesus (MGB) who was not
killed was killed, why should a similar issue not hold true for the
Imams?” Their reply is, “Jesus (MGB) was created without a father. Why
is it not allowed that the Immaculate Imams (MGB) be also created
without having a father?” They will not dare express their opinion on
this issue. May God Damn Them! When all the Prophets, Messengers and
Imams after Adam have been created from a father and a mother - with
Jesus being the only exception having only a mother - it is allowed for
the people to think he was killed while he was not. This doesn’t hold
true for other Prophets and Imams. The Almighty God wished to establish
Jesus (MGB) as a sign and a symbol for us to know that God is able to do
anything.

21-3 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah, Abdullah ibn Ja’far
al-Homayry, Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar and Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Isa and Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Hazifat ibn
Mansoor, on the authority of Mu’az ibn Kasir, on the authority of Mu’az
ibn Muslim al-Hara that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “The month of
Ramazan is thirty days. I swear by God that it never is less.”

21-4 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the authority of
Yasir - the servant (of Imam Al-Reza (MGB)), “I asked Al-Reza (MGB),
‘Would the month of Ramazan ever be twenty-nine days?’’ The Imam (MGB)
replied, ‘No. The month of Ramazan will never be less than thirty
days.’”

21-5 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah
al-Barqy, on the authority of Abil Hassan Ali ibn al-Hussein al-Reqqi,

#### الناس إلا أمر عيسى بن مريم عليهما السلام وحده لانه رفع من الارض حيا وقبض روحه بين السماء والارض، ثم رفع إلى السماء ورد عليه روحه، وذلك قول الله عز وجل: "إِذْ قَالَ اللَّهُ يَاعِيسَى إِنِّي مُتَوَفِّيكَ وَرَافِعُكَ إِلَيَّ" وقال عز وجل حكاية عما يقول عيسى يوم القيامة "وَكُنتُ عَلَيْهِمْ شَهِيدًا مَا دُمْتُ فِيهِمْ فَلَمَّا تَوَفَّيْتَنِي كُنتَ أَنْتَ الرَّقِيبَ عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَنْتَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ" ويقول المتجاوزون للحد في أمر الائمة عليهم السلام: إنه إن جازأن يشبه أمر عيسى للناس، فلم لا يجوزأن يشبه أمرهم أيضا؟ والذي يجب أن يقال لهم: إن عيسى هو مولود من غيرأب فلم لا يجوز أن يكون مولودين من غيرأب، وإنهم لا يجسرون على إظهار مذهبهم لعنهم الله في ذلك ومتى جاز أن يكون جميع أنبياء الله وحججه عليهم السلام مولودين من الآباء والامهات وكان عيسى من بينهم مولودا من غيرأب جاز أن يشبه أمره للناس دون أمر غيره من الانبياء والحجج عليهم السلام كما جاز أن يولد من غيرأب دونهم وإنما أراد الله عز وجل: إن يجعل أمره آية وعلامة ليعلم بذلك أن الله على كل شيء قدير. {.t0}

##### شهر رمضان ثلاثون يوما لا ينقص أبدا

#### 21-3 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، وعبد الله بن جعفر الحميري، ومحمد بن يحيى العطار، وأحمد بن إدريس جميعا قالوا: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، ومحمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن محمد بن سنان، عن حذيفة بن منصور، عن معاذ بن كثير، ويقال له: معاذ بن مسلم الهراء، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: شهر رمضان ثلاثون يوما لا ينقص والله أبدا.

#### 21-4 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم ابن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن ياسر الخادم قال: قلت للرضا عليه السلام: هل يكون شهر رمضان تسعة وعشرين يوما؟ فقال: إن شهر رمضان لا ينقص عن ثلاثين يوما.

#### 21-5 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني عمي محمد بن أبـي القاسـم، عن أحمـد بن أبي عبـد الله البـرقي، عن أبي الحسن علي بن الحسين

on the authority of Abdullah ibn Jaballe, on the authority of Muawiyah
ibn Ammar, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Abdullah, on the authority
of his forefathers, on the authority of his grandfather Al-Hassan ibn
Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB), “Several Jews went to see the Prophet of God
(MGB) and one of them asked him several questions which included the
following question, ‘Why has God made it incumbent upon your nation to
fast for thirty days while He has made it incumbent for other nations to
fast for more days?’ The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Indeed when Adam ate from
the tree, the fruit remained in his stomach for thirty days before it
was digested. That is why the Honorable the Exalted God made it
incumbent upon his offspring to abstain from eating and drinking for
thirty days. What they are allowed to eat and drink during these thirty
days is due to the Honorable the Exalted God’s Nobility. God has imposed
the same restrictions on my nation that He imposed on Adam (MGB). Then
the Prophet (MGB) recited the following verse, ‘Fasting is prescribed
for you as it was prescribed for those before you, that ye may (learn)
self-restraint,- (Fasting) for a fixed number of
days;’**[[939]](footnotes_4.htm#b0939)** The Jew said, ‘O Muhammad! You
are right!’”

21-6 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Kufy quoted Musa ibn Imran
al-Nakha’ee, on the authority of his uncle Al-Hussein ibn Yazid
al-Nawfaly, on the authority of Ali ibn Hamzih, on the authority of Abi
Basir, “I asked Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) about the meaning of ‘the
prescribed period in the following words of the Honorable the Exalted
God, ‘(He wants you) to complete the prescribed
period…**[[940]](footnotes_4.htm#b0940)** '’ The Imam (MGB) replied,
‘Thirty days.’”

21-7 (The compiler of the book narrated) that my father and Muhammad ibn
al-Hassan al-Walid - may God be pleased with them - narrated that Sa’ed
ibn Abdullah quoted on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn
Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isma’il ibn Bazi’a, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Yaqoob ibn Shoayb, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that in a part
of a long narration he (MGB) said, “The month of Ramazan is thirty days
as the Honorable the Exalted God says, ‘(He wants you) to complete the
prescribed period…’**[[941]](footnotes_4.htm#b0941)** Here complete
means thirty full days.”

21-8 Ahmad ibn al-Hassan al-Qat’tan narrated that Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn
Zakaria al-Qat’tan quoted Bakr ibn Abdullah ibn Habib, on the authority
of Tamim ibn Buhlool, on the authority of Abu Muawiyah, on the authority
of Isma’il ibn Mihran that he had heard Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq
(MGB)

#### الرقي عن عبد الله بن جبلة، عن معاوية بن عمار، عن الحسن بن عبد الله، عن أبائه، عن جده الحسن بن علي بن أبي طالب عليهما السلام قال:جاء نفر من اليهود إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله فسأله أعلمهم عن مسائل فكان فيما سأله أن قال: لاي شيء فرض الله الصوم على امتك بالنهار ثلاثين يوما وفرض على الامم أكثر من ذلك؟ فقال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: إن آدم لما أكل من الشجرة بقي في بطنه ثلاثين يوما ففرض الله عز وجل على ذريته ثلاثين يوما الجوع والعطش والذي يأكلونه تفضل من الله عز وجل عليهم كذلك كان على آدم ففرض الله ذلك علي امتي، ثم تلا رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله هذه الاية "كتب عليكم الصيام كما كتب على الذين من قبلكم لعلكم تتقون أياما معدودات" قال اليهودى صدقت يا محمد. {.t0}

#### 21-6 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن أبي عبد الله الكوفي، عن موسى بن عمران النخعي، عن عمه الحسين بن يزيد النوفلي، عن علي ابن حمزة، عن أبي بصير قال: سألت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام عن قول الله عز وجل: " ولتكملوا العدة " قال: ثلاثين يوما.

#### 21-7 حدثنا أبي ومحمد بن الحسن بن الوليد رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن محمد بن إسماعيل بن بزيع، عن محمد ابن يعقوب بن شعيب، عن أبيه، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام أنه قال في حديث طويل: شهر رمضان ثلاثون يوما لقول الله عز وجل: "وَلِتُكْمِلُوا الْعِدَّةَ" والكاملة التامة.

#### 21-8 حدثنا أحمد بن الحسن القطان قال: حدثنا أحمد بن يحيى بن زكريا القطان، عن بكـر بن عبـد الله بن حبيـب، عن تميم بن بهلول قال: حدثنا أبو معاوية، عن

say, “I swear by God that God has not placed a burden on His servants
more than they can bear. He has only required that they pray five times
each day and night; has established only twenty-five Dirhams of alms-tax
for each one-thousand Dirhams; has only required them to fast for thirty
days during a year; and has only required them to go on the Hajj
pilgrimage once in their lifetime.”

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “The
Shiites and their wise men consider Ramazan as never being less than
thirty days. The narrations which have been written in this chapter are
in agreement with the Quran but against the public opinion (that
sometimes the month of Ramazan may be less than thirty days). Those
people with little faith in the Shiites who have maintained that Ramazan
is thirty days every now and then, and twenty-nine days every now and
then, have resorted to the concealment of faith. They have supported the
general viewpoint of the public. There is no power nor any strength but
in God.”**[[942]](footnotes_4.htm#b0942)**

THE THIRTY FOUR WOMEN MARRYING WHOM IS FORBIDDEN
------------------------------------------------

21-9 Abu Muhammad al-Hassan ibn Hamzih ibn Ali ibn Abdullah ibn Muhammad
ibn al-Hassan ibn al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) narrated that
Muhammad ibn Yazdad quoted Abdullah ibn Muhammad al-Kufy, on the
authority of Abu Sa’id Sahl ibn Salih al-Ab’basi, on the authority of
Ibrahim ibn Abdul Rahman al-Amoli, on the authority of Musa ibn Ja’far
al-Kazim (MGB), “My father Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB) was asked
about women having intercourse with whom the Honorable the Exalted God
has declared unlawful in the Holy Quran, and women having intercourse
with whom the Prophet of God (MGB) has declared unlawful in his
traditions. He (MGB) replied, ‘There are thirty-four groups of women
with whom having intercourse has been forbidden. Seventeen cases have
been declared forbidden in the Holy Quran, and seventeen cases have been
declared forbidden in the traditions. What has come in the Quran is as
follows. The first case is adultery as the Honorable the Exalted God has
says, ‘Nor come nigh to adultery…’ **[[943]](footnotes_4.htm#b0943)**The
second case is marrying women whom one’s father has married as the
Honorable the Exalted God says, ‘And marry not women whom your fathers
married…’**[[944]](footnotes_4.htm#b0944)** And the other cases are as
follows, ‘‘Prohibited to you (For marriage) are:- Your mothers,
daughters, sisters; father’s sisters, mother’s sisters; brother’s
daughters, sister’s daughters; foster-mothers (who gave you suck),
foster-sisters; your wives’ mothers; your step-daughters under your
guardianship, born of your wives to whom ye have gone in,- no
prohibition if ye have not gone in;- (Those who have been) wives of your
sons proceeding from your loins; and two sisters in wedlock at one and
the same time, except for what is past;’
**[[945]](footnotes_4.htm#b0945)**

#### إسماعيل بن مهران قال: سمعت جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام يقول: والله ما كلف الله العباد إلا دون ما يطيقون، إنما كلفهم في اليوم والليلة خمس صلوات، وكلفهم في كل ألف درهم خمسة وعشرين درهما، وكلفهم في السنة صيام ثلاثين يوما، وكلفهم حجة واحدة، وهم يطيقون أكثر من ذلك. {.t0}

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: مذهب خواص الشيعة وأهل الاستبصار منهم في شهر رمضان أنه لا ينقص عن ثلاثين يوما أبدا، والاخبار في ذلك موافقة للكتاب ومخالفة للعامة فمن ذهب من ضعفة الشيعة إلى الاخبار التي وردت للتقية في أنه ينقص ويصيبه ما يصيبه الشهور من النقصان والتمام اتقى كما تتقى العامة، ولم يكلم إلا بما يكلم به العامة، ولا قوة إلا بالله.

##### الفروج المحرمة في الكتاب والسنة على أربعة وثلاثين وجها

#### 21-9 حدثنا أبومحمد الحسن بن حمزة بن علي بن عبد الله بن محمد بن الحسن بن الحسين بن علي بن الحسين بن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام قال: حدثنا محمد بن يزداد قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن أحمد بن محمد الكوفي قال: حدثنا أبوسعيد سهل بن صالح العباسي قال: حدثنا إبراهيم بن عبدالرحمن الآملي قال: حدثني موسى بن جعفر، عن أبيه جعفر بن محمد عليهم السلام قال: سئل أبي عليه السلام عما حرم الله عز وجل من الفروج في القرآن وعما حرمه رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله في سنته فقال: الذي حرم الله عز وجل أربعة وثلاثون وجها سبعة عشر في القرآن وسبعة عشر في السنة، فأما التي في القرآن فالزنا قال الله عز وجل: "وَلاَ تَقْرَبُوا الزِّنَا" ونكاح امرأة الاب، قال الله عز وجل: "وَلاَ تَنْكِحُوا مَا نَكَحَ آبَاؤُكُمْ مِنَ النِّسَاءِ" و"حُرِّمَتْ عَلَيْكُمْ أُمَّهَاتُكُمْ وَبَنَاتُكُمْ وَأَخَوَاتُكُمْ وَعَمَّاتُكُمْ وَخَالاَتُكُمْ وَبَنَاتُ الأَخِ وَبَنَاتُ الأُخْتِ وَأُمَّهَاتُكُمْ اللاَّتِي أَرْضَعْنَكُمْ وَأَخَوَاتُكُمْ مِنَ الرَّضَاعَةِ وَأُمَّهَاتُ نِسَائِكُمْ وَرَبَائِبُكُمُ اللاَّتِي فِي حُجُورِكُمْ مِنْ نِسَائِكُمُ اللاَّتِي دَخَلْتُمْ بِهِنَّ فَإِنْ لَمْ تَكُونُوا دَخَلْتُمْ بِهِنَّ فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَحَلاَئِلُ أَبْنَائِكُمُ الَّذِينَ مِنْ أَصْلاَبِكُمْ وَأَنْ تَجْمَعُوا بَيْنَ الأُخْتَيْنِ إِلاَّ مَا قَدْ سَلَفَ..."

And the other cases also include women in their period of menstruation
as the Honorable the Exalted God says, ‘And do not approach them until
they are clean.’ **[[946]](footnotes_4.htm#b0946)**

And the other cases also include associating with women while we are in
retreat in the mosque as the Honorable the Exalted God says, ‘But do not
associate with your wives while ye are in retreat in the mosques.’
**[[947]](footnotes_4.htm#b0947)**

The cases that have been declared forbidden in the traditions are as
follows. The first case is having intercourse during the days of the
month of Ramazan. The second is marrying with a women who has taken the
oath of condemnation**[[948]](footnotes_4.htm#b0948)** after she has
taken it. The third case is marrying women during the period of
prohibition**[[949]](footnotes_4.htm#b0949)** ; having intercourse while
in the state of ritual consecration (Ihram); marrying familiar ones to
whom you are forbidden to marry (since that would constitute incest);
marrying a woman who has been divorced by
Zihar**[[950]](footnotes_4.htm#b0950)** before the payment of
expiation**[[951]](footnotes_4.htm#b0951)** ; marrying unbelieving
women**[[952]](footnotes_4.htm#b0952)** ; for a man to ever again marry
a woman after he has divorced her nine
times**[[953]](footnotes_4.htm#b0953)** ; marrying a slave after
marrying a free woman**[[954]](footnotes_4.htm#b0954)** ; marrying your
wife’s paternal or maternal aunts**[[955]](footnotes_4.htm#b0955)** ;
marrying a slave girl without the consent of her master; marrying a
slave girl by a man who can afford to marry a free woman; marrying a
captured female slave before her being assigned to be in someone’s
possession; marrying an unbelieving
woman**[[956]](footnotes_4.htm#b0956)** ; having sex with a bought
female slave before her being purified by
Istebra**[[957]](footnotes_4.htm#b0957)** ; and having sex with a
ransomed slave woman after some of the ransom money has been paid.’”

GOD HAS MADE THIRTY-FIVE PRAYERS INCUMBENT UPON THE PEOPLE FROM ONE FRIDAY TO THE NEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21-10 Ahmad ibn Zyad ibn Ja’far al-Hamedany - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Hurayz, on the
authority of Zurarah that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “God has made
it incumbent upon the people to say thirty-five prayers from one Friday
to the next. It has been made obligatory for one to attend a
congregational prayer, and that is the Friday prayer.”

#### والحائض حتى تطهر قال الله عز وجل: "وَلاَ تَقْرَبُوهُنَّ حَتَّى يَطْهُرْنَ" والنكاح في الاعتكاف قال الله عز وجل: "وَلاَ تُبَاشِرُوهُنَّ وَأَنْتُمْ عَاكِفُونَ فِي الْمَسَاجِدِ." {.t0}

#### وأما التي في السنة فالمواقعة في شهر رمضان نهارا، وتزويج الملاعنة بعد اللعان والتزويج في العدة، والمواقعة في الاحرام، والمحرم يتزوج أو يزوج، والمظاهر قبل أن يكفر، وتزويج المشركة، وتزويج الرجل امرأة قد طلقها للعدة تسع تطليقات، وتزوج الامة على الحرة، وتزوج الذمية على المسلمة، وتزوج المرأة على عمتها وخالتها، وتزويج الامة من غير إذن مولاها، وتزويج الامة على من يقدر على تزويج الحرة، والجارية من السبي قبل القسمة، والجارية المشركة، والجارية المشتراة قبل أن يستبرئها، والمكتابة التي قد أدت بعض المكاتبة.

##### فرض الله تبارك وتعالى على الناس من الجمعة إلى الجمعة خمسا وثلاثين صلاة

#### 21-10 حدثنا أحمد بن زياد بن جعفر الهمداني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي ابن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه عن حماد بن عيسى، عن حريز، عن زرارة، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: إنما فرض الله عز وجل من الجمعة إلى الجمعة خمسا وثلاثين صلاة، فيها صلاة واحدة فرضها الله في جماعة وهي الجمعة.
