Part 27-on Four-hundred-numbered Characteristics
================================================

IN ONE MEETING, IMAM ALI TAUGHT FOUR-HUNDRED THINGS EACH OF WHICH IS VERY USEFUL FOR A MUSLIM’S LIFE AND RELIGION
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27-1 (The compiler of the book said) my father - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd
al-Yaqtayni, on the authority of Al-Qasim ibn Yahya, on the authority of
his grandfather Al-Hassan ibn Rashid, on the authority of Abi Basir and
Muhammad ibn Muslim, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), on
the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his grandfather
(MGB), on the authority of his forefathers (MGB) that in an assembly the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) taught his companions
four-hundred things each of which is very useful for a Muslim’s life and
religion. What he (MGB) taught is as follows.

Blood-letting**[[1170]](footnotes_4.htm#b1170)** improves physical
health and strengthens the intellect.

Putting perfume on the moustache is one of the traditions of the Prophet
(MGB) and of the Honorable Recorders (Kiraman
Katibin)**[[1171]](footnotes_4.htm#b1171)** .

Brushing the teeth is one of the things that pleases the Honorable the
Exalted God. It is also one of the traditions of God’s Prophet (MGB). It
cleans the mouth.

Soap makes the cuticle soft, increases intelligence, facilitates the
flow of water in the body, takes away dryness of the skin and improves
the color of the face.

Washing the head takes away dirtiness and cleans dust and rubbish.

Gargling with water and pulling water up into the nose is a tradition.
It cleans both the mouth and the nose.

Drawing snuff**[[1172]](footnotes_4.htm#b1172)** into the nose clears up
the head, cleans the body and alleviates any headaches.

Applying depilatory cream or powder**[[1173]](footnotes_4.htm#b1173)**
brings happiness and cleans the body.

Keeping the shoes in proper order helps maintain the body and helps with
cleanliness and prayer.

Cutting the nails prevents major ailments, increases one’s sustenance
and expedites the arrival of one’s share of daily bread.

Shaving the underarm fights bad odor. It is a part of cleanliness and a
custom which the clean Prophet (MGB) has ordered.

###### أبواب الاربعمائة

##### علم أمير المؤمنين أصحابه في مجلس واحد أربع مائة باب مما يصلح للمسلم في دينه ودنياه

#### 27-1 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني محمد ابن عيسى بن عبيد اليقطيني، عن القاسم بن يحيى، عن جده الحسن بن راشد، عن أبي بصير، ومحمد بن مسلم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: حدثني أبي، عن جدي، عن آبائه عليهم السلام أن أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام علم أصحابه في مجلس واحد أربع مائة باب مما يصلح للمسلم في دينه ودنياه.

#### قال عليه السلام: إن الحجامة تصحح البدن وتشد العقل.

#### والطيب في الشارب من أخلاق النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وكرامة الكاتبين.

#### والسواك من مرضات الله عز وجل وسنة النبي صلى الله عليه وآله، ومطيبة للفم.

#### والدهن يلين البشرة، ويزيد في الدماغ ويسهل مجاري الماء، ويذهب بالقشف، ويسفر اللون.

#### وغسل الرأس يذهب بالدرن وينفي القذاء.

#### والمضمضة والاستنشاق سنة وطهور للفم والانف.

#### والسعوط مصحة للرأس وتنقية للبدن وسائر أوجاع الرأس.

#### والنورة نشرة وطهور للجسد.

#### استجادة الحذاء وقاية للبدن وعون على الطهور والصلاة.

#### وتقليم الاظفار يمنع الداء الاعظم ويدر الرزق ويورده.

#### ونتف الابط ينفي الرائحة المنكرة وهو طهور وسنة مما أمر به الطيب عليه السلام.

Washing the hands before and after every meal causes an increase in
one’s share of daily bread. It also prevents one’s clothes from getting
oily and improves one’s sight.

Staying up at night (to worship God) would improve your health, cause
the pleasure of the Honorable the Exalted Lord, is a means of seeking
His Mercy, and is a way of following behavior of the Prophets.

Eating an apple is good for the stomach.

Chewing gum would strengthen the teeth, eliminate phlegm and remove bad
odor of the mouth.

It is much better to sit in the mosque after dawn until sunrise than to
go around and work to earn a living.

Eating quinces would strengthen a weak heart, clean the stomach, improve
spiritual strength, convert a scared person to a brave one, and result
in the production of a better child.

Eating twenty-one raisins with breakfast every morning would cure all
the pains except death.

27-2 It is recommended for Muslim men to have intercourse with their
wives on the first night of the month of Ramazan since the Blessed the
Sublime God said, ‘Permitted to you, on the night of the fasts, is the
approach to your wives…’**[[1174]](footnotes_4.htm#b1174)** And approach
in this verse means having sexual intercourse.

You should only wear silver rings since God’s Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Any
hand on which there is an iron ring is not clean.’

If God’s name is inscribed on your ring, you should take it off when you
want to wash your hand.

Whenever you look at yourself in the mirror you should say, ‘Thanks God
who has created me as an excellent creation, has made me beautiful, has
adorned me like no one else, and has honored me due to Islam.

When your brethren come to see you should adorn yourselves as if you
would for a stranger, so that he may see you in your best form.

Fast for three days each month, that is fast for one Wednesday in
between two Thursdays. Fasting in the month of ‘Sha’ban would fight off
temptations and concerns of the heart.

Cleansing yourself with cold water after defecation would help prevent
hemorrhoids.

Washing the clothes would eliminate sadness and is a part of cleansing
for prayer.

#### غسل اليدين قبل الطعام وبعده زيادة في الرزق وإماطة للغمر عن الثياب ويجلو البصر.

#### وقيام الليل مصحة للبدن ومرضات للرب عز وجل، وتعرض للرحمة، وتمسك بأخلاق النبيين.

#### أكل التفاح نضوح للمعدة.

#### مضغ اللبان يشد الاضراس وينفي البلغم ويذهب بريح الفم.

#### والجلوس في المسجد بعد طلوع الفجر إلى طلوع الشمس أسرع في طلب الرزق من الضرب في الارض.

#### وأكل السفرجل قوة للقلب الضعيف، ويطيب المعدة، ويزيد في قوة الفؤاد، ويشجع الجبان، ويحسن الولد.

#### أكل أحد وعشرون زبيبة حمراء في كل يوم على الريق يدفع جميع الامراض إلا مرض الموت.

#### 27-2 يستحب للمسلم أن يأتي أهله أول ليلة من شهر رمضان لقول الله تبارك وتعالى: "أُحِلَّ لَكُمْ لَيْلَةَ الصِّيَامِ الرَّفَثُ إِلَى نِسَائِكُمْ." والرفث المجامعة.

#### لا تختموا بغير الفضة، فان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله قال: ما طهرت يد فيها خاتم حديد، ومن نقش على خاتمه اسم الله عز وجل فليحوله عن اليد التي يستنجى بها في المتوضأ.

#### إذا نظر أحدكم في المرآة فليقل: الحمد لله الذي خلقني فأحسن خلقي وصورني فأحسن صورتي، وزان مني ما شان من غيري، وأكرمني بالاسلام.

#### وليتزين أحدكم لاخيه المسلم إذا أتاه كما يتزين للغريب الذي يحب أن يراه في أحسن الهيئة.

#### صوم ثلاثة أيام من كل شهر أربعاء بين خميسين، وصوم شعبان يذهب بوسواس الصدر وبلابل القلب.

#### والاستنجاء بالماء البارد يقطع البواسير.

#### وغسل الثياب يذهب الهم والحزن وهو طهور للصلاة.

You should not pull out grey hairs since they are the light of a
believer.

The white hair of whoever spends his youth for Islam will become his
light on the Resurrection Day.

A Muslim should not go to sleep while he is in a state of major
impurity.

A Muslim should not go to sleep until he gets cleaned. If he doesn’t
have access to water, he should make ablutions with dirt since a
believer’s spirit goes up to God in his sleep and the Blessed the
Sublime God accepts it and blesses it. If the time of his death has
come, then his spirit will be placed in the Treasury of God’s Mercy.
However, if the time for his death has still not arrived, then his
spirit will be returned with trusted angels and placed back in his body.

A believer should not spit in the direction of the Qibla (prayer
direction). Should he unintentionally do so, he should ask for
forgiveness from the Honorable the Exalted God for that.

You should not blow at the place of prostration.

You should not blow at your food or your drink.

You should not blow at your charm.

You should not sleep on the passage-ways.

You should not urinate in the air.

You should not urinate in flowing water. Should you do so and get hurt,
you have no one but yourselves to blame since there are residents in
water and air.

You should not sleep on your face. If you see someone sleeping on his
face, wake him up and do not let him to do this again.

You should not do your prayers lazily and while dozing off.

You should not think about yourself while you are praying since then you
are standing in the presence of your Honorable Exalted Lord. For one’s
prayer to be accepted it must be said wholeheartedly.

Eat whatever falls off of the
table-cloth**[[1175]](footnotes_4.htm#b1175)** because it is the cure
for every pain with the permission of the Honorable the Exalted God. He
can cure anyone with it whom He Wills. When you eat a meal and lick your
fingers with which you ate, the Honorable the Exalted God would says,
‘May God bless you with that.’

Wear cotton clothing because it was God’s Prophet’s (MGB) clothing and
it is our clothing. He never wore clothing made from animal’s hair and
wool, except for a reason. For sure the Magnificent and the Exalted God
is beautiful and likes to see the effect of his blessing in his servant.
Be kind to your family members although it be by just greeting them. The
Blessed the Sublime God says, ‘…reverence God, through whom ye demand
your mutual (rights), and (reverence) the wombs (that bore you), for God
ever watches over you.’ **[[1176]](footnotes_4.htm#b1176)**

#### لا تنتفوا الشيب فانه نور المسلم، ومن شاب شيبة في الاسلام كان له نورا يوم القيامة.

#### لا ينام المسلم وهو جنب، ولا ينام إلا على طهور، فإن لم يجد الماء فليتمم بالصعيد، فإن روح المؤمن ترفع إلى الله تبارك وتعالى فيقبلها ويبارك عليها، فان كان أجلها قد حضر جعلها في كنوز رحمته، وإن لم يكن أجلها قد حضر بعث بها مع امنائه من ملائكته فيردونها في جسده.

#### لا يتفل المؤمن في القبلة فإن فعل ذلك ناسيا فلستغفر الله عز وجل منه.

#### لا ينفخ الرجل في موضع سجوده، ولا ينفخ في طعامه، ولا في شرابه، ولا في تعويذة.

#### لا ينام الرجل على المحجة ولا يبولن من سطح في الهواء ولا يبولن في ماء حار، فإن فعل ذلك فأصابه شيء فلا يلومن إلا نفسه، فإن للماء أهلا وللهواء أهلا.

#### لا ينام الرجل على وجهه، ومن رأيتموه نائما على وجهه فأنبهوه ولا تدعوه.

#### ولا يقومن أحدكم في الصلاة متكاسلا، ولا ناعسا، ولا يفكرن في نفسه فانه بين يدي ربه عز وجل، وإنما للعبد من صلاته ما أقبل عليه منها بقلبه.

#### كلوا ما يسقط من الخوان فإنه شفاء من كل داء بإذن الله عز وجل لمن أراد أن يستشفي به.

#### إذا أكل أحدكم طعاما فمص أصابعه التي أكل بها قال الله عز وجل: بارك الله فيك.

#### ألبسوا ثياب القطن فإنها لباس رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وهو لباسنا، ولم نكن نلبس الشعر والصوف إلا من علة.

#### وقال: إن الله عز وجل جميل يحب الجمال، ويحب أن يرى أثر نعمته على عبده.

#### صلوا أرحامكم ولو بالسلام. يقول الله تبارك وتعالى: "وَاتَّقُوا اللهَ الَّذِي تَسَاءَلُونَ بِهِ وَالأَرْحَامَ إِنَّ اللهَ كَانَ عَلَيْكُمْ رَقِيبًا."

Do not waste your time with vain talk or vain plans since there are
certain angels which are appointed to record your deeds.

Remember God everywhere since He is with you.

Greet Muhammad (MGB) and his Household (MGB) so that the Honorable the
Exalted God may accept your supplications through Muhammad’s remembrance
and supplicating for him (MGB).

Let your hot food cool down before you eat it since God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, ‘Whenever they bring you hot food, let it cool down before you eat
it. The Honorable the Exalted God doesn’t wish us to eat hot food. There
are blessings in cooled food.’

You should not urinate in the air or in the wind.

You should teach your children things by which they may earn Godly
benefits, so that they may not be taught erroneous beliefs by others.

Watch your tongue and greet the people politely.

Return what you are entrusted with to its possessor, even if he may be
the murderer of the Prophet’s offspring (MGB).

Whenever you enter a market and see that the people are busy doing their
own affairs you should remember God as that would constitute an
atonement for your sins and an increase in your good deeds. Thus, your
name will not be recorded along with the ignorant ones.

You should not travel when the month of fasting comes because God said,
‘… So everyone of you who is present (in his home) during that month
should spend it in fasting…’ **[[1177]](footnotes_4.htm#b1177)**

There is no concealment of faith regarding drinking alcoholic beverages
and washing the feet from over the
foot-wear**[[1178]](footnotes_4.htm#b1178)** .

27-3 I admonish you against boasting about us. You should say that we
are servants of God, but you may state our virtues.

Whoever loves us should act as we do. You should seek the assistance of
piety, since it is the best assistant in the affairs of this world and
the Hereafter.

Do not associate with those who try to find fault with us. Do not praise
us in front of our enemies. Do not express our love publicly, since then
you may become despised by the kings.

Adhere to righteousness since it will save you.

Be inclined to what is near the Honorable the Exalted God. Try to obey
God. Persevere in obeying God.

How awkward would it be for a believer to enter Paradise without
dignity.

#### لا تقطعوا نهاركم بكذا وبكذا وفعلنا كذا وكذا، فإن معكم حفظة يحفظون علينا وعليكم.

#### اذكروا الله في كل مكان فإنه معكم.

#### صلوا على محمد وآله محمد، فإن الله عز وجل يقبل دعاء‌كم عند ذكر محمد ودعائكم له وحفظكم إياه صلى الله عليه وآله.

#### أقروا الحار حتى يبرد، فإن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله قرب إليه طعام فقال: أقروه حتى يبرد ويمكن أكله، ما كان الله عز وجل ليطعمنا النار، والبركة في البارد.

#### إذا بال أحدكم فلا يطمحن ببوله في الهواء ولا يستقبل الريح.

#### علموا صبيانكم ما ينفعهم الله به، لا تغلب عليهم المرجئة برأيها.

#### كفوا ألسنتكم وسلموا تسليما تغنموا.

#### أدوا الامانة إلى من ائتمنكم ولو إلى قتلة أولاد الانبياء عليهم السلام.

#### أكثروا ذكر الله عز وجل إذا دخلتم الاسواق عند اشتغال الناس، فإنه كفارة للذنوب وزيادة في الحسنات ولا تكتبوا في الغافلين.

#### ليس للعبد أن يخرج في سفر إذا حضر شهر رمضان، لقول الله عز وجل: مَنْ شَهِدَ مِنْكُمْ الشَّهْرَ فَلْيَصُمْه.

#### ليس في شرب المسكر والمسح على الخفين تقية.

#### 27-3 إياكم والغلو فينا، قولوا إنا عبيد مربوبون وقولوا في فضلنا ما شئتم.

#### من أحبنا فليعمل بعملنا وليستعن بالورع، فإنه أفضل ما يستعان به في أمر الدنيا والآخرة.

#### لا تجالسوا لنا عائبا، ولا تمتدحوا بنا عند عدونا معلنين بإظهار حبنا فتذلوا أنفسكم عند سلطانكم.

#### ألزموا الصدق فانه منجاة، وارغبوا فيما عند الله عز وجل، واطلبوا طاعته، واصبروا عليها، فما أقبح بالمؤمن أن يدخل الجنة وهو مهتوك الستر.

You should not just be hopeful of our intercession on your behalf on the
Resurrection Day. You should make an effort yourself to do good deeds.

You should not disgrace yourself in front of your enemies in the
Hereafter. You should not deny your own rank near God in front of your
enemies for this lowly world.

You should forget about trying to get what others own due to God’s
commands. Have you not heard that God’s Prophet (MGB) has informed us
that what is near God is better and more permanent. Should a believer
receive the glad tidings from the Honorable the Exalted God, he would be
delighted and interested in visiting God.

Do not belittle your weak brethren. The Honorable the Exalted God will
not unite whoever belittles a believer with that believer in Heaven,
unless he repents. You should help fulfill the needs of your brethren as
soon as you realize that he needs something before he asks. Be friends
for each other. Be kind to each other. Give gifts to one another. Do not
be like a hypocrite who says something, but doesn’t act accordingly.

Get married as this is a tradition of God’s Prophet (MGB). He (MGB)
said, ‘Whoever likes to follow my traditions should get married, since
getting married is one of my traditions.’ You should also try to have
children, since then your large nation will be proud in the Hereafter.

You should not feed your babies with an adulterer’s milk or an insane
woman’s milk, since milk could transfer a mother’s illness to the child.
You should not eat any birds which do not have a gizzard, a spur on its
feet, or a craw**[[1179]](footnotes_4.htm#b1179)** . You should not eat
any wild animals that have canine teeth and or birds that have claws.
You should not eat a spleen since it spoils the blood. You should not
wear black clothes since that was how Pharaoh dressed. You should not
eat any meat glands since this may cause leprosy. You should not make
comparisons regarding religious affairs as that doesn’t hold. Those who
do so are the enemies of the religion. It was Satan who did so first.

Do not wear rectangular shoes since Pharaoh’s shoes were that way.
Pharaoh was the first person who wore such shoes.

You should oppose wine-drinkers. I advise you to eat dates since they
are the cure of every pain. You should obey the sayings of God’s Prophet
(MGB) who said, ‘God will open a door of poverty to anyone who opens up
the door of a question to himself.**[[1180]](footnotes_4.htm#b1180)** ’
You should ask God for forgiveness often, since that would expedite the
arrival of your daily sustenance. You should rush to do good deeds, so
that you may benefit from them in the Hereafter.

#### لا تعنونا في الطلب والشفاعة لكم يوم القيامة فيما قدمتم.

#### لا تفضحوا أنفسكم عند عدوكم في القيامة، ولا تكذبوا أنفسكم عندهم في منزلتكم عند الله بالحقير من الدنيا.

#### تمسكوا بما أمركم الله به فما بين أحدكم وبين أن يغتبط ويرى ما يحب إلا أن يحضره رسول الله، وما عند الله خير وأبقى، وتأتيه البشارة من الله عز وجل فتقر عينه ويحب لقاء الله.

#### لا تحقروا ضعفاء إخوانكم فإنه من احتقر مؤمنا لم يجمع الله عز وجل بينهما في الجنة إلا أن يتوب.

#### لا يكلف المؤمن أخاه الطلب إليه إذا علم حاجته.

#### توازروا وتعاطفوا وتباذلوا، ولا تكونوا بمنزلة المنافق الذي يصف ما لا يفعل.

#### تزوجوا، فان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله ما كان يقول: "من كان يحب أن يتبع سنتي فليتزوج فإن من سنتي التزويج." واطلبوا الولد، فاني اكاثر بكم الامم غدا.

#### وتوفوا على أولادكم لبن البغي من النساء والمجنونة فإن اللبن يعدي.

#### تنزهوا عن أكل الطير الذي ليست له قانصة ولا صيصية ولا حوصلة.

#### واتقوا كل ذي ناب من السباع ومخلب من الطير.

#### ولا تأكلوا الطحال فانه بيت الدم الفاسد.

#### لا تلبسوا السواد فانه لباس فرعون.

#### اتقوا الغدد من اللحم فانه يحرك عرق الجذام.

#### ولا تقيسوا الدين، فان من الدين ما لا يقاس وسيأتي أقوام يقيسون، وهم أعداء الدين، وأول من قاس إبليس.

#### لا تحتذوا الملس فانه حذاء فرعون، وهو أول من حذا الملس.

#### خالفوا أصحاب المسكر، وكلوا التمر فان فيه شفاء من الادواء.

#### اتبعوا قول رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله، فانه قال: "من فتح على نفسه باب مسألة فتح الله عليه باب فقر."

#### أكثروا الاستغفار تجلبوا الرزق، وقدموا ما استطعتم من عمل الخير تجدوه غدا.

I admonish you against arguing because it causes doubt. If you have any
needs from the Honorable the Exalted Lord, you should choose any of the
following three times to ask Him for it: sometime on Fridays; at the
time of sunset; when the wind blows - that is at times when the gates of
Heaven are opened and Mercy descends; when the birds sing and at the
last hours of night when the dawn comes at which time two angels
announce, ‘Is there anyone who repents whose repentance is accepted of
him? Is there anyone begging for anything so that it be granted to him?
Is there anyone asking for forgiveness so that he be forgiven? Is there
anyone asking for anything to be given to him?’ and one responds, ‘Yes.
Here I am! I am responding to the Supreme God’s invitation.’

Ask (God) for your share of daily bread from dawn until sunrise. This
would be better than going around after work, since this is the time at
which God divides his servants’ share of daily bread.

27-4 Be hopeful. Do not lose hopes in God’s Mercy. The best deed in the
sight of the Honorable the Exalted God is being hopeful for relief so
that one can survive with that hope.

You should seek God’s help by reliance on Him when you say your morning
prayers, since that is the time when the rewards are bestowed.

Do not enter a shrine with a sword.

You should not put the sword in front of you while you pray, since the
Qibla (prayer direction) is a secure turning point.

Whenever you go on the Hajj pilgrimage, you should also go and visit the
shrine of God’s Prophet (MGB). It would be ungrateful not to do so.

You should also visit other shrines which the Honorable the Exalted God
has made it incumbent upon you to visit. You should ask for your share
of daily bread there.

Do not underestimate minor sins since they might lead to major sins.

Lengthen your prostration because nothing is harsher for Satan to bear
than to see the prostration of man, since Satan was ordered to prostrate
but he disobeyed and man was ordered to prostrate and he obeyed and was
saved.

You should often remember death and your departure from the grave and
standing up in front of God so that difficulties become easy for you.

Whenever you get a pain in the eye you should recite the verse of the
Throne (Ayat al-Kursi)**[[1181]](footnotes_4.htm#b1181)** hoping that
you get better if God wills. I advise you to abstain from committing
sins since any calamities, restrictions in your share of the daily
bread, scratches, or bruises are due to committing sins.

#### إياكم والجدال فانه يورث الشك.

#### من كانت له إلى ربه عز وجل حاجة فليطلبها في ثلاث ساعات: ساعة في الجمعة، وساعة تزول الشمس حين تهب الرياح وتفتح أبواب السماء وتنزل الرحمة ويصوت الطير، وساعة في آخر الليل عند طلوع الفجر، فإن ملكين يناديان: هل من تائب يتاب عليه؟ هل من سائل يعطى؟ هل من مستغفر فيغفر له؟ هل من طالب حاجة فتقضى له؟ فأجيبوا داعى الله.

#### واطلبوا الرزق فيما بين طلوع الفجر إلى طلوع الشمس، فانه أسرع في طلب الرزق من الضرب في الارض، وهي الساعة التي يقسم الله فيها الرزق بين عباده.

#### 27-4 انتظروا الفرج، ولا تيأسوا من روح الله، فان أحب الاعمال إلى الله عز وجل انتظار الفرج ما دام عليه العبد المؤمن.

#### توكلوا على الله عز وجل عند ركعتي الفجر اذا صليتموها، ففيها تعطوا الرغائب.

#### لا تخرجوا بالسيوف إلى الحرم. ولا يصلين أحدكم وبين يديه سيف فان القبلة أمن.

#### أتموا برسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله حجكم إذا خرجتم إلى بيت الله، فان تركه جفاء وبذلك أمرتم، [وأتموا] بالقبور التي ألزمكم الله عز وجل حقها وزيارتها، واطلبوا الرزق عندها.

#### ولا تستصغروا قليل الآثام، فان الصغير يحصى ويرجع إلى الكبير.

#### وأطيلوا السجود، فما من عمل أشد على إبليس من أن يرى ابن آدم ساجدا، لانه أمر بالسجود فعصى، وهذا امر بالسجود فأطاع فنجا.

#### أكثروا ذكر الموت ويوم خروجكم من القبور وقيامكم بين يدي الله عز وجل تهون عليكم المصائب.

#### إذا اشتكى أحدكم عينيه فليقرأ آية الكرسي وليضمر في نفسه أنها تبرأ، فانه يعافي إن شاء الله.

#### توقوا الذنوب فما من بلية ولا نقص رزق إلا بذنب حتى الخدش والكبوة والمصيبة.

The Honorable the Exalted God said, ‘Whatever misfortune happens to you,
is because on the things your hands have wrought, and for many (of them)
He grants forgiveness.’**[[1182]](footnotes_4.htm#b1182)** You should
often remember God when you eat food. You should not rebel since the
food is also one of God’s blessings, and it is a part of your daily
bread. It is incumbent upon you to thank and praise God for it.

It would be better if you are grateful for the blessings when you get
them and before they are gone. Blessings will testify as to how their
owner treated them.

God would be pleased with a little bit of good deeds of anyone who is
pleased with a little bit of daily bread from God.

I admonish you against immoderation as it will result in regret when
there is no use in regret.

When you are in the battlefield and you encounter your enemies, you
should talk less and remember God a lot. You should not flee since then
you will face God’s Wrath. When you encounter your wounded brethren you
should rescue them. You should do as many good deeds as you can so as to
be saved from a bad death.

If you wish to know about your rank in the sight of God, you should
consider God’s rank in your sight when you are committing sins. This
would be your rank in the sight of the Blessed the Sublime God.

The best thing you can get in your house for your wife is a sheep. The
angels would sanctify you once a day, if you have one sheep in your
house. They would sanctify you twice a day if you have two sheep in your
house. They would sanctify you three times, if you have three sheep in
your house.

Whenever a Muslim gets weak, he should eat meat and dairy
products**[[1183]](footnotes_4.htm#b1183)** since the Honorable the
Exalted God has placed strength in them.

Whenever you decide to go on the Hajj pilgrimage, you should prepare for
the trip in advance as the Honorable the Exalted God says, ‘If they had
intended to come out, they would certainly have made some preparation.’
**[[1184]](footnotes_4.htm#b1184)**

27-5 When you sit in the sun, sit with your back towards the sun so that
it doesn’t cause inner pains to appear.

When you go on the Hajj pilgrimage, look at the house of Ka’ba a lot
since the Honorable the Exalted God has established one-hundred and
twenty forms of Mercy at His House, sixty of which is for those who
circumambulate the Ka’ba, forty of which is for those who pray there and
twenty of which is for those who look at the House of Ka’ba.

#### قال الله عز وجل: "وَمَا أَصَابَكُمْ مِنْ مُصِيبَةٍ فَبِمَا كَسَبَتْ أَيْدِيكُمْ وَيَعْفُو عَنْ كَثِيرٍ."

#### أكثروا ذكر الله عز وجل على الطعام ولا تطغوا، فانها نعمة من نعم الله ورزق من رزقه يجب عليكم فيه شكره وحمده.

#### أحسنوا صحبة النعم قبل فواتها، فانها تزول وتشهد على صاحبها بما عمل فيها.

#### من رضي عن الله عز وجل باليسير من الرزق رضي الله منه بالقليل من العمل.

#### إياكم والتفريط فتقع الحسرة حين لا تنفع الحسرة.

#### إذ القيتم عدوكم في الحرب فأقلوا الكلام وأكثروا ذكر الله عز وجل، ولا تولوهم الادبار فتسخطوا الله ربكم وتستوجبوا غضبه.

#### وإذا رأيتم من إخوانكم في الحرب الرجل المجروح أو من قد نكل [به] أو من قد طمع عدوكم فيه فقووه بأنفسكم.

#### اصطنعوا المعروف بما قدرتم على اصطناعه، فانه يقي مصارع السوء.

#### من أراد منكم أن يعلم كيف منزلته عند الله فلينظر كيف منزلة الله منه عند الذنوب، كذلك تكون منزلته عند الله تبارك وتعالى.

#### أفضل ما يتخذه الرجل في منزله لعياله الشاة، فمن كانت في منزله شاة قدست عليه الملائكة في كل يوم مرة، ومن كانت عنده شاتان قدست عليه الملائكة مرتين في كل يوم، وكذلك في الثلاث، تقول: بورك فيكم.

#### إذا ضعف المسلم فليأكل اللحم واللبن، فان الله عز وجل جعل القوة فيهما.

#### إذا أردتم الحج فتقدموا في شرى الحوائج ببعض ما يقوتكم على السفر، فان الله عز وجل يقول: "وَلَوْ أَرَادُوا الْخُرُوجَ لأَعَدُّوا لَهُ عدَّةً."

#### 27-5 وإذا جلس أحدكم في الشمس فليستدبرها بظهره، فانها تظهر الداء الدفين.

#### وإذا خرجتم حجاجا إلى بيت الله عز وجل فأكثروا النظر إلى بيت الله، فان لله عز وجل مائة وعشرين رحمة عند بيته الحرام، منها ستون للطائفين، وأربعون للمصلين وعشرون للناظرين.

Confess to your sins which you remember or you do not, at the
Multazim**[[1185]](footnotes_4.htm#b1185)** and say, ‘O God! Please
forgive those sins that your guards have recorded and I have forgotten’,
since it is on the Honorable the Exalted God to forgive the sins of
those who confess to their sins there, count them, remember them and ask
God for forgiveness.

Say supplications before calamities fall upon you.

The gate to heavens open at five times: when it rains; when the holy
warriors attack; during the recitation of the
azan**[[1186]](footnotes_4.htm#b1186)** , when the Quran is recited; at
sunset and at sunrise.

Whoever performs the major ritual ablutions for the deceased should
perform the major ritual ablutions himself after he shrouds the corpse.

Do not put any perfumes on the corpse except for camphor, since a dead
person is considered to be intimate**[[1187]](footnotes_4.htm#b1187)** .

You should advise your folks to speak fairly about the dead ones, since
when the father of Fatimah (MGB) died and all of the Hashemite women
mourned in sympathizing with her, Fatimah (MGB) called them all in and
said, ‘I invite you not to mourn and cry, but to say supplications.’

Visit the graves of relatives since they become happy when you visit
them.

You should supplicate upon your parents’ graves and ask God for the
fulfillment of your needs after what you ask of God for them.

A Muslim should act like a mirror for his Muslim
brethren**[[1188]](footnotes_4.htm#b1188)** .

Whenever you notice a slippage or fault from your believing brother, you
should not attack him. You should be kind to him, advise him and guide
him.

Avoid disputes so that you are not scattered about.

I advise you to be moderate so that you may make progress.

Whenever you reach your destination after having ridden a quadruped you
should first give it some water and grass.

You should not beat quadrupeds on the face since they glorify their
Lord.

Whenever you get lost and frightened while you are traveling, you should
say, ‘Ya Salih Aqsani’, since one of your genie brothers called Salih is
always moving around and would help you find your way and would stop a
fleeing quadruped upon hearing your call.

Whenever you are frightened for yourself or your sheep from a lion, you
should draw a line around yourself and say, ‘O God! O Creator of Daniel
and the den**[[1189]](footnotes_4.htm#b1189)** , Lord of all the lions!
Please protect me and my sheep.’

Whenever you become frightened by a scorpion you should recite the
verses: ‘Peace and salutation to Noah among the nations! Thus indeed do
we reward those who do right. For he was one of our believing Servants.’
**[[1190]](footnotes_4.htm#b1190)**

#### اقروا عند الملتزم بما حفظتم من ذنوبكم وما لم تحفظوا فقولوا: "وما حفظته علينا حفظتك ونسيناه فاغفره لنا." فإنه من أقر بذنبه في ذلك الموضع وعده وذكره واستغفر الله منه كان حقا على الله عز وجل أن يغفره له.

#### وتقدموا بالدعاء قبل نزول البلاء.

#### تفتح لكم أبواب السماء في خمس مواقيت عند نزول الغيث، وعند الزحف، وعند الاذان، وعند قراء‌ة القرآن، ومع زوال الشمس، وعند طلوع الفجر.

#### من غسل منكم ميتا فليغتسل بعد ما يلبسه أكفانه.

#### لا تجمروا الاكفان ولا تمسحوا موتاكم بالطيب إلا الكافور، فان الميت بمنزلة المحرم.

#### مروا أهاليكم بالقول الحسن عند موتاكم، فان فاطمة بنت محمد صلى الله عليه وآله لما قبض أبوها صلى الله عليه وآله ساعدتها جميع بنات بني هاشم، فقالت: دعوا التعداد وعليكم بالدعاء.

#### زوروا موتاكم فانهم يفرحون بزيارتكم، وليطلب الرجل حاجته عند قبر أبيه وامه بعد ما يدعو لهما.

#### المسلم مرآة أخيه، فاذا رأيتم من أخيكم هفوة فلا تكونوا عليه، وكونوا له كنفسه وأرشدوه وانصحوه وترفقوا به.

#### إياكم والخلاف فتمزقوا، وعليكم بالقصد تزلفوا وترجوا.

#### من سافر منكم بدابة فليبدأ حين ينزل بعلفها وسقيها.

#### لا تضربوا الدواب على وجوهها فإنها تسبح ربها.

#### ومن ضل منكم في سفر أو خاف على نفسه فليناد: "يا صالح أغثني." فان في إخوانكم من الجن جنيا يسمى صالحا يسيح في البلاد لمكانكم، محتسبا نفسه لكم، فإذا سمع الصوت أجاب وأرشد الضال منكم وحبس عليه دابته.

#### من خاف من الاسد على نفسه [أ]وغنمه فليخط عليها خطة وليقل: "اللهم رب دانيال والجب، ورب كل أسد مستأسد، احفظني واحفظ غنمي."

#### ومن خاف منكم العقرب فليقرأ هذه الآيات "سَلاَمٌ عَلَى نُوحٍ فِي الْعَالَمِينَ. إِنَّا كَذَلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُحْسِنِينَ. إِنَّهُ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا الْمُؤْمِنِينَ."

Whenever you get frightened from becoming drowned you should read ‘…In
the name of Allah, whether it move or be at rest! For my Lord is, be
sure, Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful!’ **[[1191]](footnotes_4.htm#b1191)**

You should shave the hair of your children when they are seven days old.
Their head should be shaved and alms in the form of silver or gold equal
in weight to their hair should be given as charity to Muslims. This is
what God’s Prophet (MGB) did the same with Al-Hassan (MGB) and
Al-Hussein (MGB) and his other offspring (MGB).

Whenever you give something to a beggar ask him to pray for you. His
prayer for you would be accepted, although since hey lies, his prayer
for himself would never be accepted.

You should kiss the hand with which you give something to a beggar,
since the Honorable the Exalted God receives it before it reaches the
beggar’s hand. The Honorable the Exalted God says, ‘Know they not that
God doth accept repentance from His votaries and receives their gifts of
charity…’ **[[1192]](footnotes_4.htm#b1192)**

You should give charity at night since that would extinguish God’s
anger - may His Majesty be Exalted.

You should consider whatever you say to be a part of your deeds.

Speak as little as possible except for fair speech.

Give in charity from what God has given you, since the position of one
who gives charity is like that of one who fights in the way of God.
Anyone who is sure that God will reward him would give charity and
anyone who is not sure would withhold it.

Anyone who is sure and then doubts should maintain his certitude because
doubt would not invalidate certitude.

27-6 Do not give false testimony.

Do not sit at a table at which alcohol is served since you never know
when you will die.

When you go to the table to eat, sit like a good servant of God. Do not
sit with your legs crossed, since God doesn’t like this kind of sitting
and considers those who sit that way to be His enemy.

The Prophets dined after dusk.

Do not forgo eating dinner since that would ruin the body.

Fever is the forerunner for death. It is God’s prison on the Earth.
Whenever God wants to imprison someone on the Earth, he would get a
fever. Fever would shed one’s sins as leaves fall off a tree in the
fall.

All illnesses are internal except for wounds and fever that enter the
body.

#### من خاف منكم الغرق فليقرأ: "بِاِسْمِ اللَّهِ مَجْرَاهَا وَمُرْسَاهَا إِنَّ رَبِّي لَغَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ . بِسْمِ اللهِ الْمَلِكِ الْحَقِّ. وَمَا قَدَرُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ وَالأَرْضُ جَمِيعًا قَبْضَتُهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَالسَّماوَاتُ مَطْوِيَّاتٌ بِيَمِينِهِ سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَى عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ."

#### عقوا عن أولادكم يوم السابع وتصدقوا إذا حلقتموهم بزنة شعورهم فضة على مسلم، كذلك فعل رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله بالحسن والحسين وسائر ولده.

#### إذا ناولتم السائل الشيء فسألوه أن يدعو لكم، فانه يجاب فيكم ولا يجاب في نفسه، لانهم يكذبون.

#### وليرد الذي يناوله يده إلى فيه فليقبلها، فان الله عز وجل يأخذها قبل أن تقع في يد السائل، كما قال الله عز وجل: "أَلَمْ يَعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللهَ هُوَ يَقْبَلُ التَّوْبَةَ عَنْ عِبَادِهِ وَيَأْخُذُ الصَّدَقَاتِ."

#### تصدقوا بالليل فان الصدقة بالليل تطفيء غضب الرب جل جلاله.

#### احسبوا كلامكم من أعمالكم يقل كلامكم إلا في خير.

#### أنفقوا مما رزقكم الله عز وجل فان المنفق بمنزلة المجاهد في سبيل الله. فمن أيقن بالخلف جاد وسخت نفسه بالنفقة.

#### من كان على يقين فشك فليمض على يقينه فان الشك لا ينقض اليقين.

#### 27-6 لا تشهدوا قول الزور، ولا تجلسوا على مائدة يشرب عليها الخمر، فان العبد لا يدري متى يؤخذ.

#### إذا جلس أحدكم على الطعام فليجلس جلسة العبد، ولا يضعن أحدكم إحدى رجليه على الاخرى و[لا] يتربع، فانها جلسة يبغضها الله، ويمقت صاحبها.

#### عشاء الانبياء بعد العتمة. ولا تدعوا العشاء فان ترك العشاء خراب البدن.

#### الحمى رائد الموت وسجن الله في الارض، يحبس فيه من يشاء من عباده، وهي تحت الذنوب كما يتحات الوبر من سنام البعير.

#### ليس من داء إلا وهو من داخل الجوف إلا الجراحة والحمى، فانهما يردان على الجسد ورودا.

Lessen the burning of fever with violet and cool water, since such a
burning is from hell.

Do not treat a Muslim until illness overtakes him.

Saying supplications would change destiny. Use it as a tool for defense.

There are ten good aspects of making ablutions after cleaning one’s
self.

Do not be lazy since a lazy person would not honor the Honorable the
Exalted God’s rights.

You should renew your ablutions when you let out bad-smelling air.

Cleanse yourself since the Honorable the Exalted God doesn’t like a
filthy person and anyone who sits with him would hate him.

You should not play with your beard while you are saying your prayers.
You should not play with anything else either while you are praying.

Strive to do good deeds before you get busy with other work.

A believer is one who suffers himself while others are comfortable with
him.

The best of your sayings are the remembrance of the Honorable the
Exalted God.

Do not commit sins since that would imprison your share of daily bread.

Treat the patients in your family by giving charity, and guard your
property by paying the alms-tax.

Prayer is the tool for becoming near to God for all pious people.

Hajj is the weak people’s holy war.

The Holy War for a women is taking good care of her husband.

Poverty is the greatest death.

Having a small family is a type of wealth.

Destiny is half of life.

Sadness is half of oldness.

No one who is moderate will ever become poor.

Whoever seeks advice regarding his affairs would not get harmed.

Kindness is good to noble or religious men.

There is a fruit for everything. The fruit of good deeds lies in
hurrying up in doing them.

Anybody who is certain that God will give in return would give charity.

The reward of one who doesn’t do anything in times of difficulty will be
ruined.

#### اكسروا حر الحمى بالبنفسج والماء البارد، فان حرها من فيح جهنم.

#### لا يتداوى المسلم حتى يغلب مرضه صحته.

#### الدعاء يرد القضاء المبرم، فاتخذوه عدة.

#### للوضوء بعد الطهور عشر حسنات، فتظهروا.

#### إياكم والكسل، فانه من كسل لم يؤد حق الله عز وجل.

#### تنظفوا بالماء من النتن الريح الذي يتأذى به.

#### تعهدوا أنفسكم، فان الله عز وجل يبغض من عباده القاذورة الذي يتأنف به من جلس إليه.

#### لا يعبث الرجل في صلاته بلحيته ولا بما يشغله عن صلاته.

#### بادروا بعمل الخير قبل أن تشغلوا عنه بغيره.

#### المؤمن نفسه منه في تعب والناس منه في راحة.

#### وليكن جل كلامكم ذكر الله عز وجل.

#### احذروا الذنوب فان العبد ليذنب فيحبس عنه الرزق.

#### داووا مرضاكم بالصدقة.

#### حصنوا أموالكم بالزكاة.

#### الصلاة قربان كل تقي.

#### الحج جهاد كل ضعيف.

#### جهاد المرأة حسن التبعل.

#### الفقر هو الموت الاكبر.

#### قلة العيال أحد اليسارين.

#### التقدير نصف العيش.

#### الهم نصف الهرم.

#### ما عال امرؤ اقتصد، وما عطب امرؤ استشار.

#### لا تصلح الصنيعة إلا عند ذي حسب أو دين.

#### لكل شيء ثمرة وثمرة المعروف تعجيله.

#### من أيقن بالخلف جاد بالعطية.

#### من ضرب يديه على فخذيه عند مصيبة حبط أجره.

The best deed for man is waiting for the arrival of the Relief (i.e. the
Riser (MGB)) from the Honorable the Exalted God.

He who makes his mother and father sad has becomes disobedient of them.

Expedite the arrival of your sustenance by giving charity.

Fend off calamities by saying supplications before the calamities
arrive.

I swear by Him who splits up a seed and creates man, the speed with
which poverty and calamities rush towards a believer is more than the
downward speed of the flood from the top of the mountain and the running
speed of camels.

Ask God for protection against calamities since hard disasters can take
away one’s religion.

27-7 Whoever learns a lesson from other people’s conditions would
prosper.

Foster good behavior in yourself. A Muslim can attain good behavior by
staying up at nights in worship and fasting.

God would feed anyone - who drinks alcohol and knows that it is
forbidden – with the stinky blood of the people of Hell, although he is
forgiven.

You should not make a bet regarding what would constitute sin. You
should not swear to cut off your relations of kin either.

One who invites others to do good deeds but doesn’t himself do good
deeds is like a person who wants to shoot an arrow without a bow.

A Muslim woman should put on perfume only for her husband.

Anyone who is killed for keeping his property is considered to be a
martyr.

One who is ripped off (in a deal) is neither praiseworthy nor is he to
be rewarded.

An offspring’s testifying without his father’s permission and a wife’s
testifying without her husband’s permission is not correct.

Not speaking for a whole day from the morning until night is not good
unless one is busy remembering the Honorable the Exalted God.

There is no emigration from an Islamic environment. There will be no
migration after victory.**[[1193]](footnotes_4.htm#b1193)** Do business
so that you do not become needy of people, since the Honorable the
Exalted God likes honest businessmen.

Nothing is dearer to the Honorable the Exalted God than prayer. Worldly
affairs should not prevent you from praying on time because the
Honorable the Exalted God has complained about such people and said they
are those ‘Who are neglectful of their
prayers…’**[[1194]](footnotes_4.htm#b1194)** This means that they are
neglectful and do not pay enough attention to the prayer times.

#### أفضل أعمال المرء إنتظار الفرج من الله عز وجل.

#### من أحزن والديه فقد عقهما.

#### استنزلوا الرزق بالصدقة.

#### ادفعوا أمواج البلاء عنكم بالدعاء قبل ورود البلاء، فو الذي فلق الحبة وبرأ النسمة، للبلاء أسرع إلى المؤمن من انحدار السيل من أعلى التلعة إلى أسفلها ومن ركض البراذين.

#### سلوا الله العافية من جهد البلاء، فان جهد البلاء ذهاب الدين.

#### 27-7 السعيد من وعظ بغيره فاتعظ.

#### روضوا أنفسكم على الاخلاق الحسنة، فان العبد المسلم يبلغ بحسن خلقه درجة الصائم القائم.

#### من شرب الخمر وهو يعلم أنها حرام سقاه الله من طينة خبال، وإن كان مغفورا له.

#### لا نذر في معصية، ولا يمين في قطيعة.

#### الداعي بلا عمل كالرامي بلا وتر.

#### لتتطيب المرأة المسلمة لزوجها.

#### المقتول دون ماله شهيد.

#### المغبون غير محمود ولا مأجور.

#### لا يمين لولد مع والده، ولا للمرأة مع زوجها.

#### لا صمت يوم إلى الليل إلا بذكر الله عز وجل.

#### لا تعرب بعد الهجرة، ولا هجرة بعد الفتح.

#### تعرضوا للتجارة فان فيها غنى لكم عما في أيدي الناس، وإن الله عز وجل يحب العبد المحترف الامين.

#### ليس عمل أحب إلى الله عز وجل من الصلاة، فلا يشغلنكم عن أوقاتها شيء من امور الدنيا، فان الله عز وجل ذم أقواما فقال: "الَّذِينَ هُمْ عَنْ صَلاَتِهِمْ سَاهُونَ." يعني أنهم غافلون استهانوا بأوقاتها.

Know that your enemies are hypocrites when doing a good deed. The
Honorable the Exalted God would not grant them success and would not
accept anything but a sincere deed.

Goodness doesn’t become old. Sins would not be forgotten. The Majestic
God is with those who have piety and do good.

A believer would not trick his brother, betray him, debase him or have
bad suspicions of him. He would not tell him, ‘I hate you’.

Seek a maiden for your brother to marry, but if you did not find one,
seek a pious woman for him to marry.

It is easier to destroy a mountain than it is to abolish the rule of an
emperor whose life has not ended yet. Seek help from God and be patient,
since God would grant the Earth as inheritance to those of His servants
whom He wills. There is a good ending for the pious ones.

Do not hurry before it is the right time, since then you may become
sorry. Do not put things off too much, since then your hearts may get
hardened.

Have mercy upon the weak ones and seek the Honorable the Exalted God’s
Mercy for yourself by having mercy upon them.

I admonish you against gossiping about a Muslim, since a Muslim would
not gossip about his brethren. The Honorable the Exalted God has
admonished against this and said, ‘Would any of you like to eat the
flesh of his dead brother?…’ **[[1195]](footnotes_4.htm#b1195)**

A Muslim would not hold his hands together in prayer while he is
standing in front of the Honorable the Exalted God. This would be like
what the unbelievers, i.e. the Magians do

You should sit down like a servant of God when you want to eat. Eat on
the ground and do not drink while standing up.

Whenever you encounter a biting living creature while you are praying,
you should bury it under the ground, spit on it, or wrap it up in some
cloth until you finish saying your prayer.

Turning the head away from the direction of the Qibla (prayer direction)
would invalidate the prayer. Whoever does so should say his prayer again
including the azan**[[1196]](footnotes_4.htm#b1196)** , the
iqamah**[[1197]](footnotes_4.htm#b1197)** and the Takbirs.

The properties of whoever recites the Chapter
Al-Ikhlas**[[1198]](footnotes_4.htm#b1198)** eleven times before sunrise
would be safe.

Whoever recites the Chapter Al-Ikhlas**[[1199]](footnotes_4.htm#b1199)**
(and the Chapter Al-Qadr**[[1200]](footnotes_4.htm#b1200)** ) before
sunrise would be safe from committing any sins on that day no matter how
hard Satan tries.

#### اعلموا أن صالحي عدوكم يرائي بعضهم بعضا، ولكن الله عز وجل لا يوفقهم ولا يقبل إلا ما كان له خالصا.

#### البر لا يبلى والذنب لا ينسى، والله الجليل مع الذين اتقوا والذين هم محسنون.

#### المؤمن لا يغش أخاه ولا يخونه ولا يخذله ولا يتهمه، ولا يقول له: أنا منك بريء.

#### اطلب لاخيك عذرا، فان لم تجد له عذرا فالتمس له عذرا.

#### مزاولة قلع الجبال أيسر من مزاولة ملك مؤجل.

#### واستعينوا بالله واصبروا فان الارض لله يورثها من يشاء من عباده، والعاقبة للمتقين.

#### لا تعاجلوا الامر قبل بلوغه فتندموا، ولا يطولن عليكم الامد فتقسوا قلوبكم.

#### ارحموا ضعفاء‌كم واطلبوا الرحمة من الله عز وجل بالرحمة لهم.

#### إياكم وغيبة المسلم، فان المسلم لا يغتاب أخاه، وقد نهى عز وجل عن ذلك فقال: "وَلاَ يَغْتَبْ بَعْضُكُمْ بَعْضاً أَيُحِبُّ أَحَدُكُمْ أَنْ يَأْكُلَ لَحْمَ أَخِيهِ مَيْتاً."

#### لا يجمع المسلم يديه في صلاته وهو قائم بين يدي الله عز وجل، يتشبه بأهل الكفر، يعني المجوس.

#### ليجلس أحدكم على طعامه جلسة العبد، وليأكل على الارض، ولا يشرب قائما.

#### إذا أصاب أحدكم الدابة وهو في صلاته فليدفنها ويتفل عليها أو يصيرها في ثوبه حتى ينصرف.

#### الالتفات الفاحش يقطع الصلاة، وينبغي لمن يفعل ذلك أن يبتدئ الصلاة بالاذان والاقامة والتكبير.

#### من قرأ قُلْ هُوَ اللهُ أَحَدٌ من قبل أن تطلع الشمس [إحدى عشرة مرة] ومثلها إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَاهُ ومثلها آية الكرسي منع ماله مما يخاف.

#### من قرأ قُلْ هُوَ اللهُ أَحَدٌ [و إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَاهُ] قبل أن تطلع الشمس لم يصبه في ذلك اليوم ذنب وإن جهد إبليس.

You should take refuge in God from any deviation in religion and
domination of men. Whoever opposes us would get destroyed. Tucking up
the clothes helps to keep them clean as the Blessed the Sublime God
said, “And thy garments keep free from
stain!”**[[1201]](footnotes_4.htm#b1201)** Thus, God has ordered us to
tuck up our clothes.

One spoon of honey is the treatment for all ailments. The Blessed the
Sublime God said, “…there issues from within their bodies a drink of
varying colors, wherein is healing for
men…”**[[1202]](footnotes_4.htm#b1202)** That includes reciting the
Quran.

27-8 Chewing gum could reduce the phlegm.

Start your meals with a little bit of salt. If you only knew the
benefits of salt, you would prefer it to any antidotes. Seventy pains
plus what no one but the Honorable the Exalted God knows of would be
fended off of anyone who starts his meals by taking a little bit of
salt.

Pour some cool water on a head with fever in the summer in order to
reduce the fever.

You should fast three days each month. The reward would equal that of
fasting your whole life. You should fast on two Thursdays in between
which there is a Wednesday on which to fast. The Honorable the Exalted
God created Hell on a Wednesday.

Whenever you need something you should go out after it at the dawn of a
Thursday since God’s Prophet (MGB) said, ‘O God! Please bless the dawn
of Thursdays for my people.’ When you leave the house you should recite
the end of the Chapter Al-Imran and the verse of the Throne (Ayat
al-Kursi)**[[1203]](footnotes_4.htm#b1203)** and Inna Anzalnahu and the
Opening Chapter (Al-Fatiha**[[1204]](footnotes_4.htm#b1204)** ) with the
hope that his worldly needs and those of the Hereafter be fulfilled.

You should wear thick clothing since those who wear thin clothing have a
weak faith. You should not stand to pray in front of God - may His
Majesty be Exalted - wearing thin clothing.

Repent to the Honorable the Exalted God and enter His circle of Love
since the Honorable the Exalted God loves those who repent, those who
are clean and the believers who repent.

Whenever a believer insults his believing brother their relationship
will be hurt. If one calls another one an unbeliever, then one of them
would become an unbeliever. Once one accuses another Muslim, the faith
in Islam melts in his heart as salt would dissolve in water.

The doors of repentance are open to anybody who wants to repent. Repent
to God sincerely. Maybe your Lord would cover up your sins.

You should honor your covenants. Blessings and happiness would not be
destroyed except by the sins which you commit.

#### استعيذوا بالله من ضلع الدين وغلبة الرجال.

#### من تخلف عنا هلك.

#### تشمير الثياب طهور لها، قال الله تبارك وتعالى: "وَثِيَابَكَ فَطَهِّرْ." أي فشمر.

#### لعق العسل شفاء من كل داء، قال الله تبارك وتعالى: "يَخْرُجُ مِنْ بُطُونِهَا شَرَابٌ مُخْتَلِفٌ أَلْوَانُهُ فِيهِ شِفَاءٌ لِلنَّاسِ." وهو مع قراء‌ة القرآن.

#### 27-8 مضغ اللبان يذيب البلغم.

#### وابدؤوا بالملح في أول طعامكم، فلو يعلم الناس ما في الملح لاختاروه على الترياق المجرب. من ابتدأ طعامه بالملح ذهب عنه سبعون داء وما لا يعلمه إلا الله عز وجل.

#### صبوا على المحموم الماء البارد في الصيف فإنه يسكن حرها.

#### صوموا ثلاثة أيام في كل شهر، فهي تعدل صوم الدهر، ونحن نصوم خميسين بينهما أربعاء، لان الله عز وجل خلق جهنم يوم الاربعاء.

#### إذا أراد أحدكم حاجة فليبكر في طلبها يوم الخميس، فإن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله قال: "اللهم بارك لامتي في بكورها يوم الخميس." وليقرأ إذا خرج من بيته الآيات من آخر آل عمران، وآية الكرسي، وإنا أنزلناه، وأم الكتاب، فإن فيها قضاء لحوائج الدنيا والآخرة.

#### عليكم بالصفيق من الثياب، فإنه من رق ثوبه رق دينه.

#### لا يقومن أحدكم بين يدي الرب جل جلاله وعليه ثوب يشف.

#### توبوا إلى الله عز وجل وادخلوا في محبته، فان الله عز وجل يحب التوابين ويحب المتطهرين، والمؤمن تواب.

#### إذا قال المؤمن لاخيه: "اف" انقطع ما بينهما، فاذا قال له: "أنت كافر: كفر أحدهما.

#### وإذا اتهمه انماث الاسلام في قلبه كما ينماث الملح في الماء.

#### باب التوبة مفتوح لمن أرادها، فتوبوا إلى الله توبة نصوحا عسى ربكم أن يكفر عنكم سيئاتكم.

#### وأوفوا بالعهد إذا عاهدتم، فما زالت نعمة ولا نضارة عيش إلا بذنوب اجترحوها.

God would not oppress his servants. The people would not have faced any
calamities if they supplicated. Blessings will depart when calamities
befall. Cry at the Threshold of the Honorable the Exalted God with good
intentions and then God will amend things and give back the good things.

Whenever things become hard to do, a Muslim should ask the Honorable the
Exalted God for help since the key to everything is in His hands.

There are three characteristics in every man. They are evil omen; pride
or haughtiness; and high aspirations. Whenever you feel an evil omen,
you should ignore it and mention the Honorable the Exalted God. Whenever
you fear that you are becoming haughty, you should eat along with your
servants, and milk the calf**[[1205]](footnotes_4.htm#b1205)** . When
you feel that high aspirations are driving you crazy, you should ask the
Honorable the Exalted God not to leave you alone with your disobedient
self to be led to sins.

Associate with people based on what are generally accepted norms, not on
what they do not believe in. Do not force anything upon us or
yourselves. Indeed our affairs are difficult and no one but the
nearby-stationed angels and persons whose wholehearted faith God has
tested can withstand it.

When Satan tempts you, you should take refuge in God and say, ‘I believe
in Allah and in His Messenger, with pure sincerity in the religion.’

Whenever the Honorable the Exalted God grants a believer some new
clothes, he should perform the ritual ablutions (wuzu) and say two units
of prayers in which he recites the Mother of the Book (i.e. the first
Chapter of the Holy Quran), the verse of the Throne (Ayat
al-Kursi)**[[1206]](footnotes_4.htm#b1206)** , Qul Hoallahu Ahad
(Al-Ikhlas**[[1207]](footnotes_4.htm#b1207)** ), and Inna Anzalnaho fi
laylatul Qadr (Al-Qadr)**[[1208]](footnotes_4.htm#b1208)** . Then he
should praise God who has covered up his private parts and adorned him
amongst the people and say the following many times, ‘There is no power
nor any strength save in God the Sublime the Great.’

He should not commit any sins wearing those clothes. There are as many
angels as there are yarns in those clothes who ask God for his
forgiveness and God’s Mercy.

27-9 Do not be pessimistic about each other since the Honorable the
Exalted God has prohibited it.

I will be along with God’s Prophet at the Heavenly
Pool**[[1209]](footnotes_4.htm#b1209)** . My household and my grandsons
will be with me. Whoever wants us should follow our sayings and deeds.
There are good folks in every family for whom we shall intercede. We
shall also intercede on behalf of those who love us.

Therefore you should compete with each other for seeing us at the
Heavenly Pool. We shall block off our enemies from access to it and
shall satiate our lovers with it.

#### إن الله ليس بظلام للعبيد. ولو أنهم استقبلوا ذلك بالدعاء والانابة لم تزل. ولو أنهم إذا نزلت بهم النقم وزالت عنهم النعم فزعوا إلى الله عز وجل بصدق من نياتهم ولم يهنوا ولم يسرفوا لاصلح الله لهم كل فاسد ولرد عليهم كل صالح.

#### وإذا ضاق المسلم فلا يشكون ربه عز وجل، وليشتك إلى ربه الذي بيده مقاليد الامور وتدبيرها.

#### في كل امرئ واحدة من ثلاث: الطيرة والكبر والتمني، فاذا تطير أحدكم فليمض على طيرته وليذكر الله عز وجل. وإذا خشى الكبر فليأكل مع عبده وخادمه وليحلب الشاة، وإذا تمنى فليسأل الله عز وجل ويبتهل إليه ولا ينازعه نفسه إلى الاثم.

#### خالطوا الناس بما يعرفون، ودعوهم مما ينكرون، ولا تحملوهم على أنفسكم وعلينا.

#### إن أمرنا صعب مستصعب لا يحتمله إلا ملك مقرب أو نبي مرسل أو عبد قد امتحن الله قلبه للايمان.

#### إذا وسوس الشيطان إلى أحدكم فليتعوذ بالله وليقل: "آمنت بالله وبرسوله مخلصا له الدين."

#### إذا كسى الله عز وجل مؤمنا ثوبا جديدا فليتوضأ وليصل ركعتين يقرأ فيهما أم الكتاب وآية الكرسي وقُلْ هُوَ اللهُ أَحَدٌ، وإِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَاهُ فِي لَيْلَةِ الْقَدْرِ، ثم ليحمد الله الذي ستر عورته وزينه في الناس وليكثر من قول "لا حول ولا قوة إلا بالله العلي العظيم." فإنه لا يعصي الله فيه، وله بكل سلك فيه ملك يقدس له ويستغفر له ويترحم عليه.

#### 27-9 اطرحوا سوء الظن بينكم، فإن الله عز وجل نهى عن ذلك.

#### أنا مع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله ومعي عترتي وسبطي على الحوض، فمن أرادنا فليأخذ بقولنا وليعمل عملنا، فان لكل أهل بيت نجيبا ولنا شفاعة، ولاهل مودتنا شفاعة، فتنافسوا في لقائنا على الحوض، فانا نذود عنه أعداء‌نا ونسقي منه أحباء‌نا وأولياء‌نا.

Anyone who takes a sip of the Heavenly Pool’s water will never become
thirsty. There are two Heavenly Creeks flowing into our Pool. One of
them is called Tasnim and the other one is called Mo’een. There is
saffron dirt on the side of the Pool with pearls and rubies as pebbles.
This Pool is called Al-Kauthar.

The good flow of affairs is up to the Honorable the Exalted God. It is
not based upon the will of the people. Were it based upon the will of
the people, they never would have chosen others (to follow) instead of
us. However, God wants to make certain people especial as He wills. You
should thank God since He has made you especial with a great blessing
being that you are born legitimately.

On the Resurrection Day every eye will be crying and sleepless except
for the eyes of those whom God has made especial through His Nobility
and have cried over the calamities imposed upon Al-Hussein (MGB) and the
Holy Household of Muhammad (MGB).

Our followers**[[1210]](footnotes_4.htm#b1210)** are like honey bees. If
people knew (about the sweetness of) what they believed in, they would
eat them up.

You should not rush to eat until you get finished. You should also not
rush when you are in the toilet.

When you wake up from sleep, you should say ‘There is no god save Allah,
the All-clement, the All-Noble, the Ever-living, the Self-Subsisting. He
has power over all things. All glory be to the Lord of the Prophets and
the God of the Messengers. All glory be to the Lord of the seven
heavens, the seven layers of the earth, and whatever is between them,
and the Lord of the Great Throne. All praise is due to Allah, the Lord
of the Worlds.’

Once you sit down you should say the following before you stand up,
‘Sufficient to me is Allah. Sufficient to me is the Lord against the
servants (of Him). Sufficient to me is He Who has been always sufficient
to me. Sufficient to me is Allah, and He is the best of all guardians.

When you wake up at night you should look at the stars in the sky and
recite the last four verses of the Chapter Al-i-Imran as follows, ‘Men
who celebrate the praises of Allah, standing, sitting, and lying down on
their sides, and contemplate the (wonders of) creation in the heavens
and the Earth, (with the thought): "Our Lord! not for naught Hast Thou
created (all) this! Glory to Thee! Give us salvation from the penalty of
the Fire. Our Lord! any whom Thou dost admit to the Fire, Truly Thou
coverest with shame, and never will wrong-doers Find any helpers! Our
Lord! we have heard the call of one calling (Us) to Faith, 'Believe ye
in the Lord,' and we have believed. Our Lord! Forgive us our sins, blot
out from us our iniquities, and take to Thyself our souls in the company
of the righteous. Our Lord! Grant us what Thou didst promise unto us
through Thine apostles, and save us from shame on the Day of Judgment:
For Thou never breakest Thy promise.’
**[[1211]](footnotes_4.htm#b1211)**

#### ومن شرب منه شربة لم يظمأ بعدها أبدا. حوضنا مترع فيه مثعبان ينصبان من الجنة: أحدهما من تسنيم، والآخر من معين، على حافتيه الزعفران، وحصاه اللؤلؤ والياقوت، وهو الكوثر.

#### إن الامور إلى الله عز وجل ليست إلى العباد، ولو كانت العباد ما كانوا ليختاروا علينا أحدا، ولكن الله يختص برحمته من يشاء، فاحمدوا الله على ما اختصكم به من بادي النعم، على طيب الولادة.

#### كل عين يوم القيامة باكية، وكل عين يوم القيامة ساهرة، إلا عين من اختصه الله بكرامته، وبكى على ما ينتهك من الحسين وآل محمد عليهم السلام.

#### شيعتنا بمنزلة النحل، لو يعلم الناس ما في أجوافها لاكلوها.

#### لا تعجلوا الرجل عند طعامه حتى يفرغ، ولا عند غائطه حتى يأتي على حاجته.

#### إذا انتبه أحدكم من نومه فليقل: "لا إله إلا الله الحليم الكريم الحي القيوم، وهو على كل شيء قدير، سبحان رب النبيين وإله المرسلين و[سبحان] رب السموات السبع وما فيهن ورب الارضين السبع وما فيهن ورب العرش العظيم والحمد لله رب العالمين."

#### فاذا جلس من نومه فليقل قبل أن يقوم: "حسبي الله حسبي الرب من العباد، حسبي الذي هو حسبي منذ كنت، حسبي الله ونعم الوكيل."

#### وإذا قام أحدكم من الليل فلينظر إلى أكناف السماء وليقرأ: " إِنَّ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ وَاخْتِلافِ اللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ لايَاتٍ لأُِولِي الْأَلْبَابِ (190) الَّذِينَ يَذْكُرُونَ اللَّهَ قِيَامًا وَقُعُودًا وَعَلَى جُنُوبِهِمْ وَيَتَفَكَّرُونَ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ رَبَّنَا مَا خَلَقْتَ هَذَا بَاطِلاً سُبْحَانَكَ فَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ (191) رَبَّنَا إِنَّكَ مَنْ تُدْخِلْ النَّارَ فَقَدْ أَخْزَيْتَهُ وَمَا لِلظَّالِمِينَ مِنْ أَنْصَارٍ (192) رَبَّنَا إِنَّنَا سَمِعْنَا مُنَادِيًا يُنَادِي لِلإِيمَانِ أَنْ آمِنُوا بِرَبِّكُمْ فَآمَنَّا رَبَّنَا فَاغْفِرْ لَنَا ذُنُوبَنَا وَكَفِّرْ عَنَّا سَيِّئَاتِنَا وَتَوَفَّنَا مَعَ الأَبْرَارِ (193) رَبَّنَا وَآتِنَا مَا وَعَدْتَنَا عَلَى رُسُلِكَ وَلا تُخْزِنَا يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ إِنَّكَ لا تُخْلِفُ الْمِيعَادَ (194)."

The Zamzam well can take away pains. Drink its water. The well is
located at the Rukn where the Hajar
ul-Aswad**[[1212]](footnotes_4.htm#b1212)** is located since there are
four Heavenly creeks flowing under the Hajar ul-Aswad called Al-Forat,
Al-Niel**[[1213]](footnotes_4.htm#b1213)** ,
Al-Seihan**[[1214]](footnotes_4.htm#b1214)** , and
Al-Jeihan**[[1215]](footnotes_4.htm#b1215)** which are in two streams.

A Muslim should not go to fight along with one in whose orders there can
be no assurance of and who may not abide by the Decrees of the Honorable
the Exalted God regarding booties. Should one die in these conditions,
he would be considered to be an aid to our enemies for having usurped
our rights and having shed our blood. Such a death is similar to death
in the Age of Ignorance.

The remembrance of us - the members of the Holy Household - is the
treatment for pains, illnesses and the temptations of hearts. Our
friendship brings the satisfaction of the Honorable the Exalted Lord.

Anyone who follows our orders is going to be with us in the Holy
Presence. Anyone who awaits our Rule is like a person whose blood is
shed in the way of God.

God will throw into the Fire anyone who participates in a war against us
or who hears our cry for justice but doesn’t help us.

27-10 We are the gates to safety. We save whoever is oppressed, has no
way to flee and calls out for justice. We are the gates of peace.
Whoever enters the, shall be saved and whoever disobeys us will be
destroyed.

God starts with us. God destroys by us what He wishes to destroy. God
establishes everything through us. God will fend off hard times from you
due to us. God will descend rain due to us. You should not be deceived
and turn away from God due to your pride.

There has been no drops of Mercy from the Heavens since the Honorable
the Exalted God closed the gates of Heaven. Once our Riser (MGB)
uprises, there will come down drops of rain from the heavens; plants
will grow out of the ground; hatred will be removed from the hearts of
the people; beasts and other animals will be in peace with each other
such that a woman can walk from Iraq to Syria stepping on greenery all
the way with her adornments on and no beasts would frighten her.

You would be amazed if you knew the rank you attain when you stand up
against your enemies.

Once you lose me, you will see many things from the hands of the
unbelievers, the enemies, the selfish people who will belittle God’s
right and threaten your life. Then you will wish death. Once this
happens you should unite together and do not divide up into several
groups. You should adhere to God’s Strong Rope.

#### الاطلاع في بئر زمزم يذهب الداء، فاشربوا من مائها مما يلي الركن الذي فيه الحجر الاسود، فإن تحت الحجر أربعة أنهار من الجنة: الفرات والنيل وسيحان وجيحان، وهما نهران.

#### لا يخرج المسلم في الجهاد مع من لا يؤمن على الحكم ولا ينفذ في الفيء أمر الله عز وجل، فان مات في ذلك كان معينا لعدونا في حبس حقوقنا والاشاطة بدمائنا وميتته ميتة جاهلية.

#### ذكرنا أهل البيت شفاء من العلل والاسقام ووسواس الريب، وجهتنا رضا الرب عز وجل. والآخذ بأمرنا معنا غدا في حظيرة القدس. والمنتظر لامرنا كالمتشحظ بدمه في سبيل الله.

#### من شهدنا في حربنا أو سمع واعيتنا فلم ينصرنا أكبه الله على منخريه في النار.

#### 27-10 ونحن باب الغوث إذا اتقوا وضاقت عليهم المذاهب، ونحن باب حطة، وهو باب السلام، من دخله نجا ومن تخلف عنه هوى، بنا يفتح الله، وبنا يمحو ما يشاء، وبنا يثبت، وبنا يدفع الله الزمان الكلب، وبنا ينزل الغيث، فلا يغرنكم بالله الغرور.

#### ما أنزلت السماء [من] قطرة من ماء منذ حبسه الله عز وجل، ولو قد قام قائمنا لانزلت السماء قطرها، ولاخرجت الارض نباتها، ولذهب الشحناء من قلوب العباد، واصطلحت السباع والبهائم حتى تمشي المرأة بين العراق إلى الشام لا تضع قدميها إلا على النبات وعلى رأسها زينتها لا يهيجها سبع ولا تخافه.

#### لو تعلمون مالكم في مقامكم بين عدوكم وصبركم على ما تسمعون من الاذى لقرت أعينكم، ولو فقدتموني لرأيتم من بعدي امورا يتمنى أحدكم الموت مما يرى من أهل الجحود والعدوان من أهل الاثرة والاستخفاف بحق الله تعالى ذكره والخوف على نفسه، فاذا كان ذلك فاعتصموا بحبل الله جميعا ولا تفرقوا.

I advise you to be patient, to pray and be pious. You should know that
the Blessed the Sublime God despises hypocritical people. Therefore, do
not deviate from what is right.

Do not give up friendship with the righteous ones. Whoever prefers
others to us will be destroyed. He will also be at a loss in this world.
He will leave it (i.e. die) with regret.

When you enter your house, greet your family by saying ‘Peace be upon
you.’**[[1216]](footnotes_4.htm#b1216)** If no one is at home, say,
‘peace be upon us from our Lord.’ **[[1217]](footnotes_4.htm#b1217)**

You should recite the Chapter
Al-Ikhlas**[[1218]](footnotes_4.htm#b1218)** while entering your house,
since that would eliminate poverty.

Teach your children how to pray and question them about it when they
become eight years old.

Do not get near dogs. Anybody who touches a wet dog should make
ablutions. Anyone who touches a dry dog should sprinkle water on his
clothes.

If you hear a tradition from us which you do not understand, compare it
with other works by us, and ponder over it until the truth becomes known
to you.

Do not be one who rushes to divulge the secrets.

The people who have boasted about us should return to the limits of our
instructions, and the people who have neglected us should join us.

Whoever adheres to us will reach the goal. However, whoever follows ways
other than our way will be drowned.

There are flocks of God’s Mercy for our friends, and there are flocks of
God’s Wrath for our enemies.

Moderation is our way, and there is progress in following our orders.

Doubting about which units you are saying will invalidate the following
prayers: the Al-Vatr prayers**[[1219]](footnotes_4.htm#b1219)** , the
Friday prayers, in the first two units of all prayers, the dawn prayer
and the evening prayer.

When you are not clean you should not recite the Quran until you make
ablutions.

When you are saying your prayers you should honor and perform any
necessary prostrations and bowings for the Chapters which you recite.

You should not pray in such clothing that the people of Lot wore.

27-11 A man can say his prayer in a piece of clothing which he fastens
up to his neck and in a shirt which he buttons up.

#### وعليكم بالصبر والصلاة والتقية.

#### اعلموا أن الله تبارك وتعالى يبغض من عباده المتلون، فلا تزولوا عن الحق وولاية أهل الحق، فان من استبدل بنا هلك وفاتته الدنيا وخرج منها [بحسرة].

#### إذا دخل أحدكم منزله فليسلم على أهله يقول: "السلام عليكم." فان لم يكن له أهل فليقل السلام علينا من ربنا، وليقرأ قُلْ هُوَ اللهُ أَحَدٌ حين يدخل منزله، فانه ينفي الفقر.

#### علموا صبيانكم الصلاة، وخذوهم بها إذا بلغوا ثماني سنين.

#### تنزهوا عن قرب الكلاب، فمن أصاب الكلب وهو رطب فليغسله، وإن كان جافا فلينضخ ثوبه بالماء.

#### إذا سمعتم من حديثنا ما لا تعرفون فردوه إلينا وقفوا عنده، وسلموا حتى يتبين لكم الحق، ولا تكونوا مذاييع عجلى.

#### إلينا يرجع الغالي وبنا يلحق المقصر الذي يقصر بحقنا.

#### من تمسك بنا لحق، ومن سلك غير طريقتنا غرق.

#### لمحبينا أفواج من رحمة الله، ولمبغضينا أفواج من غضب الله، وطريقنا القصد، وفي أمرنا الرشد.

#### لا يكون السهو في خمس: في الوتر، والجمعة، والركعتين الاوليين من كل صلاة مكتوبة، وفي الصبح، وفي المغرب.

#### ولا يقرأ العبد القرآن إذا كان على غير طهور حتى يتطهر.

#### اعطوا كل سورة حظها من الركوع والسجود.

#### إذا كنتم في الصلاة لا يصلي الرجل في قميص متوشحا به فانه من أفعال قوم لوط.

#### 27-11 تجزي الصلاة للرجل في ثوب واحد، يعقد طرفيه على عنقه وفي القميص الصفيق يزره.

You should not perform a prayer on an image or on a carpet on which
there is an image. However, it is allowed to stand on such a carpet on
which there is an image or throw a cloth on it so that it becomes
covered. You should not tie a coin upon which there is an image onto
your clothes in which you pray. However, you can put the coin into a bag
or in other clothing. If you are worried about it being stolen, you may
tie it onto your waist.

You should not say your prayers upon wheat, barley, other nutrients or
bread.

You should not make ablutions before mentioning God’s name.

Before touching the water to make ablutions one must say ‘In the name of
God. By God. O my Lord! Please accept me as one of those who repent.
Please accept me as one of the purified ones. Once you finish making
ablutions, you should say ‘I bear witness that there is no god save
Allah and that Muhammad is His servant and messenger,’ so that you may
deserve to benefit from God’s Mercy.

Anyone who prays with recognition of its truthfulness would be forgiven.

One should not say the recommendable (Nafila) prayers at the time of the
obligatory prayers unless he has an excuse. He can say the recommendable
(Nafila) prayers after saying his obligatory prayers. He can make them
up later.

When God the Blessed the Sublime said, ‘Those who remain steadfast to
their prayer;**[[1220]](footnotes_4.htm#b1220)** ’ He meant those who
make up what they missed at night during the daytime and make up what
they missed during the day at night.

You should not say the recommendable (Nafila) prayer at the time of the
obligatory prayers. You should say the obligatory prayers first, then
you can pray as much as you wish.

The reward for saying prayers in Mecca or Medina equals that of saying
one-thousand prayers elsewhere, and the reward for spending one Dirham
in Hajj equals giving one-thousand Dirhams in charity.

One should be humble in his prayer. None of the body parts of anyone
whose heart has fear of God would move. You should not play with
anything while praying.

The Qunut**[[1221]](footnotes_4.htm#b1221)** on Friday prayers should be
said before bowing down in prostration (the Ruku). You should recite the
Opening Chapter (Al-Fatiha**[[1222]](footnotes_4.htm#b1222)** ) and the
Chapter Al-Jumuah (Friday)**[[1223]](footnotes_4.htm#b1223)** in the
first unit and the Opening Chapter
(Al-Fatiha**[[1224]](footnotes_4.htm#b1224)** ) and the Chapter
Al-Munafiqun**[[1225]](footnotes_4.htm#b1225)** in the second unit of
Friday prayer.

You should sit down after prostration after having said two units of
prayers so that your body gets calm, then you may stand up. This is the
way we did it.

#### لا يسجد الرجل على صورة ولا على بساط فيه صورة، ويجوز أن تكون الصورة تحت قدميه أو يطرح عليه ما يواريها.

#### لا يعقد الرجل الدراهم التي فيها صورة في ثوبه وهو يصلي، ويجوز أن يكون الدراهم في هميان أو في ثوب إذا خاف ويزره أى يعقد ازراره وأدخلها في العرى، ويجعلها إلى ظهره.

#### لا يسجد الرجل على كدس حنطة، ولا على شعير، ولا على لون مما يؤكل، ولا يسجد على الخبز.

#### ولا يتوضأ الرجل حتى يسمي يقول قبل أن يمس الماء: "بسم الله وبالله، اللهم اجعلني من التوابين واجعلني من المتطهرين." فاذا فرغ من طهوره قال: "أشهد أن لا إله إلا الله وحده لا شريك له، وأشهد أن محمدا عبده ورسوله." صلى الله عليه وآله، فعندها يستحق المغفرة.

#### من أتى الصلاة عارفا بحقها غفر له.

#### لا يصلي الرجل نافلة في وقت فريضة إلا من عذر، ولكن يقضي بعد ذلك إذا أمكنه القضاء. قال الله تبارك وتعالى: "الَّذِينَ هُمْ عَلَى صَلاَتِهِمْ دَائِمُونَ." يعني الذين يقضون ما فاتهم من الليل بالنهار، وما فاتهم من النهار بالليل.

#### لا تقضي النافلة في وقت فريضة.

#### إبدأ بالفريضة ثم صل ما بدا لك.

#### الصلاة في الحرمين تعدل ألف صلاة، ونفقة درهم في الحج تعدل ألف درهم.

#### ليخشع الرجل في صلاته، فانه من خشع قلبه لله عز وجل خشعت جوارحه، فلا يعبث بشيء.

#### القنوت في صلاة الجمعة قبل الركوع الثانية، ويقرأ في الاولى الحمد والجمعة، وفي الثانية الحمد والمنافقين.

#### اجلسوا في الركعتين حتى تسكن جوارحكم ثم قوموا، فإن ذلك من فعلنا.

Whenever you stand in front of the Mighty the Exalted God, you should
place your hands on your chests. Whenever you are standing in front of
the Mighty the Exalted God you should extend out your chest, stand up
straight and do not bend.

Whenever you finish saying your prayers, you should raise your hands up
towards the heavens and seek what you want.

Abdullah ibn Saba asked, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Is it not true
that God exists everywhere?’ The Commander of the Faithful (MGB)
replied, ‘Yes.’ Then Abdullah ibn Saba asked, ‘Why is it then that one
should raise his hands up towards the heavens when he prays?’ He (MGB)
replied, ‘Have you not read the following verse, ‘And in heaven is your
Sustenance, as (also) that which ye are
promised.’**[[1226]](footnotes_4.htm#b1226)** Would you then seek your
sustenance elsewhere? The heavens is the place where our sustenance and
whatever the Honorable the Exalted God has promised lies.

You should not finish your prayer without asking God for heaven, seeking
refuge to God from hell and asking God to marry you to a green-eyed
Houri .**[[1227]](footnotes_4.htm#b1227)**

Whenever you stand to say your prayers, you should say it as if it is
going to be the last prayer you are ever going to say in your life.

Smiling would not void one’s prayers but laughing out loud would.

Whenever you fall asleep, you should renew your ablutions.

Whenever you start to doze off or fall asleep in the middle of saying
your prayers, you should stop praying since in such a prayer you might
curse yourself instead of saying supplications.

Whoever who loves us by heart and helps us with his tongue and fights
our enemies would be along with us and in the same rank as we are in
Paradise.

Whoever loves us by heart and helps us with tongue, but doesn’t assist
us in fighting our enemies would be two ranks lower.

Whoever loves us by heart, but doesn’t help us either with his tongue or
hand would be in Paradise.

Whoever is our enemy by heart and doesn’t harm us with tongue and hand
would go to Hell along with our enemies.

Whoever is our enemy by heart and doesn’t harm us with his tongue would
go to Hell.

Whoever is our enemy by heart and harms us with his tongue and hand
would go to Hell.

#### إذا قام أحدكم بين يدي الله جل جلاله فليرفع يده حذاء صدره، وإذا كان أحدكم بين يدي الله جل جلاله فليتحر بصدره وليقم صلبه ولا ينحني.

#### إذا فرغ أحدكم من الصلاة فليرفع يديه إلى السماء ولينصب في الدعاء.

#### فقال عبد الله بن سبا: يا أمير المؤمنين، أليس الله في كل مكان؟ قال: بلى. قال: فلم يرفع العبد يديه إلى السماء؟

#### قال: أما تقرأ "وَفِي السَّمَاءِ رِزْقُكُمْ وَمَا تُوعَدُونَ"؟ فمن أين يطلب الرزق إلا من موضعه؟ وموضع الرزق وما وعد الله عز وجل السماء.

#### لا ينفتل العبد من صلاته حتى يسأل الله الجنة ويستجير به من النار ويسأله أن يزوجه من الحور العين.

#### إذا قام أحدكم إلى الصلاة فليصل صلاة مودع.

#### لا يقطع الصلاة التبسم، وتقطعها القهقهة.

#### إذا خالط النوم القلب وجب الوضوء.

#### إذا غلبتك عينك وأنت في الصلاة فاقطع الصلاة وثم، فانك لا تدري تدعو لك أو على نفسك، لعلك أن تدعو على نفسك.

#### من أحبنا بقلبه وأعاننا بلسانه وقاتل معنا أعداء‌نا بيده فهو معنا في الجنة في درجتنا.

#### ومن أحبنا بقلبه وأعاننا بلسانه ولم يقاتل معنا أعداء‌نا فهو أسفل من ذلك بدرجتين.

#### ومن أحبنا بقلبه ولم يعنا بلسانه ولا بيده فهو في الجنة.

#### ومن أبغضنا بقلبه وأعان علينا بلسانه ويده فهو مع عدونا في النار.

#### ومن أبغضنا بقلبه وأعان علينا بلسانه فهو في النار.

#### ومن أبغضنا بقلبه ولم يعن علينا بلسانه ولا بيده فهو في النار.

27-12 The residents of Paradise look at the homes of our followers just
as people look at the stars in the sky.

Whenever you finish reciting the Quranic chapters which begin with
‘Sabih or ‘Yasbah, you should say: Glory to God the Highmost.

Whenever you read the verse ‘Allah and His angels send blessings on the
Prophet...’**[[1228]](footnotes_4.htm#b1228)** you should send blessings
upon the Prophet and his Holy Household whether it be during your prayer
or not.

No organ in our body thanks God more than our eyes do. Guard your eyes
and do not let them see whatever they want to so that it doesn’t take
you away from remembrance of the Honorable the Exalted God.

Whenever you finish reciting the Chapter
At-Tin**[[1229]](footnotes_4.htm#b1229)** you should say: “We also
testify to that.”

Whenever you say ‘‘Say ye, “We believe in God…’ you should say ‘We
believe in God, and the revelation given to us, and to Abraham, Ishmael,
Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, and that given to Moses and Jesus, and
that given to (all) Prophets from their Lord: We make no difference
between one and another of them: And we bow to God (in Islam).’
**[[1230]](footnotes_4.htm#b1230)**

When you sit down to say the final Tashahhud in your prayer, you should
say: “I bear witness that there is no god save Allah and that Muhammad
is His servant and messenger and that the Hour shall definitely come,
there is no doubt about it, and that Allah shall definitely resurrect
those who are in graves.” Then whenever you say something else your
prayer is finished.

There is no form of worship that is harder than walking to God’s House
on foot.

Seek goodness from the camel’s hooves and neck as they go back and
forth.

God has named the Zamzam Pool Al-Saqayat since God’s Prophet (MGB)
ordered the raisins that were brought for him from Medina to be thrown
into the Zamzam Pool. This is because its water was sour and he wanted
to lower its sourness.

Once soaked raisins get old, you should not drink of it since it would
ferment into wine.

When a man becomes naked, Satan would look at him and get envious.
Therefore cover yourself up. A man should not take his clothes off from
his thighs and sit in a community.

You should not go to the mosque after eating something which smells bad.

A man should hold up his lower abdomen while in prostration of an
obligatory prayer.

#### 27-12 إن أهل الجنة لينظرون إلى منازل شيعتنا كما ينظر الانسان إلى الكواكب في السماء.

#### إذا قرأتم من المسبحات الاخيرة فقولوا: "سبحان الله الاعلى."

#### وإذا قرأتم "إِنَّ اللهَ وَمَلاَئِكَتَهُ يُصَلُّونَ عَلَى النَّبِيِّ…" فصلوا عليه في الصلاة كنتم أو في غيرها.

#### ليس في البدن شيء أقل شكرا من العين، فلا تعطوها سؤلها فتشغلكم عن ذكر الله عز وجل.

#### إذا قرأتم وَالتِّينِ فقولوا في آخرها: "ونحن على ذلك من الشاهدين."

#### إذا قرأتم "قُولُوا آمَنَّا بِاللهِ" فقولوا: "آمَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْنَا وَمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَى إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ وَإِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ وَالأَسْبَاطِ وَمَا أُوتِيَ مُوسَى وَعِيسَى وَمَا أُوتِيَ النَّبِيُّونَ مِنْ رَبِّهِمْ لاَ نُفَرِّقُ بَيْنَ أَحَدٍ مِنْهُمْ وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُسْلِمُونَ."

#### إذا قال العبد في التشهد في الاخيرتين وهو جالس: "أشهد أن لا إله إلا الله وحده لا شريك له وأشهد أن محمدا عبده ورسوله وأن الساعة آتية لا ريب فيها وأن الله يبعث من في القبور،" ثم أحدث حدثا فقد تمت صلاته.

#### ما عبد الله بشيء أشد من المشي إلى بيته.

#### اطلبوا الخير في أخفاف الابل وأعناقها، صادرة وواردة.

#### إنما سمي السقاية، لان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أمر بزبيب اتي به من الطائف أن ينبذ ويطرح في حوض زمزم، لان ماء‌ها مر، فأراد أن يكسر مرارته، فلا تشربوا إذا عتق.

#### إذا تعرى الرجل نظر إليه الشيطان فطمع فيه، فاستتروا.

#### ليس للرجل أن يكشف ثيابه عن فخذه ويجلس بين قوم.

#### من أكل شيئا من المؤذيات بريحها فلا يقربن المسجد.

#### ليرفع الرجل الساجد مؤخره في الفريضة إذا سجد.

When you want to make ablutions you should first wash your two forearms.

When you say prayer say it such that you can hear yourself reciting and
saying the Takbir and Tasbih.

Look to the right whenever you finish your prayers.

Take something from this world (on your trip to the Hereafter). Indeed
the best thing that you can take from it is piety.

The Children of Israel were divided up into two groups that were lost.
One was lost at sea and the other one was lost in the desert.

You should not eat any animals that you do not recognize to be
legitimate.

Whenever a believer gets ill and doesn’t complain to anyone but God for
three days, God will bestow upon him health.

When one is only interested in filling his stomach and fulfilling his
sexual desires, he gets farther away from God.

One should not go on a trip that might harm his religion or prayer.

There are four who hear everyone: The Prophet (MGB), Paradise, the Fire,
and the green-eyed Houries.**[[1231]](footnotes_4.htm#b1231)** When one
finishes saying his prayer, he should send blessings upon Muhammad (MGB)
and his Holy Household, ask God for Paradise, ask God for protection
from the Fire, ask God to be paired up with green-eyed
Houries**[[1232]](footnotes_4.htm#b1232)** . In fact, the Prophet (MGB)
hears the prayers of whoever sends blessings upon the Prophet Muhammad
(MGB) and takes them up to God. When anyone asks God for Paradise,
Paradise would say, ‘O Lord! Please grant to your servant what he has
asked Thee for.’ When anyone seeks protection from the Fire, the Fire
would say, ‘O Lord! Protect your servant from what he seeks protection.’
And when anyone asks for green-eyed Houries, they will say, ‘O Lord!
Please grant your servant what he asks for.’

Music is the cry of Satan for Paradise.

Whenever any of you decides to go to sleep, you should put your right
hand under your right cheek and say the following: “In the Name of
Allah. I put my side for the sake of Allah, following the faith of
Abraham, the religion of Muhammad, and the loyalty to him whom Allah has
imposed loyalty to him on me. Only that which Allah wills shall come to
pass, and whatever He does not will shall never come to pass.”

Anybody who says this supplication before going to sleep would be safe
from a plundering thief, going under the load of a collapsed building
and the angels would pray for his forgiveness.

The Honorable the Exalted God would appoint 50,000 angels to protect
whomever recites the Opening Chapter of the Holy Quran
(Al-Fatiha**[[1233]](footnotes_4.htm#b1233)** ) when he goes to bed.

#### إذا أراد أحدكم الغسل فليبدأ بذراعيه فليغسلهما.

#### إذا صليت فاسمع نفسك القراء‌ة والتكبير والتسبيح.

#### إذا انفتلت من الصلاة فانفتل عن يمينك.

#### تزود من الدنيا فان خير ما تزود منها التقوى.

#### فقدت من بني إسرائيل أمتان واحدة في البحر واخرى في البر، فلا تأكلوا إلا ما عرفتم.

#### من كتم وجعا أصابه ثلاثة أيام من الناس وشكا إلى الله كان حقا على الله أن يعافيه منه.

#### ابعد ما كان العبد من الله إذا كان همه بطنه وفرجه.

#### لا يخرج الرجل في سفر يخاف فيه على دينه وصلاته.

#### اعطي السمع أربعة: النبي صلى الله عليه وآله والجنة والنار والحور العين. فإذا فرغ العبد من صلاته فليصل على النبي صلى الله عليه وآله ويسأل الله الجنة، ويستجير بالله من النار، ويسأله أن يزوجه من الحور العين، فإنه من صلى على محمد النبي صلى الله عليه وآله سمعه النبي، ورفعت دعوته، ومن سأل الله الجنة قالت الجنة: يا رب أعط عبدك ما سأله. ومن استجار من النار قالت النار: يا رب أجر عبدك مما استجارك، ومن سأل الحور العين قلن: اللهم أعط عبدك ما سأل.

#### الغناء نوح إبليس على الجنة.

#### إذا أراد أحدكم النوم فليضع يده اليمنى تحت خده الايمن وليقل: "بسم الله وضعت جنبي لله على ملة إبراهيم ودين محمد وولاية من افترض الله طاعته، ما شاء الله كان وما لم يشأ لم يكن." فمن قال ذلك عند منامه حفظ من اللص والمغير والهدم، واستغفرت له الملائكة.

#### من قرأ قُلْ هُوَ اللهُ أَحَدٌ حين يأخذ مضجعه وكل الله عز وجل به خمسين ألف ملك يحرسونه ليلته.

27-13 Whenever any of you decides to go to sleep, you should say the
following before lying down on bed: “I seek the guard of God’s majesty,
greatness, omnipotence, power, mercy, compassion, forgiveness, might,
influence, unique Godhead, pillars, made, gathering, Apostle(s) , and
all-powerfulness on myself, family, religion, wealth, sons, results of
my deeds, and my Lord’s authority and provisions against the evils of
poisonous pests, vermin, jinn, mankind, whatsoever is walking on the
surface of this earth, whatsoever is going out of it, whatsoever is
descending from the heavens, whatsoever is ascending there, and every
creature the destiny of which is under my Lord’s control. Surely, my
Lord knows the right path. He is All-Powerful over everything. All might
and power belongs to God.”

Anybody who says this supplication before going to sleep would be safe
from a plundering thief, going under the load of a collapsed building
and the angels would pray for his forgiveness.

God’s Prophet (MGB) protected al-Hassan (MGB) and al-Hussein (MGB) this
way and he (MGB) has ordered us to use it.

We are the treasures of God’s religion. We are the keys to knowledge.
Whenever one of us - Divine Leaders - passes away, another one will come
after him. Whoever follows us would not go astray. Whoever denies us
would not be guided. Whoever prefers our enemies over us would not be
saved. Whoever abandons us will find no one to help him. Do not turn
back from us due to greed for this world in which the goods will not
last. Whoever prefers this world over the Hereafter and prefers it to us
would be very sorry in the Hereafter. These are the words of the
Honorable the Exalted God, “Lest the soul should (then) say, ‘Ah! Woe is
me!- In that I neglected (my duty) towards God, and was but among those
who mocked!’” **[[1234]](footnotes_4.htm#b1234)**

Keep your children clean and wash off any food after meals from them
since Satan would smell it, frighten the child while he sleeps, and the
two angels who record your deeds will be annoyed by it.

The first look at a woman is fine, but you should not repeat it and you
should fear temptations.

An alcoholic would meet God as an idol worshipper would. Hujr ibn Uday
asked, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Who is an alcoholic?’ The Imam
(MGB) replied, ‘It is a person who drinks wine whenever he finds it.’

The prayers of anyone who drinks an intoxicative drink would not be
accepted for forty days and nights.

The Sublime God will imprison in oozy grounds in Hell whoever says
something to dishonor a Muslim until he proves what he has said.

#### 27-13 وإذا أراد أحدكم النوم فلا يضعن جنبه على الارض حتى يقول: "اعيذ نفسي وديني وأهلي وولدي ومالي وخواتيم عملي وما رزقني ربي وخولني بعزة الله وعظمة الله وجبروت الله وسلطان الله ورحمة الله ورأفة الله وغفران الله وقوة الله وقدرة الله وجلال الله وبصنع الله وأركان الله وبجمع الله وبرسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وبقدرة الله على ما يشاء من شر السامة والهامة، ومن شر الجن والانس، ومن شر ما يدب في الارض وما يخرج منها ومن شر ما ينزل من السماء وما يعرج فيها ومن شر كل دابة أنت آخذ بناصيتها إن ربي على صراط مستقيم وهو على كل شيء قدير ولا حول ولا قوة إلا بالله العلي العظيم." فإن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله كان يعوذ بها الحسن والحسين، وبذلك أمرنا رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله.

#### ونحن الخزان لدين الله، ونحن مصابيح العلم، إذا مضى منا علم بدا علم، لا يضل من اتبعنا ولا يهتدي من أنكرنا ولا ينجو من أعان علينا عدونا، ولا يعان من أسلمنا.

#### فلا تتخلفوا عنا لطمع دنيا وحطام زائل عنكم وأنتم تزولون عنه، فإن من آثر الدنيا على الآخرة واختارها علينا عظمت حسرته غدا. وذلك قول الله عز وجل "أَنْ تَقُولَ نَفْسٌ يَا حَسْرَتَى عَلَى مَا فَرَّطْتُ فِي جَنْبِ اللهِ وَإِنْ كُنْتُ لَمِنَ السَّاخِرِينَ."

#### اغسلوا صبيانكم من الغمر، فان الشياطين تشم الغمر فيفزع الصبي في رقاده ويتأذى به الكاتبان.

#### لكم أول نظرة إلى المرأة فلا تتبعوها بنظرة اخرى واحذروا الفتنة.

#### مدمن الخمر يلقى الله عز وجل حين يلقاه كعابد وثن.

#### فقال حجر بن عدي: يا أمير المؤمنين، ما المدمن؟ قال: الذي إذا وجدها شربها.

#### من شرب المسكر لم تقبل صلاته أربعين يوما وليلة.

#### من قال لمسلم قولا يريد به انتقاض مروء‌ته حبسه الله عز وجل في طينة خبال حتى يأتي مما قال بمخرج.

Two naked men should not sleep in one bed. (Two naked women should also
not sleep in one bed.) Should they do so, they must be chastised.

Eat pumpkin since it strengthens mental
powers.**[[1235]](footnotes_4.htm#b1235)** God’s Prophet (MGB) was
amazed at pumpkin.

Eat lemons before and after each meal as the members of the Holy
Household of Muhammad (MGB) did.

Eating pears would brighten the heart and sooth inner pains.

When one stands up to say his prayer Satan faces him and watches him
with regret since Satan sees that the man is showered with God’s Mercy.

The worst deed related to religion is making innovations and the best
ones are those which please the Honorable the Exalted God.

Anyone who worships this world and prefers it to the Hereafter shall
have a terrible ending.

Use clean water.

Whoever is satisfied with what God has granted him would be in comfort.

Whoever spends his vigor and life in what would take him far away from
the Honorable the Exalted God is a loser.

If one who prays only knew how God’s Glory surrounds him during prayer,
he would never raise his head up after prostrating in worship.

Do not procrastinate your task. Do as much of it as you can.

You will receive whatever is your share of daily bread no matter how
weak you may be. You would suffer from any calamities which you are
supposed to suffer from. There is no way for you to fend off what is
destined for you.

Enjoin to do good and admonish against doing evil. Persevere at times of
difficulty.

A believer’s lantern is recognizing our rightfulness.

The worst form of blindness is not being able to see our virtues and our
enemies although we are not guilty of anything but to have invited them
to the truth, while others invited them to sedition and sticking to this
world. They chose sedition and sticking to this world over us. They hate
us and is our enemy.

We hold the flag of righteousness in our hands. It will protect anyone
who comes under its shadow. Whoever rushes to follow it would prosper.
Whoever opposes it would perish. Whoever abandons it would be debased.
Whoever adheres to it would be rescued.

I am the Queen Bee (Leader) **[[1236]](footnotes_4.htm#b1236)**of the
believers, while wealth is the queen bee of cruel people.

#### لا ينام الرجل مع الرجل في ثوب واحد [ولا المرأة مع المرأة في ثوب واحد]، فمن فعل ذلك وجب عليه الادب وهو التعزير.

#### كلوا الدباء فإنه يزيد في الدماغ، وكان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يعجبه الدباء.

#### كلوا الاترج قبل الطعام وبعده، فإن آل محمد عليهم السلام يفعلون ذلك.

#### الكمثرى يجلو القلب ويسكن أوجاع الجوف.

#### إذا قام الرجل إلى الصلاة أقبل إبليس ينظر إليه حسدا لما يرى من رحمة الله التي تغشاه.

#### شر الامور محدثاتها، وخير الامور ما كان لله عز وجل رضى.

#### من عبد الدنيا وآثرها على الآخرة استوخم العاقبة.

#### اتخذوا الماء طيبا.

#### من رضي من الله عز وجل بما قسم له استراح بدنه.

#### خسر من ذهبت حياته وعمره في ما يباعده من الله عز وجل.

#### لو يعلم المصلي ما يغشاه من جلال الله ما سره أن يرفع رأسه من سجوده.

#### إياكم وتسويف العمل، بادروا إذا أمكنكم.

#### ما كان لكم من رزق فسيأتيكم على ضعفكم، وما كان عليكم فلن تقدروا أن تدفعوه بحيلة.

#### مروا بالمعروف، وانهوا عن المنكر، واصبروا على ما أصابكم.

#### سراج المؤمن معرفة حقنا.

#### أشد العمى من عمى عن فضلنا وناصبنا العداوة بلا ذنب سبق إليه منا، إلا أنا دعونا إلى الحق، ودعاه من سوانا إلى الفتنة والدنيا، فأتاهما ونصب البراء‌ة منا والعداوة لنا.

#### لنا راية الحق من استظل بها كنته، ومن سبق إليها فاز، ومن تخلف عنها هلك، ومن فارقها هوى، ومن تمسك بها نجا.

#### أنا يعسوب المؤمنين، والمال يعسوب الظلمة.

I swear by God that nobody but believers love me, and nobody but
hypocrites despise me.

Whenever you met your brethren you should shake hands, smile and be
happy until you part. Then all your sins will be eliminated when you
leave each other.

When anyone sneezes you should tell him, ‘May God bless you.’ He should
say, ‘May God forgive and bless you’ in return. The Blessed the Sublime
God says, ‘When a (courteous) greeting is offered you, meet it with a
greeting still more courteous, or (at least) of equal courtesy…’
**[[1237]](footnotes_4.htm#b1237)**

Shake hands with your enemies and treat them with kindness as the
Honorable the Exalted God has ordered His servants to do so, ‘…Then will
he between whom and thee was hatred become as it were thy friend and
intimate! And no one will be granted such goodness except those who
exercise patience and self-restraint,- none but persons of the greatest
good fortune.’ **[[1238]](footnotes_4.htm#b1238)**

The hardest way to punish your enemy is to obey God regarding him and
treat him according to God’s orders. It would suffice for you to see
that your enemies disobey the Honorable and the Exalted God.

This world rotates. Seek what you want to gain from it slowly whenever
your turn comes.

27-14 A believer should always be awake, awaiting and frightened. He
should be awaiting worldly relief or a felicitous death. He should be
frightened by calamities that are punishment for his sins. He should be
hopeful of the Honorable the Exalted God’s Mercy.

A believer is not without fright and hope. He is frightened due to his
past, but he doesn’t neglect to seek what God has promised. He is not
safe from what the Honorable the Exalted God has frightened us from.

You are the cultivators of Earth. The Honorable and the Exalted God has
placed you there to see what you do there. Then keep an eye on what God
sees you do there.

I advise you to stay on this wide road. Lest others will take over your
place.

Whoever has perfected intellect would do good deeds and guard his
religion.

‘Be ye foremost (in seeking) Forgiveness from your Lord, and a Garden
(of Bliss), the width whereof is as the width of heaven and Earth,
prepared for those who believe in
Allah…’**[[1239]](footnotes_4.htm#b1239)** You would never reach that
‘Garden of Bliss’ unless you are pious.

#### والله لا يحبني إلا مؤمن ولا يبغضني إلا منافق.

#### إذا لقيتم إخوانكم فتصافحوا وأظهروا لهم البشاشة والبشر حتى تتفرقوا وما عليكم من الاوزار قد ذهب.

#### إذا عطس أحدكم فسمتوه: قولوا "يرحمك الله،" وهو يقول لكم: "يغفر الله لكم ويرحمكم." قال الله تبارك وتعالى: "وَإِذَا حُيِّيتُمْ بِتَحِيَّةٍ فَحَيُّوا بِأَحْسَنَ مِنْهَا أَوْ رُدُّوهَا."

#### صافح عدوك وإن كره، فإنه مما أمر الله عز وجل به عباده، يقول: "إِدْفَعْ بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ، فَإِذَا الَّذِي بَيْنَكَ وَبَيْنَهُ عَدَاوَةٌ كَأَنَّهُ وَلِيٌّ حَمِيمٌ. وَمَا يُلَقَّاهَا إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ صَبَرُوا وَمَا يُلَقَّاهَا إِلاَّ ذُو حَظٍّ عَظِيمٍ."

#### ما يكافي عدوك بشيء أشد عليه من أن تطيع الله فيه. وحسبك أن ترى عدوك يعمل بمعاصي الله عز وجل.

#### الدنيا دول، فاطلب حظك منها بأجمل الطلب حتى تأتيك دولتك.

#### 27-14 المؤمن يقظان مترقب خائف، ينتظر إحدى الحسنيين، ويخاف البلاء حذرا من ذنوبه، يرجو رحمة ربه عز وجل.

#### لا يعرى المؤمن من خوفه ورجائه، يخاف مما قدم ولا يسهو عن طلب ما وعده الله، ولا يأمن مما خوفه الله عز وجل.

#### أنتم عمار الارض الذين استخلفكم الله عز وجل فيها لينظر كيف تعملون، فراقبوه فيما يرى منكم.

#### عليكم بالمحجة العظمى فاسلكوها، لا تستبدل بكم غيركم.

#### من كمل عقله حسن عمله ونظره إلى دينه.

#### "سَابِقُوا إِلَى مَغْفِرَةٍ مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ وَجَنَّةٍ عَرْضُهَا السَّمَاوَاتُ وَالأَرْضُ أُعِدَّتْ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ." فإنكم لن تنالوها إلا بالتقوى.

Those who become filthy with sinful deeds would abandon the Honorable
the Exalted God’s remembrance.

God would appoint a satan to be constantly with whomever doesn’t obey
those whom the Honorable the Exalted God has ordered us to obey.

Your opponents are more steadfast in their wickedness. They are better
in spending money on their desires. Indeed you pay attention to this
world on which you rely. You have become used to tolerating cruelty. You
are stingy regarding this world’s goods and have neglected what would be
better for your honor, comfort and power to overcome those who oppress
you. You are neither ashamed of God regarding what He has ordered you to
do, nor would you think about what would be best for you.

You are not awakened, although you are oppressed every day. Your
feebleness doesn’t end.

Don’t you see that each day your towns and religion suffer more and
more, while you are ignorant and entertained with this world. The
Honorable the Exalted God tells you, ‘And incline not to those who do
wrong, or the Fire will seize you; and ye have no protectors other than
God, nor shall ye be helped.’ **[[1240]](footnotes_4.htm#b1240)**

You should name your children. In case you do not know their gender
(before birth), you can give them a name that is suitable for either
boys or girls. Even if it gets aborted, it would question the father on
the Resurrection Day for not having named it. God's Prophet (MGB) had
named Fatimah’s (MGB) child Mohsen before he was born.

You should not drink water while standing up, since that would cause a
pain for which there is no cure unless the Honorable the Exalted God
restores health.

Whenever you mount a quadruped remember the Honorable the Exalted God
says, ‘…In order that ye may sit firm and square on their backs, and
when so seated, ye may celebrate the (kind) favor of your Lord, and say,
"Glory to Him Who has subjected these to our (use), for we could never
have accomplished this (by ourselves). And to our Lord, surely, must we
turn back!”’ **[[1241]](footnotes_4.htm#b1241)h**

Whenever you go on a trip you should say: “O Allah, You are the
companion in journeys, the helper in transport, and the guard of the
wife, property, and sons. ”

When you settle down in a house you should say, “O Allah, grant me a
blessed landing. You are the One who provides the safest landing.”

#### من صدئ بالاثم عشى عن ذكر الله عز وجل.

#### من ترك الاخذ عن أمر الله بطاعته قيض الله له شيطانا فهو له قرين.

#### ما بال من خالفكم أشد بصيرة في ضلالتهم وأبذل لما في أيديهم منكم؟ ما ذاك إلا أنكم ركنتم إلى الدنيا فرضيتم بالضيم وشححتم على الحطام وفرطتم فيما فيه عزكم وسعادتكم وقوتكم على من بغي عليكم. لا من ربكم تستحيون فيما أمركم به ولا لانفسكم تنظرون، وأنتم في كل يوم تضامون ولا تنتبهون من رقدتكم ولا ينقضي فتوركم. أما ترون إلى بلادكم ودينكم كل يوم يبلى وأنتم في غفلة الدنيا؟ يقول الله عز وجل لكم: "وَلاَ تَرْكَنُوا إِلَى الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا فَتَمَسَّكُمْ النَّارُ وَمَا لَكُمْ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ مِنْ أَوْلِيَاءَ ثُمَّ لاَ تُنصَرُونَ."

#### سموا أولادكم، فإن لم تدروا أذكر هم أم انثى فسموهم بالاسماء التي تكون للذكر والانثى، فان أسقاطكم إذا لقوكم في القيامة ولم تسموهم يقول السقط لابيه: ألا سميتني؟ وقد سمى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله محسنا قبل أن يولد.

#### إياكم وشرب الماء من قيام على أرجلكم، فانه يورث الداء الذي لا دواء له أو يعافي الله عز وجل.

#### إذا ركبتم الدواب فاذكروا الله عز وجل وقولوا: "سُبْحانَ الَّذِي سَخَّرَ لَنَا هَذَا وَمَا كُنَّا لَهُ مُقْرِنِينَ. وَإِنَّا إِلَى رَبِّنَا لَمُنقَلِبُونَ."

#### إذا خرج أحدكم في سفر فليقل: "اللهم أنت الصاحب في السفر والحامل على الظهر والخليفة في الاهل والمال والولد."

#### وإذا نزلتم منزلا فقولوا: "اللهم أنزلنا منزلا مباركا وأنت خير المنزلين"

When you go shopping you should say, “I declare there is no god but
Allah uniquely without any associate, and declare that Mohammed is His
servant and messenger. O Allah, I seek Your safety from losing deals and
perjury, and seek Your safety from stagnancy.”

Anyone who awaits for the time of the next prayer is considered to be
amongst the visitors of the Honorable the Exalted God. He has a right
incumbent upon the Sublime God to honor His visitors and grant them
whatever they ask for.

Whoever goes on the Hajj pilgrimage or the Umra Hajj is God’s guest. It
is hoped that God would forgive him.

The Sublime God will imprison in oozy grounds in Hell whoever gives a
child an alcoholic drink, until he apologizes for what he has done.

Giving charity is a strong shield from the Fire for a believer, and for
a nonbeliever is a device to save his money. It is a protection of
property for an atheist. Soon it will be returned to him. It would fend
off calamities. However, there will be no heavenly reward for it for an
atheist.

The residents of Hell shall fall down into the Fire with their tongues
first.

The residents of Light will be bestowed light through their tongues.
Therefore watch your tongues and keep them busy remembering the
Honorable the Exalted God.

The most wicked deed is what would lead one to going astray. The best
deeds are acts of charity.

Beware not to make any sculptures, since you would be questioned about
them on the Resurrection Day.

27-15 Whenever filth is removed from you, you should say, ‘May God
remove the filthy things from me.’

Whenever you leave the bath and your brethren tell you, ‘Happy bathing
to you, you should in response tell them, ‘May you have peace of mind.’

Whenever your brethren tell you, ‘May God’s Greetings be upon you,’ you
should in response tell them, ‘May God’s Greetings be upon you, and may
He take you to the Eternal Home.’

You should never urinate or defecate on the passage-ways.

One should present his requests after saying praises. First glorify the
Honorable the Exalted God, then ask Him to fulfill your needs.)

O Suppliant! Do not ask for an illegitimate or an impossible thing.

Whenever you want to congratulate someone for having been granted a boy,
you should say, ‘May God bless you with this munificence, extend his
life to youth and may God establish his good deeds as your share of
daily bread.

#### إذا اشتريتم ما يحتاجون إليه من السوق فقولوا حين تدخلوا الاسواق: "أشهد أن لا إله إلا الله وحده لا شريك له، وأشهد أن محمدا عبده ورسوله صلى الله عليه وآله اللهم إني أعوذ بك من صفقه خاسرة ويمين فاجرة وأعوذ بك من بوار الايم."

#### المنتظر وقت الصلاة بعد الصلاة من زوار الله عز وجل، وحق على الله تعالى أن يكرم زائره وأن يعطيه ما سأل.

#### الحاج والمعتمر وفد الله ويحبوه بالمغفرة.

#### من سقى صبيا مسكرا وهو لا يعقل حبسه الله تعالى في طينة الخبال حتى يأتي مما صنع بمخرج.

#### الصدقة جنة عظيمة من النار للمؤمن، ووقاية للكافر من أن يتلف ماله، تعجل له الخلف ودفع عنه البلايا، وما له في الآخرة من نصيب.

#### باللسان كب أهل النار في النار، وباللسان اعطى أهل النور النور، فاحفظوا ألسنتكم واشغلوها بذكر الله عز وجل.

#### أخبث الاعمال ما ورت الضلال.

#### وخير ما اكتسب أعمال البر.

#### إياكم وعمل الصور فتسألوا عنها يوم القيامة.

#### 27-15 إذا أخذت منك قذاة فقل: "أماط الله عنك ما تكره."

#### إذا قال لك أخوك وقد خرجت من الحمام: "طاب حمامك وحميمك،" فقل: "أنعم الله بالك."

#### إذا قال لك أخوك: "حياك الله بالسلام،" فقل: "وأنت فحياك الله بالسلام وأحلك دار المقام."

#### لا تبل على المحجة ولا تتغوط عليها.

#### السؤال بعد المدح، فامدحوا الله عز وجل ثم اسألوا الحوائج.

#### اثنوا على الله عز وجل وامدحوه قبل طلب الحوائج.

#### يا صاحب الدعاء، لا تسأل عما لا يكون ولا يحل.

#### إذا هنئتم الرجل عن مولود ذكر فقولوا: "بارك الله لك في هبته، وبلغه أشده، ورزقك بره.

Whenever one of your brethren returns from the Hajj pilgrimage, kiss him
between his two eyes and kiss his lips with which he has kissed the
Black Stone which God’s Prophet (MGB) kissed. Kiss his eyes because he
has seen the Honorable the Exalted God’s house with it. Kiss his
forehead and face and to congratulate him say ‘May God accept your Hajj.
May God take this into consideration and reimburse you with whatever you
have spent. May this not be the last time you go on the Hajj
pilgrimage.’

Stay away from the lowly people, since they are not afraid of the
Honorable the Exalted God. The murderers of the Prophets are amongst
them. Our enemies are amongst them.

The Blessed the Sublime God honored the Earth and chose us. He chose
followers for us so that they may help us; be pleased when we get
pleased and be sad when we are sad; and give away their money and life
in our way. They are from us and will join us.

When any of our followers commits a sin, he will not die until he
encounters a calamity that would be an expiation for his sins. This
calamity would either be regarding his property, children or health so
that they may be purified when they meet the Honorable the Exalted God.
Should any sins be left when they die, then they will have a very harsh
death.

Our followers will die as sincere martyred friends (of ours), since they
have acknowledged our leadership, have been friends (with some) for our
sake, have been enemies (with some) for our sake. This is what the
Honorable the Exalted God wishes. They have believed in God and His
Prophet (MGB). The Honorable the Exalted God says, ‘And those who
believe in God and His apostles - they are the Sincere (lovers of
Truth), and the witnesses (who testify), in the eyes of their Lord, They
shall have their Reward and their Light.’
**[[1242]](footnotes_4.htm#b1242)**

The Children of Israel divided up into seventy-two sects. There will
come a time when these people will divide up into seventy-three sects.
Only one of these sects will go to Paradise.

God would make anyone who divulges our secret taste the hardness of the
iron (i.e. God would punish him).

Circumcise your children on the seventh day after their birth. Do not
worry about the heat or the cold.

Circumcision cleans the body.

The Earth would cry to God when an uncircumcised person urinates.

There are four kinds of being drunk: drunkenness due to alcohol;
drunkenness due to wealth; drunkenness due to sleeping; and drunkenness
due to kingdom.

#### إذا قدم أخوك من مكة فقبل بين عينيه، وفاه الذي قبل به الحجر الاسود الذي قبله رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم، والعين التي نظر بها إلى بيت الله عز وجل، وقبل موضع سجوده ووجهه. وإذا هنأتموه فقولوا له: "قبل الله نسكك، ورحم سعيك، وأخلف عليك نفقتك، ولا جعله آخر عهدك ببيته الحرام."

#### احذروا السفلة، فان السفلة من لا يخاف الله عز وجل. فيهم قتلة الانبياء وفيهم أعداؤنا.

#### إن الله تبارك وتعالى أطلع إلى الارض فاختارنا، واختار لنا شيعة، ينصروننا ويفرحون لفرحنا ويحزنون لحزننا ويبذلون أموالهم وأنفسهم فينا أولئك منا وإلينا.

#### ما من الشيعة عبد يقارف أمرا نهيناه عنه فيموت حتى يبتلى ببلية تمحص بها ذنوبه إما في مال وإما في ولد وإما في نفسه حتى يلقى الله عز وجل وماله ذنب. وإنه ليبقى عليه الشيء من ذنوبه فيشدد به عليه عند موته.

#### الميت من شيعتنا صديق شهيد، صدق بأمرنا وأحب فينا وأبغض فينا، يريد بذلك الله عز وجل، مؤمن بالله وبرسوله. قال الله عز وجل: "وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِاللَّهِ وَرُسُلِهِ أُوْلَئِكَ هُمْ الصِّدِّيقُونَ وَالشُّهَدَاءُ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ لَهُمْ أَجْرُهُمْ وَنُورُهُمْ."

#### افترقت بنو إسرائيل على اثنين وسبعين فرقة وستفترق هذه الامة على ثلاث وسبعين فرقة، واحدة في الجنة.

#### من أذاع سرنا أذاقه الله بأس الحديد.

#### اختتنوا أولادكم يوم السابع، لا يمنعكم حر ولا برد، فانه طهور للجسد، وإن الارض لتضج إلى الله من بول الاغلف.

#### السكر أربع سكرات: سكر الشراب، وسكر المال، وسكر النوم، وسكر الملك.

When one of you sleeps, he should place his hand under the right cheek
because he doesn’t know whether he wakes up or not.

When you intend to sleep place your right hand under your right cheek,
since you never know whether you are going to wake up or not.

I would like believers to apply depilatory powder or
cream**[[1243]](footnotes_4.htm#b1243)** once every fifteen days.

27-16 Eat less fish because it liquefies the body’s flesh, increases the
phlegm and makes it harder to breathe.

Whey**[[1244]](footnotes_4.htm#b1244)** is a remedy for every illness
except for death. **[[1245]](footnotes_4.htm#b1245)**

Eat pomegranates with the pulp since it would clean the stomach.

Each pomegranate seed that enters the stomach will revive the heart,
cleanse the soul and force Satan’s temptations out of it for forty
nights. **[[1246]](footnotes_4.htm#b1246)**

Vinegar is very useful since it decreases the bile.

Use white succory every dawn as it has heavenly drops in it.

Drink rain water since it cleans the body and takes away illnesses. God
the Blessed the Sublime said, ‘…and he caused rain to descend on you
from heaven, to clean you therewith, to remove from you the stain of
Satan, to strengthen your hearts, and to plant your feet firmly
therewith.’ **[[1247]](footnotes_4.htm#b1247)**

Nigella seeds are a cure for everything except for being poisoned.

Beef can cause illnesses.

Cow’s milk is like a drug.

Cow’s oil is a cure.

There is no better food or cure for a pregnant woman than fresh dates.
The Honorable the Exalted God told Mary (MGB), ‘And shake towards
thyself the trunk of the palm-tree, It will let fall fresh ripe dates
upon thee. So eat and drink and cool (thine) eye.’
**[[1248]](footnotes_4.htm#b1248)**

Feed the baby dates the first time you feed him as God’s Prophet (MGB)
did with Al-Hassan (MGB) and Al-Hussein (MGB).

When you want to sleep with your wife, you should not rush her into bed.
You should give her some time to prepare herself for bed.

Women need certain preparations before they can sleep with their
husbands.

When you see an unfamiliar woman and are attracted to her, you should
sleep with your own wife. She also has the same beauties which you see
in that unfamiliar woman.

Do not let Satan enter your hearts. Do not look at an unfamiliar woman.

#### إذا أراد أحدكم النوم فليضع يده اليمنى تحت خده الايمن وإنه لا يدري أينتبه من رقدته أم لا.

#### احب للمؤمن أن يطلي في كل خمسة عشر يوما من النورة.

#### 27-16 أقلوا من أكل الحيتان فانها تذيب البدن وتكثر البلغم، وتغلظ النفس.

#### حسو اللبن شفاء من كل داء إلا الموت.

#### كلوا الرمان بشحمه فانه دباغ للمعدة، وفي كل حبة من الرمان إذا استقرت في المعدة حياة للقلب وإنارة للنفس، وتمرض وسواس الشيطان أربعين ليلة.

#### نعم الآدام الخل يكسر المرة ويحيي القلب.

#### كلوا الهندباء فما من صباح إلا وعليه قطرة من قطر[ات] الجنة.

#### اشربوا ماء السماء فانه يطهر البدن، ويدفع الاسقام. قال الله تبارك وتعالى: "وَيُنَزِّلُ عَلَيْكُمْ مِنْ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً لِيُطَهِّرَكُمْ بِهِ وَيُذْهِبَ عَنكُمْ رِجْزَ الشَّيْطَانِ وَلِيَرْبِطَ عَلَى قُلُوبِكُمْ وَيُثَبِّتَ بِهِ الأَقْدَامَ."

#### ما من داء إلا وفي الحبة السوداء منه شفاء إلا السام.

#### لحوم البقر داء وألبانها دواء وأسمانها شفاء.

#### ما تأكل الحامل من شيء ولا تتداوي به أفضل من الرطب. قال الله عز وجل لمريم عليها السلام: "وَهُزِّي إِلَيْكِ بِجِذْعِ النَّخْلَةِ تُسَاقِطْ عَلَيْكِ رُطَبًا جَنِيًّا فَكُلِي وَاشْرَبِي وَقَرِّي عَيْنًا."

#### حنكوا أولادكم بالتمر، فهكذا فعل رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله بالحسن والحسين.

#### إذا أراد أحدكم أن يأتي زوجته فلا يعجلها، فان للنساء حوائج.

#### إذا رأى أحدكم امرأة تعجبه فليأت أهله، فان عند أهله مثل ما رأى. ولا يجعلن للشيطان إلى قلبه سبيلا وليصرف بصره عنها.

If one wants to get married, he should say two units of prayer, praise
God very much, send blessings upon the Prophet (MGB) and his Household.
Then he should ask God to grant him a wife out of His Nobility and
Kindness.

When you sleep with your wife you should speak as little as possible in
that state.

Speaking while sleeping with one’s spouse might cause the child to be
dumb.

You should not look into your wife’s vagina, since then you might see
something that you dislike. It may also result in blindness.
**[[1249]](footnotes_4.htm#b1249)**

When you wants to make love with your wife, you should say, ‘O my God! I
have legitimized her love for me according to your decrees. I have
accepted her as You entrusted her to me. If You destine a child for me
from her, please let it be a perfectly healthy child and do not let any
involvement or partnership of Satan in it.”

Hypodermic injections can heal four ailments.

God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Indeed hypodermic
injection**[[1250]](footnotes_4.htm#b1250)** is one of the best forms of
treatment.”

Hypodermic injections can fatten the stomach, take away inner pains and
strengthen the body.

Use viola**[[1251]](footnotes_4.htm#b1251)** .

Blood-letting is recommended for you.

It is not recommended to have sexual intercourse with your wife on the
first night of the (lunar) month or the middle of the (lunar) month,
since Satan seeks a child at these times and the other devils are his
associates and come after the child.

Do not have blood-letting performed or
depilatory**[[1252]](footnotes_4.htm#b1252)** applied on Wednesdays
since Wednesday is an eternally sinister day on which Hell was created.

There is an hour on Fridays during which anyone who performs
blood-letting would die.

#### فان لم تكن له زوجة فليصل ركعتين ويحمد الله كثيرا ويصلي على النبي وآله صلى الله عليه وآله ثم ليسأل الله من فضله فانه يبيح له برأفته ما يغنيه.

#### إذا أتى أحدكم زوجته فليقل الكلام فان الكلام عند ذلك يورث الخرس.

#### لا ينظرن أحدكم إلى باطن فرج امرأته فلعله يرى ما يكره، ويورث العمى.

#### إذا أراد أحدكم مجامعة زوجته فليقل: "اللهم إني استحللت فرجها بأمرك، وقبلتها بأمانتك، فإن قضيت لي منها ولدا فاجعله ذكرا سويا ولا تجعل للشيطان فيه نصيبا ولا شريكا."

#### الحقنة من الاربع: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إن أفضل ما تداويتم به الحقنة، وهي تعظم البطن وتنقي داء الجوف وتقوي البدن.

#### استعطوا بالبنفسج وعليكم بالحجامة.

#### إذا أراد أحدكم أن يأتي أهله فليتوق أول الاهلة وأنصاف الشهور، فان الشيطان يطلب الولد في هذين الوقتين، والشياطين يطلبون الشرك فيهما فيجيئون ويحبلون.

#### توقوا الحجامة والنورة يوم الاربعاء، فان يوم الاربعاء يوم نحس مستمر، وفيه خلقت جهنم.

#### وفي يوم الجمعة ساعة لا يحتجم فيها أحد إلا مات.
