Part 28-on More Than One-thousand Numbered Characteristics
==========================================================

28-1 Ali ibn al-Fazl al-Baghdady known as Abil Hassan al-Khayooti
narrated that Abul Hassan Ali ibn Ibrahim quoted Abu Ja’far ibn Qalib
ibn Harb al-Zabi al-Tahami and Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Uthman ibn Abi
Shoyba, on the authority of Yahya ibn Salim ibn Umar, al-Hussein ibn
Salih, on the authority of Mas’ar, on the authority of Atiye, on the
authority of Jabir that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Two-thousand years
before the creation of the heavens and the Earth it was recorded on the
door of Paradise, ‘La illaha illa Allah ‘Muhammadan Rasul Allah Ali Akhu
Rasul Allah’ meaning ‘There is no god but God, Muhammad is God's
Prophet, and Ali is the brother of God's Prophet.’”

FOUR-THOUSAND GATES TO PRAYER
-----------------------------

28-2 (The compiler of the book narrated) My father - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar and Ahmad ibn Idris
quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari, on the
authority of Al-Hussein ibn Abdullah, on the authority of Adam ibn
Abdullah al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Zakariya ibn Adam that he had
heard Abil Hassan Al-Reza (MGB) say, “Prayer has four-thousand gates.”

WHAT WAS WRITTEN AT THE BASE OF GOD’S THRONE SEVEN-THOUSAND YEARS BEFORE THE CREATION OF ADAM (MGB)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28-3 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
Abdul Hamid al-At’tar, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Rashid
al-Barmaky, on the authority of Umar ibn Sahl Al-Asady, on the authority
of Sahl ibn Qazvan al-Basry that he had heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB) say, “A female genie called Afra’e used to go to the Prophet
(MGB), hear his sayings, go to the good genies, invite them to Islam.
They accepted Islam due to her efforts. She did not go to the Prophet
(MGB) for a few days. The Prophet (MGB) asked Gabriel about her
condition. Gabriel replied, ‘She has gone to visit one of her believing
sisters.’ The Prophet (MGB), ‘Blessed**[[1253]](footnotes_4.htm#b1253)**
be those who make friends in the way of the Blessed the Sublime God. God
The Blessed The Exalted has created a pillar from red ruby in Heaven
upon which there are seventy-thousand palaces each with seventy-thousand
rooms. God has created them for those who make friendship for the sake
of God and visit each other.’ When Afra’e went to see the Prophet (MGB),
he (MGB) asked her, ‘O Afra’e! What did you see?’ She replied, ‘I saw
many strange things.’ The Prophet (MGB) asked, ‘What

###### أبواب الألف وما فوقه

##### ما كتب على باب الجنة قبل خلق السموات والارض بالفى عام

#### 28-1 حدثنا علي بن الفضل البغدادي المعروف بأبي الحسن الخيوطي قال: أخبرنا أبوالحسن علي بن إبراهيم قال: حدثنا أبوجعفر بن غالب بن حرب الضبي التهامي، وأبوجعفر محمد بن عثمان بن أبي شيبة قالا: حدثنا يحيى ابن سالم بن عمر، والحسين بن صالح وكان يفضل على الحسن بن صالح قالا: حدثنا مسعر، عن عطية، عن جابر قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: مكتوب على باب الجنة لا إله إلا الله محمد رسول الله، علي أخو رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله قبل أن يخلق الله السماوات والارض بألفي عام.

##### الصلاة لها أربعة آلاف باب

#### 28-2 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، وأحمد بن إدريس جميعا، عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، قال: حدثني الحسين ابن عبد الله، عن آدم بن عبد الله الاشعري، عن زكريا بن آدم، عن أبي الحسن الرضا عليه السلام قال: سمعته يقول: الصلاة لها أربعة آلاف باب.

##### ما وجد على ساق العرش مكتوبا قبل خلق آدم بسبعة آلاف سنة

#### 28-3 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن عبدالحميد العطار، عن محمد بن راشد البرمكي، عن عمر بن سهل الاسدي، عن سهل بن غزوان البصري قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: إن امرأة من الجن كان يقول لها عفراء وكانت تأتي النبي صلى الله عليه وآله فتسمع من كلامه فتأتي صالحي الجن فيسلمون على يديها وأنها فقدها النبي صلى الله عليه وآله فسأل عنها جبرئيل عليه السلام فقال: إنها زادت اختا لها تحبها في الله فقال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: طوبى للمتحابين في الله إن الله تبارك وتعالى خالق في الجنة عمودا من ياقوتة حمراء عليه سبعون ألف قصر في كل قصر سبعون ألف غرفة خلقهـا الله عز وجل للمتحـابين والمتزاورين، يا عفـراء أي شـيء رأيـت؟ قـالت:

was the strangest thing?’ She replied, ‘The strangest of all was that I
saw that Satan was sitting on a white stone in a green sea and had
raised his hands to the sky and said, ‘O my God! When you fulfill your
promise and throw me into the Fire of Hell, I beseech you in the
rightfulness of Muhammad (MGB), Ali (MGB), Fatimah (MGB), Al-Hassan
(MGB) and Al-Hussein (MGB) to release me from the Fire of Hell and unite
me with them on the Resurrection Day.’ Afra’e added, ‘I told Satan, ‘O
Satan! What are these names with which you beseech God?’ Satan replied,
‘I saw them on the foreleg of God's Throne seventy-thousand years before
God created Adam and I knew that they are the dearest of the creations
to God. That is why I beseech God by their rightfulness.’ The Prophet
(MGB) said, ‘Whenever the people on the Earth beseech God using these
names, God would fulfill their supplications.’”

GOD HAS TWELVE THOUSAND WORLDS
------------------------------

28-4 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Hussein
ibn Abdul Samad, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn Abi Uthman,
on the authority of Al-Ebad ibn Abdul Khaliq, on the authority of
someone who narrated that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “The
Honorable the Exalted God has created 12,000 worlds each of which is
more extensive than the seven heavens and the seven Earths. None of
these worlds know that God the Honorable the Exalted has any other
worlds except their own world. However, I am a proof for all of them.”

THERE WERE TWELVE THOUSAND COMPANIONS OF THE PROPHET
----------------------------------------------------

28-5 Ahmad ibn Zyad ibn Ja’far al-Hamedany - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn
Salim that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “There were twelve-thousand
companions for God's Prophet (MGB). Eight-thousand of them were from
Medina, two-thousand of them were from Mecca and another two-thousand of
them were the free atheist who had become Muslims. There were no
Qadarites**[[1254]](footnotes_4.htm#b1254)** , Marajites,
Kharajites**[[1255]](footnotes_4.htm#b1255)** , schismatics
(Mo’tazelites), nor any who act according to their own opinions. They
cried day and night and said, ‘O God! Please take away our souls before
we eat barley bread.’” **[[1256]](footnotes_4.htm#b1256)**

A LIGHT NEAR GOD FOUR THOUSAND YEARS BEFORE THE CREATION OF ADAM
----------------------------------------------------------------

28-6 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Hashemi quoted Al-Hassan
ibn Himad al-Basry, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Abil Jarud, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abdullah, on

#### رأيت عجائب كثيرة، قال: فأعجب ما رأيت قالت: رأيت إبليس في البحر الاخضر على صخرة بيضاء مادا يديه إلى السماء وهو يقول: إلهي إذا بررت قسمك وأدخلتني نار جهنم فأسالك بحق محمد وعلي وفاطمة والحسن والحسين ألا خلصتني منها وحشرتني معهم، فقلت: يا حارث ما هذه الاسماء التي تدعو بها؟ قال لي: رأيتها على ساق العرش من قبل أن يخلق الله آدم بسبعة آلاف سنة، فعلمت أنها أكرم الخلق على الله عز وجل فأنا أساله بحقهم. فقال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: والله لو أقسم أهل الارض بهذه الاسماء لاجابهم. {.t0}

##### من روى أن لله عز وجل اثنى عشر ألف عالم

#### 28-4 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني الحسين بن عبدالصمد، عن الحسين بن علي بن أبي عثمان قال: حدثنا العباد بن عبدالخالق، عمن حدثه، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إن لله عز وجل اثني عشر ألف عالم كل عالم منهم أكبر من سبع سماوات وسبع أرضين، ما ترى عالم منهم أن لله عز وجل عالما غيرهم. وأنا الحجة عليهم.

##### كان أصحاب رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله اثنى عشر ألف رجل

#### 28-5 حدثنا أحمد بن زياد بن جعفر الهمداني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي ابن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن هشام بن سالم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: كان أصحاب رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله اثني عشر ألفا ثمانية آلاف من المدينة، وألفان من مكة، وألفان من الطلقاء، ولم ير فيهم قدري ولا مرجي ولا حروري ولا معتزلي، ولا صحاب رأي، كانوا يبكون الليل والنهار ويقولون: اقبض أرواحنا من قبل أن نأكل خبز الخمير.

##### النور الذى كان بين يدى الله عز وجل قبل خلق آدم

#### 28-6 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن خـالد الهـاشمي قال: حدثنـا الحسن بن حماد البصري، عن أبيه، عن أبي الجارود

the authority of his father, on the authority of his forefathers that
God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Both Ali and I were a single light near God
four thousand years before he created Adam. When God created Adam, God
placed this light in his loins and transferred it through him from one
generation to the next generation until it reached the loins of Abdul
Mutalib (the Prophet’s grandfather). Then God took it out of Abdul
Mutalib's loin; divided it into two parts; placed one part in Abdullah's
(the father of Muhammad (MGB)) loins; and placed the other part in Abi
Talib’s (the father of Ali (MGB)) loins. Thus, Ali (MGB) is from me and
I am from Ali (MGB). His flesh is from my flesh and his blood is from my
blood. Whoever loves me will also love Ali (MGB). Whoever is Ali’s enemy
will be my enemy.”

A WRITING IN BETWEEN THE ANGEL MAHMOOD'S TWO SHOULDERS TWENTY-TWO THOUSAND YEARS BEFORE THE CREATION OF ADAM
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28-7 Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Masroor - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Al-Hussein ibn Muhammad ibn Amer quoted Al-Mo’ali ibn
Muhammad al-Basry, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr
al-Bazanty, on the authority of Ali ibn Ja’far that he had heard
Abal-Hassan Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB) say, “One day when God’s
Prophet (MGB) was sitting an angel who had twenty-four faces came down.
The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘O my friend Gabriel! I have never seen you in
this state.’ The angel said, ‘I am not Gabriel. I am Mahmood. The
Honorable the Exalted God has sent me down to unite in marriage one
light with another light.’ The Prophet (MGB) asked, ‘Who are they (to be
united?)’ The angel replied, ‘Fatimah (MGB) with Ali (MGB).’ When the
angel turned back, it was written in between his two shoulders,
‘Muhammad is God's Prophet (MGB) and Ali (MGB) is his Trustee.’ God’s
Prophet (MGB) asked, ‘Since when has this been written in between your
two shoulders?’ The angel replied, ‘From twenty-two thousand years
before the Honorable the Exalted God created Adam.’”

GOD HAS CREATED ONE-HUNDRED TWENTY-FOUR THOUSAND PROPHETS AND ONE-HUNDRED TWENTY-FOUR THOUSAND TRUSTEES
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28-8 Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Baghdady narrated that Ali ibn Muhammad - the
servant of Ar-Rashid - quoted Darim ibn Qabaysat ibn Nahshal ibn
Majmaulsa’eh, on the authority of Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB), on the
authority of his father Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB), on the authority
of his father Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of
his father Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of his
father Ali ibn al-Hussein as-Sajjad (MGB), on the authority of his
father Al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB), on the authority of the Commander

#### عن محمد بن عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن آبائه قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:كنت أنا وعلي نورا بين يدي الله جل جلاله قبل أن يخلق آدم بأربعة آلاف عام،فلما خلق الله آدم سلك ذلك النور في صلبه فلم يزل الله عز وجل ينقله من صلب إلى صلب حتى أقرة في صلب عبدالمطلب، ثم أخرجه من صلب عبدالمطلب فقسمه قسمين فصير، قسم في صلب عبد الله، وقسم في صلب أبي طالب فعلي مني وأنا من علي، لحمه من لحمي ودمه من دمي، فمن أحبني فبحبي أحبه، ومن أبغضه فببغضي أبغضه. {.t0}

##### ذكر المكتوب بين كتفي محمود الملك قبل خلق آدم باثنين وعشرين ألف عام

#### 28-7 حدثنا جعفر بن محمد بن مسرور رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا الحسين بن محمد ابن عامر، عن معلى بن محمد البصري، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي، عن علي بن جعفر قال: سمعت أبا الحسن موسى بن جعفر عليهما السلام يقول: بينا رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله جالس إذ دخل عليه ملك له أربعة وعشرون وجها فقال له رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: حبيبي جبرئيل لم أرك في مثل هذه الصورة؟ فقال الملك: لست بجبرئيل أنا محمود بعثني الله عز وجل أن ازوج النور من النور، قال: من من من؟ قال: فاطمة عليها السلام من علي، فلما ولى الملك إذا بين كتفيه محمد رسول الله علي وصيه، فقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: منذكم هذا بين كتفيك؟ فقال: من قبل أن يخلق الله عز وجل آدم باثنين وعشرين ألف عام.

##### خلق الله مائة وأربعة وعشرين ألف نبي و مائة وأربعة وعشرين ألف وصي

#### 28-8 حدثنا محمد بن أحمد البغدادي الوراق قال: حدثنا علي بن محمد مولى الرشيد قال: حدثنا دارم بن قبيصة بن نهشل بن مجمع السائح قال: حدثنا علي ابن موسى [الرضا] قال: حدثنا أبي موسى بن جعفر، عن أبيه[جعفر بن محمد] عن أبيه

of the Faithful Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“The Honorable the Exalted God has created one-hundred twenty-four
thousand Prophets. I am the dearest of all in the presence of God and I
do not boast about this. The Honorable the Exalted God has created
one-hundred twenty-four thousand Trustees. Ali is the dearest and the
best of all Trustees in the presence of God.”

28-9 Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Baghdady narrated that Abdullah ibn Muhammad
ibn Suleiman ibn Abdullah ibn al-Hassan quoted his father, on the
authority of his grandfather, on the authority of Zayd ibn Ali, on the
authority of his father Ali ibn al-Hussein as-Sajjad (MGB), on the
authority of his father (Al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB)), on the authority of
the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “The Honorable the Exalted God has created one-hundred
twenty-four thousand Prophets. I am the dearest of all in the presence
of God and I do not boast about this. The Honorable the Exalted God has
created one-hundred twenty-four thousand Trustees. Ali is the dearest
and the best of all Trustees in the presence of God.”

GOD ADDRESSED MOSES WITH ONE-HUNDRED TWENTY-FOUR THOUSAND WORDS
---------------------------------------------------------------

28-10 Abul-Hassan Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ali Asad Al-Asady known as Ibn
Jaradat al-Barza’ee in the town of Ray in the month of Rajab of the year
347 A.H. (958 A.D.) narrated that Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hassan
al-Ameri quoted Harun ibn Sa’id al-Eeli, on the authority of Abdullah
and Harun ibn Sa’id al-Eeli, on the authority of Abu Ja’far, Abdullah
ibn Wahab (Abu Muhammad al-Misri), on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad, on the authority of Juybar (ibn Sa’id Abul Qasim al-Balkhi),
on the authority of Al-Zah’hak, on the authority of Ibn
Abbas**[[1257]](footnotes_4.htm#b1257)** that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“Indeed the Honorable the Exalted God addressed Moses (MGB) with
one-hundred twenty-four thousand words during a period of three days and
nights. Moses neither ate nor did he drink anything during these three
days and nights. Having felt the sweetness of the Honorable the Exalted
God’s speech in his ears, he felt human speech was bad upon his return
to the Children of Israel.”

28-11 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa and Muhammad ibn Abdul Jab’bar, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Barqy, on the authority of Fuzalat ibn Ayoob, on
the authority of Sayf ibn Umayrih, on the authority of Abu Bakr
al-Hazrami, on the authority of his servant Hamzih ibn Rafe’a, on the
authority

#### محمد بن علي، عن أبيه علي بن الحسين، عن أبيه الحسين بن علي، عن أمير المؤمنين علي بن أبي طالب، عليهم السلام عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: خلق الله عز وجل مائة ألف نبي وأربعة وعشرين ألف نبي أنا أكرمهم على الله ولا فخر، وخلق الله عز وجل مائة ألف وصي وأربعة وعشرين ألف وصي، فعلي أكرمهم على الله وأفضلهم. {.t0}

#### 28-9 حدثنا محمد بن أحمد البغدادي قال: حدثني عبد الله بن محمد بن سليمان بن عبد الله بن الحسن، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن زيد بن علي، عن أبيه علي بن الحسين، عن أبيه، عن أمير المؤمنين علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: خلق الله عز وجل مائة ألف نبي وأربعة وعشرين ألف نبي وأنا أكرمهم على الله ولا فخر، وخلق الله عز وجل مائة ألف وصي وأربعة وعشرين ألف وصي، فعلي أكرمهم على الله وأفضلهم.

##### ناجى الله تعالى موسى بمائة وأربعة وعشرين ألف كلمة

#### 28-10 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن أحمد بن علي بن أسد الاسدي المعروف بابن جرادة البرذعي بالري في رجب سنة سبع وأربعين وثلاثمائة قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن الحسن العامري قال: حدثنا هارون بن سعيد الايلي قال: حدثنا عبد الله وهارون بن سعيد الايلى بفتح الهمزة وسكون التحتانية السعدى مولاهم أبوجعفر نزيل مصر ثقة فاضل كما في التقريب. وعبد الله بن وهب هو أبومحمد المصرى الفقيه صدوق وكان شيخ أهل مصر. ابن وهب قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد، عن جويبر عن الضحاك، عن ابن عباس قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:إن الله عز وجل ناجى موسى بن عمران عليه السلام بمائة ألف كلمة وأربعة وعشرين ألف كلمة في ثلاثة أيام ولياليهن، ما طعم فيها موسى ولا شرب فيها، فلما انصرف إلى بني إسرائيل وسمع كلامهم مقتهم لما كان وقع في مسامعه من حلاوة كلام الله عز وجل.

##### علم رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله عليا ألف باب يفتح كل باب ألف باب

#### 28-11 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني أحمد ابن محمد بن عيسى، ومحمد بن عبدالجبار، عن محمد بن خالد البرقي، عن فضالة بن أيوب عن سـيف بن عميـرة، عن أبي بكر الحضرمي، عن مولاة حمزة بن رافع،

of the Prophet’s wife - Umma Salma that when the Prophet (MGB) was so
ill that he (MGB) was about to die, he (MGB) said, “‘Call in my friend.’
Then Ayesha sent someone after her father (Abu Bakr). When Abu Bakr came
in, God’s Prophet (MGB) turned his face around and said, ‘Call in my
friend.’ Then Abu Bakr returned and Hafsah (the daughter of Umar) sent
someone after her father (Umar). When Umar came in, God’s Prophet (MGB)
turned his face around and said, ‘Call in my friend.’ Then Umar went
back and Fatimah (MGB) sent someone after Ali (MGB). When he (MGB) came,
God’s Prophet (MGB) stood up. Ali (MGB) entered. Then the Prophet (MGB)
covered Ali (MGB) with his own cloak. Ali (MGB) said, ‘The Prophet (MGB)
told me one-thousand traditions each of which would produce another
thousand traditions until the Prophet (MGB) and I both sweat so much
that our perspiration wetted each other.”

28-12 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
Isa ibn Ubayd, and Ibrahim ibn Ishaq ibn Ibrahim, on the authority of
Abdullah ibn Himad al-Ansari, on the authority of Sabah al-Mazny, on the
authority of Al-Harith ibn Hasira, on the authority of Al-Asbaq ibn
al-Nobatat that he had heard the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali
(MGB) say, “God’s Prophet (MGB) taught me one-thousand gates to the
forbidden and the legitimate, what has been and what shall come all the
way up until the Resurrection Day. Each of these gates opened
one-thousand gates, so that they turned into one million gates. Thus, I
acquired the knowledge of deaths, calamities and the Divine Decrees.”

28-13 Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Musa - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Ali ibn al-Hassan al-Hassanjani quoted sa’id ibn Kasir ibn Afir, on
the authority of Ibn Lahay’at and Rashdayn ibn Sa’ed, on the authority
of Hurayz ibn Abdullah, on the authority of Aba Abdul Rahman al-Habali,
on the authority of Abdullah ibn Amr, “When God’s Prophet (MGB) was so
ill that he (MGB) was about to die, he (MGB) said, ‘Call in my friend.’
They sent someone after Ali (MGB). When Ali (MGB) came in, the Prophet
(MGB) and Ali (MGB) turned their faces towards the wall and pulled their
cloak over their heads. The people were standing still outside the door
until Ali (MGB) came out. A man asked him (MGB), ‘Did God’s Prophet
(MGB) disclose any secrets to you?’ Ali (MGB) replied, ‘Yes. The Prophet
(MGB) disclosed to me one-thousand gates each of which opens up to
another one-thousand gates.’ The man said, ‘Did you memorize them?’ Ali
(MGB) replied, ‘Yes. Moreover I understood them.’ The man asked, ‘What
is the blackness that is in the moon?’ Ali (MGB) replied, ‘Indeed the
Honorable the Exalted God said, ‘We have made the Night and the Day as
two

#### عن ام سلمة زوجة النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قالت: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله في مرضه الذي توفي فيه: ادعوا لي خليلي فأرسلت عائشة إلى أبيها فلما جاء غطى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وجهه، وقال: ادعوا لي خليلي فرجع أبو بكر وبعثت حفصة إلى أبيها، فلما جاء غطى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وجهه وقال: ادعوا لي خليلي فرجع عمر، وأرسلت فاطمة عليها السلام إلى علي فلما جاء قام رسول الله فدخل ثم جلل عليا عليه السلام بثوبه. قال علي عليه السلام: فحدثني بألف حديث يفتح كل حديث ألف حديث، حتى عرقت وعرق رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله فسال علي عرقه وسال عليه عرقي. {.t0}

#### 28-12 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا محمد بن عيسى بن عبيد، وإبراهيم بن إسحاق بن إبراهيم، عن عبد الله بن حماد الانصاري عن صباح المزني، عن الحارث بن حصيرة، عن الاصبغ بن نباتة، عن أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام قال: سمعته يقول: إن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله علمني ألف باب من الحلال والحرام، ومما كان إلى يوم القيامة، كل باب منها يفتح ألف باب [فذلك ألف ألف باب] حتى علمت علم المنايا والبلايا وفصل الخطاب.

#### 28-13 حدثنا علي بن أحمد بن موسى رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسن الهسنجاني قال: حدثنا سعيد بن كثير بن عفير قال: حدثني ابن لهيعة، ورشدين ابن سعد، عن حريز بن عبد الله، عن أبي عبدالرحمن الحبلي، عن عبد الله بن عمر[و] قال:قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله في مرضه الذي توفي فيه: ادعوا أخي فأرسلوا إلى علي عليه السلام فدخل فوليا وجوههما إلى الحائط وردا عليهما ثوبا فأسر إليه والناس محتوشون وراء الباب فخرج علي عليه السلام فقال له رجل من الناس: أسر إليك نبي الله شيئا؟ قال: نعم أسر إلي ألف باب في كل باب ألف باب. قال: وعيته؟ قال: نعم وعقلته، قال: فما السواد الذي في القمر؟ قال: إن الله عز وجل قال: "وَجَعَلْنَا اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ آيَتَيْنِ فَمَحَوْنَا آيَةَ اللَّيْلِ وَجَعَلْنَا آيَةَ النَّهَارِ مُبْصِرَةً

(of Our) Signs: the Sign of the Night have We obscured, while the Sign
of the Day We have made to enlighten you; that ye may seek bounty from
your Lord, and that ye may know the number and count of the years: all
things have We explained in detail.’’**[[1258]](footnotes_4.htm#b1258)**
The man told him, ‘O Ali! You truly understood it.’”

28-14 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn Miskan, on the authority of Musa ibn Bakr, “I
asked Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), ‘How much of one’s obligatory prayers
must be compensated for if a person goes into a coma for one, two,
three, four or more days?’ The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘I will give you a
general instruction which covers this subject and whatever else of a
similar nature. In any issue in which God prevents His servants from
doing their duty, God accepts His servant’s excuse.’”

Other narrators of this tradition have added that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB) added, “'This is from those chapters which result in one-thousand
chapters. This is one of the gates which opens up to one-thousand
gates.”

28-15 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn
al-Hussein ibn Abil Khat’tab, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Abi Nasr al-Bazanty, on the authority of Umar ibn Azineh, on the
authority of Bakir ibn A’ayn, on the authority of Salim ibn Abi Hafasa
that he had heard Aba Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) say, “God's Prophet (MGB)
taught Ali (MGB) one-thousand chapters each of which of which can open
another one-thousand chapters. Bakir says, “Some of our companions went
to the see Aba Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) and repeatedly inquired about (the
validity of) this narration. It became clear that Salim (of Salim ibn
Abi Hafasa) had told the truth. Bakir added, “The person who had heard
this narration from Aba Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) narrated it for me. He
(MGB) had said, ‘Out of these one-thousand chapters no more than one or
two chapters has reached the people's hands.’ More likely he (MGB) had
said, ‘Only one chapter has reached the people’s hands.’”

28-16 Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Masroor - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Al-Hussein ibn Muhammad ibn Amer quoted Mo’ali ibn
Muhammad al-Basry, on the authority of Bastam ibn Marat, on the
authority of Ishaq ibn Hisan, on the authority of Al-Haysam ibn Vaqid,
on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hassan al-Abdi, on the authority of Sa’ed
ibn Tarif, on the authority of Al-Asbaq ibn al-Nobatat, “The Commander
of the

#### لِتَبْتَغُوا فَضْلاً مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ وَلِتَعْلَمُوا عَدَدَ السِّنِينَ وَالْحِسَابَ وَكُلَّ شَيْءٍ فَصَّلْنَاهُ تَفْصِيلاً." قال له الرجل: عقلت يا علي. {.t0}

#### 28-14 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن محمد بن سنان، عن عبد الله بن مسكان، عن موسى بن بكر قال: قلت لابي عبد الله عليه السلام: الرجل يغمى عليه اليوم واليومين والثلاثة والاربعة وأكثر من ذلك كم يقضي من صلاته؟ فقال: ألا أخبرك بما يجمع لك هذا وأشباهه: كل ما غلب الله عز وجل عليه من أمر الله أعذر لعبده.

#### وزاد فيه غيره إن أبا عبد الله عليه السلام قال: وهذا من الابواب التي يفتح كل باب منه ألف باب.

#### 28-15 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس قال: حدثني محمد ابن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي، عن عمر بن أذينة، عن بكير بن أعين، عن سالم بن أبي حفصة قال: سمعت أبا جعفر عليه السلام يقول:إن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله علم عليا عليه السلام ألف باب، يفتح كل باب ألف باب، فانطلق أصحابنا فسألوا أبا جعفر عليه السلام عن ذلك فاذا سالم قد صدق. قال بكير: وحدثني من سمع أبا جعفر عليه السلام يحدث بهذا الحديث، ثم قال: ولم يخرج إلى الناس من تلك الابواب غير باب أو اثنين، وأكثر علمي أنه قال: باب واحد.

#### 28-16 حدثنا جعفر بن محمد بن مسرور رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا الحسين بن محمد بن عامر، عن معلى بن محمد البصري، عن بسطام بن مرة، عن إسحاق بن حسان، عن الهيثم بن واقد، عن علي بن الحسن العبدي، عن سعد بن طريف، عن

Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) ordered us to emigrate from Kufa to Madaen (in
Persia). We left Kufa on Sunday. Amr ibn Harith and seven others stayed
behind. They went to a place called Khoranq which is in Hireh. They
said, ‘We will amuse ourselves here and move on Wednesday and join the
Commander of the Faithful Ali (MGB) before he says the Friday prayers.
While they were eating lunch, they saw a lizard. They hunted the lizard
and Amr ibn Harith took it by hand, opened his palm and jokingly said,
‘This is the Commander of the Faithful! Pledge allegiance to him.’ Those
seven individuals pledged allegiance to the lizard and Amr ibn Harith
himself was the eighth person who pledged allegiance to the lizard. They
returned on Wednesday night and arrived at Madaen on Friday. They did
not disperse and were all together. The Commander of the Faithful Imam
Ali (MGB) was delivering the Friday prayer sermon at the mosque. Once
they came into the mosque, Ali (MGB) looked at them and said, “O people!
God’s Prophet (MGB) disclosed one-thousand narrations to me each of
which has one-thousand gates each of which has one-thousand keys. I
heard God - may His Majesty be Exalted - say, ‘One day We shall call
together all human beings with their (respective)
Imams…’**[[1259]](footnotes_4.htm#b1259)** I swear by God that there
will be eight people who shall be resurrected with their leader which
will be a lizard. I could name them one by one for you if I wish.”

Asbaq added, “I saw that Amr ibn Harith had become so sorry and ashamed
that he held his head down just like a date palm branch.”

28-17 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
Isa ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Hamzih al-Adowi, on the
authority of Aban ibn Uthman, on the authority of Zurarah that Abi
Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) had said, “God’s Prophet (MGB) taught Ali (MGB) a
gate which opens up to one-thousand gates each of which opens up to
another thousand gates.”

28-18 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa and Abdullah ibn Amer ibn Sa’ed, on the authority of
Abdul Rahman ibn Abi Najran, on the authority of Safvan ibn Yahya, on
the authority of Bashir al-Dahan that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said,
“When the Prophet (MGB) was so ill that he (MGB) was about to die, he
asked for Ali (MGB) and once Ali (MGB) came in, the Prophet (MGB)
whispered things in his ears. When Ali (MGB) came out, they (i.e. Abu
Bakr and Umar) asked Ali (MGB), “What did your friend (MGB) tell you?”
Ali (MGB) said, “He taught me one gate which opens up to one-thousand
gates each of which opens up to another one-thousand gates.”

#### الاصبغ بن نباتة قال: أمرنا أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام بالمسير إلى المدائن من الكوفة فسرنا يوم الاحد وتخلف عمرو بن حريث في سبعة نفر فخرجوا إلى مكان بالحيرة يسمى الخورنق فقالوا: نتنزه فاذا كان يوم الاربعاء خرجنا فلحقنا عليا عليه السلام قبل أن يجمع، فبينما هم يتغذون إذ خرج عليهم ضب فصادوه فأخذه عمرو بن حريث فنصب كفه وقال: بايعوا هذا أمير المؤمنين فبايعه السبعة وعمرو ثامنهم، وارتحلوا ليلة الاربعاء فقدموا المدائن يوم الجمعة وأمير المؤمنين عليه السلام يخطب ولم يفارق بعضهم بعضا وكانوا جميعا حتى نزلوا على باب المسجد فلما دخلوا نظر إليهم أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام فقال: يا أيها الناس إن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أسر إلي ألف حديث في كل حديث ألف باب لكل باب ألف مفتاح، وإني سمعت الله جل جلاله يقول: "يوم ندعو كل اناس بامامهم" وإني اقسم لكم بالله ليبعثن يوم القيامة ثمانية نفر يدعون بامامهم وهو ضب ولو شئت أن اسميهم لفعلت، قال: فلقد رأيت عمرو بن حريث قد سقط كما تسقط السعفة حياء ولوما. {.t0}

#### 28-17 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن عيسى ابن عبيد، عن أحمد بن حمزة العدوي، عن أبان بن عثمان، عن زرارة، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: إن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله علم عليا عليه السلام بابا يفتح ألف باب، ويفتح كل باب ألف باب.

#### 28-18 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا أحمد ابن محمد بن عيسى، وعبد الله بن عامر بن سعد، عن عبدالرحمن بن أبي نجران، عن صفوان بن يحيى، عن بشير الدهان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: لما مرض رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله مرضه الذي توفي فيه بعث إلى علي عليه السلام فلما جاء أكب عليه فلم يزل يحدثه ويحدثه، فلما خرج لقياه وقالا له: بما حدثك صاحبك؟ فقال: حدثني بباب يفتح ألف باب، كل باب منها يفتح ألف باب.

28-19 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad and
Abdullah - the sons of Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan
ibn Mahboob, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim, on the authority of
Abi Hamzih al-Somali, on the authority of Abi Ishaq al-Sabi’e, on the
authority of one of the trustworthy companions of the Commander of the
Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) that he had heard Ali (MGB) say, “There is a lot
of knowledge in my heart which God’s Prophet (MGB) has taught me. I
would have taught it to others if I could have found people who were
trustworthy enough. I would have taught them so that they may acquire
some knowledge since this knowledge is the key to every gate and each
gate opens up to another thousand gates.”

28-20 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father and Muhammad
ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn
Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd and Ibrahim ibn, on the
authority of Ishaq ibn Ibrahim, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Himad
al-Ansari, on the authority of Sabah al-Mazny, on the authority of
Harith ibn Hasira, on the authority of Al-Asbaq al-Nobatat that he had
heard the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) say, “God’s Prophet
(MGB) taught me one-thousand gates to the forbidden and the legitimate,
what has been and what shall come all the way up until the Resurrection
Day. Each of these gates opened up to one-thousand gates, so that they
turned into one million gates. Thus, I acquired the knowledge of deaths,
calamities and the Divine Decrees.”

28-21 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father, Muhammad ibn
al-Hassan and Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased
with them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hijal, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn
al-Hussein al-Lu’lu’ee, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the
authority of Isma’il ibn Jabir, on the authority of Abdul Karim ibn Amr,
on the authority of Abdul Hameed ibn Abil Daylam that Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “God’s Prophet (MGB) advised Ali (MGB) about
one-thousand gates. Each gate opens up to one-thousand gates.”

28-22 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his father quoted Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn
Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Bashir al-Bajaly, on the
authority of Abi Yahya Mu’amir al-Qat’tan, on the authority of Bashir
al-Dahan, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “When the
Prophet (MGB) was so ill that he (MGB) was about to die, God’s Prophet
said,

#### 28-19 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني أحمد وعبد الله ابنا محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن هشام بن سالم، عن أبي حمزة الثمالي، عن أبي إسحاق السبيعى قال: سمعت بعض أصحاب أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام ممن يثق به قال: سمعت عليا عليه السلام يقول: إن في صدري هذا لعلما جما علمنيه رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله، لو أجد له حفظة يرعونه حق رعايته ويروونه كما يسمعونه مني إذا لاودعتهم بعضه، فعلم به كثيرا من العلم، إن العلم مفتاح كل باب، وكل باب يفتح ألف باب.

#### 28-20 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا محمد بن عيسى بن عبيد، وإبراهيم بن إسحاق بن إبراهيم، عن عبد الله ابن حماد الانصاري، عن صباح المزني، عن حارث بن حصيرة، عن الاصبغ بن نباتة، عن أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام قال: سمعته يقول: إن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله علمني ألف باب من الحلال والحرام، ومما كان ومما يكون إلى يوم القيامة، كل باب منها يفتح ألف باب فذلك ألف ألف باب حتى علمت علم المنايا والبلايا وفصل الخطاب.

#### 28-21 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن، وأحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنهم قالوا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحجال، عن الحسن بن الحسين اللؤلؤي، عن محمد بن سنان، عن إسماعيل بن جابر، عن عبدالكريم ابن عمرو، عن عبدالحميد بن أبي الديلم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: أوصى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله إلى علي عليه السلام بألف باب كل باب يفتح ألف باب.

#### 28-22 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه، عن أبيه، عن محمد ابن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن جعفر بن بشير البجلي، عن أبي يحيى معمر القطان، عن بشير الدهان عن ابی عبد الله قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله

‘Call my friend in.’ The two wives (Ayesha and Hafsah) of the Prophet
(MGB) sent someone after their fathers, i.e. Abu Bakr and Umar. However,
when the Prophet (MGB) saw them, he turned his face around and said,
‘Call in my friend.’ They sent someone after Ali (MGB). When Ali (MGB)
came in, he faced Ali (MGB) and conversed with him. When Ali (MGB) came
out, these two persons (i.e. Abu Bakr and Umar) asked Ali (MGB), ‘What
did he (MGB) tell you?’ Ali (MGB) said, ‘He (MGB) told me about
one-thousand gates each of which opens up to one-thousand gates.’”

28-23 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Yahya ibn Imran al-Hamedany, on the authority of Yunus ibn
Abdul-Rahman, on the authority of Hisham ibn al-Hakam, on the authority
of Umar ibn Yazid, “I asked Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “Is what we
have heard being God's Prophet (MGB) taught Ali (MGB) one-thousand gates
each of which opens all other gates true?” The Imam (MGB) replied, “Yes,
It is true.” The Imam (MGB) told me, “The Prophet (MGB) taught him (MGB)
a single gate which opens up to all of one- thousand gates each of which
opens up to another one-thousand gates.”

28-24 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Yaqoob
ibn Yazid and Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi
Umayr, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Abdul-Hamid, on the authority of
Abi Hamzih al-Somali, on the authority of Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) that
Ali (MGB) said, “God’s Prophet (MGB) taught me one-thousand gates each
of which opens up to another one-thousand gates.”

28-25 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father, Muhammad ibn
al-Hassan and Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased
with them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn al-Hassan
ibn Ali ibn Fazal, (on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Fazal), on
the authority of Abdullah Bakir, on the authority of Abdul Rahman ibn
Aba Abdullah that he had heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, “Indeed
God's Prophet (MGB) taught Ali (MGB) a gate which opens up to
one-thousand gates each of which would open up to another one-thousand
gates.”

28-26 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Muhammad ibn Abdul Jab’bar, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Muhammad
al-Hijal, on the authority of Sa’alabat ibn Maymun, on the authority of
Abdullah ibn Hilal that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “God’s Prophet
(MGB) taught Ali (MGB) a gate to knowledge which opens the doors to
one-thousand gates to knowledge each of which opens up to the gates to
another one- thousand gates.”

#### في مرضه الذی توفی فيه.ادعوا لي خليلي، فأرسلتا إلى أبويهما فلما نظر إليهما أعرض عنهما بوجهه، وقال: ادعوا إلي خليلي، فأرسل إلى علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام فلما نظر إليه أكب عليه يحدثه فلما خرج لقياه وقالا: ما حدثك خليلك؟ قال: حدثني ألف باب كل باب يفتح ألف باب. {.t0}

#### 28-23 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم ابن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن يحيى بن عمران الهمداني، عن يونس بن عبدالرحمن، عن هشام بن الحكم، عن عمر بن يزيد قال: قلت لابي عبد الله عليه السلام: بلغنا أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله علم عليا عليه السلام ألف باب، يفتح كل باب ألف باب؟ قال: نعم [فقال لي: بل علمه بابا واحدا فتح ذلك الباب ألف باب، فتح كل باب ألف باب].

#### 28-24 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، وإبراهيم بن هاشم، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن إبراهيم بن عبدالحميد، عن أبي حمزة الثمالي، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قال علي عليه السلام: علمني رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله ألف باب يفتح ألف باب.

#### 28-25 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن، وأحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنهم قالوا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني أحمد بن الحسن بن علي بن فضال، [عن الحسن بن علي بن فضال] عن عبد الله بكير، عن عبدالرحمن بن أبي عبد الله قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: إن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله علم عليا عليه السلام [بابا يفتح له] ألف باب كل باب يفتح له ألف باب.

#### 28-26 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن محمد بن عبدالجبار، عن عبد الله بن محمد الحجال، عن ثعلبة بن ميمون، عن عبد الله بن هلال قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: علم رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله عليا عليه السلام بابا يفتح ألف باب كل باب يفتح ألف باب.

28-27 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father and Muhammad
ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn
Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of
Al-Hussein ibn Sa’id, on the authority of some friends, on the authority
of Ahmad ibn Umar al-Halabi, on the authority of Abi Basir, “I went to
see Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) and said, ‘The Shiites say that God’s
Prophet (MGB) taught Ali (MGB) a gate to knowledge from which
one-thousands gates to knowledge are opened.’ Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB) said, ‘O Aba Muhammad! I swear by God that God’s Prophet (MGB)
taught Ali (MGB) one-thousand gates. Each gate opens up to one-thousand
gates.’ I said, ‘By God! This is true knowledge!’ Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB) said, ‘This is solely for Ali (MGB) and no one else.’”

28-28 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father, Muhammad ibn
al-Hassan and Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased
with them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Sandi ibn
al-Muhammad al-Baz’zaz, on the authority of Safvan ibn Yahya, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Bashir, on the authority of his father Bashir
al-Dahan that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “When God’s Prophet
(MGB) was so ill that he (MGB) was about to die, he (MGB) said, ‘Call my
friend in.’ The two wives of the Prophet (MGB) sent someone after their
fathers, i.e. Abu Bakr and Umar. However, when the Prophet (MGB) saw
them, he turned his face around and said, “Call in my friend. They sent
someone after Ali (MGB). When Ali (MGB) came in, He faced Ali (MGB) and
conversed with him. When Ali (MGB) came out, these two persons (i.e. Abu
Bakr and Umar) asked Ali (MGB), “What did he (MGB) tell you?” Ali (MGB)
said, “He (MGB) told me the gates which open to one-thousand gates. Each
gate opens up to one-thousand gates.”

28-29 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father, Muhammad ibn
al-Hassan and Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased
with them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Marazim ibn
Hakim al-Azodi that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “God’s Prophet
(MGB) taught Ali (MGB) one-thousand gates each of which opens up to
another one-thousand gates.”

28-30 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father, Muhammad ibn
al-Hassan ibn Ahmad al-Walid and Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar -
may God be pleased with them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted
Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority of Al-Hassan
ibn Ali Fazzal, on the authority of Ali ibn Aqabah, on the authority

#### 28-27 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسين بن سعيد، عن بعض أصحابه، عن أحمد بن عمر الحلبي، عن أبي بصير قال: دخلت على أبي عبد الله عليه السلام فقلت له: إن الشيعة يتحدثون أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله علم عليا عليه السلام بابا يفتح [منه] ألف باب كل باب يفتح ألف باب فقال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: يا أبا محمد والله رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله علم عليا عليه السلام ألف باب، يفتح كل باب ألف باب، فقلت له: والله هذا لعلم، قال: إنه لعلم وليس لاحد وليس بذاك.

#### 28-28 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه، ومحمد بن الحسن، وأحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنهم قالوا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن سندي بن محمد البزاز، عن صفوان بن يحيى قال: حدثني محمد بن بشير، عن أبيه بشير الدهان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله في مرضه الذي توفي فيه: ادعوا لي خليلي فأرسلتا إلى أبويهما، فلما رآهما أعرض بوجهه عنهما، ثم قال: ادعوا لي خليلي فأرسلتا إلى علي عليه السلام فلما جاء أكب عليه فلم يزل يحدثه ويحدثه، فلما خرج لقياه فقالا له: ما حدثك؟ قال: حدثني بباب يفتح ألف باب، كل باب يفتح ألف باب.

#### 28-29 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن، وأحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنهم قالوا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن مرازم بن حكيم الازدي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: علم رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله عليا عليه السلام ألف باب، يفتح كل باب ألف باب.

#### 28-30 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد، وأحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنهم قالوا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي

of Al-Harith ibn al-Muqayrih that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said,
“When the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) buried Fatimah (MGB),
Abu Bakr and Umar went to see him. During a long speech he (MGB) told
them, “Considering your complaint concerning why I did not call you in
for the task of the ritual ablutions of the dead (ghusl) for the Prophet
(MGB), I should tell you that the Prophet (MGB) had told me that except
for me whoever sees the Prophets (MGB) private parts would become blind.
That is why I did not inform you. However, the reason I put my head near
his ear was because the Prophet (MGB) taught me one-thousand letters
each of which would explain one-thousand other letters. Since this was a
Prophetic secret, I did not want you to become informed about it.”

28-31 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father, Muhammad ibn
al-Hassan and Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased
with them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Mansoor ibn
Yunus, on the authority of Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn
al-Hazrami**[[1260]](footnotes_4.htm#b1260)** that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir
(MGB) said, “Indeed God’s Prophet (MGB) taught Ali (MGB) one-thousand
letters each of which opens up to one-thousand letters. Each of these
letters open up to one-thousand letters.”

28-32 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father, Muhammad ibn
al-Hassan and Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased
with them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Isa, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hikam, on the authority of Ali
ibn Abi Hamzih, on the authority of Abi Basir that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB) said, “There was a booklet in the cover of the sword of God's
Prophet (MGB).”

Abi Basir asked Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “What was written in that
booklet?” The Imam (MGB) replied, “There were letters each of which
opened up to one-thousand letters.”

Abi Basir added, “Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Only the
interpretation of two of those letters has become clear up until now.”

28-33 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father, Muhammad ibn
al-Hassan and Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased
with them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority of Musa ibn Sa’edan, on
the authority of Abdullah ibn Qasim al-Hazrami, on the authority of
Malik ibn Atiye, on the authority of Aban ibn Taqlib that Abu Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Three-hundred and thirteen people (companions of
the Riser

#### الخطاب، عن الحسن بن علي بن فضال، عن علي بن عقبة، عن الحارث بن المغيرة، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: جاء أبو بكر وعمر إلى أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام حين دفن فاطمة عليها السلام في حديث طويل قال لهما فيه: أما ما ذكرتما أني لم أشهدكما أمر رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله فانه قال: لا يرى عورتي أحد غيرك إلا ذهب بصره فلم أكن لاذنكما لذلك، وأما إكبابي عليه فانه علمني ألف حرف، الحرف يفتح ألف حرف، فلم أكن لاطلع كما على سر رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله. {.t0}

#### 28-31 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن، وأحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنهم قالوا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن منصور بن يونس، عن أبي بكر محمد بن الحضرمي، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: إن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله علم عليا عليه السلام ألف حرف، كل حرف يفتح ألف حرف، والالف حرف

#### 28-32 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن، وأحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار، رضي الله عنهم قالوا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن علي بن الحكم، عن علي بن أبي حمزة، عن أبي بصير، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: كان في ذؤابة سيف رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله صحيفة صغيرة، فقلت لابي عبد الله عليه السلام: أي شيء كان في تلك الصحيفة؟ قال: هي الاحرف التي يفتح كل حرف منها ألف حرف، قالوا أبوبصير: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: فما خرج منها إلا حرفان حتى الساعة.

#### 28-33 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن، وأحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنهم قالوا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن موسـى بن سعـدان، عن عبد الله بن القـاسم الحضـرمي، عن مالك بن عطية، عن

Al-Mahdi (MGB)) will soon come to your mosque - that is in Mecca. The
people of Mecca know they are not from their own race or that of their
fathers and grandfathers. Each of them will have a sword in his hand. On
each sword a word is illustrated that would open up to one-thousand
words. A wind will blow in each valley and proclaim that this is Mehdi -
the Savior (MGB). He will appear and judge based on truth like the
family of David (MGB). He will not be asked for any witnesses.”
**[[1261]](footnotes_4.htm#b1261)**

28-34 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father, Muhammad ibn
al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid and Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya
al-Attar - may God be pleased with them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn
Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Isma’il ibn Jabir and Abdul Karim ibn
Amr, on the authority of Abdul Hameed ibn Abil Daylam that Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “God’s Prophet (MGB) entrusted Ali (MGB) with a
thousand doors each of which opened up to one-thousand words and doors.”

28-35 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father and Muhammad
ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with them - narrated that Abdullah
ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab,
on the authority of Ja’far ibn Bashir al-Bajaly, on the authority of
Zarih al-Maharebi that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “God’s Prophet
honored Ali with a cloak and then taught him a thousand words.”

28-36 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father, Muhammad ibn
Musa al-Mutevakil, Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih, Ahmad ibn Ali ibn Ibrahim
ibn Hashim, Hamzih ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Alavi, al-Hussein ibn
Ibrahim ibn Natanat, al-Hussein ibn Ahmad ibn Hisham al-Mo’adab and
Ahmad ibn Zyad ibn Ja’far al-Hamedany - may the Sublime God be pleased
with them - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted hi father,
on the authority of Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih that had heard Abi Ja’far
Muhammad ibn Ali al-Sani (MGB) say, “God’s Prophet (MGB) taught Ali
(MGB) one-thousand words. Each word opened up to one-thousand new
words.”

28-37 Al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn Idris - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that his father quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, Ali ibn
Isma’il ibn Isa, and Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of
Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Ubaydullah, on the authority of Abdullah ibn
Maymun al-Qad’dah, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad As-Sadiq
(MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), “God’s Prophet (MGB) taught
Ali (MGB) one-thousand words each of which opened up to one-thousand new
words. He did not tell the people what the Prophet (MGB) had taught
him.”

#### أبان بن تغلب، قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: سيأتي مسجدكم هذا يعني مكة ثلاثمائة وثلاثة عشر يعلم أهل مكة أنهم لم يلدهم آباؤهم ولا أجدادهم، عليهم السيوف مكتوب على كل سيف كل تفتح ألف كلمة تبعث الريح فتنادي بكل واد: هذا المهدي يقضي بقضاء آل داود، لا يسأل عليه بينة. {.t0}

#### 28-34 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد، وأحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنهم قالوا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن عيسى بن عبيد عن محمد بن سنان، عن إسماعيل بن جابر، وعبدالكريم بن عمرو، عن عبدالحميد ابن أبي الديلم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال:أوصى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله إلى علي عليه السلام ألف باب، يفتح كل كلمة وكل باب ألف كلمة وألف باب.

#### 28-35 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري قال: حدثني محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن جعفر بن بشير البجلي عن ذريح المحاربي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: جلل رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله عليا عليه السلام ثوبا ثم علمه ألف كلمة.

#### 28-36 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن موسى بن المتوكل، ومحمد بن علي ماجيلويه، وأحمد بن علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، وحمزة بن محمد بن أحمد العلوي، والحسين بن إبراهيم بن ناتانة، والحسين بن أحمد بن هشام المؤدب، وأحمد بن زياد بن جعفر الهمداني رضي الله تعالى عنهم قالوا: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن أبي جعفر محمد بن علي الثاني عليهما السلام أنه سمعه يقول: علم رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله عليا عليه السلام ألف كلمة، كل كلمة يفتح ألف كلمة.

#### 28-37 حدثنا الحسن بن أحمد بن إدريس رضي الله عنه، عن أبيه، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، وعلي بن إسماعيل بن عيسى، وعلي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن جعفر بن محمد بن عبيدالله، عن عبد الله بن ميمون القداح، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام أن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله حدث عليا عليه السلام ألف كلمة، كل كلمة يفتح ألف كلمة فما يدري الناس ما حدثه.

28-38 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih, Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil and
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with them -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn al-Hussein
ibn Abil Khat’tab, on the authority of Al-Nazr ibn Shoayb, on the
authority of Khalid ibn Mad al-Qalansi, on the authority of Jabir ibn
Yazid al-Jo’afy that Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB) said, “A
man went to Ali (MGB) when he (MGB) was on the pulpit and asked, ‘O
Commander of the Faithful! Will you let me say what I have heard Ammar
ibn Yasir quote on the authority of God’s Prophet (MGB)?’ Then the
Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘Fear God and do not ascribe to
Ammar anything other than what he said.’ Ali (MGB) repeated this thrice.
Then Ali (MGB) told the man, ‘Express what you heard him say.’ The man
said, ‘I heard Ammar say that he had heard God’s Prophet (MGB) say, ‘I
fight the polytheists with Revelations while Ali (MGB) fights them with
interpretation of Revelations.’ Then the Commander of the Faithful Imam
Ali (MGB) said, ‘Ammar spoke the truth. By the Lord of the Ka’ba this is
just one of the thousand words entrusted to me.’”

28-39 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father, Muhammad ibn
al-Hassan and Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased
with them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Isa and Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali
ibn Fazzal, on the authority of Abil Miqra Hameed ibn al-Masna al-Ajali,
on the authority of Zarih ibn Muhammad ibn Yazid al-Maharebi, “I heard
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, ‘We are the successors of the
Prophets.’ Then he (MGB) added, ‘God’s Prophet (MGB) honored Ali (MGB)
with a cloak and then taught him (MGB) one-thousand words which open up
to the doors to all words.’”

28-40 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Yaqoob
ibn Yazid and Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi
Umayr, on the authority of Mansoor ibn Hazim, on the authority of Abi
Hamzih al-Somali, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hussein as-Sajjad
(MGB), “God’s Prophet (MGB) taught Ali (MGB) one-thousand words which
open up to the doors to all words (each of which open up to the doors to
all words).”

28-41 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Sa’id, on the
authority of Al-Hussein ibn Zakwan, on the authority of Sa’ed

#### 28-38 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه، ومحمد بن موسى بن المتوكل، وأحمد ابن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنهم قالوا: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد ابن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن النضر بن شعيب، عن خالد بن ماد القلانسي، عن جابر ابن يزيد الجعفي، عن أبي جعفر محمد بن علي الباقر عليهما السلام قال: جاء رجل إلى علي عليه السلام وهو على منبره فقال: يا أمير المؤمنين أتأذن لي أن أتكلم بما سمعت عن عمار بن ياسر يرويه عن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله؟

#### فقال: اتقوا الله ولا تقولوا على عمار إلا ما قاله حتى قال ذلك ثلاث مراتثم قال له: تكلم قال: سمعت عمارا يقول: سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يقول: أنا اقاتل على التنزيل وعلي يقاتل على التأويل، فقال عليه السلام: صدق عمار ورب الكعبة، إن هذه عندي لفي ألف كلمة، تتبع كل كلمة ألف كلمة

#### .

#### 28-39 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن، وأحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنهم قالوا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، وإبراهيم بن هاشم، عن الحسن بن علي بن فضال، عن أبي المغرا حميد بن المثنى العجلي، عن ذريح بن محمد بن يزيد المحاربي قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: نحن ورثة الانبياء، ثم قال: جلل رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله على علي عليه السلام ثوبا، ثم علمه ألف كلمة، كل كلمة يفتح ألف كلمة.

#### 28-40 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، وإبراهيم بن هاشم، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن منصور بن حازم، عن أبي حمزة الثمالي، عن علي بن الحسين عليهما السلام قال: علم رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله عليا عليه السلام ألف كلمة يفتح كل كلمة منها ألف كلمة [والالف الكلمة يفتح كل كلمة ألف كلمة].

#### 28-41 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسين بن سعيد، عن الحسين

ibn Tarif, on the authority of Al-Asbaq al-Nobatat that he had heard Ali
(MGB) say, “God's Prophet (MGB) told me one-thousand narrations each of
which has one-thousand chapters.”

28-42 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father, Muhammad ibn
al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Valeed and Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya
al-Attar - may God be pleased with them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn
Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Bashir al-Bajaly and al-Hassan ibn Fazal, on the
authority of Al-Masni ibn al-Valeed al-Han’nat, on the authority of
Mansoor ibn Hazim, on the authority of Bakr ibn Habib, on the authority
of Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB), “When God’s Prophet (MGB) was so ill that
he (MGB) was about to die, he (MGB) said, ‘Call in my friend.’ Then both
Ayesha and Hafasa sent someone after their fathers (Abu Bakr and Umar).
When they came in, God’s Prophet (MGB) covered up his face. Then Abu
Bakr and Umar returned. Then the Prophet (MGB) uncovered his face and
said, ‘Call in my friend.’ Again both Ayesha and Hafasa sent someone
after their fathers - Abu Bakr and Umar. When they came in, God’s
Prophet (MGB) covered up his face again. Then Abu Bakr and Umar said ‘We
do not think that God’s Prophet (MGB) wants to see us.’ Ayesha and
Hafasa said ‘When the Prophet (MGB) said ‘Call in my friend’ we hoped
that he (MGB) wants to see you.’ Meanwhile the Commander of the Faithful
Imam Ali (MGB) came in. When the Prophet (MGB) saw Ali (MGB), he hugged
him and whispered one-thousand narrations to him each of which has
one-thousand chapters.”

28-43 Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Musa, Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Senani al-Mokattib,
al-Hussein ibn Ibrahim ibn Hisham al-Mo’ad’dab and Ali ibn Abdullah
al-Var’raq - may God be pleased with them - narrated that Ahmad ibn
Yahya ibn Zakaria al-Qat’tan quoted Bakr ibn Abdullah ibn Habib, on the
authority of Tamim ibn Buhlool, on the authority of Abu Muawiyah, on the
authority of Suleiman ibn Mihran, on the authority of Ja’far ibn
Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father Muhammad ibn Ali
al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of his father Ali ibn al-Hussein
as-Sajjad (MGB), on the authority of his father Al-Hussein ibn Ali
(MGB), on the authority of his father Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB), “When it
was time for the death of God’s Prophet (MGB), the Prophet (MGB) called
me in. When I went to see him, the Prophet (MGB) told me, ‘O Ali! You
are my Trustee and my successor over my Household and my Nation both
during my life and after my death. Your friends will be my friends and
my friends are God’s friends. Your enemies will be my enemies and my
enemies are God’s enemies. O Ali! Whoever denies your mastery after me,
it is as if he has denied my Messengership during my life. You are from
me and I am from you.’ Then the Prophet (MGB) asked me to get close to
him and taught me one-thousand gates of knowledge each of which opens up
to one-thousand gates.”

#### بن ذكوان، عن سعد بن طريف، عن الاصبغ بن نباتة قال: سمعت عليا عليه السلام يقول: حدثني رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله بألف حديث لكل حديث ألف باب. {.t0}

#### 28-42 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد، وأحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنهم قالوا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن جعفر بن بشير البجلي، والحسن بن علي بن فضال، عن المثنى بن الوليد الحناط، عن منصور بن حازم، عن بكر بن حبيب، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله في مرضه الذي قبض فيه: ادعوا لي خليلي فأرسلت عائشة وحفصة إلى أبويهما فلما جاء اغطى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وجهه ورأسه، فانصرفا فكشف رأسه رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله ثم قال: ادعوا لي خليلي فأرسلت حفصة إلى أبيها وعائشة إلى أبيها فلما جاء اغطى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وجهه، فانطلقا وقالا: ما نرى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أرادنا، قالتا: أجل إنما قال: ادعوا لي خليلي أو قال حبيبي فرجونا أن تكونا أنتما هما، فجاء‌ه أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام وألزق رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله صدره بصدره وأومأ إلى اذنه فحدثه بألف حديث لكل حديث ألف باب.

#### 28-43 حدثنا علي بن أحمد بن موسى، ومحمد بن أحمد السناني المكتب، والحسين ابن إبراهيم بن أحمد بن هشام المؤدب، وعلي بن عبد الله الوراق رضي الله عنهم قالوا: حدثنا أحمد بن يحيى بن زكريا القطان، عن بكر بن عبد الله بن حبيب قال: حدثنا تميم بن بهلول قال: حدثنا أبومعاوية، عن سليمان بن مهران، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه محمد بن علي، عن أبيه علي بن الحسين، عن أبيه الحسين بن علي، عن أبيه علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام قال: لما حضرت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله الوفاة دعاني فلما دخلت عليه قال لي: يا علي أنت وصيي وخليفتي على أهلي وامتي، في حياتي وبعد موتي، وليك وليي ووليي ولي الله، وعدوك عدوي، وعدوي عدو الله، يا علي المنكر لولايتك بعدي كالمنكر لرسالتي في حياتي لانك مني وأنا منك، ثم أدناني فأسر إلي ألف باب من العلم، كل باب يفتح ألف باب.

GOD HAS CREATED ONE MILLION WORLDS AND ONE MILLION BREED OF HUMANS
------------------------------------------------------------------

28-44 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn
Mahboob, on the authority of Amr ibn Shimr, on the authority of Jabir
ibn Yazid that Aba Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) was asked about the following
words of God the Honorable the Exalted, ‘Were We then weary with the
first Creation, that they should be in confused doubt about a new
Creation?’ **[[1262]](footnotes_4.htm#b1262)**

The Imam (MGB) replied, “O Jabir! Its interpretation is that when the
Honorable the Exalted God destroys this creation; this world and houses;
the people of Heaven in Heaven; and the people of Hell in Hell, then the
Honorable the Exalted God will create another world with a new set of
monotheist people without any male or female distinction to worship Him.
God will create another Earth for them to live in and will create
another sky to cast a shadow upon their heads. Maybe you believe that
the Honorable the Exalted God has not created any other world and has
not created any other humans than you? Indeed, I swear by God that the
Blessed the Sublimed God has created a million worlds and a million
breeds of humans, and you are in the very end of these worlds and of the
last breed of human beings.

##### خلق الله عز وجل ألف ألف عالم وألف ألف آدم

#### 28-44 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا محمد ابن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن عمرو بن شمر، عن جابر بن يزيد قال: سألت أبا جعفر عليه السلام عن قول الله عز وجل: "أَفَعَيِينَا بِالْخَلْقِ الأَوَّلِ بَلْ هُمْ فِي لَبْسٍ مِنْ خَلْقٍ جَدِيدٍ." فقال: يا جابر تأويل ذلك أن الله عز وجل إذا أفنى هذا الخلق وهذا العالم وأسكن أهل الجنة الجنة وأهل النار النار جدد الله عز وجل عالما غير هذا العالم وجدد عالما من غير فحولة ولا إناث يعبدونه ويوحدونه، وخلق لهم أرضا غير هذه الارض تحملهم وسماء غير هذه السماء تظلهم، لعلك ترى أن الله عز وجل إنما خلق هذا العالم الواحد، وترى أن الله عز وجل لم يخلق بشرا غيركم، بل والله لقد خلق الله تبارك وتعالى ألف ألف عالم وألف ألف آدم أنت في آخر تلك العوالم وأولئك الآدميين.
