Introduction
============

IN THE NAME OF GOD, MOST GRACIOUS, MOST MERCIFUL
------------------------------------------------

Praise be to God, who is the Only in terms of Unity, and is singular in
Divinity. He has created the servants using His Knowledge. The tongues
are dull**[[17]](footnotes_1.htm#b0017)** to describe Him, and the eyes
are veiled from seeing Him. It is He who is higher than the
characteristics of the creatures. And He is superior to limited
concepts. There is no similitude for Him among all the creatures. And
there is no god for all the people other than Him. And I witness that
there is no god but God - the Only, and there is no partner for Him -
being a witness confessing to His Unity; inclined towards His Grace;
repenting from his sins. And I witness that Muhammad is His servant and
His Messenger - appointed by Him to His Prophethood, and He has
entrusted him with the principle features of His religion. He has
appointed him with His Book to be a proof for His servants. And I
witness that Ali the son of Abi Talib is
his**[[18]](footnotes_1.htm#b0018)** Testamentary Trustee. He is the
best of the people after him. He is in charge of his affairs. And he is
a summoner to his way. And he is the Commander of the Faithful. And he
is the master of the Testamentary Trustees. And he is the person of the
highest priority to the Prophets.

And I witness that his wife Fatimah
Az-Zahra**[[19]](footnotes_1.htm#b0019)** is the master of all the women
in the world. And that Al-Hassan, al-Hussein and the Imams who are his
offspring are the leaders to guidance**[[20]](footnotes_1.htm#b0020)** .
They are signs of piety and the proofs of God to all the people of the
world. And I witness that whoever follows them shall be saved, and
whoever disobeys them shall be ruined. May God’s Blessings and His Mercy
be upon them, their souls and their bodies. Moreover, I noticed that the
previous Sheikhs and scholars have already authored books on various
aspects of knowledge. However, they have neglected to author a book on
numbers, and good and bad characteristics. Since this topic is very
useful for those who seek knowledge, I decided to compile this book in
order to get closer to God, attain Divine rewards, prosperity and the
Almighty God’s Mercy. I ask God not to make me hopeless since He has
power over all things.

###### المقدمة

##### بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم

#### الحمد لله الذي توحد بالوحدانية، وتفرد بالالهية، وفطر العباد على معرفته وكل الالسن عن صفته، وحجب الابصار عن رؤيته، الذي علا عن صفات المخلوقين وجل عن معاني المحدودين، فلا مثل له في الخلائق أجمعين، ولا إله غيره لجميع العالمين.

#### وأشهد أن لا إله إلا الله وحده لا شريك له، شهادة مقر بتوحيده، راغب في كرامته، تائب من ذنوبه.

#### وأشهد أن محمدا عبده ورسوله، اصطفاه برسالته، وأودعه معالم دينه، وبعثه بكتابه حجة على عباده.

#### وأشهد أن علي بن أبي طالب وصيه وخير الخلق بعده، والقائم بأمره، والداعي إلى سبيله، وأنه أمير المؤمنين، وسيد الوصيين، وأولى الناس بالنبيين، وأن زوجته فاطمة الزهراء سيدة نساء العالمين، وأن الحسن والحسين والائمة [التسعة] من ولده أئمة الهدى، وأعلام التقى، وحجج الله على أهل الدنيا، وأشهد أن من تبعهم نجا، ومن تخلف عنهم هلك، صلوات الله عليهم وعلى أرواحهم وأجسادهم ورحمة الله وبركاته.

#### أما بعد فإني وجدت مشايخي وأسلافي - رحمة الله عليهم - قد صنفوا في فنون العلم كتبا وأغفلوا عن تصنيف كتاب يشتمل على الاعداد والخصال المحمودة، والمذمومة، ووجدت في تصنيفه نفعا كثيرا لطالب العلم، والراغب في الخير فتقربت إلى الله جل اسمه بتصنيف هذا الكتاب، طالبا لثوابه، وراغبا في الفوز برحمته، وأرجو أن لا يخيبني فيما أملته ورجوته منه بتطوله ومنه، إنه على كل شيء قدير.
