Part 1- On One-numbered Characteristics
=======================================

The great Sheikh Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Hussein ibn Musa ibn
Babooyeh al-Qumi (Sheikh Sadooq) - the compiler of the book - may God
continue his honor compiled the following.

GOD IS ONE AND ONLY
-------------------

1-1 Abul Abbas Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Taleqani - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Sa’id ibn Yahya al-Bazury
quoted on the authority of Ibrahim ibn al-Haysam al-Baladi, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Al-Muafi ibn Imran, on the
authority of Israel, on the authority of Al-Miqdam ibn Sharik ibn Hani,
on the authority of his father, “A Bedouin (Arab) stood near the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) on the day of the Battle of
Jamal and asked, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Do you say that God is
One?’ The people rushed unto him and said, ‘O Bedouin! Don’t you see the
condition of the Commander of the Faithful (MGB)? His mind is busy with
several matters. It is not the time to ask such questions.’ The
Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, ‘Leave him alone. This Bedouin
wants just what we want from this
tribe.’**[[21]](footnotes_1.htm#b0021)** The Imam (MGB) then said, ‘O
Bedouin! There are four meanings implied for ‘God is One.’ Two of these
implications are not proper for God the Almighty, while the other two
hold true. The two implications that are not proper are:

1-To say that ‘He is One’ in the sense of counting in numbers. This is
not proper since what has no second cannot be counted in numbers. Don’t
you see that whoever says 'God is the third of the
three’**[[22]](footnotes_1.htm#b0022)** is an infidel.

2-To say that ‘He is One’ to imply that He is one of the people
implicitly saying that He is of a type of gender. This is not proper
either since it is a form of comparison while our Lord the Sublime is
too great to make this (comparison).

However, the two implied meanings that hold true are:

3- To say that ‘He is One’ to imply that He is One and there exists
nothing similar to Him. Our Lord is like this.

4- To say that ‘He is One’ to imply that He, the Exalted the Sublime, is
essentially One. He is not divisible in the outside world, in the mind,
or in the imagination. Our Lord, the Exalted the Sublime is like this.’”

###### باب الواحد

#### قال الشيخ الجليل أبوجعفر محمد بن علي بن الحسين بن موسى بن بابويه القمي الفقيه مصنف هذا الكتاب أدام الله عزه.

##### إن الله واحد

#### 1-1 حدثنا أبوالعباس محمد بن إبراهيم بن أسحاق الطالقاني رضي الله تعالى عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن سعيد بن يحيى البزوري، قال: حدثنا إبراهيم بن الهيثم البلدي، قال: حدثنا أبي، عن المعافى بن عمران، عن إسرائيل، عن المقدام بن شريح بن هانئ، عن أبيه قال: إن أعرابيا قام يوم الجمل إلى أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام فقال: يا أمير المؤمنين أتقول: إن الله واحد؟ قال: فحمل الناس عليه، وقالوا: يا أعرابي أما ترى ما فيه أمير المؤمنين من تقسم القلب؟ فقال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: دعوه فإن الذي يريده الاعرابي هو الذي نريده من القوم، ثم قال: يا أعرابي إن القول في أن الله واحد على أربعة أقسام، فوجهان منها لا يجوزان على الله عز وجل ووجهان يثبتان فيه، فأما اللذان لا يجوزان عليه فقول القائل: "واحد" يقصد به باب الاعداد، فهذا ما لا يجوز لان ما لا ثاني له لا يدخل في باب الاعداد، أما ترى أنه كفر من قال: "إنه ثالث ثلاثة". وقول القائل: "هو واحد من الناس" يريد به النوع من الجنس، فهذا ما لا يجوز لانه تشبيه، وجل ربنا وتعالى عن ذلك. وأما الوجهان اللذان يثبتان فيه فقول القائل "هو واحد ليس له في الاشياء شبه" كذلك ربنا، وقول القائل: إنه عز وجل أحدي المعنى، يعني به أنه لا ينقسم في وجود ولا عقل ولا وهم، كذلك ربنا عز وجل.

ABANDONING THE PRESENT TO ATTAIN THE PROMISED
---------------------------------------------

1-2 (The compiler of the book narrated) narrated that his father – may
God be pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of his father,
on the authority of Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih, on the authority of
Isma’il ibn Muslim al-Sakoony, on the authority of As-Sadiq Ja’far ibn
Muhammad (MGB), on the authority of his father, on the authority of his
forefathers, on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “Blessed be**[[23]](footnotes_1.htm#b0023)** the one who abandons
the present lust to attain the unseen promised reward.”

OPPRESSIVE CHARACTERISTICS
--------------------------

1-3 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Jab’bar, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Isma’il ibn Bazi’a, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim, on the
authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “It is one of the oppressive
characteristics when one who is riding forcefully takes the right of way
of pedestrians.”

CHARACTERISTICS ROOTED IN LOVE FOR RELIGION
-------------------------------------------

1-4 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ali ibn al-Salt
quoted on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the
authority of Rub’ay ibn Abdullah, on the authority of Fuzayl ibn Yasar
that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “The love of a man for his
brethren is due to his love for religion.”

ONE CHARACTERISTIC FOR FIVE CHARACTERISTICS
-------------------------------------------

1-5 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan
ibn Ali ibn Faz’zal, on the authority of Asim ibn Hamid, on the
authority of Abi Ubaydat al-Haza’a that Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB)
narrated that God the Exalted the Sublime says, “I swear by My Honor,
Beauty, Magnificence, Loftiness that I shall make anyone needless who
chooses Me over his selfish desires. I will make him attend to the
affairs of his Hereafter. I will protect him from getting ruined. I will
establish the heavens and the Earth as guarantees for his share of daily
bread. Moreover, I will be far superior to the business of all the
businessmen for him.”

##### ترك خصلة موجودة بخصلة موعودة

#### 1-2 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن أبيه، عن عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن إسماعيل بن مسلم السكوني، عن الصادق جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:"طوبى لمن ترك شهوة حاضرة لموعود لم يره."

##### خصلة من الجور

#### 1-3 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن عبدالجبار، عن محمد بن إسماعيل بن بزيع، عن هشام بن سالم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من الجور قول الراكب للراجل: الطريق.

##### خصلة من حب الدين

#### 1-4 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني محمد بن أحمد بن علي بن الصلت، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد، عن أبيه، عن حماد بن عيسى، عن ربعي بن عبد الله، عن فضيل ابن يسار، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من حب الرجل دينه حبه إخوانه.

##### خصلة واحدة بخمس خصال

#### 1-5 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن علي بن فضال، عن عاصم بن حميد، عن أبي عبيدة الحذاء، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: إن الله عز وجل يقول: بجلالي وجمالي وبهائي وعلائي وارتفاعي لا يؤثر عبد هواي على هواه إلا جعلت غناه في نفسه، وهمه في آخرته، وكففت عنه ضيعته وضمنت السماوات والارض رزقه، وكنت له من وراء تجارة كل تاجر.

A CHARACTERISTIC FOR A CHARACTERISTIC
-------------------------------------

1-6 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his father quoted on the authority of Abdullah ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih, on the authority of Isma’il ibn Abi Zyad
al-Sakoony, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on
the authority of his father Al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of his
forefathers, on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “If one praises the people but raises God’s Wrath, then God will
make the people who praise him to blame him.”

1-7 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on the authority of
Al-Hussein ibn Ishaq al-Tajir, on the authority of Ali ibn Mahzyar, on
the authority of Fuzalat ibn Ayoob, on the authority of Isma’il ibn Abi
Zyad**[[24]](footnotes_1.htm#b0024)** , on the authority of Aba
Abdullah - Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his
forefathers, on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “If one wants something and the Almighty God is pleased with him,
then God will not take him out of this world until He grants it to him.”

A SAVING CHARACTERISTIC
-----------------------

1-8 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the authority of
Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil Khat’tab, on the authority of Ali ibn
An-Nue’man who quoted through a chain of narrators that the Prophet
(MGB) said, “God the Exalted the Sublime said, ‘O Children of Adam! Obey
Me in what I order you to do, and do not teach Me what is best for
you.’” **[[25]](footnotes_1.htm#b0025)**

THE LOFTIEST CHARACTERISTIC OF THE RELIGION
-------------------------------------------

1-9 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted on
the authority of his father, on the authority of Abdullah ibn
Maymun**[[26]](footnotes_1.htm#b0026)** , on the authority of Ja’far ibn
Muhammad, on the authority of his father, on the authority of his
forefathers, on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “God loves the loftiness of knowledge more than the loftiness of
worshipping Him. Moreover, the loftiest characteristic in your religion
is piety.”

NO TWO THINGS COMBINED WHICH ARE BETTER THAN THE COMBINATION OF TWO CHARACTERISTICS
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-10 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased

##### خصلة بخصلة

#### 1-6 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني أبي، عن عبد الله بن محمد بن عيسى، عن أبيه، عن عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن إسماعيل بن أبي زياد السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله من طلب رضى الناس بسخط الله جعل الله حامده من الناس ذاما.

#### 1-7 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن الحسين بن إسحاق التاجر، عن علي بن مهزيار، عن فضالة بن أيوب، عن إسماعيل بن أبي زياد، عن أبي عبد الله جعفر بن محمد، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: من تمنى شيئا وهو لله عز وجل رضى لم يخرج من الدنيا حتى يعطاه.

##### خصلة منجية

#### 1-8 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد ابن عبد الله، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن علي بن النعمان بإسناده يرفعه إلى النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: قال الله تبارك وتعالى: يا ابن آدم أطعني فيما أمرتك ولا تعلمني ما يصلحك.

##### خصلة هى أفضل الدين

#### 1-9 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن عبد الله بن ميمون، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: فضل العلم أحب إلى الله عز وجل من فضل العبادة، وأفضل دينكم الورع.

##### ما جمع شيء إلى شيء أفضل من خصلة إلى خصلة

#### 1-10 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمــد

with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn
Abil-Hussein al-Farsi, on the authority of his father, on the authority
of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father,
on the authority of his grandfather, on the authority of his father, on
the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “No two things
have been combined together better than knowledge and patience.”

1-11 Suleiman ibn Ahmad ibn Ayoob
al-Lakhmy**[[27]](footnotes_1.htm#b0027)** narrated that Abdul Wahab ibn
Kharajat quoted on the authority of Abu Kurayb, on the authority of Ali
ibn Hafs al-Abasi, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn al-Hussein
al-Alavi, on the authority of his father Al-Hussein ibn Zayd, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his
father Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of his father
Ali ibn al-Hussein as-Sajjad (MGB), on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn
Ali (MGB)**[[28]](footnotes_1.htm#b0028)** , on the authority of Ali ibn
Abi Talib (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “I swear by Him in whose
Hands is my soul that no two things have combined together better than
knowledge and patience.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT IS THE HONOR OF THIS WORLD AND THE HEREAFTER
------------------------------------------------------------------

1-12 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority of
Abdullah Al-Jamoorani**[[29]](footnotes_1.htm#b0029)** , on the
authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abi Hamzih, on the authority of Sayf
ibn Umayrih, on the authority of Mansoor ibn Hazim, on the authority of
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The
companionship of religious people is the honor of this world and the
Hereafter.”

THE MOST KNOWLEDGEABLE PERSON IS ONE WHO COMBINES ONE CHARACTERISTIC WITH ANOTHER ONE
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-13 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa,
on the authority of Ali ibn Sayf, on the authority of his brother
Al-Hussein**[[30]](footnotes_1.htm#b0030)** , on the authority of his
father Sayf ibn Umayrih, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB), “The Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) was questioned
about the most knowledgeable person. He replied, ‘It is one who combines
the knowledge of the people with his own knowledge.’”

#### ابن الحسن الصفار قال: حدثني إبراهيم بن هاشم، قال: حدثني الحسن بن أبي الحسين الفارسي، عن سليمان بن جعفر الجعفري، عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن أبيه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ما جمع شيء إلى شيء أفضل من حلم إلى علم. {.t0}

#### 1-11 أخبرنا سليمان بن أحمد بن أيوب اللخمي قال: حدثنا عبدالوهاب ابن خراجة قال: حدثنا أبوكريب قال: حدثنا علي بن حفص العبسي قال: حدثنا الحسن بن الحسين العلوي، عن أبيه الحسين بن زيد، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه محمد ابن علي، عن أبيه علي بن الحسين، عن الحسين بن علي، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: والذي نفسي بيده ما جمع شيء إلى شيء أفضل من حلم إلى علم.

##### خصلة فيها شرف الدنيا والاخرة

#### 1-12 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري قال: حدثني أبوعبد الله الجاموراني عن الحسن بن علي بن أبي حمزة، عن سيف بن عميرة، عن منصور بن حازم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: مجالسة أهل الدين شرف الدنيا والآخرة.

##### أعلم الناس من جمع خصلة إلى خصلة

#### 1-13 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس قال: حدثني محمد بن أحمد، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن علي بن سيف، عن أخيه الحسين، عن أبيه سيف بن عميرة، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: سئل أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام عن أعلم الناس، قال: من جمع علم الناس إلى علمه.

THERE IS ONE TRUE PROSPERITY AND ONE TRUE MISERY
------------------------------------------------

1-14 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of his forefathers, on the authority of Ali (MGB), “True
prosperity is that man’s deeds result in his prosperity and that true
misery is that man’s deeds result in his misery.”

A CHARACTERISTIC FOR WHICH THE PEOPLE DESERVE TO BE REWARDED OR PUNISHED
------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-15 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari, on
the authority of Ali ibn al-Hikam, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn
Mihzam Al-Asady, on the authority of Abi Hamzih, on the authority of Ali
ibn al-Hussein (MGB), “Man’s tongue addresses his other organs everyday
and asks them how they are. They reply that ‘we would be fine if you
left us alone’. They swear by God and ask it to remember God in regards
to them. They say that they get rewarded due to it, and they also get
punished due to it.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT IS THE NOBLEST HOLY WAR
---------------------------------------------

1-16 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted
on the authority of Harun ibn Muslim, on the authority of Mus’adat ibn
Sadaqah: Ja’far ibn Muhammad was questioned about the meaning of a
narration on the authority of the Prophet (MGB) that says, “The noblest
holy war is to say just words in front of an oppressive ruler.” He
replied, ‘It means that he should instruct him to do as much as
he**[[31]](footnotes_1.htm#b0031)** can understand. This much effort is
accepted from him. He has no more duties.’”

THE HARDEST THING IS ONE CHARACTERISTIC THAT CANNOT BE AVOIDED UNLESS WE ABANDON ANOTHER CHARACTERISTIC
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-17 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Salt quoted on
the authority of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of
Yunus ibn Abdul-Rahman, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Sin’an, on the
authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “The disciples told
Jesus**[[32]](footnotes_1.htm#b0032)** - the son of Mary, ‘O Teacher of
the good! Teach us what the hardest thing is.’ He (MGB) said, ‘The
hardest thing is the Wrath of God the Exalted the Sublime.’ They asked,
‘How can we avoid God’s Wrath?’ He (MGB) said, ‘By not getting angry.’
They asked, ‘What is the root of anger?’ He (MGB) replied, ‘Haughtiness,
oppressiveness and belittling the people.’”

##### حقيقة السعادة واحدة وحقيقة الشقاء واحدة

#### 1-14 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني عمي محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن وهب بن وهب، عن جعفر ابن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام أنه قال: حقيقة السعادة أن يختم الرجل عمله بالسعادة، وحقيقة الشقاء أن يختم المرء عمله بالشقاء.

##### يثاب الناس أو يعاقبون بخصلة

#### 1-15 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، عن محمد بن السندي، عن علي بن الحكم، عن إبراهيم بن مهزم الاسدي، عن أبي حمزة، عن علي بن الحسين عليهما السلام قال: إن لسان ابن آدم يشرف كل يوم على جوارحه فيقول: كيف أصبحتم؟ فيقولون: بخير إن تركتنا، ويقولون: الله الله فينا، ويناشدونه، ويقولون: إنما نثاب بك، ونعاقب بك.

##### خصلة هى أفضل الجهاد

#### 1-16 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري، عن هارون بن مسلم، عن مسعدة بن صدقة قال: سئل جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام عن الحديث الذي جاء عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله "إن أفضل الجهاد كلمة عدل عند إمام جائر" ما معناه؟ قال: هذا على أن يأمره بقدر معرفته وهو مع ذلك يقبل منه وإلا فلا.

##### أشد الاشياء خصلة لا تتقى الا بترك خصلة

#### 1-17 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني محمد بن أحمد بن علي بن الصلت قال: حدثني أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن يونس بن عبدالرحمن، عن عبد الله بن سنان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال الحواريون لعيسى بن مريم: يا معلم الخير أعلمنا أي الاشياء أشد؟ فقال: أشد الاشياء غضب الله عز وجل، قالوا: فبم يتقى غضب الله؟ قال: بأن لا تغضبوا، قالوا: وما بدء الغضب؟ قال: الكبر والتجبر ومحقرة الناس.

A BELIEVER’S HONOR IS IN ONE CHARACTERISTIC AND HIS GLORY IS IN ANOTHER CHARACTERISTIC
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-18 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja’far ibn Abi Ja’far
al-Kumaydany and Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Isa, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Sa’id, on the authority of Ibn
Abi Umayr, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Sin’an, on the authority of
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “A believer’s honor is in night prayers,
and his glory is in not bothering the people.”

1-19 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja’far ibn Abi Ja’far
al-Kumaydany, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad, on the authority
of his father, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Jabal’le, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) told Gabriel, “Advise me.”
Gabriel said, “O Muhammad! Live as much as you want. You will finally
die. Love whatever you want. You will finally be separated from it. Do
whatever you want. You will finally encounter your deeds. A believer’s
honor is in his night prayers and his glory is in not bothering the
people.”

1-20 Abul-Hassan Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ali Asad Al-Asady narrated that
Muhammad ibn Jarir, al-Hassan ibn Urwah, and Abdullah ibn Muhammad
al-Vahby quoted on the authority of Muhammad ibn Hamid, on the authority
of Zafir ibn Suleiman, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ayyeene, on the
authority of Abi Hazim, on the authority of Sahl ibn Sa’ed, “Gabriel
came to the Prophet (MGB) and said, ‘O Muhammad! Live as much as you
want. You will finally die. Love whatever you want. You will finally be
separated from it. Do whatever you want. You will finally be rewarded
for it. Know that a man’s honor is in his staying up at
night**[[33]](footnotes_1.htm#b0033)** and his glory is in his
independence from the people.’”

1-21 Abul-Hassan Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ali Asad Al-Asady narrated that
Umar ibn Abi Qaylan al-Saqafy and Isa ibn Suleiman ibn Abdul-Malik
al-Qurashi quoted on the authority of Isa ibn Suleiman ibn Abdul-Malik
al-Qurashi, on the authority of Abu Ibrahim al-Tarjomani, on the
authority of Sa’ed ibn Sa’id al-Gorjany, on the authority of Nah’shall
ibn Sa’id, on the authority of Al-Zah’hak, on the authority of Ibn
Abbas**[[34]](footnotes_1.htm#b0034)** that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“The most honorable people in my nation are those who have memorized the
Quran, and those who are the people of the
night**[[35]](footnotes_1.htm#b0035)** .”

##### شرف المؤمن في خصلة وعزه في خصلة

#### 1-18 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني علي بن موسى بن جعفر بن أبي جعفر الكميداني ومحمد بن يحيى العطار، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسين بن سعيد، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن عبد الله بن سنان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: شرف المؤمن صلاته بالليل، وعزه كف الاذى عن الناس.

#### 1-19 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني علي بن موسى بن جعفر بن أبي جعفر الكميداني، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن عبد الله بن جبلة، عن عبد الله ابن سنان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله لجبرئيل: عظني فقال: يا محمد عش ما شئت فانك ميت، وأحبب ما شئت فانك مفارقه، واعمل ما شئت فانك ملاقيه، شرف المؤمن صلاته بالليل، وعزه كفه عن أعراض الناس.

#### 1-20 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن أحمد بن علي بن أسد الاسدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن جرير، والحسن بن عروة، وعبد الله بن محمد الوهبي قالوا: حدثنا محمد بن حميد قال: حدثنا زافر بن سليمان قال: حدثنا محمد بن عيينة، عن أبي حازم، عن سهل بن سعد قال: جاء جبرئيل عليه السلام إلى النبي صلى الله عليه وآله فقال: يا محمد عش ما شئت فانك ميت، وأحبب ما شئت فانك مفارقه، واعمل ما شئت فانك مجزي به، واعلم أن شرف الرجل قيامه بالليل، وعزه استغناؤه عن الناس.

#### 1-21 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن أحمد بن علي بن أسد الاسدي قال: حدثنا عمر بن أبي غيلان الثقفي، وعيسى بن سليمان بن عبدالملك القرشي قالا: حدثنا أبوإبراهيم الترجماني قال: حدثنا سعد بن سعيد الجرجاني قال: حدثنا نهشل بن سعيد، عن الضحاك، عن ابن عباس قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أشراف أمتي حملة القرآن وأصحاب الليل.

ONE CHARACTERISTIC IS THE KEY TO ALL EVIL
-----------------------------------------

1-22 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn al-Hussein al-Sa’ed Abady quoted on the authority
of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Yunus ibn Abdul-Rahman, on the authority of Davood ibn
Farqad that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) on the authority of said, “Anger
is the key to all evil.”

A CHARACTERISTIC DUE TO JUSTICE
-------------------------------

1-23 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Aba
Abdullah Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Barqy, on the authority of Al-Qasim ibn
Muhammad al-Juwhary, on the authority of Hubayb al-Khas’ami that Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Love for the people what you love for
yourselves.”

A CHARACTERISTIC DUE TO WHICH WE ARE INTERESTED IN HOW OTHERS JUDGE ABOUT US
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-24 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of some of the companions that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
said, “Whoever deals justly with the people will be pleased with how
others judge about him.”

1-25 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Al-Mufaz’zal ibn Umar that Abu Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) was asked the following question: “What is the minimum
right of a believer incumbent upon his brethren?” He (MGB) replied,
“That he doesn’t solely dedicate what they need to himself.”

SEEK NEARNESS TO GOD WITH ONE CHARACTERISTIC
--------------------------------------------

1-26 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob,
on the authority of Umar ibn Yazid that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
said, “Seek nearness to God by sympathizing with your brethren.”

GOD HAS NOT TESTED THE SERVANTS WITH ANYTHING HARDER THAN ONE CHARACTERISTIC
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-27 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated

##### مفاتح كل شر خصلة

#### -22 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني علي بن الحسين السعد آبادي، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد، عن أبيه، عن يونس بن عبدالرحمن، عن داود بن فرقد قال: قال أبو عبد الله عليه السلام: الغضب مفتاح كل شر.

##### خصلة من العدل

#### 1-23 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن أبي عبد الله محمد بن خالد البرقي، عن القاسم بن محمد الجوهري، عن حبيب الخثعمي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام: قال: أحبوا للناس ما تحبون لانفسكم.

##### خصلة من فعلها رضى بها حكما

#### 1-24 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني عمي محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن بعض أصحابنا، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من أنصف الناس من نفسه رضي به حكما لغيره.

##### ادنى حق المؤمن على أخيه خصلة

#### 1-25 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن محمد بن سنان، عن المفضل بن عمر قال: سئل أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: ما أدنى حق المؤمن على أخيه؟ قال: أن لا يستأثر عليه بما هو أحوج إليه منه.

##### التقرب إلى الله عز وجل بخصلة

#### 1-26 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن عمر بن يزيد قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: تقربوا إلى الله تعالى بمواساة إخوانكم.

##### ما بلا الله العباد بشيء أشد عليهم من خصلة

#### 1-27 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني عمي محــــمد بن أبي

that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ali al-Kufy,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Umar ibn
Abdul-Aziz, on the authority of Jamil ibn Dur’raj that Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “God has not tested the servants with anything
harder than giving money.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT IS THE RESULT OF BEING KIND
-------------------------------------------------

1-28 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Barqy, on the authority of
his father, on the authority of Khalaf ibn Himmad, on the authority of
Musa ibn Bakr, on the authority of Zurarah, on the authority of Humran
ibn A’ayn that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “There is a result for
everything. The result of being kind is to speed up turning on the
light.” **[[36]](footnotes_1.htm#b0036)**

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT STABILIZES ONE’S FAITH AND ONE THAT MAKES HIM LOSE HIS FAITH
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-29 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari, on
the authority of Abu Abdullah al-Razi, on the authority of Ali ibn
Suleiman ibn Rashid, on the authority of Musa ibn Salam that Aban ibn
Savid asked Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “What stabilizes a servant’s
faith?” He (MGB) replied, “What stabilizes his faith is piety, and what
makes him lose his faith is greed.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT DESTROYS A BELIEVER’S DIGNITY
---------------------------------------------------

1-30 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Isa ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Ubaydullah ibn Abdullah al-Dihqan, on
the authority of Durost ibn Abi Mansoor al-Vaseti, on the authority of
Ibrahim ibn Abdul-Hamid that Abil Hassan Al-Kazim (MGB) said, “Walking
in a rush will destroy a believer’s dignity.”

A GOOD CHARACTERISTIC WHICH NO OTHER CHARACTERISTIC IS BETTER THAN, AND A BAD CHARACTERISTIC THAT NO OTHER CHARACTERISTIC IS WORSE THAN
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-31 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Al-Abbas ibn Ma’ruf, on the authority of Abi Himmam -
Isma’il ibn Himmam, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sa’id

#### القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن محمد بن علي الكوفي، عن محمد ابن سنان، عن عمر بن عبدالعزيز، عن جميل بن دراج، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ما بلا الله العباد بشيء أشد عليهم من إخراج الدرهم. {.t0}

##### ثمرة المعروف خصلة

#### 1-28 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن خالد البرقي، عن أبيه، عن خلف بن حماد، عن موسى بن بكر، عن زرارة، عن حمران بن أعين، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: سمعته يقول: لكل شيء ثمرة، وثمرة المعروف تعجيل السراج.

##### خصلة تثبت الايمان في العبد، وخصلة تخرجه منه

#### 1-29 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد ابن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري قال: حدثني أبوعبد الله الرازي، عن علي ابن سليمان بن رشيد، عن موسى بن سلام، عن أبان بن سويد، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قلت: ما الذي يثبت الايمان في العبد؟ قال: الذي يثبته فيه الورع، والذي يخرجه منه الطمع.

##### خصلة تذهب ببهاء المؤمن

#### 1-30 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، عن محمد بن عيسى بن عبيد، عن عبيد الله بن عبد الله الدهقان، عن درست بن أبي منصور الواسطي، عن إبراهيم ابن عبدالحميد، عن أبي الحسن عليه السلام قال: سرعة المشي تذهب ببهاء المؤمن.

##### بر ليس فوقه بر، وعقوق ليس فوقه عقوق

#### 1-31 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن العباس بن معروف، عن أبي همام إسماعيل بن همـــام عن

ibn Qazvan, on the authority of Isma’il ibn Muslim al-Sakoony, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad, on the authority of his father (MGB)
that the Prophet (MGB) said, “There is one good characteristic that is
better than any other good characteristic. However, there are no
characteristics better than getting killed in the way of the Honorable
the Exalted God. There is some ingratitude that is worse than any other
kinds of ingratitude. However, there is no ingratitude worse than
killing one’s parents.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT GUARANTEES WHO WILL NOT BECOME POOR
---------------------------------------------------------

1-32 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Ali ibn
Isma’il, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Umar, on the authority of
Abdullah ibn Ayoob, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Maymun said, “I
heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, ‘I guarantee that whoever is
frugal will never become poor.’”

THE FORM OF CHIVALRY OF THE MEMBERS OF THE HOLY HOUSEHOLD
---------------------------------------------------------

1-33 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Al-Haysam ibn Abi Masruq al-Nehdi, on the authority of Ibn
Abi Najran, on the authority of Himad, on the authority of Hurayz that
Zurarah said, “I heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, ‘We are members
of a Household whose chivalry is to forgive those who have oppressed
us.’” **[[37]](footnotes_1.htm#b0037)**

A CHARACTERISTIC DUE TO ONE’S CHIVALRY
--------------------------------------

1-34 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of Isma’il ibn Mihran, on
the authority of Salih ibn Sa’id, on the authority of Aban ibn Taqlib,
on the authority of Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “Considering the public’s interest regarding one’s property is due
to manliness.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT IS NOT GOOD FOR A DIGNIFIED MAN
-----------------------------------------------------

1-35 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God have Mercy
upon him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi
Umayr that Muawiyah ibn Wahab said, “Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) saw me
carrying some green vegetables in Medina. He said, ‘It is not good for a
dignified man to carry lowly things since the people will then dare to
disrespect him.’”

#### محمد بن سعيد بن غزوان، عن إسماعيل بن مسلم السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام أن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: فوق كل بر بر حتى يقتل الرجل في سبيل الله عز وجل فإذا قتل في سبيل الله فليس فوقه بر. وفوق كل عقوق عقوق حتى يقتل الرجل أحد والديه.فإذا قتل أحدهما فليس فوقه عقوق. {.t0}

##### مضمون لمن عمل خصلة أن لا يفتقر

#### 1-32 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد ابن أحمد، عن علي بن إسماعيل، عن محمد بن عمر، عن عبد الله بن أيوب، عن إبراهيم ابن ميمون قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: ضمنت لمن اقتصد أن لا يفتقر.

##### مروء‌ة أهل البيت عليهم السلام خصلة

#### 1-33 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن الهيثم بن أبي مسروق النهدي، عن ابن أبي نجران، عن حماد، عن حريز، عن زرارة قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: إنا أهل بيت مروء‌تنا العفو عمن ظلمنا.

##### خصلة من المروء‌ة

#### 1-34 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه، عن عمه محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن إسماعيل بن مهران، عن صالح بن سعيد، عن أبان بن تغلب، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: من المروء‌ة استصلاح المال.

##### خصلة مكروهة للرجل السرى

#### 1-35 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد - رحمه الله - قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن معاوية بن وهب قال: رآني أبوعبد الله عليه السلام بالمدينة وأنا أحمل بقلا فقال: إنه يكره للرجل السريأن يحمل الشئ الدني فيجترئ عليه.

GOD LOVES ONE CHARACTERISTIC AND DESPISES ONE CHARACTERISTIC
------------------------------------------------------------

1-36 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority
of Ja’far ibn Bashir al-Bajaly, on the authority of Davood al-Raqqy that
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Moderation is what God the Honorable,
the Exalted loves. Wastefulness is despised by
Him**[[38]](footnotes_1.htm#b0038)** even if it is throwing away a date
seed that can be used, or throwing away the leftover liquid from your
drink.”

ONE WHO HAS THIS CHARACTERISTIC WOULD NOT BE THANKFUL FOR BLESSINGS
-------------------------------------------------------------------

1-37 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God have Mercy upon him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of Ali ibn Hisan that
someone narrated that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Whoever bears
oppression would not thank for blessings.”
**[[39]](footnotes_1.htm#b0039)**

1-38 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his father quoted on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Ahmad, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Sayyari, on the
authority of Ali ibn Asbat who linked it up to Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB) saying, “Whoever is not angered when oppressed would not thank for
blessings.”

A CHARACTERISTIC DUE TO HUMBLENESS
----------------------------------

1-39 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ali al-Kufy, on the authority of Uthman ibn Isa, on the
authority of Harun ibn Kharija’ that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said,
“It is a form of humbleness to greet everyone you meet.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT IS CLOSE TO BLASPHEMY AND A CHARACTERISTIC THAT MIGHT CHANGE DESTINY
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-40 Hamzih ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Zayd ibn
Ali ibn al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn al-Hussein ibn Abi Talib (MGB) narrated
from Qum in the month of Rajab**[[40]](footnotes_1.htm#b0040)** of the
year 339 A.H. (950 A.D.) that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Ibn al-Muqayrih, on the
authority of Al-Sakoony, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of his forefathers, on the
authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Poverty is close
to blasphemy, and jealousy might bring you close to changing destiny.”
**[[41]](footnotes_1.htm#b0041)**

##### خصلة يحبها الله وخصلة يبغضها عز وجل

#### 1-36 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن جعفر بن بشير البجلي، عن داود الرقي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إن القصد أمر يحبه الله عز وجل، وإن السرف [أمر] يبغضه [الله عز وجل] حتى طرحك النواة فإنها تصلح لشئ وحتى صبك فضل شرابك.

##### خصلة من احتملها لم يشكر النعمة

#### 1-37 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه - رحمه الله - قال: حدثني عمي محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن علي بن حسان، عمن ذكره، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من احتمل الجفاء لم يشكر النعمة.

##### من لم تغضبه خصلة لم يشكر خصلة

#### 1-38 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه، عن أبيه، عن محمد ابن أحمد، عن أحمد بن محمد السياري، عن علي بن أسباط يرفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من لم تغضبه الجفوة لم يشكر النعمة.

##### خصلة من التواضع

#### 1-39 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن محمد بن علي الكوفي، عن عثمان بن عيسى، عن هارون بن خارجة، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من التواضع أن تسلم على من لقيت.

##### خصلة كادت أن تكون كفرا وخصلة كادت أن تغلب القدر

#### 1-40 حدثنا حمزة بن محمد بن أحمد بن جعفر بن محمد بن زيد بن علي بن الحسين ابن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام بقم في رجب سنة تسع وثلاثين وثلاثمائة قال: أخبرني علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن ابن المغيرة، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: كاد الفقر أن يكون كفرا، وكاد الحسد أن يغلب القدر.

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT DESTROYED PREVIOUS NATIONS
------------------------------------------------

1-41 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan
ibn Ali al-Vasha that Abil-Hassan al-Hiza said, “I heard Abu Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) ask Abil Abbas al-Baqbaq, ‘What prevented you from
attending the pilgrimage?’**[[42]](footnotes_1.htm#b0042)** He replied,
‘The suretyship which I undertook.’ Baqbaq said, ‘What do you have to do
with suretyship? Don’t you know that it was suretyship that destroyed
previous nations?’”

MARTYRDOM IS EXPIATION FOR EVERY SIN EXCEPT FOR ONE’S DEBT
----------------------------------------------------------

1-42 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Al-Abbas ibn Ma’ruf, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn
Mahboob, on the authority of Han’nan ibn Sadeer, on the authority of his
father that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “Martyrdom in God’s way is
expiation for every sin except for one’s debt which has no expiation.
One has to pay it back either himself**[[43]](footnotes_1.htm#b0043)** ,
or the one who has given him the loan should give it up.”

GOD THE ALMIGHTY HAS SENT MUHAMMAD (MGB) AND HIS NATION A GIFT THAT HE HAS NOT GIVEN TO ANY OTHER NATION
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-43 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted on
the authority of his father, on the authority of Al-Nawfaly, on the
authority of Al-Sakoony, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB) that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “Indeed God the Blessed the Sublime has granted me and my
nation a gift that He has not granted to any other nation. This is an
honor from God for us.” He was asked, “O Prophet of God! What is it?” He
said, “It is breaking the fast and shortening our prayers (while we are)
on a journey.” Whoever doesn’t do so has turned down God’s gifts.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT ONE SHOULD HAVE IF HE WANTS TO INCREASE GOODNESS IN HIS HOUSE
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-44 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Qasim ibn Yahya, on the
authority of his grandfather Al-Hassan ibn Rashid, on the authority of
Abi Basir, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), on the
authority of his forefathers (MGB) that the Commander of the Faithful
Imam Ali (MGB) said, “Whoever wants to have an increase in goodness in
his house should make ablutions before eating.”
**[[44]](footnotes_1.htm#b0044)**

##### خصلة أهلكت القرون الاولى

#### 1-41 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن الحسن بن علي الوشاء، عن أبي الحسن الحذاء قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول لابي العباس البقباق: ما منعك من الحج؟ قال: كفالة كفلت بها، قال: مالك والكفالات، أما علمت أن الكفالة هي التي أهلكت القرون الاولى.

#### كل ذنب يكفره القتل في سبيل الله عز وجل الا خصلة فانها لا يكفرها الا احدى ثلاث خصال

#### 1-42 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن العباس بن معروف، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن حنان بن سدير، عن أبيه، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: كل ذنب يكفره القتل في سبيل الله عز وجل إلا الدين [فانه] لا كفارة له إلا أداء‌ه، أو يقضى صاحبه أو يعفو الذي له الحق.

#### ان الله تبارك وتعالى أهدى إلى محمد صلى الله عليه وآله والى امته هدية لم يهدها إلى أحد من الامم

#### 1-43 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن النوفلي، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إن الله تبارك وتعالى أهدى إلي وإلى أمتي هدية لم يهدها إلى أحد من الامم، كرامة من الله لنا، قالوا: وما ذاك يا رسول الله؟ قال: الافطار في في السفر، والتقصير في الصلاة، فمن لم يفعل ذلك فقد رد على الله عز وجل هديته.

##### من أحب أن يكثر خير بيته فليفعل خصلة عند حضور طعامه

#### 1-44 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه، عن عمه محمد بن أبي القاسم عن محمد بن عيسى، عن القاسم بن يحيى، عن جده الحسن بن راشد، عن أبي بصير، عن أبي عبد الله، عن آبائه عليهم السلام قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: من سره أن يكثر خير بيته فليتوضأ عند حضور طعامه.

GOD WILL LOOK AT WHOM HE LIKES. ONCE HE LOOKS AT HIM, HE SHALL GRANT HIM ONE OF THREE GIFTS
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-45 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Sindy, on the
authority of Ahmad ibn an-Nazr al-Khazzaz, on the authority of Amr ibn
Shimr, on the authority of Jabir that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said,
“When God likes someone, He will look at him. When He looks at him, He
will grant him one of three gifts: a headache, fever, or eye pain.”

THE HEREAFTER IS THE WEDDING OF THE PIOUS ONES
----------------------------------------------

1-46 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Ali ibn Muhammad al-Qashany that
someone narrated on the authority of Abdullah ibn al-Qasim al-Ja’fari
that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “The Hereafter is the wedding of
the pious ones.”

1-47 Ja’far ibn Ali ibn al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih
al-Kufy narrated that his grandfather Al-Hassan ibn Ali quoted on the
authority of his great grandfather Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih, on the
authority of Al-Sakoony, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father As-Sajjad (MGB), “A man
went to the Prophet (MGB) and asked, ‘Why is it that I do not like
death?’ The Prophet (MGB) asked him, ‘Do you have any wealth?’ He
replied, ‘Yes.’ The Prophet (MGB) asked, ‘Have you not sent your wealth
ahead**[[45]](footnotes_1.htm#b0045)** of you?’ He said, ‘No.’ The
Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Then that is why you do not like death.’”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT IS LIKE ITS OPPOSITE
------------------------------------------

1-48 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad, on the authority of Abi Umayr, on the
authority of Hamzih ibn Himran that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said,
“God the Exalted the Sublime has not created any certitude in which
there is no doubt similar to the doubt about death in which there is no
certitude.”

THE MOST WICKED PEOPLE ARE THOSE WHO ARE RESPECTED FOR POSSESSING ONE CHARACTERISTIC
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-49 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God have Mercy
upon him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Bakr ibn
Salih, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali, on the authority of
Abdullah**[[46]](footnotes_1.htm#b0046)** , on the authority of
Al-Hussein ibn Yazid al-Nawfaly, on the

##### ان الله تبارك وتعالى اذا أحب عبدا نظر اليه فاذا نظر اليه أتحفه من ثلاثة بواحدة

#### 1-45 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن علي بن السندي، عن أحمد بن النضر الخزاز، عن عمرو بن شمر، عن جابر عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: إذا أحب الله عبدا نظر إليه فإذا نظر إليه، أتحفه من ثلاثة بواحدة: إما صداع، وإما حمى، وإما رمد.

##### القيامة عرس المتقين

#### 1-46 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن علي بن محمد القاشاني، عمن ذكره، عن عبد الله بن القاسم الجعفري، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: القيامة عرس المتقين.

##### خصلة من أجلها لا يحب الموت

#### 1-47 حدثنا جعفر بن علي بن الحسن بن علي بن عبد الله بن المغيرة الكوفي قال: حدثني جدي الحسن بن علي، عن جده عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: أتى النبي صلى الله عليه وآله رجل فقال له: مالي لا احب الموت؟ فقال له: ألك مال؟ قال: نعم، قال: فقدمته؟ قال: لا، قال: فمن ثم لا تحب الموت.

##### خصلة تشبه ضدها

#### 1-48 حدثنا أبي قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن حمزة بن حمران، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: لم يخلق الله عز وجل يقينا لا شك فيه أشبه بشك لا يقين فيه من الموت.

##### شرار الناس الذين يكرمون مخافة خصلة فيهم

#### 1-49 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد - رحمه الله - قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن بكر بن صــالح، عن الحسن

authority of Isma’il ibn Abi Zyad**[[47]](footnotes_1.htm#b0047)** , on
the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad, on the authority of his father, on
the authority of his forefathers, on the authority of Ali (MGB) that the
Prophet (MGB) said, “The most wicked people in my
nation**[[48]](footnotes_1.htm#b0048)** are those who are respected for
fear of their wickedness. Whoever the people respect due to fear of his
wickedness is not from my nation.”

A CHARACTERISTIC IN THIS WORLD IS ABSTINENCE, AND A CHARACTERISTIC THAT IS GRATITUDE FOR ALL BLESSINGS
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-50 Al-Hussein ibn Ahmad ibn Idris - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that his father quoted on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad,
on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad, on the authority of Some of the
Al-Nofelites and Mohammad ibn Sin’an who linked it up to the Commander
of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) who said, “Pay more attention to the
acceptance of your deeds than the deeds themselves. Abstinence in the
world is reducing aspirations. And gratitude for all blessings is
avoiding everything which God the Honorable the Exalted has forbidden.
Whoever strains his body has pleased his Lord, and whoever doesn’t
strain his body has disobeyed his Lord.”

NOTHING DESERVES TO BE RESTRAINED MORE THAN THE TONGUE
------------------------------------------------------

1-51 Hamzih ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Alavi - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Zyad ibn Marvan al-Qandi, on
the authority of Abi Vaki’a, on the authority of Abi Ishaq that
Al-Harith narrated that he had heard the Commander of the Faithful Imam
Ali (MGB) say, “Restrain your tongue more than anything else.”

WHOEVER RAISES HIS ASPIRATIONS DOES WRONG
-----------------------------------------

1-52 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Al-Abbas ibn Ma’ruf, on the authority of Abi Himmam Isma’il
ibn Himam, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sa’id ibn Qazvan, on the
authority of Al-Sakoony, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father, on the authority of his
forefathers that Ali (MGB) said, “Whoever raises his aspirations shall
do wrong.”

GOOD DEEDS ARE RECORDED FOR A MUSLIM AS LONG AS HE REMAINS QUIET
----------------------------------------------------------------

1-53 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Musa ibn Umar, on the
authority of Ali ibn al-Hussein ibn Ribat, on the authority of some of
his men

#### بن علي عن عبد الله قال: حدثني الحسين بن يزيد النوفلي ، عن إسماعيل بن أبي زياد، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال: ألا إن شرار أمتي الذين يكرمون مخافة شرهم ألا ومن أكرمه الناس اتقاء شره فليس مني. {.t0}

##### خصلة هى الزهد في الدنيا وخصلة هى شكر كل نعمة

#### 1-50 حدثنا الحسين بن أحمد بن إدريس رضي الله عنه، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن بعض النوفليين، ومحمد بن سنان رفعه إلى أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام قال: كونوا على قبول العمل أشد عناية منكم على العمل. الزهد في الدنيا قصر الامل. وشكر كل نعمة الورع عما حرم الله عز وجل. من أسخط بدنه أرضى ربه، ومن لم يسخط بدنه عصى ربه.

##### ما شيء أحق بطول السجن من اللسان

#### 1-51 حدثنا حمزة بن محمد بن أحمد العلوي رضي الله عنه قال: أخبرني علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن زياد بن مروان القندي، عن أبي وكيع، عن أبي إسحاق، عن الحارث قال: سمعت أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام يقول: ما من شيء أحق بطول السجن من اللسان.

##### من أطال أمله ساء عمله

#### 1-52 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن العباس بن معروف، عن أبي همام إسماعيل بن همام عن محمد بن سعيد بن غزوان، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: من: أطال أمله ساء عمله.

##### لا يزال الرجل المسلم يكتب محسنا مادام ساكتا

#### 1-53 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن موسى بن عمر، عن علي بن الحسين بن رباط، عن بعض رجاله، عن أبي عبد

that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Good deeds are recorded for a
Muslim man as long as he remains quiet. However, once he starts to talk,
good or bad deeds**[[49]](footnotes_1.htm#b0049)** are recorded for
him.”

A CHARACTERISTIC HAVING WHICH WILL RESULT IN GOD SAVING YOU FROM THE FEAR OF THE HEREAFTER
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-54 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Hamzih ibn
Ya’la who linked it up through documents to God’s Prophet (MGB) who
said, “Whoever is the enemy of his own self rather than the people will
be saved by God from the fear of the Resurrection Day.”

THE MOST INTELLIGENT CHARACTERISTIC
-----------------------------------

1-55 Suleiman ibn Ahmad ibn Ayoob al-Lakhmy narrated that Abdul Vah’hab
ibn Kharajih quoted on the authority of Abu Kurayb, on the authority of
Ali ibn Hafs al-Abasi, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn al-Hussein
al-Alavi, on the authority of his father Al-Hussein ibn Zayd, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his
father Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn
al-Hussein as-Sajjad (MGB), on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn
Ali**[[50]](footnotes_1.htm#b0050)** , on the authority of Ali ibn Abi
Talib (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The most intelligent
characteristic after having faith in God the Honorable the Exalted is
expressing love for the people.”

THE MOST PIOUS, THE BEST WORSHIPPING, THE MOST ASCETIC AND THE MOST HARD-WORKING PEOPLE
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-56 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of Al-Abbas ibn Ma’ruf, on the
authority of Abi Shoayb who linked it up to Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
who said, “The most pious person is one who stops when in doubt. The
best worshipping person is one who performs the obligatory deeds. The
most ascetic person is one who abandons the forbidden, and the most
hard-working person is one who abandons sinning.”

BECOMING SORRY IS THE SAME AS REPENTING
---------------------------------------

1-57 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Ibn Abi Umayr, on the
authority of Ali al-Jahzamy that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said,
“Becoming sorry is the same as repenting.”

#### الله عليه السلام قال: لا يزال العبد المؤمن يكتب محسنا مادام ساكتا، فإذا تكلم كتب محسنا أو مسيئا. {.t0}

##### خصلة من فعلها آمنه الله عز وجل من فزع يوم القيامة

#### 1-54 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن حمزة بن يعلى يرفعه بإسناده قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: من مقت نفسه دون مقت الناس آمنه الله من فزع يوم القيامة.

##### رأس العقل خصلة

#### 1-55 أخبرنا سليمان بن أحمد بن أيوب اللخمي قال: حدثنا عبدالوهاب بن خراجة، قال: حدثنا أبوكريب قال: حدثنا علي بن حفص العبسي قال: حدثنا الحسن بن الحسين العلوي، عن أبيه الحسين بن زيد، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه محمد بن علي، عن علي بن الحسين، عن الحسين بن علي، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: رأس العقل بعد الايمان بالله عز وجل التحبب إلى الناس.

##### أورع الناس، وأعبد الناس، وازهد الناس، وأشد الناس اجتهادا

#### 1-56 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه، عن عمه محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن العباس بن معروف، عن أبي شعيب يرفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: أورع الناس من وقف عند الشبهة، أعبد الناس من أقام الفرائض، أزهد الناس من ترك الحرام، أشد الناس اجتهادا من ترك الذنوب.

##### كفى بالندم توبة

#### 1-57 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن علي الجهضمي، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: كفى بالندم توبة.

WHOEVER EARNS MORE THAN HIS MEALS FOM THIS WORLD
------------------------------------------------

1-58 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of Ali ibn al-Hussein ibn Ribat who linked it up to a man who
complained to the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) about his
needs. The Commander of the Faithful (MGB) said, “Know that you are only
a treasurer for other people for what you earn from this world that is
more than your meals.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT DESERVES TO BE WILLED
-------------------------------------------

1-59 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn al-Hussein al-Sa’ed Abady
quoted on the authority of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the
authority of Isma’il ibn Mihran, on the authority of Durost ibn Abi
Mansoor, on the authority of Isa ibn Bashir, on the authority of Abi
Hamzih al-Sumaly that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “When the time of
death of the Blessed Ali ibn al-Hussein (MGB) arrived, he hugged me
tightly and said, ‘O my son! I advise you to do what my father advised
me to do at the time of his death, and reminded me what his father had
advised him to do at the time of his death. O my son! I advise you not
to oppress anyone who has no helper but God.’”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT CAUSES ONE TO BE THROWN OUT AND A CHARACTERISTIC THAT CAUSES ONE TO BE JOINED
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-60 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Abu Sa’id al-Adamy, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn
al-Hussein al-Lu’lu’ee, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an that
Hazifat ibn Mansoor said that he had heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
say, “A group of people from the Quraysh tribe reduced their (level of)
treatment of the people with moderation, and were thrown out of the
Quraysh tribe.**[[51]](footnotes_1.htm#b0051)** And by God, whatever
there is in their records is suffering. Another group of people from the
Quraysh tribe treated the people with moderation and joined the lofty
household (of the Prophet).” Then he added, “Whoever withdraws his hand
from the people has withdrawn just one hand, but many hands will be
withdrawn from him.”

LOFTY CHARACTERISTICS AND BAD CHARACTERISTICS FOR THE PEOPLE OF THE WORLD
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-61 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hijal,
on the authority of Ala’, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim who
said

##### من أصاب من الدنيا فوق قوته

#### 1-58 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن ابن محبوب، عن علي بن الحسين بن رباط، رفعه قال: شكى رجل إلى أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام الحاجة فقال له: اعلم أن كل شيء تصيبه من الدنيا فوق قوتك فإنما أنت فيه خازن لغيرك.

##### الوصية بخصلة

#### 1-59 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني علي بن الحسين السعد آبادي، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن إسماعيل بن مهران، عن درست بن أبي منصور عن عيسى بن بشير، عن أبي حمزة الثمالي، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: لما حضرت علي بن الحسين عليهما السلام الوفاة ضمني إلى صدره ثم قال: يا بني اوصيك بما أوصاني به أبي عليه السلام حين حضرته الوفاة وبما ذكر أن أباه أوصاه به يا بني إياك وظلم من لا يجد عليك ناصرا إلا الله.

##### خصلة نافية وخصلة مثبتة

#### 1-60 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار قال: حدثني أبوسعيد الادمي قال: حدثنا الحسن بن الحسين الؤلؤي، عن محمد بن سنان، عن حذيفة بن منصور قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: إن قوما من قريش قلت مدارأتهم للناس فنفوا من قريش وأيم الله ما كان بأحسابهم بأس. وإن قوما من غيرهم حسنت مدرأتهم فالحقوا بالبيت الرفيع. قال: ثم قال: من كف يده عن الناس فإنما يكف عنهم يدا واحدة ويكفون عنه أيادي كثيرة.

##### خصلة ثقلت على أهل الدنيا وخصلة خفت عليهم

#### 1-61 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن الحجال، عن علاء، عن محمد بن مسلم قال: سمعت أبــا جعفر عليه

that he had heard Aba Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) say, “Good deeds are as
lofty for the people of the world as they are on their balance of deeds
on the Resurrection Day. And bad deeds are as bad for the people of the
world as they are on their balance of deeds on the Resurrection Day.”

THERE IS NO HONOR EXCEPT THROUGH ONE CHARACTERISTIC. THERE IS NO NOBILITY EXCEPT THROUGH ANOTHER CHARACTERISTIC
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-62 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry, on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of Malik ibn Atiye, on the authority of Abi Hamzih al-Sumaly
that Ali ibn al-Hussein as-Sajjad (MGB) said, “There is no honor for the
Quraysh tribe or any other Arabs except by means of humbleness, and
there is no nobility except by means of piety. A deed is not a deed
unless there is an intention behind it. There is no worshipping except
by means of understanding. Beware that the most despised person by God
the Honorable the Exalted is the one who considers himself to be the
follower of a leader but doesn’t act according to the deeds of his
leader.”

1-63 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God have Mercy
upon him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Hammad ibn Uthman that Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Collyrium helps hair to grow, dry tears,
sweeten the saliva, and improve sight.”

WHEN GOD LOVES A SERVANT HE WILL MAKE HIM SUFFER FROM A GREAT CALAMITY
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1-64 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Sahl ibn Zyad al-Adamy, on the authority of Al-Hassan
ibn al-Hussein al-Lu’lu’ee, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on
the authority of Zayd Abi Usamah ash-Shaham, on the authority of Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There is a great
reward for a great calamity. If he is pleased with the calamity, then
God the Honorable the Exalted will be pleased with him. However, if he
is displeased with the calamity, then God will be displeased with him.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT LEADS TO HEMORRHOIDS
------------------------------------------

1-65 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on the authority of Abu Sa’id
al-Adamy, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn al-Hussein al-Lu’lu’ee, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Sa’id ibn Qazvan, on the authority

#### السلام يقول: إن الخير ثقل على أهل الدنيا على قدر ثقله في موازينهم يوم القيامة وإن الشر خف على أهل الدنيا على قدر خفته في موازينهم يوم القيامة. {.t0}

##### لا حسب الا بخصلة، ولا كرم الا بخصلة، ولا عمل الا بخصلة، ولا عبادة الا بخصلة

#### 1-62 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن مالك بن عطية، عن أبي حمزة الثمالي، عن علي بن الحسين عليهما السلام قال: لا حسب لقرشي ولا لعربي إلا بتواضع، ولا كرم إلا بتقوى، ولا عمل إلا بنية، ألا وإن أبغض الناس إلى الله عز وجل من يقدي بسنة إمام ولا يقتدي بأعماله.

##### خصلة تنفع في أربعة أشياء

#### 1-63 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد - رحمه الله - قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن محمد بن سنان، عن حماد ابن عثمان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: الكحل ينبت الشعر، ويجفف الدمعة، ويعذب الريق، ويجلو البصر.

##### اذا أحب الله عز وجل عبدا ابتلاه بعظيم البلاء

#### 1-64 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار قال: حدثني سهل بن زياد الآدمي قال: حدثنا الحسن بن الحسين اللؤلؤي، عن محمد بن سنان، عن زيد أبي اسامة الشحام، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إن عظيم البلاء يكافى به عظيم الجزاء، وإذا أحب الله عبدا ابتلاه بعظيم البلاء فمن رضي فله الرضا عند الله عز وجل، ومن سخط البلاء فله السخط.

##### خصلة تورث الباسور

#### 1-65 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار قال: حدثني أبوسعيد الآدمي قال: حدثني الحســن بن الحسين اللؤلؤي، عن

of Isma’il ibn Abi Zyad**[[52]](footnotes_1.htm#b0052)** , on the
authority of Aba Abdullah - Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the
authority of his father**[[53]](footnotes_1.htm#b0053)** , on the
authority of his grandfather**[[54]](footnotes_1.htm#b0054)** , on the
authority of his father (MGB) that the Commander of the Faithful Imam
Ali (MGB) said, “Sitting on the toilet for too long will lead to
hemorrhoids.”

A HAND ON WHICH THERE IS AN IRON RING IS NOT CLEAN
--------------------------------------------------

1-66 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority
of Safvan ibn Yahya, on the authority of Al-Sari ibn Khalid, on the
authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“A hand on which there is an iron ring is not clean.”
**[[55]](footnotes_1.htm#b0055)**

DO NOT RESPOND TO WHOEVER TALKS BEFORE HE GREETS YOU
----------------------------------------------------

1-67 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Al-Hussein
ibn Yazid al-Nawfaly, on the authority of Isma’il ibn Abi
Zyad**[[56]](footnotes_1.htm#b0056)** , on the authority of Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his forefathers (MGB) that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “Do not respond to whoever talks before he greets
you.” He also said, “Do not invite anyone to dine with you unless he
greets you.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT IF PRACTICED IMPLIES DESPISE FOR MUHAMMAD’S RELIGION
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-68 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi
Umayr, on the authority of Ali ibn Abi Hamzih, on the authority of Abi
Basir that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “Whoever practices
fortune-telling or goes to see a fortune-teller indeed despises
Muhammad’s religion.” Then he was asked, “What about
physiognomy**[[57]](footnotes_1.htm#b0057)** ?” He replied, “I do not
like you to go to see them, even though what they say may be close to
reality. Physiognomy is a remnant of Prophethood leftover for the
people.”

ONLY ONE OF THE PROVERBS OF THE PROPHETS HAS REMAINED
-----------------------------------------------------

1-69 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority
of Ali ibn Asbat, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn al-Jahm that Abil
Hassan - the first**[[58]](footnotes_1.htm#b0058)** (MGB) said, “Only
one of the proverbs from the Prophets has remained that is, ‘When you
have no shame, you will do whatever you wish.’” He also said, “This
applies to the Umayyad clan.”

#### محمد بن سعيد بن غزوان، عن إسماعيل بن أبي زياد، عن أبي عبد الله جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن أبيه عليهم السلام قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: طول الجلوس على الخلاء يورث الباسور. {.t0}

##### ما طهرت كف فيها خاتم من حديد

#### 1-66 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن صفوان بن يحيى، عن السري بن خالد، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ما طهرت كف فيها خاتم من حديد.

##### من بدأ بالكلام قبل السلام فلا تجيبوه

#### 1-67 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن الحسين بن يزيد النوفلي، عن إسماعيل بن أبي زياد، عن أبي عبد الله، عن آبائه عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: من بدأ بالكلام قبل السلام فلا تجيبوه، وقال عليه السلام: لا تدع إلى طعامك أحدا حتى يسلم.

##### خصلة من فعلها أو فعلت له برئ من دين محمد صلى الله عليه وآله

#### 1- 68 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن علي بن أبي حمزة، عن أبي بصير، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من تكهن أو تكهن له فقد برئ من دين محمد صلى الله عليه وآله. قلت: فالقافة قال: ما احب أن تأتيهم، وقل ما يقولون شيئا إلا كان قريبا مما يقولون، وقال: القيافة فضلة من النبوة ذهبت في الناس.

##### ما بقى من أمثال الانبياء الا كلمة

#### 1-69 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن علي بن أسباط، عن الحسن بن الجهم، عن أبي الحسن الاول عليه السلام قال: ما بقي من أمثال الانبياء إلا كلمة: إذا لم تستحي فاعمل ما شئت. وقال: أما انها في بني امية.

WHEN GOD WISHES A SERVANT WELL, HE WILL EXPEDITE HIS PUNISHMENT IN THIS WORLD, AND WHEN HE WISHES SOMEONE BAD, HE WILL PROCRASTINATE HIS PUNISHMENT
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-70 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted on
the authority of his father, on the authority of Ibn Abi Umayr, on the
authority of Al-Sari ibn Khalid that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said,
“When God wishes a servant well, He will expedite his punishment in this
world. However, when God wishes someone bad, He will procrastinate
punishing him for the sins he commits until the Resurrection Day.”

BE PATIENT WITH THE ENEMIES OF THE BLESSINGS
--------------------------------------------

1-71 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi
Umayr, on the authority of Muawiyah ibn Wahab, on the authority of Mu’az
ibn Muslim that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Be patient with the
enemies of the blessings**[[59]](footnotes_1.htm#b0059)** . You cannot
treat those who disobey God regarding yourself any better than by
obeying God regarding them.”

THE PROPHET (MGB) AND ALI IBN ABI TALIB WERE CREATED FROM THE SAME ROOT
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

1-72 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on the
authority of Abu Sa’id Sahl ibn Zyad al-Adamy, on the authority of
Al-Hassan ibn al-Hussein al-Lu’lu’ee, on the authority of Ali ibn Hafs
al-Abasi, on the authority of Al-Salt ibn al-Ala’, on the authority of
Abil-Hozoor, on the authority of Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “The people were created from several roots. Ibn Abi
Talib and I were created from the same root. Ali is my trunk, and
Ja’far**[[60]](footnotes_1.htm#b0060)** is my branch.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT IS GRATITUDE FOR ALL BLESSINGS
----------------------------------------------------

1-73 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi
Umayr, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn
Atiye**[[61]](footnotes_1.htm#b0061)** , on the authority of Umar ibn
Yazid that he had heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, “The gratitude
for any blessing - no matter how great it may be - is to praise God the
Honorable the Exalted.”

RELIGION IS THE SAME AS LOVE
----------------------------

1-74 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted on
the

##### اذا أراد الله تبارك وتعالى بعبد خيرا عجل عقوبه في الدنيا واذا أراد به سوء‌ا أخر عقوبته

#### 1-70 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن السري بن خالد، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إذا أراد الله بعبد خيرا عجل عقوبته في الدنيا، وإذا أراد الله بعبد سوء‌ا أمسك عليه ذنوبه حتى يوافي بها يوم القيامة.

##### الصبر على أعداء النعم

#### 1-71 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني يعقوب ابن يزيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن معاوية بن وهب، عن معاذ بن مسلم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: اصبر على أعداء النعم، فإنك لن تكافي من عصى الله فيك بأفضل من أن تطيع الله فيه.

##### خلق النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وعلى بن أبى طالب عليه السلام من شجرة واحدة

#### 1-72 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن يحيى العطار، قال: حدثني أبوسعيد سهل بن زياد الآدمي، قال: حدثنا الحسن بن الحسين اللؤلؤي، عن علي بن حفص العبسي، عن الصلت بن العلاء، عن أبي الحزور، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: خلق الناس من شجر شتى، وخلقت أنا وابن أبي طالب من شجرة واحدة، أصلي علي وفرعي جعفر.

##### شكر كل نعمة خصلة

#### 1-73 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن الحسن بن عطية، عن عمر بن يزيد، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: سمعته يقول: شكر كل نعمة وإن عظمت أن تحمد الله عز وجل.

##### الدين هو الحب

#### 1-74 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هـاشم، عن أبيـه،

authority of his father, on the authority of Ibn Abi Umayr, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Himran, on the authority of Sa’id ibn Yasar
that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) told him, “Is religion anything but
love? God the Honorable the Exalted said, ‘Say, ‘If ye do love God,
Follow me: God will love you …’’” **[[62]](footnotes_1.htm#b0062)**

WHEN TWO BELIEVERS SHAKE HANDS THEY SHALL DEPART FROM EACH OTHER VOID OF ANY SINS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-75 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim quoted on the authority
of his father, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn al-Mukhtar,
on the authority of Abi Ubaydat al-Ha’za that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB)
said, “Whenever two believers shake hands, they shall depart from each
other void of any sins.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT REVIVES THE HEARTS
----------------------------------------

1-76 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi
Umayr, on the authority of Khat’tab ibn Muslimat, on the authority of
Al-Fuzayl ibn Yasar that Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) told him, “O Fuzayl!
Verily our traditions revive the hearts.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT REVIVES THE AFFAIRS OF THE ALMIGHTY GOD’S PROOFS
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1-77 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim quoted on the authority
of his father, on the authority of Ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Hamran, on the authority of Khaysamat that Abu Ja’far
al-Baqir (MGB) told him, “Visit each other in your homes since this will
revive our affairs - may God forgive anyone who revives our affairs.”

GOD THE ALMIGHTY HAS NOT CREATED ANYTHING MORE DELIGHTFUL THAN THIS CHARACTERISTIC
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-78 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Abil Sahban, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr,
on the authority of Jamil ibn Salih, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Marvan who narrated that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) told him, “O
Muhammad! My father said, ‘O my son! God has not created anything more
delightful than concealing of faith**[[63]](footnotes_1.htm#b0063)** for
your father.’”

#### عن ابن أبي عمير، عن محمد بن حمران، عن سعيد بن يسار قال: قال لي أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: هل الدين إلا الحب؟ إن الله عز وجل يقول: قُلْ إِن كُنتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي يُحْبِبْكُمُ اللّهُ وَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ وَاللّهُ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ {.t0}

##### المؤمن اذا صافح المؤمن تفرقا عن غير ذنب

#### 1-75 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن حماد بن عيسى، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن الحسين بن المختار، عن أبي عبيدة الحذاء قال: قال أبوجعفر عليه السلام: إن المؤمن إذا صافح المؤمن تفرقا عن غير ذنب.

##### خصلة تحيي القلوب

#### 1-76 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن خطاب بن مسلمة، عن الفضيل بن يسار قال: قال لي أبوجعفر عليه السلام: يا فضل إن حديثنا يحيي القلوب.

##### خصلة فيها حياة لامر حجج الله عز وجل

#### 1-77 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن محمد بن حمران، عن خيثمة قال: قال لي أبوجعفر عليه السلام: تزاوروا في بيوتكم فإن ذلك حياة لامرنا، رحم الله عبدا أحيا أمرنا.

##### ما خلق الله عز وجل شيئا أقر للعين من خصلة

#### 1-78 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أبي الصهبان عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن جميل بن صالح، عن محمد بن مروان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال لي: يا محمد كان أبي عليه السلام يقول: يا بني ما خلق الله شيئا أقر لعين أبيك من التقية.

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT CONSTITUTES NINE-TENTHS OF RELIGION
---------------------------------------------------------

1-79 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted on the authority
of Abu Sa’id al-Adamy, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn al-Hassan
al-Lu’lu’ee, on the authority of Ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of
Abdullah ibn Jundab, on the authority of Abi Umar al-Ajami that Abu
Abdullah told him, “O Abu Umar! Indeed nine-tenths of religion is in the
concealing of faith. Whoever doesn’t practice the concealing of faith
has no religion. There is concealing of faith in everything except in
drinking wine and wiping the feet from over
foot-wear**[[64]](footnotes_1.htm#b0064)** .”

WHOEVER IS PLEASED WITH HIS DESTINY OR IS DISPLEASED WITH IT
------------------------------------------------------------

1-80 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ayoob ibn Nooh, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr,
on the authority of Al-Fura that Aba Abdullah Ja’far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “What is destined will happen to whoever is pleased
with his destiny, and he will be rewarded. However, what is destined
will happen to whoever is displeased with his destiny but God will
cancel his reward.”

A CHARACTERISTIC FOR WHICH EVEN RED-HAIRED CAMELS ARE NOT LOVED
---------------------------------------------------------------

1-81 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi
Umayr, on the authority of Khalid, on the authority of Abi Hamzih
al-Sumaly that Ali ibn al-Hussein as-Sajjad (MGB) said, “I do not like
to possess red-haired camels**[[65]](footnotes_1.htm#b0065)** instead of
my being oppressed; and I have never quenched my thirst any better than
quenching my wrath over the one I got angry with.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT INCREASES THE DAILY BREAD
-----------------------------------------------

1-82 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God forgive
him - narrated that Al-Hassan ibn Matil al-Daq’qaq quoted on the
authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority
of Ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Abi Oaf al-Ajali that he had heard
Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, “Washing hands before and after every
meal will increase your share of daily bread.”

1-83 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi
Umayr,

##### تسعة أعشار الدين في خصلة

#### 1-79 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس قال: حدثني أبوسعيد الآدمي قال: حدثنا الحسن بن الحسين اللؤلؤي، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن عبد الله بن جندب، عن أبي عمر العجمي قال: قال لي أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: يا أبا عمر إن تسعة أعشار الدين في التقية، ولا دين لمن لا تقية له، والتقية في كل شيء إلا في شرب النبيذ والمسح على الخفين.

##### من رضي القضاء ومن سخطه

#### 1-80 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا أيوب بن نوح، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن الفراء، عن أبي عبد الله جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام قال: من رضي القضاء أتى عليه القضاء وهو مأجور، ومن سخط القضاء أتى عليه القضاء وأحبط الله أجره.

##### خصلة لا يتحبب بها حمر النعم

#### 1-81 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن خلاد، عن أبي حمزة الثمالي، عن علي بن الحسين عليهما السلام قال: ما أحب أن لي بذل نفسي حمر النعموما تجرعت جرعة أحب إلي من جرعة غيظ لا اكافي بها صاحبها.

##### خصلة تزيد في الرزق

#### 1-82 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد - رحمه الله - قال: حدثني الحسن بن متيل الدقاق، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن أبي عوف العجلي قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: الوضوء قبل الطعام وبعده يزيد في الرزق.

##### خصلة من الذنوب التي لا تغفر

#### 1-83 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قــال: حدثنــا سـعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن

on the authority of Al-Fuzayl’s brother, on the authority of Al-Fuzayl
that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “A sin that will not be forgiven is
one that a person commits and says, ‘I wish I was not questioned about
any deeds other than this one.’” **[[66]](footnotes_1.htm#b0066)**

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT LEADS TO HYPOCRISY AND POVERTY
----------------------------------------------------

1-84 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi
Umayr, on the authority of Mihran ibn Muhammad, on the authority of
Al-Hassan ibn Pleased with who narrated that he had heard Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) say, “Singing will lead to hypocrisy and result in
poverty.”

THE FIRST GIFT GIVEN TO A BELIEVER DUE TO A CHARACTERISTIC
----------------------------------------------------------

1-85 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn al-Hussein al-Sa’ed Abady quoted on the authority
of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his father, on
the authority of Ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Uthman
and ibn Abi Hamzih, on the authority of Ishaq ibn Am’mar that he asked
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “What is the first gift that is given to a
believer?” The Imam (MGB) replied, “The forgiveness of those who follow
his corpse in his funeral procession.”

A CHARACTERISTIC FOR WHICH ONE WHO HAS NO GOOD DEEDS IS FORGIVEN ON THE RESURRECTION DAY
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-86 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Imran that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “On the Resurrection Day a
servant will be brought forward who has no good deeds. He is told to try
to remember if he has done any good deeds. He thinks and says, “O my
Lord! I have no good deeds, but once when so and so who is one of your
believing servants passed by me, I asked him for some water. He gave me
water and I made ablutions with it. Then I prayed for Your sake.” Then
God the Blessed the Sublime will say, “Indeed I forgave you for My sake.
Take My servant to Heaven. ” **[[67]](footnotes_1.htm#b0067)**

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT IS THE ROOT OF ALL SINS
---------------------------------------------

1-87 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi
Umayr, on the authority of Durost ibn Abi Mansoor, on the authority of
someone that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “The love for the world
is the root of all sins.”

#### يزيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن أخي الفضيل، عن الفضيل، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: من الذنب التي لا تغفر قول الرجل: يا ليتني لا اؤاخذ إلا بهذا. {.t0}

##### خصلة تورث النفاق وتعقب الفقر

#### 1-84 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن مهران بن محمد، عن الحسن بن هارون قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: الغناء يورث النفاق ويعقب الفقر.

##### أول ما يتحف به المؤمن خصلة

#### 1-85 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين السعد ابادي، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن الحسن بن عثمان، وابن أبي حمزة: عن إسحاق بن عمار، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قلت له: ما أول ما يتحف به المؤمن؟ قال: يغفر لمن تبع جنازته.

##### يغفر لعبد يوم القيامة ليست له حسنة بخصلة

#### 1-86 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني عمي محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن محمد بن عمران، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: يؤتى بعبد يوم القيامة ليست له حسنة، فيقال له: اذكر أو تذكر هل لك من حسنة، قال: فيتذكر فيقول: يا رب مالي من حسنة إلا أن فلانا عبدك المؤمن مر بي فطلبت منه ماء فأعطاني ماء فتوضأت به وصليت لك، قال: فيقول الرب تبارك وتعالى: قد غفرت لك أدخلوا عبدي الجنة.

##### رأس كل خطيئة خصلة

#### 1-87 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن درست بن أبي منصور، عن رجل، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: حب الدنيا رأس كل خطيئة.

HOW AWKWARD IT IS IF A MAN ENTERS HEAVEN HAVING LOST HIS HONOR
--------------------------------------------------------------

1-88 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ayoob ibn Nooh, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr,
on the authority of Sa’ed ibn Abi Khalaf, on the authority of
Najm**[[68]](footnotes_1.htm#b0068)** that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB)
told him, “O Najm! All of you are with us in Heaven. How awkward will it
be if a man from among you enters Heaven having lost his honor!” Najm
asked, “May I be your ransom! Is this possible?” The Imam (MGB) replied,
“Yes. This will be the case if he has not guarded his private parts and
his stomach.” **[[69]](footnotes_1.htm#b0069)**

A CHARACTERISTIC DOING WHICH WILL CAUSE THE ALMIGHTY GOD TO HAVE MERCY UPON YOU
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-89 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ayoob ibn Nooh, on the authority of Ibn Abi Umayr, on the
authority of Sayf ibn Umayrih, on the authority of Mudrik ibn al-Hazhaz
that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “O Mudrik! May God have mercy
upon whoever attracts the love of the people to himself, narrates for
them what they would understand, and omits what they do not comprehend.”

A CHARACTERISTIC DOING WHICH WILL CAUSE INCREASED GOOD FOR ONE’S HOUSE
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1-90 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his father quoted on the authority of Abi Sa’id
al-Adamy, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn al-Hussein al-Lu’lu’ee, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Sa’id ibn Qazvan, on the authority of
Isma’il ibn Abi Zyad, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB),
on the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his
grandfather (MGB) that the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB)
said, “Whoever wants to increase the good in his house should wash his
hands before he eats.”

ON HIM WHOSE HEALTH HAS OVERCOME HIS ILLNESS BUT HE TREATS HIMSELF AND DIES
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-91 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted on the authority
of Sahl ibn Zyad, on the authority of Al-Nawfaly, on the authority of
Isma’il ibn Abi Zyad**[[70]](footnotes_1.htm#b0070)** that Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “I despise whoever whose health overcomes his
illness, but he treats himself with something and dies.”

A CHARACTERISTIC WHICH A BELIEVER AVOIDS
----------------------------------------

1-92 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with him

##### ما أقبح بالرجل أن يدخل الجنة وهو مهتوك الستر

#### 1-88 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أيوب بن نوح، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن سعد بن أبي خلف، عن نجم، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قال لي: يا نجم كلكم في الجنة معنا إلا أنه ما أقبح بالرجل منكم أن يدخل الجنة قد هتك ستره وبدت عورته، قال: قلت له: جعلت فداك وإن ذلك لكائن؟ قال: نعم إن لم يحفظ فرجه وبطنه.

##### خصلة من فعلها استوجب رحمة الله عز وجل

#### 1-89 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أيوب بن نوح، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن سيف بن عميرة، عن مدرك بن الهزهاز قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: يا مدرك رحم الله عبدا اجتر مودة الناس إلى نفسه، فحدثهم بما يعرفون، وترك ما ينكرون.

##### خصلة من فعلها كثر خير بيته

#### 1-90 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه، عن أبيه، عن أبي سعيد الآدمي، عن الحسن بن الحسين اللؤلؤي، عن محمد بن سعيد بن غزوان، عن إسماعيل ابن أبي زياد، عن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن جده عليهم السلام قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: من أراد أن يكثر خير بيته فليغسل يده قبل الاكل.

##### في من ظهرت صحته على سقمه فيعالج بشيء فمات

#### 1-91 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن سهل بن زياد، عن النوفلي، عن إسماعيل بن أبي زياد، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من ظهرت صحته على سقمه فيعالج بشيء فمات فأنا إلى الله منه برئ.

##### المؤمن مشغول عن خصلة

#### 1-92 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه، عن أبيـه، عن سـهل

- narrated that his father quoted on the authority of Sahl ibn Zyad, on
the authority of Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn Ja’far ibn Aqabah, on the
authority of Al-Hassan ibn Muhammad ibn Ukht Abi Malik, on the authority
of Abdullah ibn Sin’an that Abolvahid ibn al-Mukhtar said, “I asked Aba
Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) about playing chess. He (MGB) replied, ‘A believer
avoids playing it.’”

NOTHING RUINS FAITH AS MUCH AS ONE CHARACTERISTIC DOES
------------------------------------------------------

1-93 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted on the authority of Harun ibn
Muslim, on the authority of Mus’adat ibn Sadaqah, on the authority of
Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB)
that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Nothing ruins faith as much as
greed**[[71]](footnotes_1.htm#b0071)** does. Greed has a crawling
similar to the crawling of ants, and it has branches similar to the
branches of polytheism.”

ONE WHO LIVES TO SEE HIS SUCCESSOR IS PROSPEROUS
------------------------------------------------

1-94 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Ayoob ibn Nooh, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Sin’an, on the authority of Musa ibn Bakr al-Vaseti, “I asked Abil
Hassan Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB) if he (MGB) saw anything wrong if
someone says ‘may my father or mother be your ransom’ to his son or
daughter? The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘It is being ungrateful to his parents
if they are alive, but it is fine if they have passed away. My father
Ja’far (MGB) used to say that whoever lives to see his successor is
prosperous. In fact, I swear by God that He has shown me the successor
after me.’”

A BELIEVER’S HONOR IS MORE THAN THAT OF THE KA’BA
-------------------------------------------------

1-95 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on
the authority of Ibrahim ibn Umar that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said,
“A believer’s honor is more than that of the Ka’ba.”

IT SUFFICES FOR A BELIEVER TO SEE GOD’S AID IN THE FORM OF HIS ENEMIES ENGAGED IN THE ALMIGHTY GOD’S DISOBEDIENCE
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-96 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ayoob ibn Nooh, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr,
on the authority of Qutaybat al-A’eshi that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
said, “It suffices for a believer to see God’s aid in the form of his
enemies engaged in the Almighty God’s disobedience.”
**[[72]](footnotes_1.htm#b0072)**

#### بن زياد قال: حدثنا أبو نصر محمد بن جعفر بن عقبة، عن الحسن بن محمد ابن اخت أبي مالك، عن عبد الله بن سنان، عن عبدالواحد بن المختار قال: سألت أبا جعفر عليه السلام عن اللعب بالشطرنج فقال: إن المؤمن لمشغول عن اللعب. {.t0}

##### ما محق الايمان محق خصلة شيء

#### 1-93 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري قال: حدثني هارون بن مسلم، عن مسعدة بن صدقة، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ما محق الايمان محق الشح شيء، ثم قال: إن لهذا الشح دبيباً كدبيب النمل، وشعباً كشعب الشرك.

##### سعد امرؤ لم يمت حتى يرى خلفه من بعده

#### 1-94 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار قال: حدثني أيوب بن نوح، عن محمد بن سنان، عن موسى بن بكر الواسطي قال: قلت لابي الحسن موسى بن جعفر عليهما السلام: الرجل يقول لابنه أو لابنته بأبي أنت وامي أو بأبوي. أترى بذلك بأسا؟ فقال: إن كان أبواه حيين فأرى ذلك عقوقا، وإن كانا قد ماتا فلا بأس. قال: ثم قال: كان جعفر عليه السلام يقول: سعد امرء لم يمت حتى يرى خلفه من بعده وقد والله أراني الله خلفي من بعدي.

##### المؤمن أعظم حرمة من الكعبة

#### 1-95 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن حماد بن عيسى، عن إبراهيم بن عمر، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: المؤمن أعظم حرمة من الكعبة.

##### حسب المؤمن من الله نصرة أن يرى عدوه يعمل بمعاصى الله عز وجل

#### 1-96 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أيوب بن نوح، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن قتيبة الاعشى، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: حسب المؤمن من الله نصرة أن يرى عدوه يعمل بمعاصي الله.

A GIFT WILL ELIMINATE ANIMOSITIES
---------------------------------

1-97 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his father quoted on the authority of Sahl ibn Zyad,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sa’id, on the authority of Isma’il ibn
Abi Zyad al-Sakoony that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Giving a
gift before asking for something is good. Exchange gifts and be friends
since giving gifts will eliminate animosities.”

PROSPEROUS BE THE ONE WHO IS INDIFFERENT
----------------------------------------

1-98 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Safvan al-Jamal that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB) said, “Blessed be**[[73]](footnotes_1.htm#b0073)** one who looks
indifferent.**[[74]](footnotes_1.htm#b0074)** He seems to be with the
people, but he doesn’t really follow their deeds. The people know him on
the surface but they do not know what goes on within him.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT WILL MAKE ONE POOR IN THE HEREAFTER
---------------------------------------------------------

1-99 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abul-Hassan Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Asad
Al-Asady quoted on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Ayoob al-Nahravi,
on the authority of Ja’far ibn Sanid ibn Davood, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Yusuf ibn Muhammad ibn Munkadir, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Jabir ibn Abdullah that
God’s Prophet (MGB) said that the mother of Solomon the son of David,
told Solomon, “Beware that sleeping too much at night will make one poor
in the Hereafter.”

A GROUP OF PEOPLE WHO ARE THE MASTERS OF HEAVEN
-----------------------------------------------

1-100 Abul-Hassan Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ali Asad Al-Asady narrated that
his father, Ali ibn al-Abbas al-Bajaly and al-Hassan Ali ibn Nasr
al-Toosi quoted on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abdul Rahman ibn
Qazvan, on the authority of Abu Sin’an al-Abedi, on the authority of
Safvan ibn Saleem, on the authority of Ata ibn Yasar, on the authority
of Abi Sa’id al-Khidry that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Those who know
the Quran by heart**[[75]](footnotes_1.htm#b0075)** are the masters of
Heaven.”

GOD’S PROPHET MADE HIS ABLUTIONS ONE ORGAN AT A TIME
----------------------------------------------------

1-101 Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bandar al-Furqany in Furqan
narrated that Abul Abbas al-Himady quoted on the authority of Abu Muslim
al-Kajy, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Vah’hab, on the authority of
Abul Rahim ibn Zayd al-Ami, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Muawiyah ibn Qarah, on the authority of Ibn Umar that God’s
Prophet (MGB) used to make his ablutions one organ at a time.

##### الهدية تذهب بالضغائن

#### 1-97 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه، عن أبيه، عن سهل ابن زياد، قال: أخبرنا محمد بن سعيد، عن إسماعيل بن أبي زياد السكوني، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: نعم الشئ الهدية أمام الحاجة، وقال: تهادوا تحابوا فإن الهدية تذهب بالضغائن.

##### طوبى لعبد نومة

#### 1-98 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن صفوان الجمال، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: طوبى لعبد نومة، عرف الناس فصاحبهم ببدنه ولم يصاحبهم في أعمالهم بقلبه فعرفهم في الظاهر ولم يعرفوه في الباطن

##### خصلة تدع الرجل فقيرا يوم القيامة

#### 1-99 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن أحمد بن علي ابن أسد الاسدي قال: حدثني محمد بن أبي أيوب النهروي قال: حدثني جعفر بن سنيد بن داود قال: حدثني أبي قال: حدثنا يوسف بن محمد بن المنكدر، عن أبيه، عن جابر بن عبد الله قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: قالت ام سليمان بن داود لسليمان عليه السلام: إياك وكثرة النوم بالليل فإن كثرة النوم بالليل تدع الرجل فقيرا يوم القيامة.

##### عرفاء أهل الجنة صنف

#### 1-100 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن أحمد بن علي بن أسد الاسدي قال: حدثنا أبي، وعلي بن العباس البجلي، والحسن علي بن نصر الطوسي قالوا: حدثنا محمد بن عبدالرحمن بن غزوان قال: حدثنا أبوسنان العابدي قال: حدثنا صفوان بن سليم، عن عطاء بن يسار، عن أبي سعيد الخدري قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: حملة القرآن عرفاء أهل الجنة.

##### توضأ رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله مرة مرة

#### 1-101 حدثنا أبوأحمد محمد بن جعفر البندار الفرغاني بفرغانة قال: حدثنا أبوالعباس الحمادي قال: حدثنا أبومسلم الكجي قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن عبدالوهاب قال: حدثنا عبدالرحيم بن زيد العمي، عن أبيه، عن معاوية بن قرة، عن ابن عمر أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله توضأ مرة مرة.

THE CHARACTERISTIC THAT IS THE BEST GOODNESS
--------------------------------------------

1-102 Abul Hassan Ali ibn Abdullah ibn Ahmad al-Asvari narrated that Abu
Yusuf Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Qays
al-Sejezi**[[76]](footnotes_1.htm#b0076)** al-Mozakar quoted on the
authority of Abu Muhammad Abdul Aziz ibn Ali al-Sarakhsi in Marv al-Ruz,
on the authority of Abu Bakr Ahmad ibn Umran al-Baghdady, on the
authority of Abul Hassan (the first), on the authority of Abul Hassan
(the second), on the authority of Abul-Hassan (the third), on the
authority of Al-Hassan (the first), on the authority of Al-Hassan (the
second) that Al-Hassan (the third - MGB) said, “The best goodness is
being good-tempered.”

The first Abul-Hassan is Muhammad ibn Abdul Rahim al-Tastary. The second
Abul-Hassan is Ali ibn Ahmad al-Basry al-Temar. And the third
Abul-Hassan is Ali ibn Muhammad al-Vaqedy. The first Al-Hassan is
Al-Hassan ibn Urfatal Abdi. The second Al-Hassan is Al-Hassan ibn
Abil-Hassan al-Basry. And the third Al-Hassan is Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn
Abi Talib (MGB).

THE PROPHET PUT OFF HIS SPECIAL PRAYER FOR ONE CHARACTERISTIC
-------------------------------------------------------------

1-103 Abul Hassan Tahir ibn Muhammad ibn Yunus narrated that Muhammad
ibn Uthman al-Haravy quoted on the authority of Ahmad ibn Najda, on the
authority of Abu Bashar Khatn al-Muqar’ri, on the authority of Mu’amir
ibn Suleiman that he had heard Anas ibn
Malik**[[77]](footnotes_1.htm#b0077)** say that he had heard God’s
Prophet (MGB) say, “Each Prophet has a special supplication which he has
said to God and in which he has asked God for something. However, I put
off my special supplication to intercede on behalf of my nation on the
Resurrection Day.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT IS THE BEST FORM OF WORSHIPPING AND A CHARACTERISTIC THAT IS THE NOBLEST FORM OF BEING RELIGIOUS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-104 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Ibn
Muni’a**[[78]](footnotes_1.htm#b0078)** quoted on the authority of Harun
ibn Abdullah, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Abdul Rahman al-Dameshqi,
on the authority of Khalid ibn Abi Khalid al-Azraq, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abdul Rahman - whom I suspect to be ibn Abi Layli, on the
authority of Nafe’ah, on the authority of Ibn Umar that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “The best form of worshipping is to apply yourself to the
acquisition of knowledge, and the noblest form of being religious is
piety.”

WHAT IS A LOT BUT ITS DOERS ARE A FEW
-------------------------------------

1-105 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Ibn
Muni’a**[[79]](footnotes_1.htm#b0079)** quoted on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Imran al-Akhnesi in the year 28 A.H. (649 A.D.) in which he died,
that he heard Abu Khalid al-Ahmari quote on the authority of Isma’il ibn
Abi Khalid, on the authority of Ata ibn al-Sa’eb, on the authority

##### احسن الحسن خصلة

#### 1-102 حدثنا أبوالحسن علي بن عبد الله بن أحمد الاسواري قال: حدثنا أبويوسف أحمد بن محمد بن قيس السجزي المذكر قال: حدثني أبومحمد عبدالعزيز ابن علي السرخسي بمرو الروذ قال: حدثني أبوبكر أحمد بن عمران البغدادي قال: حدثنا أبوالحسن قال: حدثنا أبوالحسن، قال: حدثنا أبوالحسن، قال: حدثنا الحسن، عن الحسن، عن الحسن: إن أحسن الحسن الخلق الحسن. فأما أبوالحسن الاول فمحمد بن عبدالرحيم التستري، وأما أبوالحسن الثاني فعلى بن أحمد البصري التمار، وأما أبوالحسن الثالث فعلي بن محمد الواقدي وأما الحسن الاول فالحسن بن عرفة العبدي،و أما الحسن الثاني فالحسن بن أبي الحسن البصري وأما الحسن الثالث فالحسن بن علي بن أبي طالب عليهما السلام.

##### ترك النبي صلى الله عليه وآله دعوته لخصلة

#### 1-103 أخبرني أبوالحسن طاهر بن محمد بن يونس قال: حدثنا محمد بن عثمان الهروي قال: حدثنا أحمد بن نجدة قال: حدثنا أبوبشر ختن المقرئ قال: حدثنا معمر بن سليمان قال: إني سمعت أنس بن مالك يقول: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: لكل نبي دعوة قد دعا بها وقد سأل سؤلا، وقد خبأت دعوتي لشفاعتي لامتي يوم القيامة.

##### أفضل العبادة خصلة وأفضل الدين خصلة

#### 1-104 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا ابن منيع قال: حدثنا هارون ابن عبد الله قال: حدثنا سليمان بن عبدالرحمن الدمشقي قال: حدثنا خالد بن أبي خالد الازرق، عن محمد بن عبدالرحمن وأظنه ابن أبي ليلى عن نافع، عن ابن عمر، عن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال: أفضل العبادة الفقه، وأفضل الدين الورع.

##### شيء هو كثير وفاعله قليل

#### 1-105 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا ابن منيع قال: حدثنا أحمد بن عمران الاخنسي سنة ثمان وعشرين وفيها مات، قال: سمعت أبا خالد الاحمري يحدث عـن

of his father, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Amr that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “There are a lot of good deeds but there are only a few
good-doers.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT CONSTITUTES HALF OF THE RELIGION
------------------------------------------------------

1-106 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Ibn
Muni’a**[[80]](footnotes_1.htm#b0080)** quoted on the authority of Ali
ibn Isa al-Mokhrami in the year 130 A.H. (747 A.D.), on the authority of
Khilad ibn Isa, on the authority of Sabit, on the authority of Anas that
God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Being good-tempered constitutes half of the
religion.”

A CHARACTERISTIC THAT IS THE BEST THING GIVEN TO A MUSLIM
---------------------------------------------------------

1-107 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Abul-Abbas al-Suraj quoted on
the authority of Yaqoob ibn Ibrahim, on the authority of Vaki’a, on the
authority of Mas’ar and Sufyan, on the authority of Zyad ibn Alaqa, on
the authority of Usamah ibn Sherik that God’s Prophet (MGB) was asked,
“What is the best thing given to a Muslim?” He replied, “A good temper.”

THE PROPHET AND ALI IBN ABI TALIB WERE CREATED FROM ONE LIGHT
-------------------------------------------------------------

1-108 Muhammad ibn Umar al-Hafiz al-Baghdady narrated that Abu Muhammad
al-Hassan ibn Abdullah al-Razi quoted on the authority of his father, on
the authority of his master Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB), on the authority
of his father Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB), on the authority of his
father Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his
father Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of his father
Ali ibn al-Hussein as-Sajjad (MGB), on the authority of his father
Al-Hussein (MGB), on the authority of his brother Al-Hassan ibn Ali
(MGB), on the authority of his father Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “Ali and I were created from the same light.”

A SERVANT’S WELL-BEING DEPENDS UPON THE WELL-BEING OF ONE OF HIS ORGANS
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

1-109 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ibrahim
al-Daybali quoted on the authority of Abu Abdullah, on the authority of
Sufyan, on the authority of Mujahid that he heard al-Sha’abi narrated
that he heard al-Nue’man ibn Bashir said that he had heard God’s Prophet
(MGB) say, “There is a delicate organ in man’s body. If it is healthy
all his body is healthy. If it gets ill, it will cause the ailment of
the rest of the body. That is the heart.”

1-110 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Abul Abbas al-Suraj quoted on
the authority of Abul Abbas al-Siraj quoted on the authority of
Qutaybat, on the authority of Roshdin ibn Sa’ed al-Mesri Abul
Haj’jaj**[[81]](footnotes_1.htm#b0081)** , on the authority of Sharahil
ibn Yazid**[[82]](footnotes_1.htm#b0082)** , on the authority of
Abdullah ibn Umar and Abi

#### إسماعيل بن أبي خالد، عن عطاء بن السائب، عن أبيه، عن عبد الله بن عمرو قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الخير كثير وفاعله قليل. {.t0}

##### خصلة هى نصف الدين

#### 1-106 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: حدثنا ابن منيع قال: حدثنا علي بن عيسى المخرمي سنة إحدى وثلاثين قال: حدثنا خلاد بن عيسى، عن ثابت، عن أنس قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: حسن الخلق نصف الدين.

##### أفضل ما أعطى المسلم خصلة

#### 1-107 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا أبوالعباس السراج قال: حدثنا يعقوب بن إبراهيم قال: حدثنا وكيع، عن مسعر، وسفيان، عن زياد بن علاقة، عن اسامة بن شريك قال: قيل لرسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ماأفضل ما أعطي المرء المسلم؟ قال: الخلق الحسن.

##### خلق النبي وعلي بن أبي طالب عليهما السلام من نور واحد

#### 1-108 حدثنا محمد بن عمر الحافظ البغدادي قال: حدثني أبومحمد الحسن بن عبد الله الرازي قال: حدثني أبي قال: حدثني سيدي علي بن موسى الرضا قال: حدثني أبي موسى بن جعفر قال: حدثني أبي جعفر بن محمد قال: حدثني أبي محمد ابن علي قال: حدثني أبي علي بن الحسين قال: حدثني أبي الحسين قال: حدثني أخي الحسن بن علي قال: حدثني أبي علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: خلقت أنا وعلى من نور واحد.

##### صلاح العبد في صلاح شيء من جسده

#### 1-109 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: حدثنا أبوجعفر محمد بن إبراهيم الديبلي قال: حدثنا أبوعبد الله قال: حدثنا سفيان، عن مجاهد قال: سمعت الشعبي يقول: سمعت النعمان بن بشير يقول: سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يقول: في الانسان مضغة إذا هي سلمت وصحت سلم بها سائر الجسد، فإذا سقمت سقم بها سائر الجسد وفسد، وهي القلب.

#### 1-110 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: حدثنا أبوالعباس السراج قال: حدثنا قتيبة قال: حدثنا رشدين بن سعد المصري أبو الحجـاج قال: حدثنا شراحيل بن يزيد عن

Hurayrih that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “When a man’s heart is healthy,
then his body is healthy. If the heart is diseased, then the body will
become diseased.”

A MAN ENTERS HEAVEN FOR ONE CHARACTERISTIC
------------------------------------------

1-111 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Sejezy narrated that Ibn Mu’az quoted on
the authority of Al-Hussein al-Marvazy, on the authority of Abdullah, on
the authority of Yahya ibn Ubaydullah, on the authority of his father,
on the authority of Aba Hurayreh that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “A
servant (i.e. person) would enter Heaven for having removed a thorn on
the path of the Muslims.”

ONE WHO LIKES TWO CHARACTERISTICS SHALL DO ONE THING
----------------------------------------------------

1-112 Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bandar al-Furqany narrated that
Abul Abbas Muhammad ibn Jumhoor al-Himady quoted on the authority of Abu
Abdullah Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Zayd al-Sayeq al-Mac’ci in Mecca narrated
that Ahmad ibn Shoayb quoted on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Yunus ibn Shahab that Anas ibn
Malik**[[83]](footnotes_1.htm#b0083)** heard God’s Prophet (MGB) say,
“Whoever likes an extended share of his daily bread and a delayed death
will visit his kin.”

GOD’S PROPHET FINISHED HIS PRAYERS WITH ONE GREETING
----------------------------------------------------

1-113 Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bandar narrated that Abul Qasim
Sa’id ibn Ahmad ibn Abi Salim quoted on the authority of Abu Zakarya
Yahya ibn al-Fazl al-Var’raq, on the authority of Ishaq ibn Ibrahim
al-Var’raq al-Samarqandi, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Salme, on the
authority of Baqiat ibn al-Walid, on the authority of
Al-Zayady**[[84]](footnotes_1.htm#b0084)** , on the authority of
Al-Zuhra, on the authority of Anas that God’s Prophet (MGB) finished his
prayers with one greeting. **[[85]](footnotes_1.htm#b0085)**

#### عبد الله بن عمر، وأبي هريرة قالا: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إذا طاب قلب المرء طاب جسده، وإذا خبث القلب خبث الجسد. {.t0}

##### دخل الرجل الجنة بخصلة

#### 1-111 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد السجزي قال: أخبرنا ابن معاذ قال: حدثنا الحسين المروزي قال: حدثنا عبد الله قال: أخبرنا يحيى بن عبيد الله قال: سمعت أبي يقول: سمعت أبا هريرة يقول: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: دخل عبد الجنة بغصن من شوك كان على طريق المسلمين فأماطه عنه.

##### من سره خصلتان فليستعمل خصلة

#### 1-112 حدثنا أبوأحمد محمد بن جعفر البندار الفرغاني، قال: حدثنا أبوالعباس محمد بن محمد بن جمهور الحمادي قال: حدثنا أبوعبد الله محمد بن علي بن زيد الصايغ المكي بمكة قال: حدثنا أحمد بن شبيب قال: أخبرني أبي، عن يونس عن ابن شهاب، عن أنس بن مالك قال: سمعت النبي صلى الله عليه وآله يقول: من سره أن يبسط له في رزقه وينسأ له في أجله فليصل رحمه.

##### كان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يسلم تسليمة واحدة

#### 1-113 حدثنا أبوأحمد محمد بن جعفر البندار قال: حدثني أبوالقاسم سعيد بن أحمد بن أبي سالم قال: حدثنا أبوزكريا يحيى بن الفضل الوراق قال: حدثنا إسحاق بن إبراهيم الوراق السمرقندي قال: حدثنا سليمان بن سلمة قال: حدثنا بقية بن الوليد، عن الزيادي، عن الزهري، عن أنس أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله كان يسلم تسليمة واحدة.
