Part 2- On Two-numbered Characteristics
=======================================

RECOGNITION OF GOD BY TWO CHARACTERISTICS
-----------------------------------------

2-1 Ahmad ibn Harun al-Fami**[[86]](footnotes_1.htm#b0086)** and Ja’far
ibn Muhammad ibn Masroor - may God be pleased with them - narrated that
Muhammad ibn Ja’far ibn Bat’tat quoted on the authority of Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim, on the
authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “I heard my father (MGB)
narrate on the authority of his father (MGB) that a man stood in front
of the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) and said, ‘O Commander
of the Faithful! How did you come

###### باب الإثنين

##### معرفة التوحيد بخصلتين

#### 2-1 حدثنا أحمد بن هارون الفامي وجعفر بن محمد بن مسرور رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا محمد بن جعفر بن بطة قال: حدثنا أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن هشام بن سالم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: سمعت أبي يحدث عن أبيه عليه السلام أن رجلاً قام إلى أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام

to recognize your Lord?’ He (MGB) replied, ‘By the dissolution of
intentions and the breach of aspirations. Sometimes I had an aspiration,
but He got in the way between me and my aspirations. Sometimes I made
some intentions, but destiny opposed my intentions. Thus, I realized
that there is some other Planner.’ The man asked, ‘Why did you thank Him
for His Blessings?’ He (MGB) replied, ‘I looked at His Calamities which
He fended off from me and brought them upon someone else. Thus, I
realized that He has Blessed me. Thus, I thanked Him.’ The man asked,
‘Why do you like to meet Him?’ He (MGB) replied, ‘I saw that He has
given me the religion of His Angels, Messengers and Prophets. Then I
realized that He has honored me with this religion and will never forget
me. Therefore, I would like to meet Him.’

ON THE PROPHET’S SAYING, “THERE ARE TWO THINGS WHICH I DO NOT WISH TO SHARE WITH ANYONE”
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-2 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted on
the authority of his father, on the authority of Al-Nawfaly, on the
authority of Al-Sakoony, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB), on the authority of his forefathers (MGB), on the authority of
Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There are two things which I
do not wish to share with anyone. The first one is my ablutions that are
a part of my prayer, and the second one is my charity which I personally
like to put in the hands of the needy, since it will be placed in the
Hands of the Merciful.”

TWO STRANGE THINGS TO PUT UP WITH
---------------------------------

2-3 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Al-Nawfaly, on the
authority of Al-Sakoony, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB),
on the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his
forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “There are two strange things you must put up with: Accept a
wise saying said by a fool, and forgive a foolish saying said by a wise
man.”

NOTHING VOIDS ABLUTIONS EXCEPT FOR WHAT LEAVES FROM THE TWO SIDES
-----------------------------------------------------------------

2-4 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr al-Bazanty, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Sama’at, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Miskan, on the authority of
Abi Basir al-Moradi: “I asked Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) regarding
having

#### فقال له: يا أمير المؤمنين بما عرفت ربك؟ قال: بفسخ العزم ونقض الهم لما أن هممت فحال بيني وبين همي، وعزمت فخالف القضاء عزمي فعلمت أن المدبر غيري، قال: فبما ذا شكرت نعماه؟ قال: نظرت إلى بلاء قد صرفه عني وأبلى به غيري، فعلمت أنه قد أنعم علي فشكرته، قال: فبما ذا أحببت لقاء‌ه؟ قال: لما رأيته قد اختار لي دين ملائكته ورسله وأنبيائه علمت أن الذي أكرمني بهذا ليس ينساني فأحببت لقاء‌ه. {.t0}

##### قال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله خلتان لا احب أن يشاركني فيهما أحد

#### 2-2 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن النوفلي، عن السكوني، عن أبي عبد الله، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: خلتان لا احب أن يشاركني فيهما أحد: وضوئي فانه من صلاتي، وصدقتي فانها من يدي إلى يد السائل فانها تقع في يد الرحمن.

##### غريبتان فاحتملوهما

#### 2-3 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن النوفلي، عن السكوني، عن جعفر ابن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: غريبتان فاحتملوهما كلمة حكم من سفيه فاقبلوها، وكلمة سفه من حكيم فاغفروها.

##### لا ينقض الوضوء الا ما خرج من الطرفين

#### 2-4 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي قال: حدثني محمد بن سماعة، عن عبد الله بن مسكان، عن أبي بصيـر المرادي، عن أبي عبـد الله عليه السـلام قـال: سألته عن الحجامة والقئ وكل دم سائل، فقال: ليس فيه وضوء إنما الوضوء ممـــا

phlebotomy performed and any blood that flows out of the body. The Imam
(MGB) replied, ‘There is no need to make any ablutions since one must
only make ablutions due to what leaves from the two
sides**[[87]](footnotes_1.htm#b0087)** by (the mechanisms bestowed to us
due to) God’s Blessing.’”

The compiler of the book - may God increase his honor - said, “This
means defecation, farting, urination, and ejaculation.”

TWO BLESSINGS BEING DENIED
--------------------------

2-5 Ja’far ibn Ali al-Kufy - may God be pleased with him - narrated that
his grandfather Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih quoted on
the authority of his grandfather Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih, on the
authority of Isma’il ibn Muslim, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad
(MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his
forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “Two blessings are taken for
granted**[[88]](footnotes_1.htm#b0088)** : Security and health.”

TWO THINGS WHICH CAUSE TROUBLE FOR MOST PEOPLE
----------------------------------------------

2-6 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim quoted on the authority
of his father, on the authority of Al-Nawfaly, on the authority of
Al-Sakoony, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the
authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his forefathers
(MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“There are two things which cause trouble for most people: health and
leisure.” **[[89]](footnotes_1.htm#b0089)**

2-7 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Mu’az
quoted on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn al-Hassan al-Marvazy, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn al-Mobarak and al-Fazl ibn Musa, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn Sa’id ibn Abi Hind, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Ibn Ab’bas that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“There are two things which cause sedition for most people: health and
leisure.”

NO WORSHIP OF GOD IS BETTER THAN BEING QUIET AND WALKING TO GOD’S HOUSE
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

2-8 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Ayoob ibn Nooh, on the authority of Al-Rabi’a ibn Muhammad
al-Muslimy, on the authority of Abil Rabi’a ash-Shamy, on the authority
of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “No worship of God is better than being
quiet and walking to God’s House.”

2-9 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the

authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Ibn Abi Umayr, on the
authority

#### خرج من طرفيك اللذين أنعم الله بهما عليك. {.t0}

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب أدام الله عزه: يعني من بول أو غائط أو ريح أو مني.

##### نعمتان مكفورتان

#### 2-5 حدثنا جعفر بن علي الكوفي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني جدي الحسن ابن علي بن عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن جده عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن إسماعيل بن مسلم، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: نعمتان مكفورتان: الامن والعافية.

##### خصلتان كثيرمن الناس مفتون فيهما

#### 2-6 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن النوفلي، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: خصلتان كثير من الناس مفتون فيهما: الصحة والفراغ.

#### 2-7 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا أبوجعفر محمد بن معاذ قال: حدثنا الحسين بن الحسن المروزي، عن عبد الله بن المبارك، والفضل بن موسى قالا: أخبرنا عبد الله بن سعيد بن أبي هند، عن أبيه، عن ابن عباس قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: نعمتان مفتون فيهما كثير من الناس الفراغ والصحة.

##### ما عبد الله عز وجل بشيء أفضل من الصمت والمشي إلى بيته

#### 2-8 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن أيوب بن نوح، عن الربيع بن محمد المسلي، عن أبي الربيع الشامي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ما عبد الله بشيء أفضل من الصمت والمشي إلى بيته.

##### يؤمر بالمعروف رجلان

#### 2-9 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيـد،

of Yahya al-Tawil al-Basry**[[90]](footnotes_1.htm#b0090)** , on the
authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “A believer who accepts advice
or an ignorant person who learns will listen to the enjoinment of the
good and the admonishment against evil. However, one who has the whip
and the sword will not.”

2-10 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on
the authority of Abil Ab’bas Jarir al-Bajaly, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ishaq, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “There are two wings for atheism: the
Umayyads and the al-Muhlibs.**[[91]](footnotes_1.htm#b0091)** ”

THE BLESSED THE SUBLIME GOD HAS DIVIDED THE PEOPLE ON THE EARTH INTO TWO GROUPS
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-11 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abdul Jab’bar, on the authority of Al-Hassan
ibn Ali ibn Faz’zal, on the authority of Zarif ibn Nasih, on the
authority of Ibrahim ibn Yahya, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad
(MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “The Blessed the Sublime God has divided the people on the Earth
into two groups and placed me in the better one. Then he divided that
group into three parts and I was in the best part. Then he chose the
Quraysh from amongst the Arabs, chose the children of Abdul Mutalib from
amongst the Hashemites**[[92]](footnotes_1.htm#b0092)** , and chose me
from amongst the children of Abdul Mutalib.”

TWO GROUPS IN THIS NATION WHOSE IMPROVEMENT WOULD IMPROVE THE NATION AND WHOSE CORRUPTION WOULD CORRUPT THE NATION
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-12 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his father quoted on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Ahmad, on the authority of Al-Abbas ibn Ma’ruf, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Sa’id ibn Qazvan, on the authority of Al-Sakoony, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the authority of his father
(MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There are two groups in this
nation whose improvement would improve the nation and whose corruption
would corrupt the nation.” He (MGB) was asked, “O Prophet of God! Who
are they?” The Prophet (MGB) replied, “The jurisprudents and the
chiefs.”

FEAR GOD REGARDING TWO WEAK ONES
--------------------------------

2-13 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his father quoted on the authority of Muhammad ibn

#### عن ابن أبي عمير، عن يحيى الطويل البصري عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إنما يؤمر بالمعروف وينهى عن المنكر مؤمن فيتعظ، أو جاهل فيتعلم، وأما صاحب سوط وسيف فلا. {.t0}

##### للكفر جناحان

#### 2-10 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن أبي العباس جرير البجلي عن محمد بن إسحاق، عن أبيه، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: للكفر جناحان: بنو امية وآل المهلب.

##### قسم الله تبارك وتعالى اهل الارض قسمين

#### 2-11 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن محمد بن عبدالجبار، عن الحسن بن علي بن فضال، عن ظريف بن ناصح، عن إبراهيم بن يحيى قال: حدثني جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: قسم الله تبارك وتعالى أهل الارض قسمين فجعلني في خيرهما ثم قسم النصف الآخر على ثلاثة فكنت خير الثلاثة، ثم اختار العرب من الناس، ثم اختار قريشا من العرب، ثم اختار بني هاشم من قريش، ثم اختار بني عبدالمطلب من بني هاشم، ثم اختارني من بني عبدالمطلب.

##### صنفان من هذه الامة اذا صلحا صلحت الامة واذا فسدا فسدت الامة

#### 2-12 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه، عن أبيه، عن محمد ابن أحمد، عن العباس بن معروف، عن محمد بن سعيد بن غزوان، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله صنفان من امتي إذا صلحا صلحت امتي، وإذا فسدا فسدت امتي، قيل: يا رسول الله ومن هما؟ قال: الفقهاء والامراء.

##### اتقو الله في الضعيفين

#### 2-13 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني أبـي، عـن

Ahmad, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Sindy, on the authority of Uthman
ibn Isa, on the authority of Sama’at, on the authority of Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB), “Fear God regarding two weak ones meaning orphans and
women.”

THE REWARD OF WHOEVER TAKES CARE OF TWO DAUGHTERS, TWO SISTERS, TWO PATERNAL AUNTS OR TWO MATERNAL AUNTS
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-14 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Zakariya
al-Mumin who linked it up to Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “Whoever takes
care of two daughters, two sisters, two paternal aunts or two maternal
aunts will be safeguarded from the Fire.”

TWO MEN WILL NOT SENSE THE SCENT OF PARADISE
--------------------------------------------

2-15 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Al-Sindy, on the
authority of Ali ibn al-Hikam, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
al-Fuzayl, on the authority of Sharis al-Vabeshy, on the authority of
Jabir, on the authority of Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “The scent of Paradise can be smelled from a distance of
five-hundred years away. However, those damned by their parents and the
cuckold will not sense it.” He was asked, “O Prophet of God! Who is a
cuckold?” He (MGB) replied, “One whose wife commits adultery and he
knows about it.”

WHAT HAS BEEN SAID ABOUT TWO-FACED PEOPLE **[[93]](footnotes_1.htm#b0093)**
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-16 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Abi Ja’far
Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of Abil Jo’aza al-Monabat ibn
Abdullah, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Alvan, on the authority of
Amr ibn Khalid, on the authority of Zayd ibn Ali, on the authority of
his father (MGB), on the authority of his grandfather (MGB), on the
authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “A two-faced
person will be presented on the Resurrection Day with his tongue coming
out from behind his head and with another tongue sticking out in front.
They will bring fire to burn him and proclaim, ‘This is one who had two
faces and two tongues in the world. This is how he will be known on the
Resurrection Day.’”

2-17 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Ibn
Muni’a**[[94]](footnotes_1.htm#b0094)** quoted on the authority of Abu
Bakr ibn Abi Shoyba’, on the authority of Abu Muawiyah, on the authority
of Al-A’amash, on the authority of Abi Salih, on the authority of Abi
Hurayrih that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The worst of the

#### محمد بن أحمد، عن علي بن السندي، عن عثمان بن عيسى، عن سماعة، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: اتقوا الله في الضعيفين يعني بذلك اليتيم والنساء. {.t0}

##### ثواب من عال ابنتين أو اختين أو عمتين أو خالتين

#### 2-14 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار قال: حدثنا محمد بن عيسى بن عبيد، عن زكريا المؤمن رفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من عال ابنتين أو اختين أو عمتين أو خالتين حجبتاه من النار.

##### لا يجد ريح الجنة رجلان

#### 2-15 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن محمد بن السندي، عن علي بن الحكم، عن محمد بن الفضيل، عن شريس الوابشي، عن جابر، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إن الجنة ليوجد ريحها من مسيرة خمس مائة عام، ولا يجدها عاق ولا ديوث، قيل: يا رسول الله وما الديوث قال: الذي تزني امرأته وهو يعلم.

##### ما جاء في ذى وجهين

#### 2-16 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن أبي جعفر أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن أبي الجوزاء المنبه بن عبد الله، عن الحسين بن علوان، عن عمرو بن خالد، عن زيد بن علي، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: يجئ يوم القيامة ذو الوجهين دالعا لسانه في قفاه وآخر من قدامه يلتهبان نارا حتى يلهبا جسده، ثم يقال له: هذا الذي كان في الدنيا ذا وجهين وذا لسانين يعرف بذلك يوم القيامة.

#### 2-17 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: حدثنا ابن منيع قال: حدثنا أبوبكر بن أبي شيبة قال: حدثنا أبومعاوية، عن الاعمش، عن أبي صالح، عن أبي هريرة قال: قـال

people near the Honorable the Exalted God on the Resurrection Day are
the two-faced ones.”

2-18 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Ibn
Muni’a**[[95]](footnotes_1.htm#b0095)** quoted on the authority of Abu
Bakr ibn Abi Shoyba’, on the authority of Abu Muawiyah, on the authority
of Sharik, on the authority of Al-Rakin, on the authority of Na’eem ibn
Hanzale’, on the authority of Am’mar that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The
people who are two-faced in this world will have two tongues of Fire on
the Resurrection Day.”

2-19 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority
of Musa ibn Umar, on the authority of Ibn Sin’an, on the authority of
U’an ibn Mu’een - the hat-buyer - that Ibn Abi Ya’foor said, “I heard
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, ‘Whoever meets the believers in one
fashion, but gossips about them in their absence in a different fashion
will have two tongues of Fire on the Resurrection Day.’”

2-20 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority
of Ali ibn An-Nue’man, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Miskan, on the
authority of Davood ibn Farqad, on the authority of Abi Shaybih az-Zahri
that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “A servant who is two-faced and has
two tongues is bad. He will praise his believing brother in front of
him, but talk badly about him in his absence. He will be jealous of him
whenever he gets a blessing and will not assist him when a calamity
befalls him.”

THE PEOPLE ARE IN TWO GROUPS: SOME WHO GET RELIEVED BY OTHERS AND SOME FROM WHOM OTHERS GET RELIEVED
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-21 Al-Hussein ibn Ahmad ibn Idris - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that his father quoted on the authority of Muhammad ibn Salim,
on the authority of Ahmad ibn an-Nazr, on the authority of Amr ibn
Shimr, on the authority of Jabir, on the authority of Abi Ja’far
al-Baqir (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The people are in two
groups: those who get relieved by others and those from whom others get
relieved. Those who get relieved are the believers. Once they die they
are relieved of this world and its calamities. Those from whom others
get relieved are the unbelievers. Once they die, the trees, the animals
and many of the people get relieved from them.”

#### رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إن من شر الناس عند الله عز وجل يوم القيامة ذا الوجهين. {.t0}

#### 2-18 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا ابن منيع قال: حدثنا أبوبكر بن أبي شيبة قال: حدثنا شريك، عن الركينعن نعيم بن حنظلة، عن عمار قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: من كان له وجهان في الدنيا كان له يوم القيامة لسانان من نار.

#### 2-19 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أحمد ابن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، عن موسى بن عمر، عن ابن سنان، عن عون بن معين بياع القلانس، عن ابن أبي يعفور قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: من لقى المؤمنين بوجه، وغابهم بوجه أتى يوم القيامة وله لسانان من نار.

#### 2-20 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن علي بن النعمان، عن عبد الله بن مسكان، عن داود بن فرقد، عن أبي شيبة الزهري، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: بئس العبد عبد يكون ذا وجهين وذا لسانين، يطري أخاه في الله شاهدا، ويأكله غائبا، إن اعطي حسده، وإن ابتلي خذله.

##### الناس اثنان واحد أراح، وآخر استراح

#### 2-21 حدثنا الحسين بن أحمد بن إدريس رضي الله عنه، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن سالم، عن أحمد بن النضر، عن عمرو بن شمر، عن جابر، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الناس اثنان واحد أراح وآخر استراح، فأما الذي استراح فالمؤمن إذا مات استراح من الدنيا وبلائها، وأما الذي أراح فالكافر إذا مات أراح الشجر والدواب وكثيراً من الناس.

PEOPLE ARE OF TWO TYPES: THE LEARNED AND THE SEEKER OF KNOWLEDGE
----------------------------------------------------------------

2-22 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil Qasim quoted on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his father Muhammad ibn
Khalid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr who linked it up to
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “The people are in two groups:
knowledgeable ones and those acquiring knowledge. The rest of the people
are like flies subject to the wind and such people will be thrown into
the Fire.”

TWO CHARACTERISTICS ONE OF WHICH WILL CAUSE FORGETTING SINS AND THE OTHER WILL CAUSE HARDENING OF THE HEARTS
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-23 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his father quoted on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn
Ishaq al-Tajir, on the authority of Ali ibn Mahzyar, on the authority of
Fuzalat**[[96]](footnotes_1.htm#b0096)** , on the authority of Isma’il
ibn Abi Zyad al-Sakoony, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
that his father Al-Baqir (MGB) said, “The Blessed the Sublime God
revealed to Moses (MGB), ‘Do not get pleased with the extent of your
wealth and do not abandon remembering Me under any circumstances since
extensive wealth will cause the forgetting of sins, and abandoning My
remembrance will cause the hardening of hearts.’”

TWO CHARACTERISTICS THAT PROVIDE IMMUNITY TO LEPROSY
----------------------------------------------------

2-24 Ahmad ibn Ali ibn Ibrahim - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his father quoted on the authority of his father Ibrahim ibn
Hashim, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of
Hafs ibn al-Bakhtari, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB),
“Cutting the nails and shaving the moustache every Friday provides
immunity to leprosy.”

ATTEND TO TWO MAJOR ISSUES
--------------------------

2-25 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Ishaq al-Tajir, on the authority of Ali
ibn Mahzyar, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Sa’id, on the authority
of Fuzalat ibn Ayoob, on the authority of Isma’il ibn Abi
Zyad**[[97]](footnotes_1.htm#b0097)** , on the authority of Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) that his father (MGB) said, “Abuzar - may God have Mercy
upon him - cried due to the fear of the Honorable the Exalted God so
much that he started to complain about his eyes. He was told: ‘O Abuzar!
Pray to God to heal your eyes.’ He said, ‘I am not worried about that. I
have more important issues to attend to.’ He was asked, ‘What are you
attending to?’ He replied, ‘Paradise and the Hell-fire.”

##### الناس اثنان عالم ومتعلم

#### 2-22 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني عمي محمد ابن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه محمد بن خالد، عن محمد ابن أبي عمير رفعه إبي أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: الناس اثنان عالم ومتعلم، وسائر الناس همج والهمج في النار.

##### خصلتان احداهما تنسى الذنوب والاخرى تقسى القلوب

#### 2-23 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني أبي، عن الحسين بن إسحاق التاجر، عن علي بن مهزيار، عن فضالة، عن إسماعيل بن أبي زياد عن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: أوحى الله تبارك وتعالى إلى موسى عليه السلام: لا تفرح بكثرة المال، ولا تدع ذكري على كل حال، فان كثرة المال انسي الذنوب، وترك ذكري يقسي القلوب.

##### خصلتان امان من الجذام

#### 2-24 حدثنا أحمد بن علي بن إبراهيم رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني أبي، عن أبيه إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن حفص بن البختري، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: تقليم الاظفار وأخذ الشارب من جمعة إلى جمعة أمان من الجذام.

##### الشغل بالعظيمتين

#### 2-25 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن الحسين بن إسحاق التاجر، عن علي بن مهزيار، عن الحسين بن سعيد، عن فضالة بن أيوب، عن إسماعيل بن أبي زياد، عن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: بكى أبوذر - رحمه الله - من خشية الله عز وجل حتى اشتكى بصره، فقيل له: يا أباذر لو دعوت الله أن يشفي بصرك، فقال: إني عنه لمشغول وما هو من أكبر همي، قالوا: وما يشغلك عنه؟ قال: العظيمتان: الجنة والنار.

THE WORLD IS JUST TWO WORDS AND TWO DIRHAMS
-------------------------------------------

2-26 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim quoted on the authority
of his father, on the authority of Al-Nawfaly, on the authority of
Al-Sakoony, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the
authority of his father (MGB), “Abuzar - may God have Mercy upon him -
was standing by the Ka’ba and said, ‘I am Jundab ibn Sakan.’ The people
gathered around him. He said, ‘You prepare some things to take along
with yourself when deciding to go on a trip. The trip to the Hereafter
is upcoming. Don’t you want to prepare some things to take along to
benefit you?’ A man went to him and said, ‘Please advise us.’ He said,
‘Fast on hot days as a means of savings for the Resurrection, and
perform the Hajj pilgrimage**[[98]](footnotes_1.htm#b0098)** visit for
major affairs. Say two units of prayers in the dark of the night for the
awe of the grave. Speak fairly**[[99]](footnotes_1.htm#b0099)** , give
charity to the poor and do not utter wicked words so that perhaps you
may be saved from the Day of Hardship (Resurrection). Consider this
world to be worth only two Dirhams. Spend one Dirham for your wife and
send the second Dirham ahead of you. Any third Dirham is harmful and
will not benefit you. Consider this world to be two words. Use one word
to earn a legitimate means of sustenance and use the second one to
attain the Hereafter. The third word is harmful and will not benefit
you. Do not go after it.’ He added, ‘The sorrow of the day which I
cannot attain kills me.’”

2-27 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Ali ibn
al-Sindy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Amr ibn Sa’id, on the
authority of Musa ibn Akeel, “I heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say,
‘A man would not be knowledgeable (in religion) unless he abandons lust
and doesn’t care about what he wears or what he eats to overcome his
hunger.’” **[[100]](footnotes_1.htm#b0100)**

2-28 Ja’far ibn Ali ibn al-Hassan al-Kufy - may God have Mercy upon
him - narrated that his father Ali ibn al-Hassan quoted on the authority
of his father Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih, on the authority of Al-Sakoony,
on the authority of his father, on the authority of his forefathers, on
the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There in no
good in life except for two men: a knowledgeable one who is obeyed, and
an obedient student.”

THERE IS NO GOOD IN THIS WORLD EXCEPT FOR TWO MEN
-------------------------------------------------

2-29 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father and Muhammad
ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with them - narrated that Sa’ed ibn
Abdullah

##### الدنيا كلمتان ودرهمان

#### 2-26 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن النوفلي، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: قام أبوذر رحمة الله عليه عند الكعبة فقال: أنا جندب بن سكن، فاكتنفه الناس، فقال: لو أن أحدكم أراد سفرا لاتخذ فيه من الزاد ما يصلحه، فسفر يوم القيامة أما تريدون فيه ما يصلحكم؟ فقام إليه رجل فقال: أرشدنا، فقال: صم يوما شديد الحر للنشور، وحج حجة لعظائم الامور وصل ركعتين في سواد الليل لوحشة القبور، كلمة خير تقولها وكلمة شر تسكت عنها أو صدقة منك على مسكين لعلك تنجو بها يا مستكين من يوم عسير. اجعل الدنيا درهمين درهما أنفقته على عيالك، ودرهما قدمته لآخرتك، والثالث يضر ولا ينفع فلا ترده. اجعل الدنيا كلمتين كلمة في طلب الحلال وكلمة للاخرة، والثالثة تضر ولا ننفع لا تردها، ثم قال: قتلني هم يوم لا ادركه.

##### لا يكون الرجل فقيها حتى يكون فيه خصلتان

#### 2-27 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد ابن أحمد، عن علي بن السندي، عن محمد بن عمرو بن سعيد، عن موسى بن أكيل قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: لا يكون الرجل فقيها حتى لا يبالي أي ثوبيه ابتذل وبما سد فورة الجوع.

##### لا خير في العيش الا لرجلين

#### 2-28 حدثنا جعفر بن علي بن الحسن الكوفي - رحمه الله - عن أبيه علي ابن الحسن، عن أبيه الحسن بن علي بن عبد الله المغيرة، عن عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: لا خير في العيش إلا لرجلين: عالم مطاع، أو مستمع واع.

##### لا خير في الدنيا الا لاحد رجلين

#### 2-29 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله،

quoted on the authority of Al-Qasim ibn Muhammad al-Isbahany, on the
authority of Suleiman ibn Davood al-Minqari, on the authority of Hafs
ibn Qiyath al-Nakha’ee that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “There is
no good in this world except for two men: a man who does more good deeds
every day, and a man who compensates for his sins through repentance.
When will he be able to repent? I swear by God that God would not accept
his repentance even if he prostrates to God to the extent that his neck
falls off, unless by his friendship with us - the members of the Holy
Household.”

THERE ARE TWO FORMS OF KNOWLEDGE
--------------------------------

2-30 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Ahmad, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad, on the authority of
Al-Ab’bas ibn Ma’ruf, on the authority of Ali ibn Mahzyar, on the
authority of Hikam ibn Buhlool, on the authority of Isma’il ibn Himmam,
on the authority of Umar ibn Azineh, on the authority of Aban ibn Abi
Ayyash, on the authority of Salim ibn Qays al-Hilaly, “I heard Ali (MGB)
tell Abil Tufayl Amer ibn Vasele’ al-Kanani: ‘O Abil Tufayl! There are
two forms of knowledge: The knowledge over which people must ponder, and
that is the knowledge of the religion, and the knowledge which cannot be
pondered over, that is the Might of the Honorable the Exalted God.’”

TWO STRANGE CHARACTERISTICS: EATING THE SUSTENANCE PROVIDED BY GOD AND ASCRIBING DIVINITY TO OTHERS THAN GOD
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-31 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his father Muhammad ibn
Khalid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the authority of
Ibrahim ibn (Abi) Zyad, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB),
"The Blessed the Sublime God sent down an angel to Earth. He stayed on
the Earth for a long time and then returned to the heavens. He was
asked, “What did you see there?” He said, “I saw many amazing things
there, but the most amazing thing that I saw was someone who abused your
blessings. He ate of what You provided for his sustenance, but claimed
to be god. I was amazed at his boldness and Your Patience.” God the
Almighty said, “You were amazed at My Patience? I let him live for
four-hundred years, and he never got ill. I granted to him whatever he
wanted in the world, and I never changed his food and drinks.”

ENJOINING TO DO GOOD AND ADMONISHING AGAINST EVIL ARE TWO OF THE CREATURES OF THE EXALTED THE HONORABLE GOD
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-32 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Yaqoob ibn
Yazid who linked it up to Abu Jaf’far Al-Baqir (MGB) saying, “Enjoining
to

#### عن القاسم بن محمد الاصبهاني، عن سليمان بن داود المنقري، عن حفص بن غياث النخعي قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: لا خير في الدنيا إلا لاحد رجلين: رجل يزداد في كل يوم إحسانا، ورجل يتدارك ذنبه بالتوبة، وأنى له بالتوبة، والله لو سجد حتى ينقطع عنقه ما قبل الله منه إلا بولايتنا أهل البيت. {.t0}

##### العلم علمان

#### 2-30 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن العباس بن معروف، عن علي بن مهزيار، عن حكم بن بهلول، عن إسماعيل بن همام، عن عمر بن اذينة، عن أبان ابن أبي عياش، عن سليم بن قيس الهلالي قال: سمعت عليا عليه السلام يقول لابي الطفيل عامر بن واثلة الكناني: يا أبا الطفيل العلم علمان: علم لا يسع الناس إلا النظر فيه وهو صبغة الاسلام، وعلم يسع الناس ترك النظر فيه وهو قدرة الله عز وجل.

##### خصلتان عجيبتان اكل رزق الله وادعاء الربوبية دون الله عز وجل

#### 2-31 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني عمي محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه محمد بن خالد، عن محمد بن سنان، عن إبراهيم بن [أبي] زياد، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إن الله تبارك وتعالى أهبط ملكا إلى الارض فلبث فيها دهرا طويلا ثم عرج إلى السماء فقيل له: ما رأيت؟ فقال: رأيت عجائب كثيرة وأعجب ما رأيت أني رأيت عبدا متقلبا في نعمتك يأكل رزقك ويدعي الربوبية، فعجبت من جرأته عليك، ومن حلمك عنه. فقال الله عز وجل: فمن حلمي عجبت؟ قال: نعم [يا رب] قال: قد أمهلته أربع مائة سنة لا يضرب عليه عرق، ولا يريد من الدنيا شيئا إلا ناله، ولا يتغير عليه فيها مطعم ولا مشرب.

##### الامر بالمعروف والنهي عن المنکر خلقان من خلق الله عز وجل

#### 2-32 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيـى العطـار، عن محمد بن

do good and admonishing against evil are two of the creatures of the
Exalted the Honorable God. God will honor whoever helps them, and God
will abandon whoever abandons them.”

THE TWO THINGS WHICH CONSTITUTED MOST OF THE WORSHIPPING OF ABUZAR - MAY GOD HAVE MERCY UPON
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-33 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Yahya ibn Abi Imran
al-Hamedany, on the authority of Yunus ibn Abdul-Rahman, on the
authority of several narrators that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said,
“Most of the worship of Abuzar - may God have Mercy upon him - were two
things: thinking and taking heed.”

IF A WOMAN HAS HAD TWO HUSBANDS WHICH HUSBAND WILL SHE BELONG TO IN HEAVEN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-34 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Musa ibn Ibrahim, on the authority of
Al-Hassan, on the authority of his father who linked it up to God’s
Prophet (MGB), “Umma Salma asked the Prophet (MGB), ‘May my father and
mother be your ransom! If a woman has had two husbands who die and enter
Heaven, which one will she belong to?’ The Prophet (MGB) answered, ‘O
Umma Salma! She will chose the one who was best tempered and loved his
wife the most. O Umma Salma! Good temper will result in the best of this
world and the Hereafter.’”

ENEMIES WHO DISPUTE WITH EACH OTHER ABOUT THEIR LORD
----------------------------------------------------

2-35 Abu Muhammad Am’mar ibn al-Hussein al-Asrooshani - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Ismat quoted on
the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Tabary in Mecca, on the authority
of Abul Hassan ibn Abi Shoja’ al-Bajaly, on the authority of Ja’far ibn
Abdullah al-Hanafy, on the authority of Yahya ibn Hashim, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Jabir, on the authority of Sadaqaht ibn Sa’id,
on the authority of Al-Nazr ibn Malik, “I told al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn
Abi Talib (MGB), ‘O Aba Abdullah! Tell me about the Honorable the
Exalted God’s words, ‘These two antagonists dispute with each other
about their Lord…’**[[101]](footnotes_1.htm#b0101)** ’ He (MGB) replied,
‘It is about us and the Umayyads who dispute with each other about the
Honorable the Exalted God. We said that God has told the truth, but they
said that God has lied. We are enemies of each other on the Resurrection
Day.’”

#### أحمد، عن يعقوب بن يزيد باسناده رفعه إلى أبي جعفر عليه السلام أنه قال: الامر بالمعروف والنهي عن المنكر خلقان من خلق الله عز وجل، فمن نصرهما أعزه الله ومن خذلهما خذله الله عز وجل. {.t0}

##### کان اکثر عبادة ابي ذر - رحمه الله - خصلتين

#### 2-33 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن يحيى بن أبي عمران الهمداني، عن يونس بن عبدالرحمن، عمن رواه، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: كان أكثر عبادة أبي ذررحمة الله عليه خصلتين: التفكر والاعتبار.

##### المرأة يکون لها زوجان من اهل الجنه لأيهما تکون فی الجنه

#### 2-34 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن موسى بن إبراهيم، عن الحسن، عن أبيه باسناده رفعه إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أن أم سلمة قالت له: بأبي أنت وأمي المرأة يكون لها زوجان فيموتان فيدخلان الجنة لايهما تكون؟ فقال: يا أم سلمة تخير أحسنهما خلقا وخيرهما لاهله، يا ام سلمة إن حسن الخلق ذهب بخير الدنيا والآخرة.

##### خصمان اختصموا فی ربهم

#### 2-35 حدثنا أبومحمد عمار بن الحسين الاسروشني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني علي بن محمد بن عصمة قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد الطبري بمكة قال: حدثنا أبوالحسن ابن أبي شجاع البجلي، عن جعفر بن عبد الله الحنفي، عن يحيى بن هاشم، عن محمد بن جابر، عن صدقة بن سعيد، عن النضر بن مالك قال: قلت للحسين بن علي بن أبي طالب عليهما السلام: يا أبا عبد الله حدثني عن قول الله عز وجل "[هَذَانِ] خَصْمَانِ اخْتَصَمُوا فِي رَبِّهِمْ" قال: نحن وبنو امية اختصمنا في الله عز وجل قلنا: صدق الله، وقالوا: كذب الله. فنحن وإياهم الخصمان يوم القيامة.

JAWAD**[[102]](footnotes_1.htm#b0102)** HAS TWO MEANINGS
--------------------------------------------------------

2-36 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Suleiman,
“A man asked Abal-Hassan (MGB)**[[103]](footnotes_1.htm#b0103)** while
he was circumambulating (around the Ka’ba), ‘What is the meaning of
Jawad?’ The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘There are two meanings in what you are
asking about. If you are asking about the creatures, Jawad is him who
performs his obligatory deeds and Bakhil is him who is miserly in
performing what God has made incumbent upon him. If you are asking about
the Creator, then you should know that He is Jawad if He grants and is
also Jawad if He withholds. This is because if He grants something to
His creatures, then He has granted them what they deserve not, and if He
withholds something from His creatures, He has withheld from them what
they do not deserve.”

SILVER AND GOLD MONEY ARE DESTRUCTIVE
-------------------------------------

2-37 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Zyad ibn Marvan, on
the authority of Abi Vaki’a, on the authority of Abi Ishaq, on the
authority of Al-Harith, on the authority of the Commander of the
Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Silver and gold
money destroyed those before you and they will destroy you, too.”

GOLD AND SILVER ARE TWO PERVERTING METALS
-----------------------------------------

2-38 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn
Imran**[[104]](footnotes_1.htm#b0104)** who linked up this tradition,
“Gold and silver are two perverting metals. Whoever loves them is with
them.”

The compiler of the book - may God increase his honor - interprets this
to mean that whoever loves them so much that he doesn’t pay the Divinely
Ordained dues on them is with them.

SEEK REFUGE FROM TWO CHARACTERISTICS
------------------------------------

2-39 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Yusuf ibn al-Harith, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn Yazid, on the authority of Hayat ibn Sharih,
on the authority of Salim ibn Qayla, on the authority of Dur’raj, on the
authority of Abil Haysam, on the authority of Abi Sa’ad al-Khidry, “I
heard God’s Prophet (MGB) say, ‘I Seek refuge in God from disbelief and
debt.’ He (MGB) was told, ‘O Prophet of God! Is debt equal to
disbelief?’ He (MGB) replied, ‘Yes.’”

##### الجواد علی وجهين

#### 2-36 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أحمد بن سليمان قال: سأل رجل أبا الحسن عليه السلام وهو في الطواف، فقال له: أخبرني عن الجواد؟ فقال: إن لكلامك وجهين فان كنت تسأل عن المخلوق فان الجواد: الذي يؤدي ما افترض الله عز وجل عليه، والبخيل من بخل بما افترض الله عليه، وإن كنت تعني الخالق فهو الجواد إن أعطى، وهو الجواد إن منع، لانه إن أعطى عبد أعطاه ما ليس له، وإن منع منع ما ليس له.

##### الدينار والدرهم مهلکان

#### 2-37 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن زياد بن مروان، عن أبي وكيع، عن أبي إسحاق، عن الحارث قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الدينار والدرهم أهلكا من كان قبلكم وهما مهلكاكم.

##### الذهب والفضة حجران ممسوخان

#### 2-38 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران يرفع الحديث قال: الذهب والفضة حجران ممسوخان فمن أحبهما كان معهما.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب أدام الله عزه -: يعني بذلك من أحبهما حبا يمنع حق الله منهما.

##### التعوذ من خصلتين

#### 2-39 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن يوسف بن الحارث، عن عبد الله بن يزيد، عن حيوة بن شريح قال: حدثنا سالم ابن غيلان، عن دراج، عن أبي الهيثم، عن أبي سعد الخدري قال: سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يقول: أعوذ بالله من الكفر والدين، قيل: يا رسول الله أيعدل الدين بالكفر؟ فقال صلى الله عليه وآله: نعم.

TWO CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SHIITES
----------------------------------

2-40 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted
on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the
authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the authority of Malik ibn Atiye,
on the authority of Abi Hamzih, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hussein
(MGB), “I am ready to give my hand for (abolishing) two negative
characteristics in the Shiites: impatience and not keeping secrets.”

THERE ARE TWO PLEASURES FOR ONE WHO FASTS
-----------------------------------------

2-41 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Sa’id who linked it
up through a chain of narrators to Imam as-Sadiq (MGB) saying, “There
are two pleasures for one who fasts: The first pleasure is for when he
breaks his fast, and the second one is for when he meets the Honorable
the Exalted God.”

FASTING IS FOR GOD
------------------

2-42 The Georgian**[[105]](footnotes_1.htm#b0105)** Abu Muhammad Abdus
ibn Ali ibn al-Ab’bas in Samarqand narrated that Abul Qasim Abdullah ibn
Yaqoob ibn Yusuf al-Razi quoted Muhammad ibn Yunus al-Kadimi, on the
authority of Abu Amir, on the authority of Zama’a, on the authority of
Sala’ma, on the authority of Akrama, on the authority of Ibn
Abbas**[[106]](footnotes_1.htm#b0106)** that the Prophet (MGB) said,
“God - the Blessed the Sublime said, ‘All the deeds of the descendants
of Adam are for themselves, except for their fasting which is for Me. I
Myself am the reward for his fasting. Fasting is a believer’s armor on
the Resurrection Day as you guard yourselves with armor in this world.
To the Honorable the Exalted God, the smell of the mouth of one who is
fasting is better than the smell of musk. There are two pleasures for
one who fasts: one is for when he breaks his fast, eats and drinks and
the second one is for when he meets Me and I take him to Paradise.”

WHAT HAS BEEN SAID ABOUT THE HONEST VS. THE DISHONEST BUSINESSMEN
-----------------------------------------------------------------

2-43 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad who
linked it up through a chain of narrators to Al-Hussein ibn Zayd ibn Ali
ibn Abi Talib, on the authority of his father Zayd ibn Ali, on the
authority of his father Ali ibn al-Hussein (MGB), on the authority of
his father Al-Hussein (MGB), on the authority of his father Ali (MGB)
that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The business of any two businessmen who
are sincere in dealing with each other will be blessed for as long as
they remain

##### في الشيعة خصلتان

#### 2-40 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن مالك بن عطية، عن أبي حمزة، عن علي بن الحسين عليهما السلام قال: وددت أني افتديت خصلتين في الشيعة لنا ببعض [لحم] ساعدي: النزق وقلة الكتمان.

##### للصائم فرحتان

#### 2-41 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه، عن عمه محمد بن أبي القاسم عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن الحسين بن سعيد، عن رجاله يرفعه إلى الصادق عليه السلام قال: للصائم فرحتان: فرحة عند إفطاره، وفرحة عند لقاء الله عز وجل.

##### الصوم لله تعالى

#### 2-42 حدثنا أبومحمد عبدوس بن علي بن العباس الجرجاني بسمرقند، قال: حدثنا أبوالقاسم عبد الله بن يعقوب بن يوسف الرازي قال: حدثنا محمد بن يونس الكديمي قال: حدثنا أبوعامر قال: حدثنا زمعة، عن سلمة، عن عكرمة، عن ابن عباس، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: قال الله تبارك وتعالى: كل عمل ابن آدم هو له غير الصيام هو لي وأنا اجزي به، والصيام جنة العبد المؤمن يوم القيامة كما يقي أحدكم سلاحه في الدنيا، ولخلوف فم الصائم أطيب عند الله عز وجل من ريح المسك، والصائم يفرح بفرحتين: حين يفطر فيطعم ويشرب: وحين يلقاني فادخله الجنة.

##### ما جاء في التاجرين اذا صدقا وبرا، واذا كذبا وخانا

#### 2-43 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد رفعه إلى الحسين بن زيد بن علي بن الحسين بن علي بن أبي طالب، عن أبيه زيد بن علي، عن أبيه علي بن الحسين، عن أبيه الحسـين،

honest with each other. Once one cheats the other, their business will
no longer be blessed. The two parties to a deal can call off the deal
for as long as they are both present. If there is a dispute between
them, what the owner says is more acceptable.”
**[[107]](footnotes_1.htm#b0107)**

TWO THINGS WHICH PROVIDE US WITH BENEFITS EVERY DAWN AND DUSK
-------------------------------------------------------------

2-44 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Yaqoob ibn
Yazid, on the authority of Zyad ibn Marvan al-Qandi, on the authority of
Abi Vaki’a, on the authority of Abi Ishaq al-Sabi’e, on the authority of
Al-Harith, on the authority of the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali
(MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “I advise you to attend to
agriculture and raising sheep, since these would provide you with
benefits every dawn and dusk.” The people asked the Prophet (MGB), “O
Prophet of God! Then what about raising camels?” The Prophet (MGB)
replied, “Camels are the associates of Satan! Their benefits come to us
in dangerous ways.” The people said, “O Prophet of God! If the people
hear this, they will abandon raising camels.” The Prophet (MGB) replied,
“No. The wicked ones will not!”

TWO FORMS OF SHOPPING ARE BAD
-----------------------------

2-45 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of Abdul Rahman
ibn Himad, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an who linked it up
through a chain of narrators to Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) that the Imam
(MGB) considered two forms of shopping to be bad: just picking the goods
without checking them, and buying goods without having ever seen them.

THERE ARE TWO PRAYERS FOR HIGH QUALITY GOODS AND TWO CURSES FOR BAD GOODS
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-46 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Yaqoob ibn
Yazid, on the authority of Marvak ibn Ubayd who linked it up through
other narrators to Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “There are two prayers
for high quality goods, and there are two curses for bad goods. People
pray for high quality goods and say, ‘May God bless you and the man who
sold you to me.’ People curse bad goods and say, ‘May God not bless you
and the man who sold you to me.’”

TWO CHARACTERISTICS GRANTED TO WHOEVER HONORS THE RIGHTS OF GOD
---------------------------------------------------------------

2-47 Muhammad ibn Musa al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the authority

#### عن أبيه علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إذا التاجران صدقا وبرا بورك لهما، وإذا كذبا وخانا لم يبارك لهما، وهما بالخيار ما لم يفترقا، فان اختلفا فالقول قول رب السلعة أو يتتاركا. {.t0}

##### شيئان يروحان بخير ويغدوان بخير

#### 2-44 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن زياد بن مروان القندي، عن أبي وكيع، عن أبي إسحاق السبيعي، عن الحارث قال: قال قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: عليكم بالغنم والحرث، فانهما يروحان بخير ويغدوان بخير فقيل: يا رسول الله فأين الابل؟ قال: تلك أعنان الشياطين ويأتيها خيرها من الجانب الاشأم، قيل: يا رسول الله إن سمع الناس بذلك تركوها، فقال: إذا لا يعدمها الاشقياء الفجرة.

##### بيعان مكروهان

#### 2-45 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن عبدالرحمن بن حماد، عن محمد بن سنان مسندا إلى أبي جعفر عليه السلام أنه كره بيعين: اطرح وخذ، من غير تقليب وشرى ما لم تره.

##### في الجيد دعوتان وفى الردى دعوتان

#### 2-46 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن مروك بن عبيد، عمن ذكره، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام: أنه قال: في الجيد دعوتان، وفي الردئ دعوتان، يقال لصاحب الجيد: بارك الله فيك وفيمن باعك، ويقال لصاحب الردئ: لا بارك الله فيك ولا فيمن باعك.

##### من ناصح الله عز وجل أعطي خصلتين

#### 2-47 حدثنا محمد بن موسى المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني عبد الله بن جعفر

of Muawiyah ibn Wahab that he had heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say,
“Any believer who honors the rights of God - that is he honors other
people’s rights and only takes from others what he deserves - is granted
two characteristics: sustenance from the Honorable the Exalted God with
which he is content, and God’s Pleasure with which he is saved.”

2-48 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of Abul Qasim Abdul Rahman ibn Himad
al-Kufy, on the authority of Abi Muhammad Abdullah ibn Muhammad
al-Qaffari, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Ibrahim al-Ja’fari, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the authority of his father
(MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Whoever is sympathetic with the
poor and treats the people fairly is a true believer.”

2-49 And in another narration we read that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“Whoever gets pleased with his good deeds and feels bad about his bad
deeds is a believer.”

ONE WHO HAS TWO CHARACTERISTICS IS GOOD, OTHERWISE STAY AWAY FROM HIM
---------------------------------------------------------------------

2-50 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God have Mercy upon
him - narrated that his father quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Ali al-Kufy, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Umar ibn Abdul-Aziz, on the authority of
Al-Khaybari, on the authority of Yunus ibn Zabyan and al-Mufaz’zal ibn
Umar, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “One who has two
characteristics is good. Otherwise you should avoid him.” He was asked,
“What are these two characteristics?” The Imam (MGB) replied, “Being
careful to say his prayers on time and being sympathetic with others.”

TWO THINGS CAN TERMINATE THE WAITING PERIOD OF A DIVORCED WOMAN WHO HAS NOT HAD HER MENSTRUATION IN DUE TIME
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-51 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr
al-Bazanty, on the authority of Jameel, on the authority of Zurarah, on
the authority of Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “There are two things
which can terminate the waiting period (iddah) of a divorced woman who
has not had her menstruation in due time. The first one is three months
of being clean during which no blood is seen, and the second one is
three menstruations between each of which there is no clean period as
long as three months.” **[[108]](footnotes_1.htm#b0108)**

#### الحميري، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن معاوية بن وهب قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: ما ناصح الله عبد مسلم في نفسه فأعطى الحق منها وأخذ الحق لها إلا اعطي خصلتين: رزقا من الله عز وجل يقنع به ورضى عن الله ينجيه. {.t0}

##### من كان فيه خصلتان فهو مؤمن حقا

#### 2-48 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه، عن عمه محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله قال: حدثني أبوالقاسم عبدالرحمن بن حماد الكوفي، عن أبي محمد عبد الله بن محمد الغفاري، عن جعفر بن إبراهيم الجعفري، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: من واسى الفقير وأنصف الناس من نفسه فذلك المؤمن حقا.

#### 2-49 وفي خبر آخر قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: من سرته حسنته وساء‌ته سيئته فهو مؤمن.

##### خصلتان من كانتا فيه والا فاعزب ثم اعزب ثم اعزب

#### 2-50 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار- رحمه الله - عن أبيه، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن خالد، عن محمد بن علي الكوفي، عن محمد بن سنان، عن عمر بن عبدالعزيز، عن الخيبري عن يونس بن ظبيان، والمفضل بن عمر، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: خصلتان من كانتا فيه وإلا فاعزب ثم اعزب ثم اعزب، قيل: وما هما قال: الصلاة في مواقيتها، والمحافظة عليها والمواساة.

##### أمران أيهما سبق إلى المطلقة المسترابة بانت به

#### 2-51 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال حدثني أحمد ابن محمد بن عيسى، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي، عن جميل، عن زرارة، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: أمران أيهما سبق إليها بانت به المطلقة المسترابة التي تستريب الحيض إن مرت بها ثلاثة أشهر بيض ليس بها دم بانت بها، وإن مرت بها ثلاث حيض ليس بين الحيضتين ثلاثة أشهر بانت بالحيض.

SEEK NEARNESS TO THE HONORABLE THE EXALTED GOD WITH TWO CHARACTERISTICS
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

2-52 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of Umar ibn Yazid, on the authority of Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB), “Being kind is different from paying the alms-tax. Seek nearness
to the Honorable the Exalted God with kindness and visiting the
relations of kin.”

TWO CHARACTERISTICS WHICH ELIMINATE POVERTY, INCREASE LIFE AND FEND OFF SEVENTY HARSH DEATHS
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-53 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Safvan ibn Yahya, on the authority of Ishaq ibn Qalib, on the authority
of someone who narrated that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “Kindness
and charity eliminate poverty, increase life and fend off seventy harsh
deaths.”

TRADITIONS ARE OF TWO TYPES
---------------------------

2-54 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim quoted his father, on
the authority of Al-Nawfaly, on the authority of Al-Sakoony, on the
authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father
Al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of his forefathers (MGB) that Ali (MGB)
said, “There are two types of traditions. Some traditions are related to
the obligatory. Practicing them leads to guidance and abandoning them
leads to deviation. Some other traditions are not obligatory. It is
better to practice them, but it is not a sin to abandon them."

DOING GOOD IS ONLY VALUED BY THOSE WHO HAVE TWO CHARACTERISTICS
---------------------------------------------------------------

2-55 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted Ahmad ibn Isa, on
the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the authority of Sayf ibn
Umayrih, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “Doing good is
only valued by those who are honorable or religious.”

FRIENDS ARE OF TWO TYPES
------------------------

2-56 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn
Ahmad, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Ahmad al-Razi, on the authority
of Bakr ibn Salih, on the authority of Isma’il ibn Mihran, on the
authority

##### التقرب إلى الله عز وجل بخصلتين

#### 2-52 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه، عن عمه محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن عمر بن يزيد قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام المعروف شيء سوى الزكاة، فتقربوا إلى الله عز وجل بالبر وصلة الرحم.

##### خصلتان ينفيان الفقر، ويزيدان في العمر، ويدفعان عن فاعلهما سبعين ميتة سوء

#### 2-53 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن صفوان بن يحيى، عن إسحاق بن غالب، عمن حدثه، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: البر والصدقة ينفيان الفقر، ويزيدان في العمر، ويدفعان سبعين ميتة سوء.

##### السنة سنتان

#### 2-54 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن النوفلي، عن السكوني، عن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام أنه قال: السنة سنتان: سنة في فريضة الاخذ بها هدى وتركها ضلالة، وسنة في غير فريضة الاخذ بها فضيلة، وتركها غير خطيئة.

##### لا تصلح الصنيعة الا عند ذي خصلتين

#### 2-55 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري، عن أحمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن سيف بن عميرة عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: لا تصلح الصنيعة إلا عند ذي حسب أو دين.

##### الاخوان صنفان

#### 2-56 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أحمـد،

of Muhammad ibn Hafs, on the authority of Yaqoob ibn Bashir, on the
authority of Jabir, on the authority of Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) that a
man went to Basra to see the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB)
and said, “O Commander of the Faithful! Please inform me about my
brethren.” The Commander of the Faithful (MGB) replied, “There are two
types of brethren: sincere ones and hypocrites. The sincere brethren are
similar to one’s hands, wings, and property. Once you find a sincere
brother, do not hesitate to help him with your life and wealth. Be
friends with his friends and be an enemy of his enemies. Cover up his
flaws, and express his good deeds. However, you who ask should know that
such friends are as scarce as red matches
are.**[[109]](footnotes_1.htm#b0109)** About hypocrites, you should only
associate with them on the surface as they do with you. You should not
expect anything else from them. Treat them just as they treat you in
terms of being polite with and talking pleasantly with them.”

PEOPLE ARE OF TWO TYPES
-----------------------

2-57 Ja’far ibn Ali al-Kufy - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his father quoted his father Al-Hassan ibn Ali, on the authority of
Al-Ab’bas ibn Amer, on the authority of Salih ibn Sa’id-Sakoony, on the
authority of Abi Hamzih al-Sumaly that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said,
“People are of two types: believers and the ignorant. Therefore, do not
disturb believers, and do not treat the ignorant ones out of ignorance
lest you shall be like them.”

TWO LEADERS WHO ARE NOT IN POWER
--------------------------------

2-58 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Muhammad ibn Ahmad, who linked it up through a chain of narrators to Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), who said that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There
are two leaders who are not in power: The man who is following a corpse
in a funeral procession doesn’t have the power to return until the body
is buried, and a man who is on a Hajj
pilgrimage**[[110]](footnotes_1.htm#b0110)** visit along with a woman
doesn’t have the power to leave until she finishes her Hajj pilgrimage.”

TWO THINGS WITH WHICH SOME CORRUPT THEIR PRAYERS
------------------------------------------------

2-59 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr,
on the authority of Sa’alabat ibn Maymun, on the authority of
Maysara**[[111]](footnotes_1.htm#b0111)** that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB)
said, “There are two things with which some people corrupt their
prayers. The first thing is saying ‘tabaraka ismuka wa ta’ala jadduka’
which means ‘Blessed is Thy name and High is

#### عن عبد الله بن أحمد الرازي، عن بكر بن صالح، عن إسماعيل بن مهران، عن محمد بن حفص عن يعقوب بن بشير، عن جابر، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قام إلى أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام رجل بالبصرة فقال: يا أمير المؤمنين أخبرنا عن الاخوان؟ قال: الاخوان صنفان إخوان الثقة وإخوان المكاشرة فأما إخوان الثقة فهم الكف والجناح والاهل والمال فاذا كنت من أخيك على حد الثقة فابذل له مالك وبدنك، وصاف من صافاه، وعاد من عاداه، واكتم سره وعيبه، وأظهر منه الحسن. واعلم أيها السائل إنهم أقل من الكبريت الاحمر. وأما إخوان المكاشرة فانك تصيب منهم لذتك فلا تقطعن ذلك منهم. ولا تطلبن ماوراء ذلك من ضميرهم، وابذل لهم ما بذلوا لك من طلاقه الوجه وحلاوة اللسان. {.t0}

##### الناس رجلان

#### 2-57 حدثنا جعفر بن علي الكوفي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني أبي، عن أبيه الحسن بن علي، عن العباس بن عامر، عن صالح بن سعيد السكوني، عن أبي حمزة الثمالي، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: الناس رجلان: مؤمن وجاهل، فلا تؤذي المؤمن ولا تجهل الجاهل فتكون مثله.

##### أميران وليسا بأميرين

#### 2-58 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن أحمد بن محمد باسناده رفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أميران وليسا بأميرين، ليس لمن تبع جنازة أن يرجع حتى تدفن أو يؤذن له، ورجل يحج مع امرأة فليس له أن ينفر حتى تقضي نسكها.

##### شيئان يفسد الناس بهما صلاتهم

#### 2-59 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر، عن ثعلبة بن ميمون، عن ميسرة، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: شيئان يفسد الناس بهما صلاتهم: قول الرجـل تبـارك

Thy Fortune.’ This is what the genies said about God out of ignorance
and God has stated it quoting them. The second thing is saying
‘as-salamu alayna va ala ebadillah as-salihin’ which means ‘Peace be
upon us and upon God’s servants - the good-doers’ in the middle of the
prayer (since this is said at the end to terminate the prayers). ”
**[[112]](footnotes_1.htm#b0112)**

NO TWO THINGS ARE LOVED BY THE HONORABLE THE EXALTED GOD MORE THAN THE FOLLOWING TWO
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-60 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Sa’id, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Mansoor ibn
Yunus, on the authority of Abi Hamzih al-Somali, that he had heard the
Ornament of the Worshippers - Ali ibn al-Hussein (MGB) say, “No two
steps are loved by the Honorable the Exalted God more than the following
two steps: The steps taken forward by a believer with which he
reinforces the troop lines in a holy war, and the steps taken to
reinforce the ties of kinship towards the relations of kin who have
broken the ties of kinship. No two sips are loved by the Honorable the
Exalted God more than the following two sips: The sips of a believer’s
wrath which he quenches and the sip of a believer’s suffering which he
takes in with his patience and forbearance. No two drops of tears are
loved by the Honorable the Exalted God more than the following two: The
drop of blood shed in the way of God, and the drop of tears shed in the
middle of the night by one who only sheds it for the Honorable the
Exalted God.”

TWO CHARACTERISTICS WHICH SATAN TAUGHT NOAH (MGB)
-------------------------------------------------

2-61 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali, on the
authority of Aban ibn Uthman, on the authority of Al-Ala’ ibn Syabat
that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “When Noah’s (MGB) ark landed,
Satan appeared and told Noah, ‘There is no man on the planet Earth who
has pleased me more than you have, since you cursed these corrupt
people; they were destroyed; and I got rid of them. Do you want me to
teach you two characteristics? Avoid jealousy since it was jealousy
which caused me to become this way. Also avoid greed since it was greed
which resulted in what happened to Adam.
”**[[113]](footnotes_1.htm#b0113)**

TWO CHARACTERISTICS OF WHICH PEOPLE SHOULD BE MOST FEARFUL
----------------------------------------------------------

2-62 Muhammad ibn Ahmad Al-Asady narrated that Muhammad ibn Abi Imran
quoted Abu Mus’ab Ahmad ibn Abu Bakr al-Zahri, on the authority of Ali
ibn Abi Ali al-Lahabi, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Munkadir, on
the authority of Jabir ibn Abdullah that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “What
I am most afraid of for my nation is unattainable aspirations and

#### اسمك وتعالى جدك وإنما هو شيء قالته الجن بجهالة فحكى الله عنهم، وقول الرجل: السلام علينا وعلى عباد الله الصالحين. {.t0}

##### ما من خطوة أحب إلى الله من خطوتين، وما من جرعة أحب إليه من جرعتين

#### 2-60 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن الحسين بن سعيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن منصور بن يونس، عن أبي حمزة الثمالي قال: سمعت علي بن الحسين زين العابدين عليهما السلام يقول: ما من خطوة أحب إلى الله عز وجل من خطوتين: خطوة يسد بها المؤمن صفا في سبيل الله، وخطوة إلى ذي رحم قاطع، وما من جرعة أحب إلى الله عز وجل من جرعتين: جرعة غيظ ردها مؤمن بحلم، وجرعة مصيبة ردها مؤمن بصبر، وما من قطرة أحب إلى الله عز وجل من قطرتين: قطرة دم في سبيل الله وقطرة دمعة في سواد الليل لا يريد بها عبد إلا الله عز وجل.

##### خصلتان ذكرهما ابليس لنوح عليه السلام

#### 2-61 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن الحسن بن علي، عن أبان بن عثمان، عن العلاء بن سيابة، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: لما هبط نوح عليه السلام من السفينة أتاه إبليس فقال له: ما في الارض رجل أعظم منة علي منك، دعوت الله على هؤلاء الفساق فأرحتني منهم، ألا اعلمك خصلتين: إياك والحسد فهو الذي عمل بي ما عمل، وإياك والحرص فهو الذي عمل بآدم ما عمل.

##### اخوف ما يخاف على الناس خصلتان

#### 2-62 حدثنا محمد بن أحمد الاسدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن أبي عمران قال: حدثنا أبومصعب أحمد بن أبي بكر الزهري قال: حدثنا علي بن أبي علي اللهبي عن محمد بن المنكدر عن جابر بن عبدالله قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إن أخوف

unreachable hopes. Aspirations would hinder one from the truth and
unreachable hopes would make one forget the Hereafter. The life in this
world is to be ended while the life in the Hereafter is ahead of you.
Each life has its own children. Try to be of the children of the
Hereafter if you can. Try not to be of the children of this world. Today
you are alive, can do things and there is no Reckoning. However,
tomorrow you will die and will be in the World of Reckoning where you
cannot do anything.”

2-63 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the
authority of Umar ibn Azineh, on the authority of Aban ibn Abi Ayyash,
on the authority of Salim ibn Qays al-Hilaly, on the authority of the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“There are two groups of scientists. Those who practice their knowledge
are prosperous, but those who abandon their knowledge get destroyed. The
residents of Hell will be bothered with the bad smell of the scientists
who have not put their knowledge into practice. However, there are those
who are most sorry. They invite others to God, and their call is
accepted by others who then obey God and are taken to Heaven by God.
However, the caller himself is taken to Hell by God for not acting (on
his own words), and those following their whims will be the most sorry.”
Then the Commander of the Faithful (MGB) added, “I fear two things
concerning you. The first is following your whims, and the second is
having high aspirations since following your whims will prevent you from
accepting the truth, and having high aspirations will make you forget
the Hereafter."

2-64 Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bandar al-Shafe’ee al-Furqany in
Furqan narrated that Abul Abbas al-Himady quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad
al-Shafe’ee, on the authority of his uncle Ibrahim ibn Muhammad, on the
authority of Ali ibn Abi Ali al-Lahabi, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Munkadir, on the authority of Jabir ibn Abdullah that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “What I am most afraid of for my nation is unattainable
aspirations and unreachable hopes. Aspirations would hinder one from the
truth and unreachable hopes would make one forget the Hereafter. The
life in this world is to be ended while the life in the Hereafter is
ahead of you. Each life has its own children. Try to be of the children
of the Hereafter, if you can. Try not to be of the children of this
world. Today you are alive, can do things and there is no Reckoning.
However, tomorrow you will die and will be in the World of Reckoning
where you cannot do anything.”

#### ما أخاف على أمتي الهوى وطول الامل، أما الهوى فانه يصد عن الحق، وأما طول الامل فينسي الآخرة، وهذه الدنيا قدارتحلت مدبرة، وهذه الآخرة قدارتحلت مقبلة، ولكل واحدة منهما بنون، فان استطعتم أن تكونوا من أبناء الآخرة ولا تكونوا من أبناء الدنيا فافعلوا، فانكم اليوم في دار عمل ولا حساب وأنتم غدا في دار حساب ولا عمل. {.t0}

#### 2-63 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن أحمد ابن محمد بن عيسى، عن أبيه، عن حماد بن عيسى، عن عمر بن اذينة، عن أبان بن أبي عياش، عن سليم بن قيس الهلالي، عن أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال في كلام له: العلماء رجلان: رجل عالم آخذ بعلمه فهذا ناج، ورجل عالم تارك لعلمه فهذا هالك. وإن أهل النار ليتأذون بريح العالم التارك لعلمه. وإن أشد أهل النار ندامة وحسرة رجل دعا عبدا إلى الله عز وجل فاستجاب له وقبل منه وأطاع الله عز وجل فأدخله الله الجنة وأدخل الداعي النار بتركه علمه واتباعه الهوى ثم قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: ألا إن أخوف ما أخاف عليكم خصلتين اتباع الهوى وطول الامل أما اتباع الهوى فيصد عن الحق، وطول الامل ينسي الآخرة.

#### 2-64 حدثنا أبوأحمد محمد بن جعفر البندار الشافعي الفرغاني بفرغانة قال: حدثنا أبوالعباس الحمادي قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد الشافعي قال: حدثنا عمي إبراهيم بن محمد قال: حدثنا علي بن أبي علي اللهبي، عن محمد بن المنكدر، عن جابر ابن عبد الله قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إن أخوف ما أتخوف على امتي الهوى وطول الامل، أما الهوى فيصد عن الحق، وأما طول الامل فينسي الآخرة وهذه الدنيا مرتحلة ذاهبة وهذه الآخرة مرتحلة قادمة ولكل واحدة منهما بنون فان استطعتم أن تكونوا من أبناء الآخرة، ولا تكونوا من أبناء الدنيا فافعلوا، فانكم اليوم في دار العمل ولا حساب، وأنتم غدا في دار الحساب ولا عمل.

TWO CHARACTERISTICS WHICH YOU ARE ADMONISHED AGAINST
----------------------------------------------------

2-65 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Ahmad ibn Muhammad Isa and Abdullah ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the
authority of Ali ibn al-Hikam, on the authority of Sayf ibn Umayrih, on
the authority of Mufaz’zal ibn Mazid that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
said, “I admonish you against two characteristics which can ruin men: to
worship God with a wrong religion, and to advise people on issues you
are uninformed about.”

2-66 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted
Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Yunus ibn Abdul-Rahman,
on the authority of Abdul Rahman ibn al-Haj’jaj that Abu Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) told him, “I admonish you against two characteristics
which can ruin men: to worship God with a wrong religion, and to advise
people on issues you are uninformed about.”

TWO TYPES OF WATER WHICH DID NOT HEED NOAH’S CALL
-------------------------------------------------

2-67 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah, on
the authority of his father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr,
on the authority of Abdullah ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “Noah (MGB) called all waters to assist him
during the Flood. All types of water heeded his call except for two:
bitter water and sulphate water.”

FAITH CONSISTS OF TALKING AND ACTION
------------------------------------

2-68 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Ma’qel al-Qarmaysani said,
“I was standing with my father. Abu Salt al-Haravy, Ishaq ibn Rahoyeh
and Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Hanbal were also present there. My father
said, “Each of you should narrate a tradition for me.” Abu Salt
al-Haravy said, “Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB), who I swear by God was
really pleasant as his name indicates, quoted on the authority of his
father Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB), on the authority of his father
Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father
Muhammad ibn Ali (MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hussein (MGB), on
the authority of his father Al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB), on the authority
of his father Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“Faith consists of talking and action.” When we left Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Hanbal said, “What form of chain of traditions was that?” My father
said, “It is the healing medication for the insane. If they treat a mad
man using it, he will be healed.”

##### النهي عن الخصلتين

#### 2-65 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن أحمد وعبد الله ابني محمد بن عيسى، عن علي بن الحكم، عن سيف بن عميرة، عن مفضل بن مزيد قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: أنهاك عن خصلتين فيهما هلك الرجال: أن تدين الله بالباطل وتفتي الناس بما لا تعلم.

#### 2-66 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن محمد بن عيسى بن عبيد، عن يونس بن عبدالرحمن، عن عبدالرحمن بن الحجاج قال: قال لي أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: انهاك عن خصلتين ففيهما هلك من هلك: إياك أن تفتي الناس برأيك، أو تدين بمالا تعلم.

##### ماء‌ان لم يجيبا نوحا لما دعا المياه

#### 2-67 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه: عن عمه محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن عبد الله بن سنان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إن نوحا لما كان أيام الطوفان دعا مياه الارض فأجابته إلا الماء المر، و[ماء] الكبريت.

##### الايمان قول وعمل

#### 2-68 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن معقل القرميسيني، عن محمد ابن عبد الله بن طاهر قال: كنت واقفا على أبي وعنده أبوالصلت الهروي وإسحاق بن راهويه وأحمد بن محمد بن حنبل، فقال أبي: ليحدثني كل رجل منكم بحديث، فقال: أبوالصلت الهروي: حدثني علي بن موسى الرضا وكان والله رضى كما سمي عن أبيه موسى بن جعفر، عن أبيه جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه محمد بن علي، عن أبيه، علي بن الحسين، عن أبيه الحسين بن علي، عن أبيه علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الايمان قول وعمل، فلما خرجنا قال أحمد بن محمد بن حنبل: ما هذا الاسناد؟ فقال له أبي: هذا سعوط المجانين إذا سعط به المجنون أفاق.

TWO HUNGRY ONES WHO WOULD NEVER GET SATIATED
--------------------------------------------

2-69 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah
al-Barqy, on the authority of his father Muhammad ibn Khalid (al-Barqy),
on the authority of some of his companions who linked it up through a
chain of narrators to Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “There are two hungry ones who would never get satiated:
those who are eager to learn (would never get satiated with knowledge),
and those who are greedy for money (would never get satiated with
wealth).

TWO CHARACTERISTICS DUE TO TRUE FAITH
-------------------------------------

2-70 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on
the authority of Ali ibn Hisan al-Vaseti, who linked it up to Zurarah,
on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) who said, “Two
characteristics are due to true faith. The first one is that you prefer
the truth over the false, even if it may be to your disadvantage. The
second one is that what you say is not beyond your intellect.”

THERE ARE TWO TYPES OF CHIVALRY
-------------------------------

2-71 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his
father, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, who linked it up through
other narrators to Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) in his will to his son Muhammad
ibn al-Hanafyeh, “Know that there are two types of chivalry for a Muslim
man. One type of generosity is for the home, and the other type is for
when you travel. The chivalry for the home is to recite the Quran,
associate with the scholars; ponder over religious decrees; and
safeguard congregational prayers. The chivalry for when you travel is to
give of what you have taken along with you to your travel companions; to
minimize disputes with your travel companions; and remember the
Honorable the Exalted God when you ascend, descend or sit down.”

2-72 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his
father, on the authority of Al-Nawfaly, on the authority of Al-Sakoony,
on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the authority of his
father (MGB)**[[114]](footnotes_1.htm#b0114)** , on the authority of his
forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “Urinating while standing up without a proper excuse and
cleansing oneself with the right hand after defecation are both acts
that are harmful to oneself.”

##### منهومان لا يشبعان

#### 2-69 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه محمد بن خالد [البرقي] عن عدة من أصحابه يرفعونه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام أنه قال: منهومان لا يشبعان: منهوم علم ومنهوم مال.

##### خصلتان من حقيقة الايمان

#### 2-70 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن علي بن حسان الواسطي يرفعه إلى زرارة، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إن من حقيقة الايمان أن تؤثر الحق وإن ضرك على الباطل وإن نفعك، وأن لا تجوز منطقك علمك.

##### المروء‌ة مروء‌تان

#### 2-71 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن حماد بن عيسى، عمن ذكره، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام في وصيته لابنه محمد بن الحنفية: واعلم أن مروء‌ة المرء المسلم مروء‌تان: مروء‌ة في حضر ومروء‌ة في سفر، فأما مروء‌ة الحضر فقراء‌ة القرآن، ومجالسة العلماء، والنظر في الفقه والمحافظة على الصلاة في الجماعات، وأما مروء‌ة السفر فبذل الزاد، وقلة الخلاف على من صحبك، وكثرة ذكر الله عز وجل في كل مصعد ومهبط ونزول وقيام وقعود.

##### خصلتان من الجفاء

#### 2-72 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن النوفلي، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: البول قائما من غير علة من الجفاء، والاستنجاء باليمين من الجفاء.

TWO CHARACTERISTICS WHICH SPEED UP THE ARRIVAL OF YOUR DAILY BREAD
------------------------------------------------------------------

2-73 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his father quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Ishaq, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Marvan that Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Washing the dishes and sweeping the entrance way
of the house would speed up the arrival of the daily bread.”

THE SUBSISTENCE FOR ONE’S SPOUSE IS BETWEEN TWO ABOMINABLE LIMITS
-----------------------------------------------------------------

2-74 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn
Ahmad, on the authority of Ali ibn Isma’il, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Amr ibn Sa’id, on the authority of some of his companions who said
that they heard al-Ayashi say, “I asked Al-Reza (MGB) about the
subsistence for the spouse. The Imam (MGB) said, ‘It is in between two
abominable limits.’ I asked the Imam (MGB), ‘May I be your ransom! I
swear by God that I do not know what the two abominable limits are.’ The
Imam (MGB) said, ‘Yes. May God have Mercy upon you! Don’t you know that
God the Honorable the Exalted despises extravagance and miserliness and
has said, ‘Those who, when they spend, are not extravagant and not
niggardly, but hold a just (balance) between those
(extremes).’**[[115]](footnotes_1.htm#b0115)** ”

TWO CHARACTERISTICS IN RETURN FOR TWO CHARACTERISTICS
-----------------------------------------------------

2-75 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Muhammad ibn Abdul Jab’bar, on the authority of

Abdul Rahman ibn Abi Najran, on the authority of Abdul Rahman ibn Abi
Najran, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Ribat, on the
authority of Abu Bakr al-Hazrami, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali
ibn Ribat, on the authority of some of his companions that Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Be kind to your parents so that your children may
be kind to you. Honor the chastity of other men’s women so that they
honor the chastity of your women.”

THERE ARE TWO TYPES OF SHYNESS
------------------------------

2-76 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted Harun ibn Muslim, on the
authority of Mus’adat ibn Zyad, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father Al-Baqir (MGB), on the
authority of his forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that
God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There are two types of shyness. One is due to
being weak and the other type is due to strength, submission to God in
Islam and faith.”

##### خصلتان مجلبتان للرزق

#### 2-73 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أبي، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن محمد بن عيسى بن عبيد، عن محمد بن إسحاق، عن محمد بن مروان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: غسل الاناء، وكسح الفناء مجلبة للرزق.

##### تجب النفقة على العيال بين المكروهين

#### 2-74 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن علي بن إسماعيل، عن محمد بن عمرو بن سعيد، عن بعض أصحابه قال: سمعت العياشي وهو يقول: استأذنت الرضا عليه السلام في النفقة على العيال فقال: بين المكروهين قال: فقلت: جعلت فداك لا والله ما أعرف المكروهين: قال: فقال: بلى يرحمك الله أما تعرف أن الله عز وجل كره الاسراف وكره الاقتار فقال: "والذين إذا أنفقوا لم يسرفوا ولم يقتروا وكان بين ذلك قواما".

##### خصلتان بخصلتين

#### 2-75 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن محمد بن عبدالجبار، عن عبدالرحمن بن أبي نجران، عن الحسن بن علي بن رباط، عن أبي بكر الحضرمي، عن بعض أصحابه، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: بروا آباء‌كم يبركم أبناؤكم وعفوا عن نساء الناس تعف نساؤكم.

##### الحياء على وجهين

#### 2-76 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه، عن عمه محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن هارون بن مسلم، عن مسعدة بن زياد، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الحياء على وجهين فمنه ضعف ومنه قوة وإسلام وإيمان.

WHAT MIGHT CAUSE PARENT’S BEING DAMNED BY THE CHILDREN
------------------------------------------------------

2-77 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his
father, on the authority of Al-Nawfaly, on the authority of Al-Sakoony,
on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority
of his father Al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of his forefathers (MGB),
on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Parents
might be damned by their children if they do not honor their rights just
as children could be damned by their parents should they not honor their
parents’ rights.”

ON THE PROPHET'S STATEMENT: "I AM THE SON OF THE TWO OFFERINGS"
---------------------------------------------------------------

2-78-A Ahmad ibn al-Hassan al-Qat’tan narrated that Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Saeed al-Kufy quoted on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hassan ibn
al-Faz'zal, on the authority of his father, “I asked Abal-Hassan Ali ibn
Musa al-Reza (MGB) about the meaning of the statement: ‘I am the son of
the two offerings’ (as expressed by the Prophet (MGB). He (MGB) said,
‘That means that the Prophet (MGB) was the descendant of both Ishmael,
the son of Abraham - the friend of God (MGB), and Abdullah - the son of
Abdul Mutalib. Ishmael was the patient son that God gave the glad
tidings of his birth to Abraham (MGB). ‘Then when (the son) reached (the
age of) (serious) work with him, he said, ‘O my son! I see in a vision
that I offer thee in sacrifice. Now see what is thy view!’ (The Son)
said, ‘O my father! Do as thou art commanded. Thou will find me, if God
so wills one practicing Patience and
Constancy!’**[[116]](footnotes_1.htm#b0116)** ’ When he decided to offer
him as sacrifice, God replaced him with a chubby black and white sheep.
This sheep had been raised in a fresh green area, and had grazed in the
gardens of Heaven for forty years. It had no mother. Rather the
Honorable the Exalted God said to it be and it was created so as to be
substituted for Ishmael, ‘We but say the word, ‘Be’, and it
is.’**[[117]](footnotes_1.htm#b0117)** ”

Whatever is sacrificed in Mina until the Resurrection Day will be
sacrificed on behalf of Ishmael. This is one of the offerings. Now let
us consider the second one. Abdul Mutalib grabbed the door knob of the
Ka'ba and prayed to God to be granted ten sons. He bet with the Almighty
God that he shall offer one of them for sacrifice if his prayer is
accepted. When the number of his sons became ten, he took them all
inside the Ka'ba and drew lots in their names. The lot fell upon
Abdullah's name - the father of the Prophet Muhammad (MGB) - that he
loved the most. He drew lots again, and it fell upon Abdullah's name. He
drew lots for the third time. Again the lots fell upon Abdullah's name.
Then he took him, imprisoned him and decided to offer him for sacrifice.
All of the women of the Quraysh tribe got together and

##### ما يلزم الوالدين من عقوق الولد

#### 2-77 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن النوفلي، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: يلزم الوالدين من العقوق لولدهما إذا كان الولد صالحا ما يلزم الولد لهما.

##### قول النبي صلى الله عليه وآله انا ابن الذبيحين

#### 2-78 حدثنا أحمد بن الحسن القطان قال: أخبرنا أحمد بن محمد بن سعيد الكوفي قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسن بن علي بن فضال، عن أبيه قال: سألت أبا الحسن علي ابن موسى الرضا عليهما السلام عن معنى قول النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: أنا ابن الذبيحين قال: يعني إسماعيل ابن إبراهيم الخليل عليهما السلام وعبد الله بن عبدالمطلب أما إسماعيل فهو الغلام الحليم الذي بشر الله به إبراهيم "فَلَمَّا بَلَغَ مَعَهُ السَّعْيَ قَالَ يَا بُنَيَّ إِنِّي أَرَى فِي الْمَنَامِ أَنِّي أَذْبَحُكَ فَانْظُرْ مَاذَا تَرَى. قَالَ يَا أَبَتِ افْعَلْ مَا تُؤْمَرُ (ولم يقل له: يا أبت افعل ما رأيت) سَتَجِدُنِي إِنْ شَاءَ اللهُ مِنَ الصَّابِرِينَ." فلما عزم على ذبحه فداه الله بذبح عظيم بكبش أملح يأكل في سواد، ويشرب في سواد، وينظر في سواد، ويمشي في سواد، ويبول ويبعرفي سواد، وكان يرتع قبل ذلك في رياض الجنة أربعين عاما، وما خرج من رحم انثى، وإنما قال الله عز وجل له: كن، فكان ليفدي به إسماعيل فكل ما يذبح بمنى فهو فدية لاسماعيل إلى يوم القيامة فهذا أحد الذبيحين، وأما الآخر فان عبدالمطلب كان تعلق بحلقة باب الكعبة ودعا الله عز وجل أن يرزقه عشرة بنين ونذر لله عز وجل أن يذبح واحدا منهم متى أجاب الله دعوته، فلما بلغوا عشرة [أولاد] قال: قد وفى الله لي فلافين لله عز وجل فأدخل ولده الكعبة وأسهم بينهم فخرج سهم عبد الله أبي رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وكان أحب ولده إليه، ثم أجالها ثانية فخرج سهم عبد الله، ثم أجالها ثـالثة فخرج سهم عبد الله، فأخذه وحبسـه وعـزم على ذبــحه

started crying. Abdul Mutalib's daughter - Ateka said, "Ask the Almighty
God to excuse you from offering your son for sacrifice." Abdul Mutalib
said, "My daughter! How can I ask for an excuse? You are mature and
intelligent." Ateka said, "Draw lots concerning your son, and your
camels that are around the Shrine. Increase the number of camels so much
that your Lord gets pleased and the lot falls upon the name of the
camels." Then Abdul Mutalib sent someone after his camels. They brought
them all there. He chose ten of the camels and drew lots. The lot fell
upon the name of Abdullah. He chose an additional ten and drew lots
again. The lot fell upon the name of Abdullah again. He added to the
number of camels and repeated drawing lots until the number of camels
reached one-hundred. Then the lot fell upon the name of the camels. The
people of the Quraysh became very happy and said God is Great so loud
that the Tehamat Mountains started to shake. Abdul Mutalib said, "No. I
must draw lots three more times." He drew lots three more times. The lot
fell upon the name of the camels all the three times. On the third time,
Zubayr and Abu Talib dragged their brother Abdullah away from under
Abdul Mutalib's feet. The part of his face that was on the ground got
hurt. They lifted him up and kissed him. Abdul Mutalib ordered all the
one-hundred camels be taken to Hazvareh and slaughtered there. He
stressed that no one should be deprived of the meat. There were five
traditions of Abdul Mutalib which the Almighty God continued their
practice in Islam as follows:

1- He forbade the (marriage of) the father's ex-wives with the sons.
**[[118]](footnotes_1.htm#b0118)**

2- He established one-hundred camels as blood compensation for killing.

3- He circumambulated the Ka'ba seven times.

4- He found a treasure and paid one fifth of it as levy.
**[[119]](footnotes_1.htm#b0119)**

5- When he dug up the Zamzam spring, he established it as the supply of
water for the pilgrims.

If Abdul Mutalib was not a proof (of the Divine God) and his decision to
offer his son as sacrifice was not similar to that of Abraham (MGB)
about his son Ishmael, the Noble Prophet (MGB) would not have been proud
of being related to them (Abraham and Abdul-Mutalib) and would not have
said, "I am the son of the two offerings." The reason God prevented
Ishmael from being sacrificed was the same one whereby He prevented
Abdullah from being sacrificed. The reason was that the Noble Prophet
(MGB) and the Immaculate Imams (MGB) were in their loins. Thus, God
prevented their being sacrificed due to the Blessed Prophet (MGB) and
the Imams (MGB). Thus, the tradition of offering one's son as a
sacrifice did not become popular among the people. Otherwise, it would
have become

#### فاجتمعت قريش ومنعته من ذلك. واجتمع نساء عبدالمطلب يبكين ويصحن فقالت له ابنته عاتكة: يا أبتاه اعذر فيما بينك وبين الله عز وجل في قتل ابنك. {.t0}

#### قال: فكيف أعذر يا بنية فإنك مباركة، قالت: اعمد إلى تلك السوائم التي لك في الحرم فاضرب بالقداح على ابنك وعلى الابل وأعط ربك حتى يرضى.

#### فبعث عبدالمطلب إلى إبله فأحضرها وعزل منها عشرا وضرب السهام فخرج سهم عبد الله، فما زال يزيد عشرا عشرا حتى بلغت مائة فضرب فخرج السهم على الابل فكبرت قريش تكبيرة ارتجت لها جبال تهامة، فقال عبدالمطلب: لا حتى أضرب بالقداح ثلاث مرات فضرب ثلاثا كل ذلك يخرج السهم على الابل، فلما كان في الثالثة اجتذ به الزبير وأبوطالب وإخوانه من تحت رجليه فحملوه وقد انسلخت جلدة خده الذي كان على الارض وأقبلوا يرفعونه ويقبلونه ويمسحون عنه التراب وأمر عبدالمطلب أن تنحر الابل بالحزورة ولا يمنع أحد منها وكانت مائة.

#### وكانت لعبد المطلب خمس سنن أجراها الله عز وجل في الاسلام: حرم نساء الآباء على الابناء، وسن الدية في القتل مائة من الابل، وكان يطوف بالبيت سبعة أشواط، ووجد كنزا فأخرج منه الخمس، وسمى زمزم لما حفرها سقاية الحاج، ولو لا أن عبدالمطلب كان حجة وأن عزمه على ذبح ابنه عبد الله شبيه بعزم إبراهيم على ذبح ابنه إسماعيل لما افتخر النبي صلى الله عليه وآله بالانتساب إليهما لاجل أنهما الذبيحان في قوله عليه السلام: " أنا ابن الذبيحين " والعلة التي من أجلها رفع الله عز وجل الذبح عن إسماعيل هي العلة ألتي من أجلها رفع الذبح عن عبد الله وهي كون النبي صلى الله عليه وآله والائمة عليهم السلام في صلبهما فببركة النبي والائمة صلى الله عليه وآله رفـع الله الذبح عنهما فلم تجر السـنة في الناس

obligatory for people to offer their sons for sacrifice on the day of
celebrating the Eid ul-Azha each year until the Resurrection Day to seek
nearness to God. Everything sacrificed on the Eid ul-Azha until the
Resurrection Day will be a substitute for Ishmael.

The compiler of the book said, "There are many traditions about the
offering. In some traditions we read that Isaac was the one offered for
sacrifice. In others we read that Ishmael was the one offered for
sacrifice. We cannot reject a tradition that has an authentic
documentation. Ishmael was offered for sacrifice. However, later when
Isaac was born, he wished that it was he himself who was offered for
sacrificed by his father. He would have been patient and would have
submitted to the decree of the Almighty God just as his brother did.
Then he would have earned the same rank and reward that his brother had
earned. God was aware of his intentions. For this reason he called him
"the offering" among his angels.

2-78-B It was narrated by Muhammad ibn Ali al-Bishari al-Qazvini - may
God be pleased with him - that Al-Muzaf’far ibn Ahmad al-Qazvini quoted
Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Kufy Al-Asady, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Isma’il al-Barmaky, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Dahir, on the
authority of Abi Qatadah al-Horani, on the authority of Vaki’a ibn
al-Jarah, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Mihran, on the authority of
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB): "What the Prophet (MGB) meant when he (MGB)
said, ‘statement: ‘I am the son of the two offerings’ was to call one’s
uncle father as the Honorable the Exalted God did in His statement,
“Were ye witnesses when death appeared before Jacob? Behold, he said to
his sons: "What will ye worship after me?" They said, "We shall worship
Thy God and the God of thy fathers, of Abraham, Isma'il and Isaac,- the
one (True) God: To Him we bow (in Islam).”
**[[120]](footnotes_1.htm#b0120)**

In this verse God has called Ishmael who was the uncle of Jacob as his
father. Likewise, the Prophet (MGB) called uncle as father. Therefore,
when the Prophet (MGB) said that he (MGB) is the son of the two
offerings he (MGB) is referring to Ishmael and Isaac one of whom, i.e.
Ishmael was a true offering and the other one, i.e. Isaac is a virtual
offering due to the fact that he wished he had been offered as a
sacrifice and deserved the reward. Thus, the statement ‘I am the son of
the two offerings’ can be interpreted in both ways as said above.

AND THERE IS ANOTHER TRADITION REGARDING THE GREAT OFFERING
-----------------------------------------------------------

2-79 Abdul Vahid ibn Muhammad ibn Abdus Al-Neishaboory Al-Attar narrated
that Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Qutaybat Al-Neishaboory quoted on the
authority of Fazl ibn Shadan, "I heard Imam Reza (MGB) say that Abraham
(MGB) wished

#### بقتل أولادهم، ولو لا ذلك لوجب على الناس كل أضحى التقرب إلى الله تعالى ذكره بقتل أولادهم، وكل ما يتقرب الناس به إلى الله عز وجل من اضحية فهو فداء لاسماعيل إلى يوم القيامة. {.t0}

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب أدام الله عزه -: قد اختلف الروايات في الذبيح فمنها ما ورد بأنه إسماعيل ومنها ما ورد بأنه إسحاق، ولا سبيل إلى رد الاخبار متى صح طرقها، وكان الذبيح إسماعيل لكن إسحاق لما ولد بعد ذلك تمنى أن يكون هو الذي امر أبوه بذبحه فكان يصبر لامر الله ويسلم له كصبر أخيه وتسليمه، فينال بذلك درجته في الثواب، فعلم الله عز وجل ذلك من قلبه فسماه الله عز وجل بين ملائكته ذبيحا لتمنيه لذلك.

#### [و] حدثنا بذلك محمد بن علي البشاري القزويني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا المظفر بن أحمد القزويني قال: حدثنا محمد بن جعفر الكوفي الاسدي، عن محمد بن اسماعيل البرمكي، عن عبد الله بن داهر، عن أبي قتادة الحراني، عن وكيع بن الجراح، عن سليمان بن مهران، عن أبي عبد الله الصادق جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام وقول النبي صلى الله عليه وآله "أنا ابن الذبيحين يريد بذلك العم [لان العم] قد سماه الله عز وجل أبا في قوله"أَمْ كُنتُمْ شُهَدَاءَ إِذْ حَضَرَ يَعْقُوبَ الْمَوْتُ إِذْ قَالَ لِبَنِيهِ مَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ بَعْدِي قَالُوا نَعْبُدُ إِلَهَكَ وَإِلَهَ آبَائِكَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ وَإِسْحَاقَ" وكان إسماعيل عم يعقوب فسماه الله في هذا الموضع أبا، وقد قال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: العم والد فعلى هذا الاصل أيضا يطرد قول النبي صلى الله عليه وآله "أنا ابن الذبيحين" أحدهما ذبيح بالحقيقة والآخر ذبيح بالمجاز، واستحقاق الثواب على النية والتمني، فالنبي صلى الله عليه وآله هو ابن الذبيحين من وجهين على ما ذكرناه

##### وللذبح العظيم وجه آخر:

#### 2-79 حدثنا عبدالواحد بن محمد بن عبدوس النيسابوري العطار رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن محمد بن قتيبة النيسابوري، عن الفضل بن شاذان قال: سمعت الرضا عليه السلام يقول: لما أمر الله عز وجل إبراهيم عليه السلام أن يذبح مكان

that he had sacrificed his own son Ishmael when God the Almighty the
Sublime sent a sheep and ordered Abraham (MGB) to sacrifice it instead
of his son. He wished that he had not been ordered to sacrifice a sheep
instead of his son, so that he could have the feeling a father who
sacrifices his dearest son with his own hands has, and could deserve the
highest ranks of reward for suffering calamities. However, God the
Almighty revealed to him: "O Abraham! Who is My dearest creature for
you?" Abraham (MGB) said, "O my Lord! You have not created anyone who is
dearer to me than your friend Muhammad (MGB)." Then God the Almighty
revealed to him: "O Abraham! Do you like him more or do you like
yourself more?" He said, "No. I like him more than I like myself." God
said, "Do you like his child or do you like your child more?" He said,
"Yes. His child." God said, "Will the oppressive beheading of his child
by his enemies hurt you more, or your beheading your own child due to
your obeying Me?" He said, "O My Lord! Of course, the beheading of his
child by his enemies will hurt me more." God said, "O Abraham! A group
of people who consider themselves to be a part of Muhammad's (MGB)
nation out of animosity and oppression will slaughter his son Hussein
(MGB) just like a sheep. Thus, they will deserve My wrath. Then Abraham
(MGB) became really sad hearing this, felt a pain in his heart and
started to cry. Then the Almighty God revealed the following to him, "O
Abraham! I accepted your sorrow and sadness due to the slaughtering of
Hussein (MGB) instead of the sorrow you would have experienced for the
sacrifice of your son Ishmael. And I will grant you the highest rewards
for suffering calamities." And this is God the Almighty's words, "And We
ransomed him with a momentous sacrifice."
**[[121]](footnotes_1.htm#b0121)**

TWO STANDING, TWO MOVING, TWO DIFFERENT AND TWO OPPOSITE THINGS
---------------------------------------------------------------

2-80 Abul Abbas Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Taleqani - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abdul Aziz ibn Yahya al-Basry quoted
Muhammad ibn Atiye, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Amr ibn Sa’id
al-Basry, on the authority of Himad, on the authority of Abdullah ibn
Suleiman who used to read many books as saying, “I have read in one of
the Books of the Honorable the Exalted God that once Zul-Qarnayn
finished building the dam he continued his travels. He ran into a
knowledgeable man during his travels with his troops. The knowledgeable
man asked him, ‘Let me know about the two things which are standing ever
since the Honorable the Exalted God created them, the two things which
are moving, the two things which are different from each other and the
two things which are opposite of each other.’ Zul-Qarnayn said, ‘The two
things which are standing are the heavens and the Earth. The two things
which are moving are the sun and the moon. The two things which are
different

#### ابنه إسماعيل الكبش الذي أنزله عليه تمنى إبراهيم عليه السلام أن يكون قد ذبح ابنه إسماعيل بيده وأنه لم يؤمر بذبح الكبش مكانه ليرجع إلى قلبه ما يرجع إلى قلب الوالد الذي يذبح أعز ولده عليه بيده فستحق بذلك أرفع درجات أهل الثواب على المصائب فأوحى الله عز وجل إليه: يا إبراهيم من أحب خلقي إليك؟ فقال: يا رب ما خلقت خلقا هو أحب إلي من حبيبك محمد صلى الله عليه وآله فأوحى الله تعالى إليه أفهو أحب إليك أم نفسك قال: بل هو أحب إلي من نفسي، قال: فولده أحب إليك أم ولدك: قال: بل ولده، قال: فذبح ولده ظلما على أيدي أعدائه أوجع لقلبك أو ذبح ولدك بيدك في طاعتي؟ قال: يا رب بل ذبح ولده ظلما على أيدي أعدائه أوجع لقلبي، قال: يا إبراهيم فان طائفة تزعم أنها من أمة محمد ستقتل الحسين ابنه من بعده ظلما وعدوانا كما يذبح الكبش، ويستوجبون بذلك سخطي، فجزع إبراهيم عليه السلام لذلك، وتوجع قلبه، وأقبل يبكي، فأوحى الله عز وجل إليه: يا إبراهيم قد فديت جزعك على ابنك إسماعيل لو ذبحته بيدك بجزعك على الحسين وقتله، وأوجبت لك أرفع درجات أهل الثواب على المصائب وذلك قول الله عز وجل "وفديناه بذبح عظيم". {.t0}

##### شيئان قائمان وشيئان جاريان وشيئان مختلفان وشيئان متباغضان

#### 2-80 حدثنا محمد بن إبراهيم بن إسحاق الطالقاني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبدالعزيز بن يحيى البصري قال: حدثنا محمد بن عطية قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن عمرو ابن سعيد البصري قال: حدثنا هشام بن جعفر، عن حماد، عن عبد الله بن سليمان وكان قارئا للكتب قال: قرأت في بعض كتب الله عز وجل إن ذا القرنين لما فرغ من عمل السد انطلق على وجهه فبينا هو يسير وجنوده إذ مر برجل عالم فقال لذي القرنين: أخبرني عن شيئين منذ خلقهما الله عز وجل قائمين؟ وعن شيئين جاريين؟ وعن شيئين مختلفين؟ وعن شيئين متباغضين؟ فقال له ذو القرنين:

from each other are the day and the night, and the two things which are
opposite of each other are life and death.’ The knowledgeable man said,
‘Go. You are knowledgeable.”

This tradition is long, but I have only mentioned a short part of it
here as deemed necessary. I have narrated it in full in the book Kitab
al-Nabuwah.

THE REWARD OF WHOEVER GOES ON THE HAJJ PILGRIMAGE TWICE
-------------------------------------------------------

2-81 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
al-Hussein ibn Abil Khat’tab, on the authority of Al-Hijal, on the
authority of Safvan ibn Yahya, on the authority of Safvan ibn Mihran
al-Jamal, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “Whoever goes
on the Hajj pilgrimage twice would always be in good conditions until he
dies.”

SAYING WHAT IS RIGHT UNDER TWO CONDITIONS
-----------------------------------------

2-82 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted Harun ibn Muslim, on the
authority of Mus’adat ibn Sadaqah, on the authority of Ja’far ibn
Muhammad (MGB)**[[122]](footnotes_1.htm#b0122)** , on the authority of
his father (MGB)**[[123]](footnotes_1.htm#b0123)** that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “Nothing that a believer does is loved by the Honorable the
Exalted God more than saying what is right whether he is pleased or
angry.”

2-83 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah on the authority of his father, on the authority of Wahab ibn
Wahab, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad
(MGB)**[[124]](footnotes_1.htm#b0124)** , on the authority of his father
(MGB)**[[125]](footnotes_1.htm#b0125)** , “There are two kinds of
homicide: unintentional (or semi-intentional) and intentional. There are
also two types of fighting: fighting with the rebellious atheists until
they submit, and fighting with the Muslim rebels until they stop their
rebellion.”

TWO CHARACTERISTICS LOVED BY THE HONORABLE THE EXALTED GOD IN THE HEAVENS AND BY THE PEOPLE ON EARTH
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-84 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Abi Sa’id al-Adamy, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Davood
al-Yaqoobi, on the authority of his brother Suleiman ibn Davood who
linked it up through a chain of narrators to God’s Prophet (MGB) and
said, “A man told the Prophet (MGB), ‘O Prophet of God! Please let me
know of something which I do and be loved by God in the heavens and by
the people on the Earth.’ The Prophet (MGB) told him, ‘Be inclined to
what is near the Honorable the Exalted God to be loved by God, and
abstain from what is near the people to be loved by the people.’”

#### أما الشيئان القائمان فالسماوات والارض، وأما الشيئان الجاريان فالشمس والقمر، وأما الشيئان المختلفان فالليل والنهار، وأما الشيئان المتباغضان فالموت والحياة. قال: فانطلق فانك عالم.والحديث طويل أخذنا منه موضع الحاجة، وقد أخرجته تاما في كتاب النبوة. {.t0}

##### ثواب من حج حجتين

#### 2-81 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن الحسين ابن أبي الخطاب، عن الحجال، عن صفوان بن يحيى، عن صفوان بن مهران الجمال، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من حج حجتين لم يزل في خير حتى يموت.

##### قول الحق في حالين

#### 2-82 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه، عن عمه محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن هارون بن مسلم، عن مسعدة بن صدقة، عن جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام قال: قال أبي عليه السلام: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ما أنفق مؤمن من نفقة هي أحب إلى الله عز وجل من قول الحق في الرضا والغضب.

##### القتل قتلان والقتال قتالان

#### 2-83 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن وهب بن وهب، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام أنه قال: القتل قتلان، قتل كفارة، وقتل درجة، والقتال قتالان: قتال الفئة الكافرة حتى يسلموا، وقتال الفئة الباغية حتى يفيئوا.

##### خصلتان من فعلهما احبه الله عز وجل من السماء واحبه الناس من الارض

#### 2-84 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن أبي سعيد الآدمي، عن إبراهيم بن داود اليعقوبي، عن أخيه سليمان بن داود باسناده رفعه قال: قال رجل للنبي صلى الله عليه وآله: يارسول الله علمني شيئا إذا أنا فعلته أحبني الله من السماء وأحبني الناس من الارض، فقال له: ارغب فيما عند الله عز وجل يحبك الله، وازهد فيما عند الناس يحبك الناس.

THE PROPHET OF GOD HAD TWO RINGS
--------------------------------

2-85 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Aba Abdullah al-Razi, on the authority of Ali ibn Suleiman,
on the authority of Abdullah ibn Ubaydullah al-Hashemi, on the authority
of Ibrahim ibn Abil Balad, (on the authority of his father,) on the
authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “The Prophet of God (MGB) had
two rings. On one of them it was written in Arabic ‘There is no God but
God, Muhammad is the Messenger of God’ and on the other one it was
written in Arabic ‘God Speaks the Truth.’”

THERE ARE TWO GIFTS FROM ONE WHO FASTS
--------------------------------------

2-86 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn al-Hussein al-Sa’ed Abady
quoted Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Ali al-Kufy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the authority
of Abdullah ibn Ayoob, on the authority of Abdul-Salam al-Iskafi, on the
authority of Umayr ibn Ma’mun whose son was with Al-Hassan
(MGB)**[[126]](footnotes_1.htm#b0126)** , on the authority of Al-Hassan
ibn Ali (MGB), “The gift from a man who fasts is that he puts perfume on
his hair and irons his clothes, and the gift from a woman who fasts is
to comb her hair and iron her clothes. When Abu Abdullah al-Hussein ibn
Ali (MGB) fasted, he (MGB) put on perfume and said, ‘Good scent is the
gift from one who fasts.’”

THERE ARE TWO SIGNS FOR THE APPROACH OF THE HOUR
------------------------------------------------

2-87 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Al-Abbas ibn Ma’ruf, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Faz’zal,
on the authority of Zarif ibn Nasih, on the authority of Abil Hassain,
“I heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say that the Prophet of God (MGB)
was questioned about the Hour **[[127]](footnotes_1.htm#b0127)**and the
Prophet (MGB) said, ‘It is when the people believe in astrology and deny
destiny.’”

IT IS NOT PERMITTED TO GIVE CHARITY TO THE HASHEMITES EXCEPT IN TWO CONDITIONS
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-88 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn
Ahmad, on the authority of Yusuf ibn al-Harith, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abdul Rahman al-Arzami, on the authority of his father, on
the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad
(MGB)**[[128]](footnotes_1.htm#b0128)** , on the authority of his father
(MGB)**[[129]](footnotes_1.htm#b0129)** , “It is not permitted to give
charity to the Hashemites**[[130]](footnotes_1.htm#b0130)** except in
two conditions: they can be given water to drink when they are thirsty,
and one of the Hashemites can give charity to another one.”

##### كان لرسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله خاتمان

#### 2-85 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن أبي عبد الله الرازي، عن علي بن سليمان، عن عبد الله ابن عبيد الله الهاشمي، عن إبراهيم بن أبي البلاد [عن أبيه]، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: كان لرسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله خاتمان أحدهما عليه مكتوب "لا إله إلا الله، محمد رسول الله" والآخر "صدق الله".

##### تحفة الصائم شيئان

#### 2-86 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين السعد آبادي، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن محمد بن علي الكوفي، عن محمد بن سنان، عن عبد الله بن أيوب، عن عبدالسلام الاسكافي، عن عمير بن مأمون وكانت ابنته تحت الحسن، عن الحسن بن علي عليهما السلام قال: تحفة الصائم أن يدهن لحيته ويجمر ثوبه وتحفة المرأة الصائمة أن تمشط رأسها وتجمر ثوبها. وكان أبوعبد الله الحسين بن علي عليهما السلام: إذا صام يتطيب بالطيب ويقول: الطيب تحفة الصائم.

##### تقوم الساعة عند ظهور علامتين

#### 2-87 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن العباس بن معروف، عن الحسن بن علي بن فضال، عن ظريف ابن ناصح، عن أبي الحصين قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: سئل رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله عن الساعة، فقال: عند إيمان بالنجوم وتكذيب بالقدر.

##### لا تحل الصدقة لبني هاشم الا في وجهين

#### 2-88 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن يوسف بن الحارث، عن محمد بن عبدالرحمن العرزمي، عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهم السلام قال: لا تحل الصدقة لبني هاشم إلا في وجهين: إن كانوا عطاشا وأصابوا ماء فشربوا، وصدقة بعضهم على بعض.

TWO CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LOWLY PEOPLE
---------------------------------------

2-89 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Al-Sayyari who linked it up through a chain of narrators to
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) who was questioned about the lowest of the
people. The Imam (MGB) said, “They are those who drink and play the
Tanbour.**[[131]](footnotes_1.htm#b0131)** ”

TWO SINS ONE OF WHICH IS WORSE THAN THE OTHER ONE
-------------------------------------------------

2-90 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn
Yahya ibn Imran**[[132]](footnotes_1.htm#b0132)** , on the authority of
Abu Abdullah al-Razi, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn
al-Nue’man, on the authority of Asbat ibn Muhammad who linked it up
through a chain of narrators to the Prophet (MGB), “Gossiping is worse
than committing adultery.” The Prophet (MGB) was asked, “O Prophet of
God! How could that be so?” The Prophet (MGB) replied, “One who has
committed adultery can repent and God would accept his repentance, but
if one who has gossiped repents, God would not accept his repentance
until the one he gossiped about forgives him.”

THE TWO BENEFITS OF BRUSHING THE TEETH
--------------------------------------

2-91 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah, on the authority of Abil Jo’aza al-Monabat ibn Abdullah and
Abil Khazraj al-Hassan ibn al-Zebarqan (al-Qumi), on the authority of
Fuzayl ibn Uthman, “I heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, ‘Clean your
teeth with As-Sa’ed**[[133]](footnotes_1.htm#b0133)** as it would make
your mouth smell good and increase your sexual power.’”

EATING SOAP HAS TWO EFFECTS
---------------------------

2-92 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Aba Abdullah al-Razi, on the
authority of Ali ibn Asbat, on the authority of Al-Hikam ibn Meskin, “I
heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, ‘Eating soap would weaken the
knees and spoil the semen.’”

2-93 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abdul Jab’bar who linked it up through a chain
of narrators to God’s Prophet (MGB), “There are two groups on whose
behalf I shall not intercede: friends of oppressive kings and those who
transgress beyond the religion due to their being excessively
religious.”

##### خصلتان من فعلهما فهو سفلة

#### 2-89 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن السياري باسناده يرفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام أنه سئل عن السفلة، فقال: من يشرب الخمر، ويضرب بالطنبور.

##### ذنبان احدهما اشد من الاخر

#### 2-90 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار قال: حدثني محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران قال: حدثني أبوعبد الله الرازي، عن الحسن بن علي بن النعمان، عن أسباط بن محمد باسناده يرفعه إلي النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال: الغيبة أشد من الزنا، فقيل: يا رسول الله ولم ذلك؟ قال: صاحب الزنا يتوب فيتوب الله عليه، وصاحب الغيبة يتوب فلا يتوب الله عليه حتى يكون صاحبه الذي يحله.

##### اتخاذ السعد في الاسنان يورث خصلتين

#### 2-91 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن أبي الجوزاء المنبه بن عبد الله، وأبي الخزرج الحسن بن الزبرقان، عن فضيل بن عثمان قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: اتخذوا في أسنانكم السعد فانه يطيب الفم، ويزيد في الجماع.

##### اكل الاشنان يورث خصلتين

#### 2-92 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد ابن أحمد، عن أبي عبد الله الرازي، عن علي بن أسباط، عن الحكم بن مسكين قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: أكل الاشنان يوهن الركبتين ويفسد ماء الظهر.

##### رجلان لا تنالهما شفاعة النبي صلى الله عليه وآله

#### 2-93 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن محمد بن عبدالجبار باسناده يرفعه إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال: رجلان لا تنالهما شفاعتي: صاحب سلطان عسوف غشوم، وغال في الدين مارق.

USING TWO KINDS OF TOOTHPICKS WOULD LEAD TO LEPROSY
---------------------------------------------------

2-94 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
Isa, on the authority of Ubaydullah ibn Abdullah al-Dehqan, on the
authority of Durost ibn Abi Mansoor, on the authority of Abdullah ibn
Sin’an that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Do not use sweet basil
stems or pomegranate tree twigs as toothpicks as this might lead to
leprosy.”

THIS WORLD AND THE HEREAFTER ARE ON THE TWO SIDES OF A SCALE
------------------------------------------------------------

2-95 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Qasim ibn
Muhammad al-Isfahani, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Davood
al-Minqari, on the authority of Sufyan ibn Ayyineh, on the authority of
Al-Zuhra that he had heard Ali ibn al-Hussein
(MGB)**[[134]](footnotes_1.htm#b0134)** say, “Whoever is not calmed by
what God has promised would suffer from worldly losses. By God, this
world and the Hereafter are like the two sides of a scale. Whichever
side is loaded more and goes down, the other side would get lighter and
go up.” The Imam (MGB) added, “‘When the Event inevitable cometh to
pass**[[135]](footnotes_1.htm#b0135)** ,’ i.e. the Hereafter comes,
‘Then will no (soul) entertain falsehood concerning its
coming’**[[136]](footnotes_1.htm#b0136)** ‘(Many) will it bring
low;**[[137]](footnotes_1.htm#b0137)**’ that is God will throw the
enemies of God into the Fire, and ‘(many) will it
exalt;’**[[138]](footnotes_1.htm#b0138)** that is God will lead the
friends of God into Paradise.”

Then the Imam (MGB) turned towards some of the men present and told
them, “Fear God, make brief requests and do not ask for what is not
created, since whoever asks for what is not created would suffer from
grief and not get what he had asked for.”

Then the Imam (MGB) asked, “How could one obtain what has not been
created?”

The man asked, “How could one ask for what has not been created?”

Then the Imam (MGB) said, “By asking for wealth, property and increasing
sustenance in order to attain comfort, while comfort is not created in
this world and is not for the people of this world. Comfort is created
in Paradise and it is for the people of Paradise. Suffering and grief
have been created in this world and (they are created) for the people of
this world. No one is given anything unless he has some greed for it.
Whoever has more belongings in this world is more needy, since he needs
the people to protect his wealth. Therefore, all the belongings in this
world increase one’s needs. Thus, there is no comfort in this world.
However, Satan whispers to the Children of
Adam**[[139]](footnotes_1.htm#b0139)** that comfort lies in collecting
wealth. Thus, they are led to toil in this world and the consequent
Reckoning in the Hereafter.”

##### خلالان يهيجان عرق الجذام

#### 2-94 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن عبيد الله بن عبد الله الدهقان، عن درست بن أبي منصور، عن عبد الله بن سنان قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: لا تتخللوا بعود الريحان، ولا بقضيب الرمان، فانهما يهيجان عرق الجذام.

##### الدنيا والاخرة ككفتي الميزان

#### 2-95 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن القاسم بن محمد الاصبهاني، عن سليمان بن داود المنقري، عن سفيان بن عيينة، عن الزهري قال: سمعت علي بن الحسين عليهما السلام يقول: من لم يتعز بعزاء الله تقطعت نفسه على الدنيا حسرات، والله ما الدنيا والآخرة إلا ككفتي الميزان فأيهما رجح ذهب بالآخر، ثم تلا قوله عز وجل "إذا وقعت الواقعة" يعني القيامة "ليس لوقعتها كاذبة خافضة" خفضت والله بأعداء الله إلى النار "رافعة" رفعت والله أولياء الله إلى الجنة.

#### ثم أقبل على رجل من جلسائه فقال له: اتق الله وأجمل في الطلب ولا تطلب ما لم يخلق فان من طلب ما لم يخلق تقطعت نفسه حسرات ولم ينل ما طلب.

#### ثم قال: وكيف ينال ما لم يخلق، فقال الرجل: وكيف يطلب ما لم يخلق؟ فقال: من طلب الغنى والاموال والسعة في الدنيا فانما يطلب ذلك للراحة، والراحة لم تخلق في الدنيا ولا لاهل الدنيا، إنما خلقت الراحة في الجنة ولاهل الجنة، والتعب والنصب خلقا في الدنيا ولاهل الدنيا وما اعطي أحد منها جفنة إلا اعطي من الحرص مثليها ومن أصاب من الدنيا أكثر كان فيها أشد فقرا لانه يفتقر إلى الناس في حفظ أمواله، ويفتقر إلى كل آلة من آلات الدنيا فليس في غنى الدنيا راحة ولكن الشيطان يوسوس إلى ابن آدم أن له في جمع [ذلك] المال راحة وإنما يسوقه إلى التعب في الدنيا والحساب عليه في الآخرة.

Then the Imam (MGB) said, “In this world the Friends of God would never
overexert themselves for this world. Rather, in this world they shall
strive for the Hereafter.”

Then the Imam (MGB) added, “A sin will be recorded for whoever gets
worried about his daily sustenance in this world. Jesus the Messiah
(MGB) told his disciples, ‘This world is a bridge. Pass over it but do
not build on it.’”

HE HAS LET FREE THE TWO BODIES OF FLOWING WATER, MEETING TOGETHER: BETWEEN THEM IS A BARRIER WHICH THEY DO NOT TRANSGRESS
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-96 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Qasim ibn
Muhammad al-Isfahani, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Davood
al-Minqari, on the authority of Yahya ibn Sa’id al-Qat’tan that he had
heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, “The following words of the
Honorable the Exalted God ‘He has let free the two bodies of flowing
water, meeting together: Between them is a Barrier which they do not
transgress’**[[140]](footnotes_1.htm#b0140)** refer to Ali (MGB) and
Fatimah (MGB). They are like the ‘two bodies of water’ filled with such
deep knowledge that neither one of them would transgress to the other
one’s side. And the verse ‘Out of them come Pearls and
Coral’**[[141]](footnotes_1.htm#b0141)** refers to Al-Hassan (MGB) and
Al-Hussein (MGB).”

THE PROPHE LEFT TWO THINGS AMONGST HIS NATION
---------------------------------------------

2-97 Al-Hassan ibn Abdullah ibn Sa’id al-Askari narrated that Muhammad
ibn Hamdan al-Qushayri quoted Al-Muqayrih ibn Muhammad ibn al-Muhlib, on
the authority of his father, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Davood, on
the authority of Fuzayl ibn Mazooq, on the authority of Atiye al-Oafi,
on the authority of Abi Sa’id al-Khidry that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“I have left amongst you two things each of which is longer than the
other one. They are the Book of God which is a Rope that extends from
the heavens to the Earth and my Itrat. These two shall not be separated
from each other until they meet me at the Heavenly
Pool.**[[142]](footnotes_1.htm#b0142)** ”

(The narrator of this tradition added:) I asked Abi Sa’id (al-Khidry),
“Who are the Prophet’s Itrat?” He replied, “They are the members of his
Holy Household.”

WILL BE QUESTIONED ABOUT THE ‘TWO HEAVY THINGS’**[[143]](footnotes_1.htm#b0143)** ON THE RESURRECTION DAY
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-98 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab and Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Abdullah ibn
Sin’an, on the authority of Ma’ruf ibn Kharboz, on the authority

#### ثم قال عليه السلام: كلا ما تعب أولياء الله في الدنيا للدنيا بل تعبوا في الدنيا للآخرة. ثم قال: ألا ومن اهتم لرزقه كتب عليه خطيئة كذلك قال المسيح [عيسى] عليه السلام للحواريين: إنما الدنيا قنطرة فاعبروها ولا تعمروها.

##### مرج البحرين يلتقيان بينهما برزخ لا يبغيان

#### 2-96 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن القاسم بن محمد الاصبهاني، عن سليمان بن داود المنقري قال: حدثنا يحيى بن سعيد القطان قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول في قوله عز وجل: "مرج البحرين يلتقيان بينهما برزخ لا يبغيان" قال: علي وفاطمة عليهما السلام بحران من العلم، عميقان، لا يبغى أحدهما على صاحبه "يخرج منهما اللؤلؤ والمرجان" الحسن والحسين عليهما السلام.

##### ترك النبي صلى الله عليه وآله في امته أمرين

#### 2-97 حدثنا الحسن بن عبد الله بن سعيد العسكري قال: أخبرنا محمد بن حمدان القشيري قال: أخبرنا المغيرة بن محمد بن المهلب قال: حدثني أبي قال: حدثني عبد الله بن داود، عن فضيل بن مرزوق، عن عطية العوفي، عن أبي سعيد الخدري قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إني تارك فيكم أمرين أحدهما أطول من الآخر كتاب الله حبل ممدود من السماء إلى الارض وعترتي، ألا وإنهما لن يفترقا حتى يردا علي الحوض.

#### فقلت لابي سعيد: من عترته؟ قال: أهل بيته.

##### السؤال عن الثقلين يوم القيامة

#### 2-98 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، ويعقوب بن يزيد جميعا، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن عبد الله بن سنان، عن معروف بن خربـوذ، عـن أبـي

of Abil Tufayl Amer ibn Vasele’, on the authority of Haziqat ibn Asid
al-Qaffari, “When God’s Prophet (MGB) returned from the Farewell
Pilgrimage we were with him (MGB). When we reached Al-Juhfa, the Prophet
(MGB) ordered his companions to relax. Then the people all settled down.
Then they said the call to prayer and the Prophet (MGB) said two units
of prayers with his companions. Then the Prophet (MGB) turned towards
them and told them, ‘The Graceful, the All-Aware has informed me that I
will die and so shall you. Assume that I have answered God’s call. I am
held responsible to God regarding what I have delivered to you. Verily,
I am leaving behind God’s Book and His Proof. You are held responsible
for them. What would you tell your Lord?’ They said, ‘We will say that
you fulfilled your mission, gave us advice, and strived. May God grant
you the best reward on our behalf.’”

Then the Prophet (MGB) asked them, “Don’t you bear witness that there is
no god but One; that I am God’s Prophet sent to you; that Paradise does
exist; that Hell does exist; and that there is resurrection after
death?” They replied, “We bear witness to this.”

The Prophet (MGB) said, “May God bear witness to what you say. I take
you as witnesses and bear witness that God is my Master. I am the Master
of all Muslims. Is it not true that my Mastery over the believers is
more than that of their own mastery over themselves? Do you believe in
this? Will you bear witness to this?” They replied, “We bear witness to
this.”

Then the Prophet (MGB) said, “Whoever I am the Master of, Ali is the
Master of.” Then he grabbed Ali’s hand and raised it up along with his
own hand in such a way that both their underarms could be seen. Then the
Prophet (MGB) said, “O my God! Please be the friend of his friends and
be the enemy of his enemies. Assist whoever assists him, and abandon
whoever abandons him. I shall leave and you will meet me again at the
Heavenly Pool**[[144]](footnotes_1.htm#b0144)** later. That is a Pool
whose width expands from Bosri to
San’a.**[[145]](footnotes_1.htm#b0145)** There are as many silver
goblets in it as there are stars in the sky. Then I shall question you
about what you bear witness to today when I meet you at my Pool. I will
ask you what you did with the Two Heavy
Things**[[146]](footnotes_1.htm#b0146)** and how you dealt with what I
left behind when you meet me. “

They said, “O Messenger of God! What are the Two Heavy Things?”

The Prophet (MGB) said, “The greater of the Two Heavy Things is the Book
of the Honorable the Exalted God. It is a means that is extended from
God and I towards you. One side of it is in the Hand of God and the
other side is in your hands. The knowledge of the past and what is yet
to come up until the arrival of the Hour is in it. And the smaller of
the Two Heavy Things is equal to the Quran: It is Ali ibn Abi Talib
(MGB) and his Household (MGB). These Two will be inseparable until they
come to me at the Heavenly Pool.”

#### الطفيل عامر بن واثلة، عن حذيفة بن أسيد الغفاري قال: لما رجع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله من حجة الوداع ونحن معه أقبل حتى انتهى إلى الجحفة فأمر أصحابه بالنزول فنزل القوم منازلهم، ثم نودي بالصلاة فصلى بأصحابه ركعتين، ثم أقبل بوجهه إليهم فقال لهم: إنه قد نبأني اللطيف الخبير أني ميت وأنكم ميتون، وكأني قد دعيت فاجبت وأني مسؤول عما ارسلت به إليكم، وعما خلفت فيكم من كتاب الله وحجته وأنكم مسؤولون، فما أنتم قائلون لربكم؟ قالوا: نقول: قد بلغت ونصحت وجاهدت فجزاك الله عنا أفضل الجزاء ثم قال لهم: ألستم تشهدون أن لا إله إلا الله وأني رسول الله إليكم وأن الجنة حق؟ وأن النار حق؟ وأن البعث بعد الموت حق؟ فقالوا: نشهد بذلك، قال: اللهم اشهد على ما يقولون، ألا وإني اشهدكم أني أشهد أن الله مولاي، وأنا مولى كل مسلم، وأنا أولى بالمؤمنين من أنفسهم، فهل تقرون لي بذلك، وتشهدون لي به؟ فقالوا: نعم نشهد لك بذلك، فقال: ألا من كنت مولاه فإن عليا مولاه وهو هذا، ثم أخذ بيد علي عليه السلام فرفعها مع يده حتى بدت آباطهما: ثم: قال: اللهم وال من والاه، وعاد من عاداه، وانصر من نصره واخذل من خذله، ألا وإني فرطكم وأنتم واردون علي الحوض، حوضي غدا وهو حوض عرضه ما بين بصرى وصنعاء فيه أقداح من فضة عدد نجوم السماء، ألا وإني سائلكم غدا ماذا صنعتم فيما أشهدت الله به عليكم في يومكم هذا إذا وردتم علي حوضي، وماذا صنعتم بالثقلين من بعدي فانظروا كيف تكونون خلفتموني فيهما حين تلقوني؟ قالوا: وما هذان الثقلان يا رسول الله؟ قال: أما الثقل الاكبر فكتاب الله عز وجل، سبب ممدود من الله ومني في أيديكم، طرفه بيد الله والطرف الآخر بأيديكم، فيه علم ما مضى وما بقي إلى أن تقوم الساعة، وأما الثقل الاصغر فهو حليف القرآن وهو علي بن أبي طالب وعترته عليهم السلام، وإنهما لن يفترقا حتى يردا علي الحوض. {.t0}

Ma’ruf ibn Kharboz said, “I quoted this for Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB).
Then the Imam (MGB) said, ‘Abil Tufayl has told the truth. May God have
Mercy upon him. I have seen this in Ali (MGB)’s book and I know it.”

A similar tradition has been narrated by my father - may God be pleased
with him - who quoted that Ali ibn Ibrahim quoted his father, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr.

A similar tradition has been narrated by Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn
Masroor - may God be pleased with him - who quoted Al-Hussein ibn
Muhammad ibn Amer, on the authority of his uncle Abdullah ibn Amer, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr.

A similar tradition has been narrated by Muhammad ibn Musa ibn
al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him - who quoted Ali ibn
al-Hussein al-Sa’ed Abady, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah
al-Barqy, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Sin’an, on the authority
of Ma’ruf ibn Kharboz, on the authority of Abil Tufayl Amer ibn Vasele’,
on the authority of Haziqat ibn Asid al-Qaffari.

The compiler of the book - may God increase his honor said, “There are
many traditions on this issue. I have presented them in the book
Al-Ma’refat fi Fazael.

AL-HASSAN (MGB) AND AL-HUSSEIN (MGB) HAD TWO AMULETS
----------------------------------------------------

2-99 Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Qazvini known as Ibn Muqayrih
narrated that Muhammad ibn Abdullah al-Hazrami quoted Ahmad ibn Yahya
al-Ahval, on the authority of Khilad al-Muqar’ri, on the authority of
Qays, on the authority of Abil Hassain**[[147]](footnotes_1.htm#b0147)**
, on the authority of Yahya ibn Vasab that Ibn Umar said, “Al-Hassan
(MGB) and Al-Hussein (MGB) had two
amulets**[[148]](footnotes_1.htm#b0148)** which were filled with
fuzz**[[149]](footnotes_1.htm#b0149)** from the wings of Gabriel (MGB).”

DAY NAN NIGHT ARE TWO CARRIAGES
-------------------------------

2-100 Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bandar narrated that Abu Hamid
Ahmad ibn Ishaq al-Haravy quoted Abu Hafs Umar ibn al-Hassan ibn Nasr
al-Qazi, on the authority of Mo’amil ibn Ahab, on the authority of
Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih al-Misri, on the authority of Sufyan al-Sowri,
on the authority of his father, on the authority of Akrama, on the
authority of Ibn Abbas**[[150]](footnotes_1.htm#b0150)** that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “Day and night are two carriages.”

TWO MEN TO WHOM GOD HAS GRANTED TWO WINGS WITH WHICH TO FLY IN PARADISE ALONG WITH THE ANGELS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-101 Ahmad ibn Zyad ibn Ja’far al-Hamedany - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted Muhammad ibn Isa

#### قال معروف بن خربوذ: فعرضت هذا الكلام على أبي جعفر عليه السلام فقال: صدق أبوالطفيل - رحمه الله - هذا الكلام وجدناه في كتاب علي عليه السلام وعرفناه.

#### وحدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير. وحدثنا جعفر بن محمد بن مسرور رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا الحسين بن محمد ابن عامر، عن عمه عبد الله بن عامر، عن محمد بن أبي عمير. وحدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين السعد آبادي، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن عبد الله بن سنان، عن معروف بن خربوذ، عن أبي الطفيل عامر بن واثلة، عن حذيفة بن أسيد الغفاري بمثل هذا الحديث سواء.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب أدام الله عزه: الاخبار في هذا المعنى كثيرة وقد أخرجتها في كتاب المعرفة في الفضائل.

##### كان على الحسن والحسين عليهما السلام تعويذان

#### 2-99 حدثنا علي بن محمد بن الحسن القزويني المعروف بابن مقبرة قال: أخبرنا محمد بن عبد الله الحضرمي قال: حدثنا أحمد بن يحيى الاحول قال: حدثنا خلاد المقرئ، عن قيس، عن أبي الحصين، عن يحيى بن وثاب، عن ابن عمر قال: كان على الحسن والحسين عليهما السلام تعويذان حشوهما من زغب جناح جبرائيل عليه السلام.

##### الليل والنهار مطيتان

#### 2-100 حدثنا أبوأحمد محمد بن جعفر البندار قال: حدثنا أبوحامد أحمد بن إسحاق الهروي قال: حدثنا أبوحفص عمر بن الحسن بن نصر القاضي قال: حدثنا مؤمل بن إهاب قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن المغيرة المصري، عن سفيان الثوري، عن أبيه، عن عكرمة، عن ابن عباس قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الليل والنهار مطيتان.

##### رجلان جعل الله عز وجل لكل واحد منهما جناحين يطير بهما مع الملائكة في الجنة

#### 2-101 حدثنا أحمد بن زياد بن جعفر الهمداني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن محمد بن عيسى بن عبيد، عن يونس بن عبـد الرحمن، عـن

ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Yunus ibn Abdul-Rahman, on the authority
of Ibn Asbat, on the authority of Ali ibn Salim, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Sabet ibn Abi
Sofayeh**[[151]](footnotes_1.htm#b0151)** that Ali ibn al-Hussein
as-Sajjad (MGB) said, “May God have Mercy upon Al-Abbas - that is Ibn
Ali**[[152]](footnotes_1.htm#b0152)** - who preferred his brother to
himself and sacrificed himself for his brother as a result of which both
his hands were cut off (by the enemies). God granted him two wings so
that he can fly in Paradise along with the angels. God did the same for
Ja’far ibn Abi Talib (MGB).

Abbas (MGB) has such a high rank near the Blessed the Sublime God which
all the martyrs of Karbala**[[153]](footnotes_1.htm#b0153)** envy on the
Resurrection Day.”

This is a long narration. I have only presented a part of it here as
needed. I have presented the complete tradition along with other
traditions regarding the nobilities of Ab’bas ibn Ali (MGB) in the book
Maqtal Al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB).

TWO THINGS RUIN THE PEOPLE
--------------------------

2-102 Muhammad ibn Ahmad Abu Abdullah al-Qaza’ee - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Abu Abdullah Ishaq ibn al-Ab’bas ibn Ishaq ibn
Musa ibn Ja’far quoted his father, on the authority of his forefathers
(MGB), on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB) that the Commander
of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said, “Fear of poverty and arrogance ruin
the people.”

WHAT THE COMMANDER OF THE FAITHFUL (MGB) SAID ABOUT TWO PEOPLE WHO BROKE HIS BACK
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-103 Ahmad ibn Harun al-Fami - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Ja’far ibn Bat’tat known as
Mil**[[154]](footnotes_1.htm#b0154)** quoted Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah
al-Barqy, who linked it up through a chain of narrators to the Commander
of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB), “Two men will break my back in this
world: the corrupt but eloquent, and the ignorant worshipper. The first
group use their tongue to cover up their corruption and the second group
use their worshipping to cover up their ignorance. Therefore, beware of
the corrupt scholars and ignorant worshippers. They are the ones who
cause all sedition. I heard God’s Prophet (MGB) say, ‘O Ali! My nation
will be destroyed by eloquent hypocrites.’”

A GREEDY MAN IS DEPRIVED OF TWO CHARACTERISTICS AND HAS TWO CHARACTERISTICS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-104 Ahmad ibn Harun al-Fami and Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Masroor - may
God be pleased with them - narrated that Muhammad ibn Ja’far ibn Bat’tat
quoted Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his father
who linked it up to Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “A greedy man is

#### ابن أسباط، عن علي بن سالم، عن أبيه، عن ثابت بن أبي صفية قال: قال علي بن الحسين عليهما السلام: رحم الله العباس يعني ابن علي فلقد آثروأ بلى وفدى أخاه بنفسه حتى قطعت يداه فأبد له الله بهما جناحين يطير بهما مع الملائكة في الجنة كما جعل لجعفر بن أبي طالب، وإن للعباس عند الله تبارك وتعالى لمنزلة يغبطه بها جميع الشهداء يوم القيامة. {.t0}

#### والحديث طويل أخذنا منه موضع الحاجة، وقد أخرجته بتمامه مع ما رويته في فضائل العباس بن علي عليهما السلام في كتاب مقتل الحسين بن علي عليهما السلام.

##### اثنان أهلك الناس

#### 2-102 حدثنا محمد بن أحمد أبوعبد الله القضاعي رضي الله عنه قال: أخبرنا أبوعبد الله إسحاق بن العباس بن إسحاق بن موسى بن جعفر، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن الحسين بن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: أهلك الناس اثنان خوف الفقر، وطلب الفخر.

##### قول أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام قطع ظهرى رجلان

#### 2-103 حدثنا أحمد بن هارون الفامي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن جعفر ابن بطة المعروف بميل قال: حدثنا أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه باسناده يرفعه إلى أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام أنه قال: قطع ظهري رجلان من الدنيا: رجل عليم اللسان فاسق، ورجل جاهل القلب ناسك، هذا يصد بلسانه عن فسقه، وهذا بنسكه عن جهله، فاتقوا الفاسق من العلماء والجاهل من المتعبدين، أولئك فتنة كل مفتون، فاني سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يقول: ياعلي هلاك امتي على يدي [كل] منافق عليم اللسان.

##### حرم الحريص خصلتين ولزمته خصلتان

#### 2-104 حدثنا أحمد بن هارون الفامي قال: حدثنا محمد بن جعفر بن بطة قال: حدثنا أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه يرفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه الســـلام

deprived of two characteristics and has two characteristics. He is
deprived of contentment and has lost comfort. He is deprived of being
pleased (with God’s Judgement) and has lost certitude.”

TWO PRAYERS WHICH GOD’S PROPHET (MGB) NEVER ABANDONED SAYING
------------------------------------------------------------

2-105 Based on what the jurist Abul Qasim Abdullah ibn Ahmad related to
me in Balkh, Ali ibn Abdul Aziz quoted that Amr ibn Oan narrated on the
authority of Khalaf ibn Abdullah, on the authority of Abi Ishaq
al-Sheibany, on the authority of Abdul Rahman ibn al-Aswad, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Ayesha, “God’s Prophet
(MGB) never stopped saying two forms of prayers in public or in
private**[[155]](footnotes_1.htm#b0155)** : one was saying two units of
prayers after the afternoon prayer, and the other one was saying two
units of prayers before the morning prayer.”

2-106 Abul Qasim Abdullah ibn Ahmad narrated that Ali ibn Abdul Aziz
quoted Abu Na’eem, on the authority of Abdul Vahid ibn Aymain, on the
authority of his father, “I went to see Ayesha and asked her about the
two units of prayers after the afternoon prayers. She said, ‘I swear by
God who will take away his soul (i.e. the Prophet’s soul), the Prophet
(MGB) never stopped saying those two units of prayers until he (MGB)
went to meet the Honorable the Exalted God (perished), except for when
he (MGB) was ill and could not say the prayers in a standing position.
He said most of his prayers in a standing position.’ I asked her,
‘However, when Umar was in power, he admonished against these prayers.’
She said, ‘You are right. However, God’s Prophet (MGB) never said these
prayers in the mosque, since he (MGB) feared that this might place a
burden on his nation. Thus, he preferred to hide this from them.’”

2-107 Abul Qasim Abdullah ibn Ahmad narrated that Yusuf ibn Ishaq
al-Hazrami quoted Al-Howzi**[[156]](footnotes_1.htm#b0156)** , on the
authority of Al-Shoa’bat**[[157]](footnotes_1.htm#b0157)** , on the
authority of Abi Ishaq, on the authority of Masruq, on the authority of
Ayesha, “Whenever God’s Prophet (MGB) was with me, he (MGB) said two
units of prayers after saying the afternoon prayers.”

2-108 Abul Qasim Abdullah ibn Ahmad narrated that Muhammad ibn Ali ibn
Tarkhan quoted Abdullah ibn al-Sabah al-At’tar, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Sin’an, that is Al-O’aqi, on the authority of Abu
Jamreh**[[158]](footnotes_1.htm#b0158)** , on the authority of Abu Bakr
ibn Abdullah ibn Qays, on the authority of his father that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “Whoever says the two prayers at the cool times shall enter
Paradise.” This means after the morning and afternoon prayers.

The compiler of the book - may God increase his honor - said, “My
intention behind presenting these traditions here is to denounce those
who are opposed to saying the extra prayers after the morning and
afternoon prayers and that they oppose what the Prophet (MGB) said and
did.”

#### قال:حرم الحريص خصلتين، ولزمته خصلتان: حرم القناعة فافتقد الراحة، وحرم الرضا فافتقد اليقين. {.t0}

##### صلاتان لم يتركهما رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله

#### 2-105 أخبرني أبوالقاسم عبد الله بن أحمد الفقيه فيما أجازه لي ببلخ قال: أخبرنا علي بن عبدالعزيز قال: حدثنا عمرو بن عون قال: أخبرنا خلف بن عبد الله، عن أبي إسحاق الشيباني، عن عبدالرحمن بن الاسود عن أبيه، عن عائشة قالت: صلاتان لم يتركهما رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله سرا وعلانية: ركعتين بعد العصر وركعتين قبل الفجر.

#### 2-106 أخبرني أبوالقاسم عبد الله بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا علي بن عبدالعزيز قال: حدثنا أبونعيم قال: حدثنا عبدالواحد بن أيمن قال: حدثني أبي، عن عائشة أنه دخل عليها يسألها عن الركعتين بعد العصر قالت: والذي ذهب بنفسه (تعني رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله) ما تركهما حتى لقى الله عز وجل، وحتى ثقل عن الصلاة، وكان يصلي كثيرا من صلاته وهو قاعد، فقلت: إنه لما ولي عمر كان ينهى عنهما، قالت: صدقت، ولكن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله كان لا يصليهما في المسجد مخافة أن يثقل على أمته وكان يحب ما خفف عليهم.

#### 2-107 حدثنا أبوالقاسم عبد الله بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا يعقوب بن إسحاق الحضرمي قال: حدثنا الحوضي قال: حدثنا شعبة، عن أبي إسحاق، عن مسروق عن عائشة أنها قالت: كان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله عندي يصلي بعد العصر ركعتين.

#### 2-108 أخبرني أبوالقاسم عبد الله بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا محمد بن علي بن طرخان قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن الصباح العطار، قال: حدثنا محمد بن سنان يعني العوقي - قال: حدثنا أبوجمرة، عن أبي بكر بن عبد الله بن قيس، عن أبيه قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: "من صلى البردين دخل الجنة" يعني بعد الغداة وبعد العصر.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب أدام الله عزه -: كان مرادي بايراد هذه الاخبار الرد على المخالفين لانهم لا يرون بعد الغداة وبعد العصر صلاة فأحببت أن ابين أنهم قد خالفوا النبي صلى الله عليه وآله في قوله وفعله.

TWO GROUPS OF PEOPLE WHO HAVE NOT BENEFITED FROM ISLAM
------------------------------------------------------

2-109 Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Bashar al-Qazvini - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Al-Muzaf’far ibn Ahmad and Ali ibn Muhammad ibn
Suleiman quoted Ali ibn Ja’far al-Baghdady, on the authority of Ja’far
ibn Muhammad ibn Malik al-Kufy, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn
Rashid, on the authority of Ali ibn Salim, on the authority of his
father that Aba Abdullah Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “The
least thing with which a man might lose his faith is to sit down with
the Boasters**[[159]](footnotes_1.htm#b0159)** , listen to them and
acknowledge what they say. My father (MGB) narrated that his father
(MGB) quoted on the authority of his grandfather (MGB) that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, ‘There are two groups of people in my nation who
have not benefited from Islam at all. They are the
Boasters**[[160]](footnotes_1.htm#b0160)** and the
Qadarites**[[161]](footnotes_1.htm#b0161)** .’”

2-110 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Ibn
Muni’a**[[162]](footnotes_1.htm#b0162)** quoted Ibn Muni’a, on the
authority of Al-Hassan ibn Arafeh, on the authority of Ali ibn Sabit, on
the authority of Isma’il ibn Abi Ishaq, on the authority of Ibn Abi
Layli, on the authority of Nafe’ah, on the authority of Ibn Umar that
God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There are two groups of people in my nation
who have not benefited from Islam at all. They are the Marajites and the
Qadarites**[[163]](footnotes_1.htm#b0163)** .”

ANIMOSITY WOULD BRING ABOUT TWO SUFFERINGS
------------------------------------------

2-111 Ahmad ibn Ibrahim ibn al-Walid al-Salmy narrated that Abulfazl
Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Katib al-Neishaboory quoted through documents
linking up to the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) that
he (MGB) told his children, “O my children! Avoid animosity with the
people, since they can be divided into two groups. Some of them are
intelligent ones who would deceive you and some of them are ignorant
ones who would rush to retaliate. What one says is like a male, while
what is said in response is like a female. Once they mingle together
there would be an inevitable outcome.” The Imam (MGB) then recited the
following poem:

***Whoever refuses to respond to the ignorant, his honor would be
saved  
 Whoever is moderate with the base people has done the right thing  
 Whoever honors great men would be honored  
 Whoever belittles great men would not be honored.***
**[[164]](footnotes_1.htm#b0164)**

PEOPLE GET OLD, BUT TWO THINGS REMAIN YOUNG WITHIN THEM
-------------------------------------------------------

2-112 Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Bandar al-Furqany in Furqan
narrated that Abul Qasim Sa’id ibn Ahmad ibn Abi Salim quoted Abu
Zakarya Yahya ibn al-Fazl al-Varraq, on the authority of Qutaybat ibn
Sa’id, on the authority of Abu Awanah, on the authority of Qatadah, on
the authority of Anas that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The Children of
Adam (people) will get old, but two things still remain young within
them: greed for wealth and greed for life.”

#### 2-109 حدثنا محمد بن علي بن بشار القزويني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا المظفر بن أحمد، وعلي بن محمد بن سليمان قالا: حدثنا علي بن جعفر البغدادي، عن جعفر بن محمد بن مالك الكوفي، عن الحسن بن راشد، عن علي بن سالم، عن أبيه قال: قال أبوعبد الله جعفر بن محمد الصادق عليهما السلام: أدنى ما يخرج به الرجل من الايمان أن يجلس إلى غال فيستمع إلى حديثه ويصدقه على قوله، إن أبي حدثني، عن أبيه، عن جده عليهم السلام أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله قال: صنفان من أمتي لا نصيب لهما في الاسلام: الغلاة والقدرية.

#### 2-110 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا ابن منيع قال: حدثنا الحسن بن عرفة قال: حدثنا علي بن ثابت، عن إسماعيل بن أبي إسحاق، عن ابن أبي ليلى، عن نافع، عن ابن عمر قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: صنفان من امتي ليس لهما في الاسلام نصيب: المرجئة والقدرية.

##### معاداة الرجال لا يخلو صاحبها من خصلتين

#### 2-111 حدثنا أحمد بن إبراهيم بن الوليد السلمي قال: حدثنا أبوالفضل محمد ابن أحمد الكاتب النيسابوري باسناده رفعه إلى أمير المؤمنين علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام أنه قال لبنيه: يا بني إياكم ومعاداة الرجال فانهم لا يخلون من ضربين: من عاقل يمكر بكم، أو جاهل يعجل عليكم، والكلام ذكر والجواب انثى، فاذا اجتمع الزوجان فلا بد من النتاج ثم أنشأ يقول:

 

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="50%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center"> ومن دارى الرجال فقد أصابا</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">سليم العرض من حذر الجوابا</h4></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">ومن حقر الرجــــال فلن يهابا</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">ومن هـــاب الرجال تهيبوه</h4></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

##### يهرم ابن آدم ويشب منه اثنان

#### 2-112 حدثنا أبوأحمد محمد بن جعفر البندار الفرغاني بفرغانة قال: حدثني أبوالقاسم سعيد بن أحمد بن أبي سالم قال: حدثنا أبوزكريا يحيى بن الفضل الوراق قال: حدثني قتيبة بن سعيد قال: حدثنا أبوعوانة، عن قتادة، عن أنس، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: يهرم ابن آدم ويشب منه اثنان: الحرص على المال، والحرص على العمر.

####  ومن دارى الرجال فقد أصابا {style="text-align: center"}

#### سليم العرض من حذر الجوابا {style="text-align: center"}

#### ومن حقر الرجــــال فلن يهابا {style="text-align: center"}

#### ومن هـــاب الرجال تهيبوه {style="text-align: center"}

2-113 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Sejezy narrated that Muhammad ibn Mu’az
quoted Al-Hussein ibn al-Hassan, on the authority of Abdullah ibn
al-Mobarak, on the authority of Sho’abat ibn al-Haj’jaj, on the
authority of Abi Qatadah, on the authority of Anas ibn
Malik**[[165]](footnotes_1.htm#b0165)** that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“The Children of Adam (people) will get old or die, but two things still
remain young in them: greed and aspirations.”

TWO CHARACTERISTICS WHICH CAUSE TWO THINGS
------------------------------------------

2-114 Abul-Hassan Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ali Asad Al-Asady narrated that
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Ameri quoted Ibrahim ibn Isa ibn
Ubayd al-Sadoosi, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Amr, on the authority
of Yahya ibn Abdullah ibn al-Hassan ibn al-Hassan, on the authority of
his mother Fatimah - the daughter of Al-Hussein, on the authority of her
father (MGB)**[[166]](footnotes_1.htm#b0166)** that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “Inclination towards this world would increase anxiety and grief.
Abstinence from this world would comfort the heart and the body.”

THE TWO THINGS WHICH THE CHILDREN OF ADAM DISLIKE
-------------------------------------------------

2-115 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Abul Abbas al-Suraj quoted
Qutaybat, on the authority of Abdul Aziz, on the authority of Amr ibn
Abi Amr, on the authority of Asim ibn Umar ibn Qatadat, on the authority
of Mahmood ibn Lobayd that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There are two
things which the Children of Adam dislike. They dislike death, while
death is the relief of the believers from trials, and they dislike to
have little wealth, while having little wealth would reduce the amount
of Reckoning.”

THE PROPHET (MGB) REMAINED SILENT IN TWO INSTANCES
--------------------------------------------------

2-116 Judge Abu Sa’id Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Sejezy narrated that
Al-Hassan ibn Himdan quoted Abu Masood Isma’il ibn Masood, on the
authority of Yazid - Zari’a, on the authority of Sa’id - who is Abi
Urubeh, on the authority of Qatadat, on the authority of Al-Hassan,
“Samrah ibn Jundab and Imran ibn Hussayn had a discussion with each
other. Samrat narrated that he remembered two instances when the Prophet
(MGB) remained silent: once after saying the Takbir (God is Great) in
prayer and the second time after reciting the Opening Chapter of the
Quran (Al-Fatiha**[[167]](footnotes_1.htm#b0167)** ) and before bowing
down in prayer.” Qatadat then said that the second instance of the
Prophet’s (MGB) silence in what Samurah narrated was after saying ‘Qayr
al-Maqzoobe va laz-Zaleen’ (…those whose (portion) is not wrath, and who
go not astray)**[[168]](footnotes_1.htm#b0168)** .

However, Imran ibn Hussayn rejected this. Then they both wrote a letter
in this regard to Abi ibn Ka’ab and asked him about this. Abi ibn Ka’ab
replied, “What Samurah has remembered is right.”

#### 2-113 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد السجزي قال: أخبرنا محمد بن معاذ قال: حدثنا الحسين بن الحسن، عن عبد الله بن المبارك قال: أخبرنا شعبة بن الحجاج، عن قتادة، عن أنس بن مالك أن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: يهلك أو قال: يهرم ابن آدم ويبقى منه اثنتان الحرص والامل.

##### خصلتان تورث كل واحدة منهما خصلتين

#### 2-114 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن أحمد بن علي بن أسد الاسدي قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن الحسن العامري قال: حدثنا إبراهيم بن عيسى بن عبيد قال: حدثنا سليمان بن عمرو، عن عبد الله بن الحسن بن الحسن، عن امه فاطمة بنت الحسين، عن أبيها عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الرغبة في الدنيا تكثر الهم والحزن، والزهد في الدنيا يريح القلب والبدن.

##### خصلتان يكرههما ابن آدم

#### 2-115 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا أبوالعباس السراج قال: حدثنا قتيبة قال: حدثنا عبدالعزيز، عن عمرو بن أبي عمرو، عن عاصم بن عمر بن قتادة، عن محمود بن لبيد أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله قال: شيئان يكرههما ابن آدم: يكره الموت والموت راحة للمؤمن من الفتنة، ويكره قلة المال وقلة المال أقل للحساب.

##### كان لرسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله سكتتان

#### 2-116 أخبرني القاضي أبوسعيد الخليل بن أحمد السجزي قال: حدثنا الحسن ابن حمدان قال: حدثنا أبومسعود إسماعيل بن مسعود قال: حدثنا يزيد وهوابن زريع - قال: حدثنا سعيد وهو ابن أبي عروبة - عن قتادة، عن الحسن أن سمرة بن جندب وعمران بن حصين تذاكرا فحدث سمرة أنه حفظ عن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله سكتتين: سكتة إذا كبر، وسكتة إذا فرغ من قراء‌ته عند ركوعه، ثم إن قتادة ذكر السكتة الاخيرة إذا فرغ من قراء‌ة "غير المغضوب عليهم ولا الضالين" أي حفظ ذلك سمرة وأنكره عليه عمران بن حصين قال: فكتبنا في ذلك إلى ابي بن كعب فكان في كتابه إليهما أو في رده عليهما أن سمرة قد حفظ.

The compiler of the book - may God increase his honor - said, “The
Prophet (MGB) remained silent for a short while after reciting the
verses of the Quran and before saying Allahu Akbar (God is Great) to go
into the state of bowing down in prayers so that there is a pause in
between them. This means that the Prophet (MGB) neither said Amin (Amen)
after reciting the Opening Chapter of the Holy Quran
(Al-Fatiha**[[169]](footnotes_1.htm#b0169)** ) quietly or loudly. As
remaining silent doesn’t imply saying anything, this is a strong proof
for the Shiites who oppose saying Amin (Amen) after reciting the Opening
Chapter of the Holy Quran (Al-Fatiha**[[170]](footnotes_1.htm#b0170)**
). And there is no strength save in God the Sublime the Great.”

2-117 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Ibn Sa’ed quoted Al-Ab’bas ibn
Muhammad, on the authority of Oan ibn Am’marat al-Etri, on the authority
of Ja’far ibn Suleiman, on the authority of Malik ibn Dinar, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn Qalib, on the authority of Abi Sa’id al-Khidry
that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There are two characteristics which
cannot co-exist in a Muslim: stinginess and being bad-tempered.”

TWO CHARACTERISTICS WHICH CANNOT CO-EXIST IN ONE’S HEART
--------------------------------------------------------

2-118 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Sejezy narrated that Ibn Sa’ed quoted Ishaq
ibn Shahin, on the authority of Khalid ibn Abdullah, on the authority of
Yusuf ibn Musa (ibn Rashid ibn Bilal al-Qat’tan), on the authority of
Jarir (ibn Abdul Hamid), on the authority of Soheil (ibn Abi Salih), on
the authority of Safvan, on the authority of Abi Yazid, on the authority
of Abil Qa’aqa ibn al-Lajlah, on the authority of Abi Hurayrih that
God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Extreme miserliness and faith can never
co-exist in one’s heart.”

JEALOUSY IS NOT PROPER EXCEPT IN TWO CONDITIONS
-----------------------------------------------

2-119 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ibrahim
al-Daybali quoted Abu Abdullah (who is Al-Hussein ibn al-Hassan
al-Marvazy), on the authority of Sufyan, on the authority of Al-Zuhra,
on the authority of Salim, on the authority of his father that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “It is not proper to be jealous except in two
conditions. The first case is to be jealous of a man to whom God has
granted things and he gives some in charity day and night. The second
case is to be jealous of a man to whom God has granted the Quran and he
recites it during the day and the night.”

THE REASON FOR THE TWOFOLD LOVE OF THE PROPHET FOR AQIL
-------------------------------------------------------

2-120 Abu Muhammad al-Hassan ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya ibn al-Hassan ibn
Ja’far ibn Ubaydullah ibn al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn
Abi Talib (MGB) narrated that his grandfather Yahya ibn al-Hassan (MGB)
quoted Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Moqad’dasi, on the authority

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب أدام الله عزه: إن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله إنما سكت بعد القراء‌ة لئلا يكون التكبير موصولا بالقراء‌ة، وليكون بين القراء‌ة والتكبير فصل، وهذا يدل على أنه لم يقل: آمين بعد فاتحة الكتاب سرا ولا جهرا لان المتكلم سرا وعلانية لا يكون ساكتا، وفي ذلك حجة قوية للشيعة على مخالفيهم في قولهم " آمين " بعد الفاتحة ولا قوة إلا بالله [العلي العظيم].

##### خصلتان لا يجتمعان في مسلم

#### 2-117 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: حدثنا ابن صاعد قال: حدثنا العباس ابن محمد قال: حدثنا عون بن عمارة العنزي قال: حدثنا جعفر بن سليمان عن مالك بن دينار، عن عبد الله بن غالب، عن أبي سعيد الخدري قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: خصلتان لا تجتمعان في مسلم: البخل وسوء الخلق.

##### خصلتان لا يجتمعان في قلب عبد

#### 2-118 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد السجزي قال: أخبرنا ابن صاعد قال: حدثنا إسحاق بن شاهين قال: حدثنا خالد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا يوسف بن موسى قال: حدثنا جرير، عن سهيل عن صفوان، عن أبي يزيد، عن القعقاع بن اللجلاج، عن أبي هريرة، عن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله قال: لا يجتمع الشح والايمان في قلب عبد أبدا.

##### لا حسد الا في اثنتين

#### 2-119 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا أبوجعفر محمد بن إبراهيم الديبلي قال: حدثنا أبوعبد الله قال: حدثنا سفيان، عن الزهري، عن سالم، عن أبيه قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: لا حسد إلا في اثنتين رجل آتاه الله مالا فهو ينفق منه آناء الليل وآناء النهار، ورجل آتاه الله القرآن فهو يقوم به آناء الليل وآناء النهار.

##### علة محبة النبي صلى الله عليه وآله لعقيل بن أبى طالب حبين

#### 2-120 حدثنا أبومحمد الحسن بن محمد بن يحيى بن الحسن بن جعفر بن عبيد الله بن الحسين بن علي بن الحسين بن علي بن أبي طالـب عليهم السلام قال: حدثنـي

of Ali ibn al-Hassan, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Rostam, on the
authority of Abi Hamzih al-Sakoony, on the authority of Jabir ibn Yazid
al-Jo’afy, on the authority of Abdul Rahman ibn Sabit that God’s Prophet
(MGB) told Aqil, “O Aqil! My love for you is twofold. I myself love you
and I also love you since Abi Talib loves you.”

THE PROPHET (MGB) WAS PLEASED BY TWO THINGS
-------------------------------------------

2-121 Al-Hassan ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Alavi - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that his grandfather quoted on the authority of
Davood ibn al-Qasim, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Zayd that he had
heard a group of the members of his household say, “When Ja’far ibn Abi
Talib - may God be pleased with him - returned from Ethiopia where he
had migrated to, it coincided with the conquering of Khaybar. The
Prophet (MGB) stood up in front of him, kissed him on the forehead and
said, ‘I do not know what has pleased me more? Is it the return of
Ja’far or is it the conquering of Khaybar by God.’”

(The compiler of the book said,) ‘I have narrated the traditions in this
regard in the book Faza’el Ja’far ibn Abi Talib.

THE PROPHETGRANTED TWO THIGS TO AL-HASSAN AND AL-HUSSEIN
--------------------------------------------------------

2-122 Al-Hassan ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Alavi - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that his grandfather quoted az-Zubayr ibn Abu Bakr,
on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hamzih az-Zubayri, on the authority of
Ibrahim ibn Ali al-Ra’fe’ee, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of his grandmother Bint Abi Ra’feh, “When the Prophet of God
(MGB) was ill and about to perish, Fatimah (MGB) - the daughter of God’s
Prophet (MGB), Al-Hassan (MGB) and Al-Hussein (MGB) were with the
Prophet (MGB). Fatimah (MGB) said, ‘O Prophet of God! They are your
(grand)children! Grant them something as inheritance.’ The Prophet (MGB)
said, ‘I grant Al-Hassan my majesty and mastery, and grant Al-Hussein my
bravery and benevolence.’”

2-123 Al-Hassan ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Alavi - may God have Mercy
upon him - narrated that his grandfather quoted Muhammad ibn Ali, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn al-Hassan ibn Muhammad and Hussein ibn Ali ibn
Abdullah ibn Abi Ra’feh, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of one of the elders among the Helpers (Ansar) who linked it
up to Zaynab - the daughter of Abi Ra’feh, on the authority of her
mother that Fatimah (MGB) said, “O Prophet of God! They are your
(grand)children! Grant them something.” The Prophet (MGB) said, “I grant
Al-Hassan my majesty and mastery, and grant Al-Hussein my bravery and
benevolence.’

2-124 Al-Hassan ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Alavi - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that his grandfather quoted Muhammad ibn Ja’far, on
the authority of his father, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Muhammad,
on the authority of Safvan ibn Suleiman that the Prophet (MGB) said,
“Regarding

#### جدي يحيى بن الحسن قال: حدثني إبراهيم بن محمد بن يوسف المقدسي قال: حدثنا علي ابن الحسن، عن إبراهيم بن رستم، عن أبي حمزة السكوني، عن جابر بن يزيد الجعفي عن عبدالرحمن بن سابط قال: كان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يقول لعقيل: إني لاحبك يا عقيل حبين حبا لك وحبا لحب أبي طالب لك. {.t0}

##### امران سر بهما النبي صلى الله عليه وآله

#### 2-121 حدثنا الحسن بن محمد بن يحيى العلوي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني جدي قال: حدثنا داود بن القاسم قال: حدثنا الحسن بن زيد قال: سمعت جماعة من أهل بيتي يقولون: إن جعفر بن أبي طالب رضي الله عنه لما قدم من أرض الحبشة وكان بها مهاجرا وذلك يوم فتح خيبر، قام إليه النبي صلى الله عليه وآله فقبل بين عينيه ثم قال: ما أدري بأيهما أنا أسر: بقدوم جعفر، أو بفتح خيبر. وقد أخرجت الاخبار التي رويتها في هذا المعنى في كتاب فضائل جعفر بن أبي طالب عليه السلام.

##### نحل النبي صلى الله عليه وآله الحسن والحسين خصلتين

#### 2-122 حدثنا الحسن بن محمد بن يحيى العلوي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني جدي قال: حدثنا الزبير بن أبي بكر قال: حدثني إبراهيم بن حمزة الزبيري، عن إبراهيم ابن علي الرافعي، عن أبيه، عن جدته بنت أبي رافع قالت: أتت فاطمة بنت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله بابنيها الحسن والحسين عليهما السلام إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله في شكواه الذي توفي فيه، فقالت: يا رسول الله هذان ابناك فورثهما شيئا قال: أما الحسن فان له هيبتي وسؤددي وأما الحسين فان له جرأتي وجودي.

#### 2-123 حدثنا الحسن بن محمد بن يحيى العلوي - رحمه الله - قال: حدثني جدي قال: حدثني محمد بن علي قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن الحسن بن محمد وحسين بن علي بن عبد الله بن أبي رافع قال:أخبرني أبي عن شيخ من الانصار يرفعه إلى زينب بنت ابن أبي رافع، عن أمها قالت: قالت فاطمة عليها السلام: يا رسول الله هذان ابناك فانحلهما، فقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أما الحسن فنحلته هيبتي وسؤددي، وأما الحسين فنحلته سخائي وشجاعتي.

#### 2-124 حدثنا الحسن بن محمد بن يحيى العلوي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني جدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن جعفر قال: حدثني أبي، عن إبراهيم بن محمد، عن صــفوان بن

Al-Hassan, I have granted him my grandeur and patience, and regarding
Al-Hussein, I have granted him my benevolence and compassionateness.”

IT IS NOT PROPER FOR ONE TO STAY AWAKE AFTER THE NIGHT PRAYER EXCEPT FOR TWO PEOPLE
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-125 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Abul Abbas al-Suraj quoted
Abdullah ibn Umar, on the authority of Vaki’a ibn al-Jar’rah, on the
authority of Sufyan, on the authority of Mansoor (ibn al-Mua’tamar ibn
Abdullah ibn Rabi’ah al-Kufy), on the authority of Khasamat (ibn Abdul
Rahman), on the authority of Abdullah (ibn Mas’ood) that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “It is not proper to stay awake after the night prayer
except for two people: one who wants to pray, and one who is traveling.”

THE TWO MAIN CAUSES OF GOING TO HELL AND THE TWO MAIN CAUSES OF GOING TO PARADISE
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-126 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Ibn Mu’az quoted on the
authority of Al-Hussein al-Marvazy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Ubayd, on the authority of Davood al-Awedi, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Abi Hurayrih that the Prophet (MGB) said,
“The two main two reasons why some people from my nation will go to Hell
are the two cavities.” The Prophet (MGB) was asked, “O Prophet of God!
What do you mean by the two cavities?” The Prophet replied, “Stomach and
sex.” The Prophet (MGB) added, “And the two main reasons for entry into
Paradise are fearing God and having a good temper.”

THE HONORABLE THE EXALTED GOD WOULD NOT GIVE HIS SERVANTS TWO FEARS AND TWO SECURITIES
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2-127 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Ibn Mu’az quoted Al-Hussein
al-Marvazy, on the authority of Abdullah, on the authority of (ibn) Oan,
on the authority of Al-Hassan that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “God the
Blessed the Sublime swore by His Honor and Grandeur that He would not
give His servants (that is the people) two fears and two securities. If
a person is not afraid of Me in this world, I will scare him on the
Resurrection Day, and if he is afraid of Me in this world, I will make
him secure on the Resurrection Day.”

TWO THINGS IMPROVE THIS NATION AND TWO DESTROY IT
-------------------------------------------------

2-128 Abul-Hassan Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ali Asad Al-Asady narrated that
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Ameri quoted Ibrahim ibn Isa ibn
Ubayd al-Sadoosi, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Amr, on the authority
of Abdullah ibn Hassan ibn Hassan ibn Ali, on the authority of his
mother Fatimah - the daughter of Al-Hussein (MGB), on the authority of
his father (MGB)**[[171]](footnotes_1.htm#b0171)** that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “The first two things that would improve this nation are
abstinence and certitude, and the last two things that would destroy it
are stinginess and having high aspirations.”

#### سليمان أن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: أما الحسن فأنحله الهيبة والحلم، وأما الحسين فأنحله الجود والرحمة. {.t0}

##### لا سهر بعد العشاء الاخرة الا لاحد رجلين

#### 2-125 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا أبوالعباس السراج قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن عمر قال: حدثنا وكيع بن الجراح، عن سفيان، عن منصور عن خيثمة، عن عبد الله عن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله قال: لا سمر بعد العشاء الآخرة إلا لاحد رجلين: مصل أو مسافر.

##### اکثر ما يدخل به الامه النار شيئتان واکثر ما يدخل به الجنه شيئتان

#### 2-126 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا ابن معاذ قال: حدثنا الحسين المروزي، قال: حدثنا محمد بن عبيد قال: حدثنا داود الاودي عن أبيه، عن أبي هريرة، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: إن أول ما يدخل به النار من امتي الاجوفان، قالوا: يا رسول الله وما الاجوفان قال: الفرج والفم، وأكثر ما يدخل به الجنة تقوى الله وحسن الخلق.

##### لا يجمع الله عز وجل علی عبده خوفين ولا امنين

#### 2-127 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: أخبرنا ابن معاذ قال: حدثنا الحسين المروزي قال: حدثنا عبد الله قال: أخبرنا [ابن] عون، عن الحسن قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: قال الله تبارك وتعالى وعزتي وجلالي لا أجمع على عبدي خوفين، ولا أجمع له أمنين، فاذا أمنني في الدنيا أخفته يوم القيامة، وإذا خافني في الدنيا آمنته يوم القيامة.

##### صلاح اول هذه الامة بخصلتين وهلاك آخرها بخصلتين

#### 2-128 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن أحمد بن علي بن أسد الاسدي قال: حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن الحسن العامري قال: حدثنا إبراهيم بن عيسى بن عبيد السدوسي قال: حدثنا سليمان بن عمرو، عن عبد الله بن حسن بن حسن بن علي، عن امه فاطمة بنت الحسين، عن أبيها عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إن صلاح أول هذه الامة بالزهد واليقين، وهلاك آخرها بالشح والامل.
