Part 3-on Three-numbered Characteristics
========================================

**Section 1**

THREE WHOM GOD WILL LET INTO PARADISE WITHOUT ANY RECKONING, AND THREE WHOM GOD WILL THROW INTO HELL WITHOUT ANY RECKONING
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-1 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted
Ibrahim ibn Mahzyar, on the authority of his brother Ali ibn Mahzyar, on
the authority of Fuzalat ibn Ayoob, on the authority of Suleiman ibn
Durostoyeh, on the authority of Ajlan that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
said, “There are three groups of people whom God will let into Paradise
without any Reckoning, and three whom God will throw into Hell without
any Reckoning. The three whom God will let enter Paradise without any
Reckoning are just leaders, honest businessmen and elderly men who have
spent their whole life in obedience to the Honorable the Exalted God.
And the three whom God will throw into Hell without any Reckoning are
the unjust leaders, businessmen who lie, and elderly adulterers.”

3-2 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated that
Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of
Al-Hassan ibn Ali, on the authority of Ibn Zyad, on the authority of
Al-Halabi that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “There are three things
which God will not question a believer about: the food he eats, the
clothes he wears, and a good and helpful wife who helps him, and assists
him in guarding his chastity.”

THREE CHARACTERISTICS EACH OF WHICH WOULD CAUSE ONE TO BE UNDER THE SHADE OF THE HONORABLE THE EXALTED GOD’S THRONE
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-3 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ali ibn al-Salt
quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, on the authority of Isma’il ibn
Mihran, on the authority of Othman ibn Jabalat, on the authority of Abi
Hamzih al-Somali, on the authority of Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) that
God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There are three qualities having each of
which would cause one to be under the Shade of the Honorable the Exalted
God (on the Resurrection Day) on the day in which there is no shade but
God’s Shade. The first characteristic is to grant to people what you
expect of them. The second characteristic is to only do what pleases
God, and not do what would raise God’s Wrath. The third characteristic
is not to express the faults of one’s Muslim brothers in their absence,
unless one first removes such faults from himself. It is better to
attend to the improvement of one’s own faults than to seek out other
people’s faults.”

###### باب الثلاثة

##### ثلاثة يدخلهم الله الجنة بغير حساب، وثلاثة يدخلهم الله النار بغير حساب

#### 3-1 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري، عن إبراهيم بن مهزيار، عن أخيه علي بن مهزيار، عن فضالة بن أيوب، عن سليمان ابن درستويه، عن عجلان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ثلاثة يدخلهم الله الجنة بغير حساب، وثلاثة يدخلهم الله النار بغير حساب، فأما الذين يدخلهم الله الجنة بغير حساب فامام عادل، وتاجر صدوق، شيخ أفنى عمره في طاعة الله عز وجل، وأما الثلاثة الذين يدخلهم الله النار بغير حساب فامام جائر، وتاجر كذوب، وشيخ زان.

##### ثلاثة اشياء لا يحاسب الله عز وجل عليها المؤمن

#### 3-2 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن الحسن بن علي، عن ابن زياد، عن الحلبي قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: ثلاثة أشياء لا يحاسب الله عليها المؤمن: طعام يأكله وثوب يلبسه وزوجة صالحة تعاونه، وتحصن فرجه.

##### ثلاث خصال من كن فيه أو واحدة منهن كان في ظل عرش الله عز وجل

#### 3-3 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني محمد بن أحمد بن علي بن الصلت، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد، عن إسماعيل بن مهران، عن عثمان بن جبلة، عن أبي حمزة الثمالي، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ثلاث خصال من كن فيه أو واحدة منهن كان في ظل عرش الله عز وجل [يوم القيامة] يوم لا ظل إلا ظله: رجل أعطى الناس من نفسه ما هوسائلهم لها، ورجل لم يقدم رجلا ولم يؤخر اخرى حتى يعلم أن ذلك لله فيه رضى أو سخط، ورجل لم يعب أخاه المسلم بعيب حتى ينفي ذلك العيب من نفسه فانه لا ينفي منها عيبا إلا بدا له عيب، وكفى بالمرء شغلا بنفسه عن الناس.

3-4 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn al-Hussein
ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the
authority of Al-Khazr ibn Muslim al-Sayrafi, “I heard Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) say ‘Three groups of people will be under the Shade of
the Honorable the Exalted God on the Day in which there is no shade
other than God’s Shade. The first group are those who treat the people
fairly. The second group are those who only do what pleases God, and do
not do anything which would raise God’s Wrath. The third group of people
are those who do not express the faults of their Muslim brothers in
their absence, unless they first remove such faults from themselves. It
is better to attend to the improvement of one’s own faults than to seek
out other people’s faults.’”

THREE GROUPS OF PEOPLE ARE CLOSEST TO THE HONORABLE THE EXALTED GOD ON THE RESURRECTION DAY
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-5 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, on the authority of Uthman ibn Isa, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn Moskan, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Muslim that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Three groups of people
will be the closest to God on the Resurrection Day until He is finished
with the Reckoning of the people. The first group are those who do not
oppress their subordinates when they get angry. The second group are
those who associate with two people and do not favor one over the other.
The third group are those who tell the truth whether it is in their
favor or not.”

THE THREE CONDITIONS WHICH IMPLY THE ACCEPTANCE OF ONE’S PRAYERS
----------------------------------------------------------------

3-6 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Al-Hussein ibn Ishaq al-Tajir, on the authority of Ali ibn Mahzyar, on
the authority of Ali ibn Hadid who linked it up to Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB), “If your body shakes, your tears flow and you fear (God)
wholeheartedly, then you can be hopeful of God’s forgiveness, since you
have achieved your goal.”

ONE IS NOT A TRUE BELIEVER UNLESS HE HAS THREE CHARACTERISTICS
--------------------------------------------------------------

3-7 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn
Ahmad**[[172]](footnotes_1.htm#b0172)** , on the authority of Sahl ibn
Zyad, on the authority of Al-Harith ibn al-Dalhath - a servant of
Al-Reza (MGB), “I heard Abal-Hassan (MGB)

#### 3-4 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن محمد بن سنان قال: حدثنا الخضر بن مسلم الصيرفي قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: ثلاثة في ظل عرش الله عز وجل يوم لا ظل إلا ظله: رجل أنصف الناس من نفسه ورجل لم يقدم رجلا ولم يؤخر اخرى حتى يعلم أن ذلك لله عز وجل رضى أو سخط، ورجل لم يعب أخاه بعيب حتى ينفي ذلك العيب من نفسه، فانه لا ينفي منها عيبا إلا بداله عيب آخر، وكفى بالمرء شغلا بنفسه عن الناس.

##### ثلاثة أقرب الخلق إلى الله عز وجل يوم القيامة

#### 3-5 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد، عن عثمان بن عيسى، عن عبد الله بن مسكان عن محمد بن مسلم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ثلاثة هم أقرب الخلق إلى الله يوم القيامة حتى يفرغ [الناس] من الحساب: رجل لم تدعه قدرته في حال غضبه إلى أن يحيف على من تحت يديه، ورجل مشى بين اثنين فلم يمل مع أحدهما على الآخر بشعيرة ورجل قال الحق فيما له وعليه.

##### عند وجود ثلاثة أشياء اجابة الدعاء

#### 3-6 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن الحسين بن إسحاق التاجر، عن علي بن مهزيار، عن علي بن حديد رفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إذا اقشعر جلدك ودمعت عيناك ووجل قلبك فدونك دونك فقد قصد قصدك.

##### لا يكون المؤمن مؤمنا حتى يكون فيه ثلاث خصال

#### 3-7 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس قال: حدثني محمد بن أحمد قال: حدثني سهل بن زياد، عن الحارث بن الدلهاث مولى الرضا عليه السلام

say ‘One cannot be a true believer unless he possesses the following
three characteristics: one from his Lord, one from his Prophet and one
from his Imam. The one from his Lord is guarding secrets as the
Honorable the Exalted God said, ‘He (alone) knows the Unseen, nor does
He make anyone acquainted with his Mysteries, except an Apostle whom He
has chosen.’**[[173]](footnotes_1.htm#b0173)** However, the one from the
Prophet is kind treatment with the people, as the Honorable the Exalted
God has ordered His Prophet (MGB) to treat the people with kindness and
patience and said, ‘Hold to forgiveness; command what is right; but turn
away from the ignorant.’**[[174]](footnotes_1.htm#b0174)** And the one
from the Imams (MGB) is patience and perseverance during times of
hardship and calamities. The Honorable the Exalted God says, ‘…and to be
firm and patient, in pain (or suffering) and
adversity…’**[[175]](footnotes_1.htm#b0175)** ”

THREE CHARACTERISTICS WHICH DO NOT EXIST IN A BELIEVER
------------------------------------------------------

3-8 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority of Al-Nazr
ibn Shoayb, on the authority of Al-Harithi, on the authority of Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), “Anyone
who is miserly, jealous and cowardly is not a believer. A believer would
not be cowardly, greedy or miserly.”

THE PROPHET ASKED HIS LORD FOR THREE THINGS. GOD GRANTED HIM TWO, BUT DID NOT GRANT HIM THE THIRD
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-9 Suleiman ibn Ahmad ibn Ayoob al-Lakhmy narrated that Muhammad ibn
Uthman ibn Abi Shoyba’ quoted Minjab ibn al-Harith, on the authority of
Abu Hozayfah al-Sa’labi, on the authority of Zyad ibn Alaqa, on the
authority of Jabir ibn Samurah al-Sava’ee, on the authority of Ali ibn
Abi Talib MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “I asked my Lord - the
Blessed the Sublime - for three things. He granted me two of them, but
did not grant me the third. I said, ‘O Lord! Please do not let my nation
be destroyed by hunger’. The Lord said, ‘Let it be so.’ I said, ‘O Lord!
Please do not let their enemies - that is the polytheists - take over my
nation so as to uproot my people.’ The Lord said, ‘Let it be so.’ I
said, ‘O Lord! Please do not let there be any mischief amongst them.’
The Lord did not grant me this.”

Suleiman ibn Ahmad said, “There have been no other chains of narration
of this tradition from Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB). Only Minjab ibn
al-Harith has narrated it.”

THREE THINGS RAISE THE RANKS, THE THREE EXPIATIONS, THE THREE WHICH DESTROY, THE THREE WHICH SAVE
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-10 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Harun ibn al-Jahm, on the authority of Savir ibn Abi

#### قال: سمعت أبا الحسن عليه السلام يقول: لا يكون المؤمن مؤمنا حتى يكون فيه ثلاث خصال: سنة من ربه، وسنة من نبيه، وسنة من وليه، فالسنة من ربه كتمان سره، قال الله عز وجل: "عالم الغيب فلا يظهر على غيبه أحدا إلا من ارتضى من رسول". وأما السنة من نبيه صلى الله عليه وآله فمداراة الناس فان الله عز وجل أمر نبيه صلى الله عليه وآله بمداراة الناس فقال: "خذ العفو وأمر بالعرف وأعرض عن الجاهلين" وأما السنة من وليه فالصبر في البأساء والضراء فان الله عز وجل يقول: "والصابرين في البأساء والضراء". {.t0}

##### ثلاث خصال لا تكون في المؤمن

#### 3-8 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن النضر بن شعيب، عن الحارثي عن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: لا يؤمن رجل فيه الشح والحسد والجبن ولا يكون المؤمن جبانا ولا حريصا ولا شحيحا.

##### سأل النبى ربه ثلاث خصال، فأعطاه اثنتين، ومنعه واحدة

#### 3-9 أخبرنا سليمان بن أحمد بن أيوب اللخمي قال: حدثنا محمد بن عثمان ابن أبي شيبة قال: حدثنا منجاب بن الحارث قال: حدثنا أبوحذيفة الثعلبي عن زياد بن علاقة، عن جابر بن سمرة السوائي، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام أن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: سألت ربي تبارك وتعالى ثلاث خصال فأعطاني اثنتين ومنعني واحدة، قلت: يا رب لا تهلك امتي جوعا، قال: لك هذه، قلت: يا رب لا تسلط عليهم عدوا من غيرهم يعني من المشركين فيجتاحوهم قال: لك ذلك، قلت: يا رب لا تجعل بأسهم بينهم، فمنعني هذه. قال سليمان بن أحمد: لا يروى هذا الحديث عن علي عليه السلام إلا بهذا الاسناد تفرد به منجاب بن الحارث.

##### ثلاث درجات وثلاث كفارات وثلاث موبقات وثلاث منجيات

#### 3-10 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار قال: حدثنا أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عـن هـارون

Fakhteh, on the authority of Abi Jamileh al-Mufaz’zal ibn Salih, on the
authority of Sa’ed ibn Tarif, on the authority of Abi Ja’far Muhammad
ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB), “There are three ranks, three expiations, three
things which destroy and three things which save. As for the three
things which raise the ranks they are greeting aloud, feeding the needy,
and praying in the night when the people are asleep. As for the three
expiations, they are making ablutions with cold water, going on foot in
the day and at night to the prayers, and attending congregational
prayers. As for the three things which destroy, they are being really
stingy, following selfish desires, and being haughty and selfish. As for
the three things which save us, they are fearing God in private and in
public; moderation in times of prosperity and poverty; and saying what
is fair whether we are pleased or angry.”

3-11 The judge al-Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Sejezy narrated that Ibn Sa’ed
quoted Yusuf ibn Musa al-Qat’tan and Ahmad ibn Mansoor ibn Sayyar, on
the authority of Ahmad ibn Yunus, on the authority of Ayoob ibn Atabat,
on the authority of Al-Fazl ibn Bakir
al-Abdi**[[176]](footnotes_1.htm#b0176)** , on the authority of Qatadah,
on the authority of Anas that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There are three
things which destroy and three things which save. As for the three
things which save, they are fearing the Honorable the Exalted God in
private and in public; moderation in times of poverty and affluence; and
speaking fairly whether you are pleased or angry. As for the three
things which destroy, they are being really stingy; following one’s
selfish desires; and being haughty and selfish.”

In another tradition that has been narrated on the authority of Imam
as-Sadiq (MGB), we read, “Being really stingy implies being suspicious
of the Honorable the Exalted God.” I have presented the chain of
narrations of this tradition in the book Ma’ani al-Akhbar.

3-12 Abul Hassan Muhammad ibn Ali ibn ash-Shah narrated that Abu Hamid
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hussein quoted on the authority of Abu Yazid
Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Khalidy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn
Salih al-Tamimy, on the authority of Anas ibn Muhammad Abu Malik, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB),
on the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his
grandfather (MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB), on the
authority of God’s Prophet (MGB) in the Prophet’s will to Ali (MGB), “O
Ali! There are three ranks, three expiations, three things which
destroy, and three things which save. As for the three things which
raise the ranks they are making ablutions with cold water; waiting for
the next prayers after you pray; and going on foot in the day and at
night to the prayers; and

#### بن الجهم، عن ثوير بن أبي فاخته، عن أبي جميلة المفضل بن صالح، عن سعد بن طريف عن أبي جعفر محمد بن علي الباقر عليهما السلام قال: ثلاث درجات، وثلاث كفارات، وثلاث موبقات، وثلاث منجيات، فأما الدرجات فافشاء السلام، وإطعام الطعام، والصلاة بالليل والناس نيام، والكفارات إسباغ الوضوء في السبرات والمشي بالليل والنهار إلى الصلوات، والمحافظة على الجماعات، وأما الثلاث الموبقات فشح مطاع وهوى متبع، وإعجاب المرء بنفسه. وأما المنجيات فخوف الله في السر والعلانية، والقصد في الغنى والفقر، وكلمة العدل في الرضا والسخط. {.t0}

#### 3-11 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد السجزي القاضي قال: أخبرنا ابن صاعد قال حدثنا يوسف بن موسى القطان، وأحمد بن منصور بن سيار قالا: حدثنا أحمد بن يونس قال: حدثنا أيوب بن عتبة، عن الفضل بن بكير العبدي قال: حدثنا قتادة، عن أنس، عن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله قال: ثلاث مهلكات، وثلاث منجيات، فالمنجيات خشية الله عز وجل في السر والعلانية، والقصد في الغنى والفقر، والعدل في الرضا والغضب. والثلاث المهلكات شح مطاع، وهو متبع، وإعجاب المرء بنفسه.

#### و قد روي حديث آخر عن الصادق عليه السلام أنه قال: الشح المطاع سوء الظن بالله عز وجل. وقد آخر جته مسندا في كتاب معاني الاخبار.

#### 3-12 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن علي بن الشاه قال: حدثنا أبوحامد أحمد بن محمد بن الحسين قال: حدثنا أبويزيد أحمد بن خالد الخالدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن صالح التميمي قال: حدثنا أبي قال: حدثنا أنس بن محمد أبومالك، عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال: في وصيته له: يا علي ثلاث درجات وثلاث كفارات، وثلاث مهلكات، وثلاث منجيات، فأما الدرجات فإسباغ الوضوء في السبرات، وانتظار الصلاة بعد الصلاة، والمشي بالليل والنهار إلى الجماعات. وأمـا الكفارات

attending congregational prayers. As for the three expiations, they are
greeting aloud, feeding the needy, and spend the night in prayer when
other people are asleep. As for the three things which destroy, they are
being really stingy; following one’s selfish desires; and being haughty
and selfish. As for the three things which save, they are fearing God in
private and in public; moderation in times of affluence and poverty; and
speaking fairly whether you are pleased or angry.”

In another tradition from the Prophet (MGB) when he (MGB) was asked what
the great angels asked him about when he was in the Ascension, the
Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘They asked me about the ranks and the
expiations.’ The Prophet (MGB) added, ‘They asked me about the things
that raise the ranks. I told them they are making ablutions with cold
water; going on foot to the congregational prayers; and waiting for the
prayers after you pray, and being friends with me and the members of my
Household until death.’ This is a long tradition.
I**[[177]](footnotes_1.htm#b0177)** have presented it along with its
chain of narrations in the book Isbat al-Mi’raj.

3-13 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted Harun ibn Muslim, on the
authority of Mus’adat ibn Zyad, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad
(MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB) that the Prophet (MGB) said,
“There are three things which destroy. They are breaching transactions,
abandoning traditions and leaving the society. There are three things
which save. They are watching out what you say, crying over your
mistakes, and staying at home.”

THREE THINGS FOR WHICH GOD WOULD MARRY OFF ONE OF THE HOURI-EYED ONES TO YOU
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-14 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Abdullah
ibn Sin’an that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “There are three
characteristics for which God would marry off one of the Houri-eyed ones
to you.**[[178]](footnotes_1.htm#b0178)** They include withholding your
anger, standing up against the swords of the enemies of the Honorable
the Exalted God, and abandoning illegitimately earned property for the
sake of the Honorable the Exalted God.”

THE THREE PEOPLE WHO WOULD WRONG YOU IF YOU DO NOT EXPRESS YOUR DISCONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-15 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted Al-Fazl ibn Amer on

#### فافشاء السلام وإطعام الطعام والتهجد بالليل والناس نيام، وأما المهلكات فشح مطاع، وهوى متبع وإعجاب المرء بنفسه. وأما المنجيات فخوف الله في السر والعلانية، والقصد في الغنى والفقر، وكلمة العدل في الرضا والسخط. وفي حديث آخر عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أنه لما سئل في المعراج فيما اختصم الملاء الاعلى؟ قال: في الدرجات والكفارات قال: فنوديت وما الدرجات قلت: إسباغ الوضوء في السبرات، والمشي إلى الجماعات، وانتظار الصلاة بعد الصلاة، وولايتي وولاية أهل بيتي حتى الممات. الحديث طويل قد اخرجته مسندا" علی وجهه فی کتاب اثبات المعراج. {.t0}

#### 3-13 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني عمي محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن هارون بن مسلم، عن مسعدة بن زياد، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام أن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: ثلاث موبقات: نكث الصفقة، وترك السنة، وفراق الجماعة. وثلاث منجيات: تكف لسانك، وتبكي على خطيئتك. وتلزم بيتك.

##### ثلاث من كن فيه زوجه الله من الحور العين

#### 3-14 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن عبد الله بن سنان قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: ثلاث من كن فيه زوجه الله من الحور العين كيف يشاء: كظم الغيظ، والصبر على السيوف لله عز وجل، ورجل أشرف على مال حرام فتركه لله عز وجل.

##### ثلاثة ان لم تظلمهم ظلموك

#### 3-15 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنــا عبـد الله بن

the authority of Musa ibn al-Qasim al-Bajaly, on the authority of Zarih
al-Maharebi, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), on the
authority of his forefathers (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There
are three people who would wrong you if you do not express your
discontent. They are the ignorant ones, your wife, and your servant.”

THREE PEOPLE WOULD NOT GET WHAT IS RIGHTFULLY THEIRS FROM THREE PEOPLE
----------------------------------------------------------------------

3-16 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God forgive him - narrated that
his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah
al-Barqy, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Ubayd, on the authority of
Al-Hussein ibn Alvan, on the authority of Amr ibn Sabit, on the
authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his
forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB), “There are three
people who would not get what is rightfully theirs from three other
people. They are the honorable ones (who would not take what is
rightfully theirs) from the wicked ones; the patient ones from the
ignorant ones; and the good-doers from the evildoers.”

3-17 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah, on the authority of Abil Qasim Abdul Rahman ibn Himad, on the
authority of Abi Imran Amr ibn Mus’ab al-Arzami, on the authority of Abi
Hamzih al-Somali, “I heard Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) say, ‘One is caught
in between three things: calamities, destiny and blessings. It is
incumbent upon him to be patient in the face of calamities sent from
God. It is incumbent upon him to submit to the destiny determined for
him by God. It is also incumbent upon him to be grateful for the
blessings sent to him by the Honorable the Exalted God.”

THREE PEOPLE WHO DESERVE MERCY
------------------------------

3-18 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn Sin’an, “I heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
say, ‘Have mercy on three people as they deserve mercy: an honorable one
who has been striken with misery and is no longer honored; an affluent
person who has suffered and is needy; and a scholar who is belittled by
his family members and the ignorant ones.”

THREE PEOPLE WITH WHOM GOD IS ANGRY
-----------------------------------

3-19 Hamzih ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Alavi - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted Yaqoob ibn Yazid,
on the authority of Ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn

#### جعفر الحميري، عن الفضل بن عامر، عن موسى بن القاسم البجلي، عن ذريح المحاربي، عن أبي عبد الله، عن آبائه عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ثلاثة إن لم تظلمهم ظلموك: السفلة، وزوجتك، وخادمك. {.t0}

##### ثلاثة لا ينتصفون من ثلاثة

#### 3-16 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه - رحمه الله - عن عمه محمد بن أبي القاسم قال: حدثني أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أحمد بن عبيد، عن الحسين بن علوان، عن عمرو بن ثابت، عن أبي عبد الله، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: ثلاثة لا ينتصفون من ثلاثة: شريف من وضيع، وحليم من سفيه، وبر من فاجر.

##### ثلاث خصال العبد بينهن

#### 3-17 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله عن أبي القاسم عبدالرحمن بن حماد، عن أبي عمران عمرو بن مصعب العرزمي، عن أبي حمزة الثمالي قال: سمعت أبا جعفر عليه السلام يقول: العبد بين ثلاثة: بلاء وقضاء ونعمة. فعليه في البلاء من الله الصبر فريضة، وعليه في القضاء من الله التسليم فريضة، وعليه في النعمة من الله عز وجل الشكر فريضة.

##### ثلاثة حق لهم أن يرحموا

#### 3-18 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن عبد الله ابن سنان قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إني لا رحم ثلاثة، وحق لهم أن يرحموا: عزيز أصابته مذله بعد العز، وغني أصابته حاجة بعد الغني، وعالم يستخف به أهله والجهلة.

##### ثلاثة يبغضهم الله عز وجل

#### 3-19 حدثنا حمزة بن محمد بن أحمد العلوي رضي الله عنه قال: أخبرني علي ابن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن الحسين بن عثمان،

Uthman, “Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, ‘Indeed the Honorable the
Exalted God is angry with the oppressive wealthy ones, wicked old men
and the arrogant needy ones.’ Then the Imam (MGB) asked, ‘Do you know
who the arrogant needy ones are?’ I said, ‘He is one who has little
money.’ The Imam (MGB) said, ‘No. He is someone who would not spend any
of his money in order to get closer to the Honorable the Exalted God.’”

THREE OCCASIONS FOR LYING, THREE OCCASIONS NOT TO TELL THE TRUTH, THREE OCCASIONS NOT TO ASSOCIATE
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-20 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
al-Hussein ibn Sa’id, on the authority of Abil-Hussein ibn al-Hazrami,
on the authority of Jamil ibn Dur’raj, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Sa’id, on the authority of Al-Maharebi, on the authority of Ja’far ibn
Muhammad (MGB)**[[179]](footnotes_1.htm#b0179)** , on the authority of
his father (MGB)**[[180]](footnotes_1.htm#b0180)** , on the authority of
his forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that the Prophet
(MGB) said, “There are three situations in which it is good to lie: when
plotting in a war, when promising to your wife, and when interceding
between two people to improve their relationship. There are three
situations in which it is bad to tell the truth: in gossiping, in
informing a man about his wife, and when denying some (bad) news.” The
Prophet (MGB) added, “Associating with three groups of people will spoil
the heart: associating with mean people, talking with women and
associating with rich people.”

THREE CHARACTERISTICS FOR THREE CHARACTERISTICS
-----------------------------------------------

3-21 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn
Ahmad, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Muhammad al-Razi, on the
authority of Bakr ibn Salih, on the authority of Abi Ayoob, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said,
“Whoever tells the truth has purified his deeds. God will increase the
share of the daily bread of whoever has good intentions. God will extend
the life of whoever treats his wife kindly.”

ONE CHARACTERISTIC RESULTS IN THREE CHARACTERISTICS
---------------------------------------------------

3-22 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Abi Sa’id al-Adamy, on the
authority of Abdul Aziz al-Abdi that Ibn Abi Ya’foor said, “I heard Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, ‘Whoever gets attached to this world has
only grabbed onto continual grief, unattainable aspirations and
unreachable hopes.’”

#### عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إن الله عز وجل يبغض الغني الظلوم، والشيخ الفاجر، والصعلوك المختال، ثم قال: أتدري ما الصعلوك المختال؟ قال: فقلنا: القليل المال، قال: لا هو الذي لا يتقرب إلى الله عز وجل بشيء من ماله. {.t0}

##### ثلاث يحسن فيهن الكذب وثلاث بقبح فيهن الصدق وثلاثة مجالستهم تميت القلب

#### 3-20 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن الحسين بن سعيد، عن أبي الحسين بن الحضرمي، عن موسى بن القاسم البجلي، عن جميل بن دراج، عن محمد بن سعيد، عن المحاربي، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: ثلاث يحسن فيهن الكذب: المكيدة في الحرب، وعدتك زوجتك، والاصلاح بين الناس. وثلاث يقبح فيهن الصدق: النميمة، وإخبارك الرجل عن أهله بما يكرهه. وتكذيبك الرجل عن الخبر. قال: وثلاثة مجالستهم تميت القلب: مجالسة الانذال والحديث مع النساء، ومجالسة الاغنياء.

##### ثلاث بثلاث

#### 3-21 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس قال:حدثني محمد بن أحمد، عن عبد الله بن محمد الرازي، عن بكر بن صالح، عن أبي أيوب، عن محمد بن مسلم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من صدق لسانه زكا عمله، ومن حسنت نيته زاد الله في رزقه، ومن حسن بره بأهله زاد الله في عمره.

##### واحدة بثلاث

#### 3-22 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن أبي سعيد الادمي، عن عبدالعزيز العبدي، عن ابن أبي يعفور قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: من تعلق قلبه بالدنيا تعلق منها بثلاث خصال: هم لا يفنى، وأمل لا يدرك، ورجاء لا ينال.

THE SIGNS OF GETTING OLD ARE THREE
----------------------------------

3-23 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Yaqoob
ibn Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority
of Ibrahim ibn Abdul-Hamid that Al-Sabah - the servant of Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “I was accompanying Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
when we reached Mount Uhud. The Imam (MGB) asked me, ‘Do you see the
whole in the mountain?’ I replied, ‘Yes, I do.’ The Imam (MGB) said,
‘However, I do not see it. There are three signs for getting old.
Reduction of sight, bending of the back and shortening of steps.”

THREE CHARACTERISTICS UNIQUE TO THE PROPHETS, THEIR OFFSPRING AND THEIR FOLLOWERS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-24 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Hassan ibn
Musa al-Khishab, on the authority of Isma’il ibn Mihran, on the
authority of Ali ibn Uthman that Abil Hassan Musa ibn Ja’far
(MGB)**[[181]](footnotes_1.htm#b0181)** said, “There are three things
unique to the Prophets, their offspring and their followers: physical
illness, fear of the kings, and poverty.”

THREE CHARACTERISTICS WHICH GOD HATES
-------------------------------------

3-25 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on
the authority of Musa ibn Ja’far al-Baghdady, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn al-Mo’ala who linked it up through some narrators to Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “There are three things which cause the
Honorable the Exalted God’s hatred: sleeping when you are not sleepy,
laughing without a cause, and eating on a full stomach.”

3-26 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of Mansoor ibn al-Ab’bas, on the
authority of Ali ibn Asbat, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Abdul Hab’bar,
on the authority of his grandfather that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
said, “There are three kinds of gifts: gifts in return for gifts, gifts
for making up and gifts for the sake of the Honorable the Exalted God.”

THREE THINGS THE PROPHETS ARE NOT IMMUNE TO SEE FROM THEIR FOLLOWERS
--------------------------------------------------------------------

3-27 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris and Muhammad ibn Yahya
al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari who
quoted through a chain of narrators that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq

##### علامات الكبر ثلاث

#### 3-23 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن إبراهيم بن عبدالحميد عن الصباح مولى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: كنت مع أبي عبد الله عليه السلام فلما مررنا باحد قال: ترى الثقب الذي فيه، قلت: نعم، قال: أما أنا فلست أراه، وعلامة الكبر ثلاث: كلال البصر، وانحناء الظهر، ورقة القدم.

##### ثلاث خصال خص بها الانبياء وأولادهم وأتباعهم

#### 3-24 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني الحسن بن موسى الخشاب، عن إسماعيل بن مهران، عن علي بن عثمان، عن أبي الحسن موسى بن جعفر عليهما السلام قال: إن الانبياء وأولاد الانبياء وأتباع الانبياء خصوا بثلاث خصال: السقم في الابدان، وخوف السلطان، والفقر.

##### ثلاث خصال فيهن المقت من الله تبارك وتعالى

#### 3-25 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار قال: حدثني محمد بن أحمد قال: حدثني موسى بن جعفر البغدادي، عن محمد بن المعلي، عمن أخبره، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ثلاث فيهن المقت من الله عز وجل: نوم من غير سهر، وضحك من غير عجب، وأكل على الشبع.

##### الهدية على ثلاثة وجوه

#### 3-26 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني عمي محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن منصور بن العباس، عن علي بن أسباط، عن أحمد بن عبدالجبار، عن جده، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: الهدية على ثلاثة وجوه: هدية مكافأة، وهدية مصانعة، وهدية لله عز وجل.

##### ثلاث خصال لم يعر منها نبي فمن دونه

#### 3-27 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، ومحمد بن يحيى العطار جميعا، عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري باسناده يرفعـه إلـى

(MGB) said, “There are three things which the Prophets (MGB) are not
immune to see from their followers: being considered to be ill omen,
being jealous of and fastidious thoughts about creation.”

The compiler of the book - may God increase his honor - said, “What is
meant by ill omen here is that the followers of the Prophets (MGB)
considers them to be ill omen. The Prophets (MGB) did not consider them
to be ill omen as the Honorable the Exalted God said regarding the
people of the Prophet Salih, They said, ‘Ill omen do we augur from thee
and those that are with thee’. He said, ‘Your ill omen is with
God.’”**[[182]](footnotes_1.htm#b0182)** And as others have told their
Prophets (MGB), “for us, we augur an evil omen from you: if ye desist
not, we will certainly stone you. And a grievous punishment indeed will
be inflicted on you by us."**[[183]](footnotes_1.htm#b0183)** And
regarding envy here is that the Prophets are envied. They do not envy
others as the Honorable the Exalted God says, “Or do they envy mankind
for what God hath given them of his bounty? but We had already given the
people of Abraham the Book and Wisdom, and conferred upon them a great
kingdom.”**[[184]](footnotes_1.htm#b0184)**

And regarding deluding thoughts about creation refers to the fact that
the Prophets (MGB) encounter people who are fastidious in their
thoughts. An example of this is what the Honorable the Exalted God
describes about al-Walid ibn al-Muqayrih al-Makhzoomi (in the following
verses of the Holy Quran), “For he thought and he plotted; And woe to
him! How he plotted! Yea, Woe to him; How he
plotted!”**[[185]](footnotes_1.htm#b0185)** This means that he had said
the following about the Quran, “This is nothing but magic, derived from
of old; This is nothing but the word of a mortal!”
**[[186]](footnotes_1.htm#b0186)**

THE THREE ROOTS OF INFIDELITY
-----------------------------

3-28 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Al-Ab’bas ibn Maruf, on the authority of Bakr ibn Muhammad, on the
authority of Abi Basir that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “There are
three roots for infidelity: greed, haughtiness and jealousy. Regarding
greed, when Adam was forbidden to eat of the tree, greed caused him to
eat of it. Regarding haughtiness, when Satan was ordered to prostrate,
he refused to do so. Regarding jealousy, one of the two sons of Adam
killed the other one due to jealousy.”

THE THREE FORMS OF DEBTS
------------------------

3-29 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Aba Abdullah al-Razi, on the
authority of Mansoor ibn al-Ab’bas, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn
Ali

#### أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ثلاث لم يعر منها نبي فمن دونه: الطيرة والحسد، والتفكر في الوسوسة في الخلق. {.t0}

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب أدام الله عزه: معنى الطيرة في هذا الموضع هوأن يتطير منهم قومهم فأماهم عليهم السلام فلا يتطيرون وذلك كما قال الله عز وجل عن قوم صالح "قَالُوا اطَّيَّرْنَا بِكَ وَبِمَنْ مَعَكَ قَالَ طَائِرُكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ." وكما قال آخرون لانبيائهم عليهم السلام: "قَالُوا إِنَّا تَطَيَّرْنَا بِكُمْ لَئِنْ لَمْ تَنتَهُوا لَنَرْجُمَنَّكُمْ…" الآية. وأما الحسد [فانه] في هذا الموضع هو أن يحسدوا لا أنهم يحسدون غيرهم وذلك كما قال الله عز وجل: "أَمْ يَحْسُدُونَ النَّاسَ عَلَى مَا آتَاهُمْ اللَّهُ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ فَقَدْ آتَيْنَا آلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَآتَيْنَاهُمْ مُلْكًا عَظِيمًا." وأما التفكر في الوسوسة في الخلق فهو بلواهم عليهم السلام بأهل الوسوسة لا غير ذلك، وذلك كما حكى الله عز وجل عنهم عن الوليد بن المغيرة المخزومي "إِنَّهُ فَكَّرَ وَقَدَّرَ. فَقُتِلَ كَيْفَ قَدَّرَ. ثُمَّ قُتِلَ كَيْفَ قَدَّرَ." يعني قال للقرآن: "إِنْ هَذَا إِلاَّ سِحْرٌ يُؤْثَرُ. إِنْ هَذَا إِلاَّ قَوْلُ الْبَشَرِ. "

##### اصول الكفر ثلاثة

#### 3-28 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار قال: حدثني العباس بن معروف، عن بكر بن محمد، عن أبي بصير عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: اصول الكفر ثلاثة: الحرص والاستكبار والحسد، فأما الحرص فآدم حين نهي عن الشجرة حمله الحرص على أن يأكل منها، وأما الاستكبار فابليس حين امر بالسجود فأبى، وأما الحسد فابنا آدم حين قتل أحدهما صاحبه حسدا.

##### الدين على ثلاثة وجوه

#### 3-29 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحـمد، عن أبي عبـد الله الرازي، عن منـصور بن العباس، عن الحسن بن علي بن

ibn Yaqtayn, on the authority of Amr**[[187]](footnotes_1.htm#b0187)** ,
on the authority of Khalaf ibn Himmad, on the authority of Muhraz, on
the authority of Abi Basir, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There are three forms of debt.
There are those who give more time to their debtor when they loan money
to others, and do not put off the repayment of their own debts to others
and pay back their own debts as soon as they can. This would be to their
benefit, not to their loss. However, there are those who pay back their
own debts when they take back what they have loaned to others. They
neither lose or gain. However, there are those who take back what they
have loaned to others, but put off the repayment of their own debts.
This would be to their loss, not their gain.”

YOU MUST SEEK PERMISSION TO ENTER THREE TIMES
---------------------------------------------

3-30 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah
al-Barqy, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Ali ibn
Asbat, on the authority of his uncle Yaqoob ibn Salim, on the authority
of Abi Basir, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “You must
ask permission to enter (from outside the
door).**[[188]](footnotes_1.htm#b0188)** The first time is to let the
residents of the house hear your request. The second request is to let
them cover up their bodies (to meet the veiling requirements), and the
third request is to give them a chance to grant you permission to enter
or deny it. If they do not grant you permission to enter, you must
immediately return.”

THREE PEOPLE NOT TO GREET
-------------------------

3-31 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted Muhammad ibn
al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab who linked it up through a chain of
narrators to Imam as-Sadiq (MGB) saying, “Do not greet those who are
attending a funeral procession, those who are going to the
congregational prayers, and those who are in the bath.”

THE BEST THREE PEOPLE
---------------------

3-32 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted
Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of his father, on the authority
of Abdullah ibn al-Fazl al-Nawfaly, on the authority of Isa ibn Abdullah
al-Hashemi, on the authority of Abi Khalid Muhammad ibn Suleiman, on the
authority of someone, on the authority of Ibn al-Munkadir who linked it
up through documents to God’s Prophet (MGB) who said, “The best of you
are those who feed (the needy), greet aloud, and pray (at night) when
others are asleep.”

#### يقطين عن عمروعن خلف بن حماد، عن محرز، عن أبي بصير، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الدين على ثلاثة وجوه:رجل إذا كان له فأنظر وإذا كان عليه أعطى ولم يماطل فذلك له ولا عليه. ورجل إذا كان له استوفى، وإن كان عليه أوفى، فذلك لا له ولا عليه. ورجل إذا كان له استوفى وإذا كان عليه مطل فذلك عليه ولا له. {.t0}

##### وجوه الاستيذان ثلاثة

#### 3-30 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن علي بن أسباط، عن عمه يعقوب بن سالم، عن أبي بصير، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: الاستيذان ثلاثة أولهن يسمعون، والثانية يحذرون، والثالثة إن شاؤوا أذنوا وإن شاؤوا لم يفعلوا فيرجع المستأذن.

##### ثلاثة لا يسلمون

#### 3-31 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب باسناده يرفعه إلى الصادق عليه السلام قال: ثلاثة لا يسلمون: الماشي مع جنازة، والماشي إلى الجمعة، وفي بيت الحمام.

##### خير الناس ثلاثة

#### 3-32 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن عبد الله بن الفضل النوفلي، عن عيسى بن عبد الله الهاشمي، عن أبي خالد محمد بن سليمان، عن رجل، عن ابن المنكدر باسناده قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: خيركم من أطعم الطعام، وأفشى السلام وصلى والناس نيام.

THREE CHARACTERISTICS INDICATE AFFLUENCE, BEAUTY AND DEFEAT OF YOUR ENEMIES
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-33 Hamzih ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Alavi - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Al-Nawfaly, on the authority of Al-Sakoony, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the authority of his father
(MGB), on the authority of his forefathers (MGB), on the authority of
Ali (MGB), “Using good scent indicates affluence. Wearing good garments
indicates beauty. Having a good temper defeats one’s enemies.”

3-34 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ali ibn
al-Hikam who linked it up through a chain of narrators to Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB), “The following are three of the traditions of the
Messengers (MGB): putting on perfume, having their hair cut, and making
love often.”

THREE THINGS ARE PLEASING TO THE EYES
-------------------------------------

3-35 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn
Ahmad, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority
of Ubaydullah ibn Abdullah al-Dehqan, on the authority of Durost ibn Abi
Mansoor, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Abdul-Hamid, on the authority
of Abil Hassan - the first (MGB)**[[189]](footnotes_1.htm#b0189)** ,
‘Looking at greenery, looking at flowing water and looking at a
beautiful woman are pleasing to the eyes.’

THREE GOOD CHARACTERISTICS
--------------------------

3-36 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Haysam ibn Abi Masruq
al-Nehdi, on the authority of Abdul Aziz ibn Umar, on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Umar al-Halabi, “I asked Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), ‘Which
characteristics are better for a man?’ The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘Dignity
without being awesome, generosity without demanding something in return,
and attending to affairs other than worldly affairs.’”

THREE WASTEFUL ACTS
-------------------

3-37 Al-Hussein ibn Ahmad ibn Idris - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari linked
it up through a chain of narrators to Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) who
said, “Three things would constitute being wasteful: wearing indecent
garments, throwing away a date seed, and pouring away your leftover
water.” The Imam (MGB) added, “There is no wastefulness in eating.”

##### ثلاث خصال خصلة منها تظهر الغنى وخصلة تظهر الجمال وخصلة تكبت الاعداء

#### 3-33 حدثنا حمزة بن محمد بن أحمد العلوي رضي الله عنه قال: أخبرني علي ابن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن النوفلي، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه،عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: الدهن يظهر الغنى، والثياب تظهر الجمال، وحسن الملكة يكبت الاعداء.

##### ثلاث من سنن المرسلين

#### 3-34 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه: قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن علي بن الحكم يرفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ثلاث من سنن المرسلين: العطر، وإحفاء الشعر، وكثرة الطروقة.

##### ثلاثة يجلين البصر

#### 3-35 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن أحمد عن محمد بن عيسى، عن عبيد الله بن عبد الله الدهقان، عن درست بن أبي منصور، عن إبراهيم بن عبدالحميد، عن أبي الحسن الاول عليه السلام قال: ثلاثة يجلين البصر: النظر إلى الخضرة، والنظر إلى الماء الجاري، والنظر ألى الوجه الحسن.

##### الخصال الجميلة ثلاث

#### 3-36 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن الهيثم بن أبي مسروق النهدي، عن عبدالعزيز بن عمر، عن أحمد بن عمر الحلبي قال: قلت لابي عبد الله عليه السلام: أي الخصال بالمرء أجمل؟ قال عليه السلام: وقار بلا مهابة، وسماح بلا طلب مكافأة، وتشاغل بغير متاع الدنيا.

##### السرف في ثلاث

#### 3-37 حدثنا الحسين بن أحمد بن إدريس رضي الله عنه عن أبيه قال: حدثني محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري باسناده يعرفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: السرف في ثلاث ابتذا لك ثوب صونك، وإلقائك النوى يمينا وشمالا، واهراقك فضلة الماء، وقال: ليس في الطعام سرف.

GOD’S PROPHET (MGB) CURSED THREE PEOPLE
---------------------------------------

3-38 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Ubaydullah
ibn Abdullah al-Dehqan, on the authority of Durost ibn Abi Mansoor, on
the authority of Ibrahim ibn Abdul-Hamid, on the authority of Abil
Hassan (MGB), “God’s Prophet (MGB) has cursed the following three: one
who eats his foodstuff alone on a trip; one who rides in the wilderness
alone; and one who sleeps alone in the house.”

RANKS IN HEAVEN WHICH ONLY THREE PEOPLE CAN ATTAIN
--------------------------------------------------

3-39 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God have Mercy
upon him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Al-Nazr ibn Soweed, on the authority of Abi Basir, on the authority of
Zar’at, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “There is a rank in Heaven which no one but a just
leader, intimate and kind relative, or a patient husband can attain.”

THREE PEOPLE ARE NOT SUBJECT TO THE RULES
-----------------------------------------

3-40 Al-Hassan ibn Muhammad al-Sakoony narrated that
Al-Hazrami**[[190]](footnotes_1.htm#b0190)** quoted Ibrahim ibn Abi
Muawiyah, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Al-A’amash, on the authority of Abi Zebyan, “An insane woman who had
committed adultery was brought to Umar. Umar order that she be stoned to
death. They took her to Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB). The Imam (MGB) asked,
‘What is going on?’ They said, ‘She is a crazy woman who has committed
adultery. Umar has ordered her to be punished.’ The Imam (MGB) said, ‘Do
not rush to do so.’ Then the Imam (MGB) told Umar, ‘Don’t you know that
three people are not subject to the rules? They are children until they
mature, crazy people until they become sane, and people who are asleep
until they wake up.”

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “This
tradition appeared here this way. The original version of this tradition
that has been narrated on the authority of the Divine Leaders (MGB)
says, ‘When an insane man commits adultery, he should be punished.
However, when an insane woman commits adultery, she should not be
punished. That is because an insane man does the act (of adultery),
while an insane woman would be the subject (of adultery).”

THREE PEOPLE SWORE TO KILL THE PROPHET, BUT ALI ROSE UP AGAINST THEM
--------------------------------------------------------------------

3-41 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Ma’qel al-Qarmaysani
quoted Ja’far al-Var’raq on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hassan
al-Ashj, on the authority of Yahya ibn Zayd ibn Ali ibn al-Hussein
(MGB), “One day God’s Prophet (MGB) went out and said the dawn prayer.

##### لعن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله ثلاثة

#### 3-38 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن محمد بن عيسى بن عبيد، عن عبيد الله بن عبد الله الدهقان. عن درست بن أبي منصور، عن إبراهيم بن عبدالحميد، عن أبي الحسن عليه السلام قال: لعن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله ثلاثة: الآكل زاده وحده، والراكب في الفلاة وحده، والنائم في بيت وحده.

##### في الجنة درجة لا ينالها الا ثلاثة

#### 3-39 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد - رحمه الله - قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن النضر بن سويد، عن زرعة عن أبي بصير، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إن في الجنة درجة لا ينالها إلا إمام عادل، أو ذو رحم وصول، أو ذو عيال صبور.

##### رفع القلم عن ثلاثة

#### 3-40 حدثنا الحسن بن محمد السكوني قال: حدثنا الحضرمي قال: حدثنا إبراهيم بن أبي معاوية قال: حدثنا أبي، عن الاعمش، عن أبي ظبيان قال: اتي عمر بامرأة مجنونة قد فجرت فأمر برجمها فمروا بها على علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام فقال: ما هذه؟ قالوا: مجنونة فجرت، فأمر بها عمر أن ترجم، فقال: لا تعجلوا فأتى عمر فقال له: أما علمت أن القلم رفع عن ثلاثة: عن الصبي حتى يحتلم، وعن المجنون حتى يفيق، وعن النائم حتى يستيقظ.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب: جاء هذا الحديث هكذا والاصل في هذا قول أهل البيت عليهم السلام المجنون إذا زنى حد، والمجنونة إذا زنت لا تحد لان المجنون يأتي والمجنونة تؤتى.

##### حديث الثلاثة الذين حلفوا أن يقتلوا رسول الله فنهض اليهم علي

#### 3-41 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني محمد بن معقل القرميسيني، عن جعفر الوراق قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الاشج، عن يحيى بن زيد بن علي بن الحسين عليهما السلام قال: خرج رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله ذات يوم وصلى الفجر.

Then he (MGB) asked, ‘O people! Which of you will rise against the three
people who have sworn to Lat and Uzza to kill me? By the Lord of the
Ka’ba! They have lied!’ The people all looked down and no one said
anything. The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘I think Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) is
not amongst you?’ Amir ibn Qatada said, ‘He (MGB) had a fever at night
and did not come out to pray with you. Will you permit me to inform
him?’ The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Go and do so.’

He went and informed Ali (MGB). Then the Commander of the Faithful Ali
(MGB) came out while he (MGB) had tied the two corners of his robe to
his neck. He said, ‘O Prophet of God! What has happened?’ The Prophet
(MGB) said, ‘My Lord has informed me that there are three people who
have risen up to kill me, but I swear by the Lord of the Ka’ba that they
have lied.’

Then the Commander of the Faithful Ali (MGB) said, ‘I will get ready and
go to fight with them by myself.’ Then the Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Fine.
Here is my garment, my armor, and my sword.’ The Prophet (MGB) dressed
him, put on his own armor on Ali (MGB), gave Ali (MGB) his own sword and
put his own turban on Ali’s head. The Commander of the Faithful (MGB)
rode his horse and left. Three days passed. Gabriel did not bring any
news about Ali (MGB) and there was no other news about him. Fatimah
(MGB) brought forth Al-Hassan (MGB) and Al-Hussein (MGB) and said, ‘I
hope you have not made these boys orphans!’ The Prophet (MGB) cried and
said, ‘I give the glad tidings of Paradise for whoever brings me any
news about Ali (MGB).’ The people who were present there started to look
around. Then Amir ibn Qatada returned with the news of Ali’s (MGB)
return. Then the Commander of the Faithful (MGB) came back with two
slaves, three camels and three horses. Gabriel descended to the Prophet
(MGB) and informed the Prophet (MGB) about what had happened. The
Prophet (MGB) said, ‘O Abal-Hassan**[[191]](footnotes_1.htm#b0191)** !
Do you want me to tell you what happened?’ Then the hypocrites said, ‘So
far Muhammad was in great pains wondering about Ali’s whereabouts and
now he wants to tell us what has happened to Ali (MGB)!’

Then the Prophet (MGB) said, ‘O Abal-Hassan (Ali)! You yourself tell us
what happened to you so that you be the witness for these people.’ Ali
(MGB) said, ‘O Prophet of God! Yes. Once I got there I found these three
people riding on camels. They yelled at me and asked me who I am. I
replied, ‘I am the cousin of God’s Prophet!’ They said, ‘We do not know
who God’s Prophet is. To us killing you and Muhammad is the same.’ Then
this man who was killed attacked me and we had a fight. Then there came
a red wind in which I could hear your voice saying, ‘I have cut off the
neck of his armour for you. Hit him at the neck!’ I hit him at the neck,
but it did not work. Then a black wind started to blow and I heard your
voice saying

#### ثم قال: معاشر الناس أيكم ينهض إلى ثلاثة نفر قد آلوا باللات والعزى ليقتلوني وقد كذبوا ورب الكعبة، فأحجم الناس ما تكلم أحد، فقال: ما أحسب أن علي بن أبي طالب فيكم، فقام إليه عامر بن قتادة فقال: إنه وعك في هذه الليلة ولم يخرج يصلي معك، فتأذن لي أن اخبره؟ فقال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: شأنك، فمضى إليه فأخبره فخرج أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام وكأنه نشط من عقال وعليه إزارقد عقد طرفيه على رقبته فقال: يا رسول الله ما هذا الخبر فقال: هذا رسول ربي يخبرني عن ثلاثة نفر قد نهضوا إلي ليقتلوني وقد كذبوا ورب الكعبة، فقال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: أنا لهم سرية وحدي هو ذا ألبس علي ثيابي فقال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: بل هذه ثيابي وهذا درعي وهذا سيفي فألبسه ودرعه وعممه وقلده وأركبه فرسه وخرج أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام فمكث ثلاثة أيام لا يأتيه جبرئيل بخبره ولا خبر من الارض فأقبلت فاطمة بالحسن والحسين عليهم السلام على وركيها تقول: أو شك أن يؤتم هذين الغلامين فأسبل النبي صلى الله عليه وآله عينيه يبكي، ثم قال: معاشر الناس من يأتيني بخبر علي، ابشره بالجنة، وافترق الناس في الطلب لعظيم ما رأوا بالنبي صلى الله عليه وآله وأقبل عامر بن قتادة يبشر بعلي ودخل أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام ومعه أسيران ورأس وثلاثة أبعرة وثلاثه أفراس وهبط جبرئيل فخبر النبي صلى الله عليه وآله بما كان فيه، فقال له النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: تحب أن اخبرك بما كنت فيه يا أبا الحسن؟ فقال المنافقون: هو منذ ساعة قد أخذه المخاض وهو الساعة يريد أن يحدثه، فقال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: بل تحدث أنت يا أبا الحسن لتكون شهيدا على القوم، فقال: نعم يا رسول الله لما صرت في الوادي رأيت هؤلاء ركبانا على الاباعر، فنادوني من أنت فقلت: أنا علي بن أبي طالب ابن عم رسول الله، فقالوا: ما نعرف لله من رسول سواء علينا وقعنا عليك أو على محمد، وشد علي هذا المقتـول، ودار بينـي

‘I have raised his armour!’ I hit him on the leg and chopped it off.
Then I threw him on the ground and chopped off his head. Then the other
two said, ‘We have heard that Muhammad is a kind and sympathetic friend.
Please do not rush in killing us and take us to him. This friend of ours
equaled one-thousand fighters.’ Then the Prophet (MGB) said, ‘The first
voice was that of Gabriel, and the second one was that of
Michael.’**[[192]](footnotes_1.htm#b0192)** Then the Prophet (MGB)
turned to one of the two men and said, ‘Say ‘There is no god but God,
and I bear witness that you are God’s Prophet.’’

The man replied, ‘It is easier for me to carry Mount Abi Qays on my
shoulders than to say this. The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Then chop off his
head.’ They brought forth the other man. The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Say
‘There is no god but God, and I bear witness that you are God’s
Prophet.’’

The man said, ‘Let me join my friend.’ The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘O
Abal-Hassan (Ali)! Chop off his head.’ The Commander of the Faithful
(MGB) got up to chop off the man’s head. However, Gabriel descended and
said, ‘O Muhammad! Your Lord sends you greetings and says ‘Thou shall
not kill him since he is good-tempered and kind with his tribe.’ The man
who was under the sword asked, ‘Is this the messenger from your Lord who
is informing you?’ The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘Yes.’ The man said, ‘I swear
by God that I never withheld even a penny from my brethren and I never
fled from war. Now I bear witness that there is no god but God and that
you are His Messenger.’ The Prophet (MGB) said, ‘This is a man whose
generosity and being good-tempered will take him to Paradise.’”

THREE CHARACTERISTICS IN DOING GOOD TO ONE’S BRETHREN
-----------------------------------------------------

3-42 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Sahl ibn Zyad al-Adamy,
on the authority of someone and Umar ibn Abdul-Aziz, on the authority of
Jamil ibn Dur’raj, “Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, ‘The best of you
are the generous ones, and the worst of you are the miserly ones. Being
good is doing good deeds for your brethren and trying to fulfill their
needs. Such deeds will debase Satan, free man from the Fire and take him
into Paradise. O Jamil! Relate this to the noble ones from amongst your
friends.’”

Jamil ibn Dur’raj added, “I asked, ‘May I be your ransom! Who are the
noble ones from amongst my friends?’ Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said,
‘They are the ones who are good to their friends both in times of ease
and in times of difficulty.’ Then Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) added, ‘O
Jamil! This would be easy to do for one who is well-off. The Honorable
the Exalted God has praised the act of doing good by those who have very
little and has said, ‘… but give them preference over themselves, even
though poverty was their (own lot). And those saved from the
covetousness of their own souls,- they are the ones that achieve
prosperity.’’**[[193]](footnotes_1.htm#b0193)**”

#### وبينه ضربات وهبت ريح حمراء وسمعت صوتك فيها يا رسول الله وأنت تقول: قد قطعت لك جربان درعه فاضرب حبل عاتقه، فضربته فلم أحفه، ثم هبت ريح سوداء سمعت صوتك فيها يا رسول الله وأنت تقول: قد قلبت لك الدرع عن فخذه فاضرب فخذه،فضربته فقطعته ووكزته وقطعت رأسه ورميت به وأخذت رأسه، وقال لي: هذان الرجلان: بلغنا أن محمدا رفيق شفيق رحيم فاحملنا إليه ولا تعجل علينا وصاحبنا كان يعد بألف فارس.فقال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: أما الصوت الاول الذي حك مسامعك فصوت جبرئيل، وأما الصوت الآخر فصوت ميكائيل، قدم إلى أحد الرجلين [فقدمه علي عليه السلام] فقال [النبي صلى الله عليه وآله]: قل لا إله إلا الله واشهد أني رسول الله فقال لنقل جبل أبي قبيس أحب إلى من أن أقول هذه الكلمة. فقال: أخره يا أبا الحسن واضرب عنقه [فضرب علي عليه السلام عنقه] ثم قال: قدم الآخر، فقدم، فقال: قل لا إله إلا الله واشهد أني رسول الله فقال: ألحقني بصاحبي، قال: أخره يا أباالحسن واضرب عنقه فأخره وقام أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام ليضرب عنقه فهبط جبرئيل فقال: يا محمد إن ربك يقرئك السلام ويقول لك: لا تقتله فانه حسن الخلق، سخي في قومه، فقال الرجل وهو تحت السيف: هذا رسول ربك يخبرك؟ قال: نعم، فقال: والله ما ملكت درهما مع أخ لي قط إلا أنفقته، ولا كلمت بسوء مع أخ لي، ولا قطبت وجهي في الجدب، وأنا أشهد أن لا إله إلا الله، وأنك رسول الله. فقال صلى الله عليه وآله: هذا ممن جره حسن خلقه وسخاؤه إلى جنات النعيم. {.t0}

##### في البر بالاخوان والسعى في حوائجهن ثلاث خصال

#### 3-42 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار قال: حدثني سهل بن زياد الادمي قال: حدثني رجل، وعمر بن عبدالعزيز عن جميل بن دراج قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: خياركم سمحاؤكم وشراركم بخلاؤكم، ومن صالح الاعمال البر بالاخوان، والسعي في حوائجهم، وفي ذلك مرغمة للشيطان، وتزحزح عن النيران ودخول الجنان يا جميل أخبر بهذا الحديث غرر أصحابك، قال: فقلت له: جعلت فداك من غرر أصحابي؟ قال: هم البارون بالاخوان في العسر واليسر، ثم قال: يا جميل أما إن صاحب الكثير يهون عليه ذلك، وقد مدح الله عز وجل صاحب القليل، فقال: "وَيُؤْثِرُونَ عَلَى أَنْفُسِهِمْ وَلَوْ كَانَ بِهِمْ خَصَاصَةٌ وَمَنْ يُوقَ شُحَّ نَفْسِهِ فَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمْ الْمُفْلِحُونَ."

THREE LOCATIONS WHERE DEFECATION IS ADMONISHED AGAINST
------------------------------------------------------

3-43 Hamzih ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Alavi - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Al-Nawfaly, on the authority of Al-Sakoony, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the authority of his
forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB), “The Prophet of God
(MGB) admonished against defecation in three locations: along the edges
of a body of water; alongside a river; and under fruit-bearing trees.”

THERE ARE THREE PROBLEMS IN GETTING EXPOSED TO THE SUN
------------------------------------------------------

3-44 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa,
on the authority of Abu Yahya Sohail ibn Zyad al-Vaseti who linked it up
with a chain of narrators to the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali
(MGB), “There are three problems in getting exposed to the sun. It
causes water to evaporate; it will darken the skin; wear out clothing
and make hidden pains apparent.”

THERE ARE THREE SIGNS FOR ONE WHO IS WASTEFUL
---------------------------------------------

3-45 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his father quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hussein, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Khalid, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al-Ash’ari, on the
authority of Abi Ishaq who linked it up to Ali ibn al-Hussein
(MGB)**[[194]](footnotes_1.htm#b0194)**, “There are three signs for one
who is wasteful: What he eats, he doesn’t deserve to eat; what he wears,
he doesn’t deserve to wear, and what he buys, he doesn’t deserve to
buy.”

ALL EYES WILL WEEP ON THE RESURRECTION DAY EXCEPT THREE
-------------------------------------------------------

3-46 Ja’far ibn Ali ibn al-Hassan al-Kufy - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Al-Hassan ibn Ali quoted his grandfather Abdullah
ibn al-Muqayrih, on the authority of Al-Sakoony, on the authority of
Ja’far ibn Muhammad al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of his
father**[[195]](footnotes_1.htm#b0195)** (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “On the Resurrection Day, all eyes will be weeping except for
three pairs of eyes: those which have cried out of fear of God; those
which have been held away from looking at what God has forbidden to look
at; and those which have not slept for the sake of God.”

ALL GOOD IS IN THREE TRAITS
---------------------------

3-47 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim quoted Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority
of Yunus ibn Abdul-Rahman, on the authority of Abi Ayoob al-Khizaz, on
the authority of Abi Hamzih, on the authority of Abi Ja’far al-Baqir
(MGB) that the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said,

##### النهى عن التغوط في ثلاثة مواضع

#### 3-43 حدثنا حمزة بن محمد بن أحمد العلوي رضي الله عنه قال: أخبرني علي ابن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن النوفلي، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: نهى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أن يتغوط على شفير ماء يستعذب منه،أو نهر يستعذب منه، أو تحت شجرة عليها ثمرها.

##### في استقبال الشمس ثلاث خصال ردية

#### 3-44 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري قال: حدثني أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى قال: حدثني أبويحيى سهيل بن زياد الواسطي باسناده يرفعه إلى أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام قال: لا تستقبلوا الشمس فانها مبخرة، تشحب اللون وتبلي الثوب، وتظهر الداء الدفين.

##### للمسرف ثلاث علامات

#### 3-45 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أحمد عن محمد بن الحسين، عن محمد بن خالد، عن إبراهيم بن محمد الاشعري، عن أبي اسحاق يرفعه إلى علي بن الحسين عليهما السلام قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: للمسرف ثلاث علامات يأكل ما ليس له، ويلبس ما ليس له، ويشتري ما ليس له.

##### كل عين باكية يوم القيامة الا ثلاث أعين

#### 3-46 حدثنا جعفر بن علي بن الحسن الكوفي رضي الله عنه، عن الحسن بن علي، عن جده عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:كل عين باكية يوم القيامة إلا ثلاث أعين: عين بكت من خشية الله، وعين غضت عن محارم الله، وعين باتت ساهرة في سبيل الله.

##### جمع الخير كله في ثلاث خصال

#### 3-47 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن يونس بن عبدالرحمن، عن أبي أيوب الخزاز، عن

“All good is contained in three traits: looking, being quiet and
talking. If one doesn’t get admonished when he sees things, he is in
error. Not thinking when you are quiet equals ignorance, and any talk in
which there is no remembrance of God is in vain. Blessed
are**[[196]](footnotes_1.htm#b0196)** those whose consideration teaches
them lessons; whose silence causes them to think; whose talking is
mention of God; who weep for their sins; and save people from their
evil.”

THREE PEOPLE RIDING ON AN ANIMAL IS ADMONISHED AGAINST
------------------------------------------------------

3-48 Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy - may God have Mercy upon
him - narrated that his father quoted his grandfather Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Ali ibn
Asbat, on the authority of his uncle Yaqoob ibn Salim who linked up this
tradition through a chain of narrators to the Commander of the Faithful
Imam Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) in a lengthy tradition said,
“Three people should not ride on a riding animal together. Should they
do so, the one who is sitting ahead of the other two is cursed.”

THE RIGHT OF AN ILL-TRAVELLER UPON HIS TRAVEL COMPANIONS IS TO STAY WITH HIM FOR THREE DAYS
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-49 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his father Muhammad ibn Yahya quoted Muhammad ibn
Ahmad, on the authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of some
companions who linked up the tradition to the Prophet (MGB) having said,
“The right of an ill traveler upon his travel companions is to stay with
him for three days.**[[197]](footnotes_1.htm#b0197)**”

THREE BAD ATTRIBUTES FOR BLACK SHOES AND THREE GOOD FOR YELLOW ONES
-------------------------------------------------------------------

3-50 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted Muhammad ibn
Ahmad, on the authority of Musa ibn Umar, on the authority of Abdullah
ibn Jabal’le, on the authority of Han’nan ibn Sadeer, “I went to see Aba
Abdullah while I was wearing black shoes. He (MGB) asked me, ‘Why are
you wearing black shoes?’ Don’t you know that there are three attributes
for them?’ I said, ‘May I be your ransom! No. What are they?’ The Imam
(MGB) said, ‘They will weaken your vision, weaken your sexual drive and
make you depressed. Moreover, it is part of the apparel of the
oppressors. You should wear yellow shoes, since that would sharpen the
vision, improve your sexual drive and reduce your depression. It is part
of the Prophets’ apparel.”

LEARN THREE TRAITS FROM THE CROW
--------------------------------

3-51 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil Qasim quoted on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah Al-Barqy, on the authority of Ali ibn Muhammad,

#### أبي حمزة، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: جمع الخير كله في ثلاث خصال: النظر، والسكوت، والكلام. فكل نظر ليس فيه اعتبار فهو سهو، وكل سكوت ليس فيه فكرة فهو غفلة، وكل كلام ليس فيه ذكر فهو لغو. فطوبى لمن كان نظره عبرة وسكوته فكرا، وكلامه ذكرا، وبكى على خطيئته، وأمن الناس شره. {.t0}

##### النهى عن ارتداف ثلاثة نفر على الدابة

#### 3-48 حدثنا علي بن أحمد بن عبد الله البرقي - رحمه الله - عن أبيه، عن جده أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن علي بن أسباط، عن عمه يعقوب بن سالم يرفع الحديث إلى أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله في حديث طويل: لا يرتدف ثلاثة على دابة، فان أحدهم ملعون، وهو المقدم.

##### حق المسافر أن يقيم عليه أصحابه اذا مرض ثلاثا

#### 3-49 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه، عن أبيه محمد بن يحيى عن محمد بن أحمد، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن عدة من أصحابنا رفعوا الحديث قال: حق المسافر أن يقيم عليه أصحابه إذا مرض ثلاثا.

##### في النعل السوداء ثلاث خصال ردية، وفى الصفراء ثلاث خصال محمودة

#### 3-50 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس قال: حدثني محمد بن أحمد، عن موسى بن عمر، عن عبد الله بن جبلة، عن حنان بن سدير قال: دخلت على أبي عبد الله عليه السلام وعلي نعل سوداء فقال: مالك ولبس نعل سوداء! أما علمت أن فيها ثلاث خصال؟ قال: قلت: وما هي جعلت فداك؟ قال: تضعف البصر، وترخي الذكر، وتورث الهم وهي مع ذلك من لباس الجبارين، عليك بلبس نعل صفراء فان فيها ثلاث خصال قال: قلت: وما هي قال: تحد البصر، وتشد الذكر، وتنفي الهم، وهي مع ذلك من لباس الانبياء عليهم السلام.

##### تعلموا من الغراب ثلاث خصال

#### 3-51 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه، عن عمه محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن علي بن محمد، عن أبي أيوب المدينـي، عـن

on the authority of Abi Ayoob al-Madani, on the authority of Suleiman
ibn Ja’far al-Ja’fari, on the authority of Al-Reza (MGB), on the
authority of his forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that
God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Learn three traits from the crow: having sex
in private, going out after your daily bread early in the morning and
being cautious.”

THREE THINGS ARE THE RESULT OF ANOTHER THREE THINGS
---------------------------------------------------

3-52 Al-Hussein ibn Ahmad ibn Idris - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that his father quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of
Musa ibn Ja’far ibn Wahab al-Baghdady, on the authority of Ubaydullah
al-Dihqan, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Umar al-Halabi, on the
authority of Zayd al-Qatat, on the authority of Aban ibn Taqlib that he
had heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, “Maintaining health is the
result of careful examinations, feeling sorry is the result of rushing,
and not getting things done on time is the result of not starting on
time.”

THERE IS BAD A OMEN IN THREE THINGS
-----------------------------------

3-53 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Sahl ibn Zyad al-Adamy, on the
authority of Uthman ibn Isa, on the authority of Khalid ibn Najih, “The
issue of bad omen was brought up in the presence of Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB). The Imam (MGB) said, ‘There is a bad omen in three
things: women, riding animals and houses. The thing with bad omen in
women is the greatness of the nuptial gift and the displeasure of her
husband; the thing with bad omen in riding an animal is in its not being
tamed and not giving a ride; and the thing with bad omen in a house is
in its small yard, bad neighbors and its many shortcomings.”

THREE GROUPS DISREGARD THE WARNINGS GIVEN TO THEM
-------------------------------------------------

3-54 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Sahl
ibn Zyad, on the authority of Amr ibn Uthman, on the authority of
Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih, on the authority of Talha al-Shami, on the
authority of Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB), “The Honorable the Exalted God’s
words, ‘When they disregarded the warnings that had been given
them,…’**[[198]](footnotes_1.htm#b0198)** apply to three groups of
people: those who accepted this and also informed others - they were
saved; those who accepted this but did not inform others - their faces
were distorted; and those who did not accept this and ordered others not
to accept - they were destroyed.”

3-55 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Abu Abdullah al-Razi, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn al-

#### سليمان بن جعفر الجعفري، عن الرضا، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: تعلموا من الغراب خصالا ثلاثا: استتاره بالسفاد وبكوره في طلب الرزق، وحذره. {.t0}

##### ثلاثة تكون مع ثلاثة

#### 3-52 حدثنا الحسين بن أحمد بن إدريس رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني أبي، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن موسى بن جعفر بن وهب البغدادي، عن عبيد الله الدهقان، عن أحمد ابن عمر الحلبي، عن زيد القتات، عن أبان بن تغلب قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: مع التثبت تكون السلامة، ومع العجلة تكون الندامة، ومن ابتدأ بعمل في غير وقته كان بلوغه في غير حينه.

##### الشؤم في ثلاثة

#### 3-53 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن سهل بن زياد الادمي قال: حدثني عثمان بن عيسى، عن خالد بن نجيح، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: تذاكروا الشوم عنده، فقال: الشوم في ثلاثة في المرأة والدابة والدار، فأما شوم المرأة فكثرة مهرها وعقوق زوجها، وأما الدابة فسوء خلقها ومنعها ظهرها، وأما الدار فضيق ساحتها، وشر جيرانها، وكثرة عيوبها.

##### الذين نسوا ما ذكروا به ثلاثة اصناف

#### 3-54 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن سهل بن زياد قال: حدثني عمرو بن عثمان، عن عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن طلحة الشامي، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام في قول الله عز وجل: "فلما نسوا ما ذكروا به" قال: كانوا ثلاثة أصناف: صنف ائتمروا وأمروا [فنجوا] وصنف ائتمروا ولم يأمروا [فمسخوا ذرا] وصنف لم يأتمروا ولم يأمروا فهلكوا.

##### ثلاثة في حرز الله عز وجل إلى أن يفرغ الله من الحساب

#### 3-55 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه، قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار عن محمد بن أحمد: قال حدثني أبوعبد الله الرازي، عن الحسن بن الحسين اللؤلؤي، عن

Hussein al-Lu’lu’ee, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Yusuf, on the
authority of Al-Hassan ibn Zyad al-Attar that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB) said, “Three groups of people are protected by the Honorable the
Exalted God until God gets done with the Reckoning: those who have never
committed adultery; those who have never mixed their wealth with usury;
and those who have never made any attempts to do these two deeds.”

WHOEVER IS GRANTED THREE THINGS NOT DEPRIVED OF THREE
-----------------------------------------------------

3-56 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Muawiyah ibn Wahab that Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) told him, “O Muawiyah! Whoever is granted three
things would not be deprived of three things. Whoever is granted ‘the
chance to call upon God’ is also granted ‘an answer to his prayers’.
Whoever is granted ‘being grateful’ is also granted ‘an increase in
favors’. Whoever is granted ‘reliance’ is also granted ‘sufficiency’ as
the Honorable the Exalted God says in His Book, ‘…And if anyone puts his
trust in God, sufficient is (God) for
him…’**[[199]](footnotes_1.htm#b0199)** and says, ‘… If ye are grateful,
I will add more (favors) unto you;…’**[[200]](footnotes_1.htm#b0200)** ;
and says, ‘Call on Me; I will answer your (Prayer):…’
**[[201]](footnotes_1.htm#b0201)**

ADMONISHED AGAINST CONSULTING WITH THREE PEOPLE
-----------------------------------------------

3-57 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Adam, on the authority of his father
through a chain of documentations that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “O Ali!
Do not consult with a coward since he would hinder your progress. Do not
consult with a miser since he would lower your aspirations; and do not
consult with a greedy person since he would guide you towards collecting
wealth. O Ali! Know that cowardliness, miserliness and greed are of the
same nature. They all stem from having a bad opinion about God.”

THE INTELLECT IS DIVIDED INTO THREE PARTS
-----------------------------------------

3-58 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah, on the authority of his father Muhammad ibn Khalid who linked
it up through a chain of narrators to God’s Prophet (MGB) who said, “The
intellect is divided into three parts. Whoever possesses all parts has
perfected his intellect. Whoever doesn’t possess all parts has no
intellect at all. These parts of intellect are having a good recognition
of the Honorable the Exalted God, good obedience to God, and good
recognition of His Orders .**[[202]](footnotes_1.htm#b0202)**”

#### الحسين بن يوسف، عن الحسن بن زياد العطار قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام:ثلاثة في حرز الله عز وجل إلى أن يفرغ الله من الحساب: رجل لم يهم بزنا قط ورجل لم يشب ماله بربا قط، ورجل لم يسع فيهما قط. {.t0}

##### من أعطى ثلاثة لم يحرم ثلاثة

#### 3-56 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن معاوية بن وهب عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام أنه قال: يا معاوية. من أعطى ثلاثة لم يحرم ثلاثة: من أعطي الدعاء اعطي الاجابة، ومن اعطي الشكر اعطي الزيادة، ومن اعطي التوكل اعطي الكفاية، فان الله عز وجل يقول في كتابه: "وَمَنْ يَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى اللَّهِ فَهُوَ حَسْبُهُ" ويقول: "لَئِنْ شَكَرْتُمْ لَأَزِيدَنَّكُمْ" ويقول: "ادْعُونِي أَسْتَجِبْ لَكُمْ"

##### النهي عن مشاورة ثلاثة

#### 3-57 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن محمد بن آدم، عن أبيه باسناده قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: يا علي لا تشاورن جبانا فانه يضيق عليك المخرج، ولا تشاورن البخيل فانه يقصربك عن غايتك، ولا تشاورن حريصا فانه يزين لك شرها. واعلم يا علي أن الجبن والبخل والحرص غريزة واحدة يجمعها سوء الظن.

##### قسم العقل على ثلاثة أجزاء

#### 3-58 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه محمد بن خالد باسناده يرفعه قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: قسم العقل على ثلاثة أجزاء، فمن كانت فيه كمل عقله، ومن لم تكن فيه فلا عقل له: حسن المعرفة بالله عز وجل، وحسن الطاعة له، وحسن الصبر على أمره.

ADAM CHOSE ONE OF THREE CHARACTERISTICS
---------------------------------------

3-59 Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Abdullah al-Barqy - may God have Mercy upon him -
narrated that his father quoted his grandfather, on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of Amr ibn Uthman, on the
authority of Abi Jamileh al-Mufaz’zal ibn Salih, on the authority of
Sa’ed ibn Sa’ed ibn Tarif, on the authority of Al-Asbaq ibn al-Nobatat
that Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB) said, “Gabriel descended upon Adam (MGB)
and said, ‘O Adam! I have been ordered to let you choose one of three
things. Choose one and let go of the other two.’ Adam (MGB) asked, ‘O
Gabriel! What are they?’ Gabriel said, ‘The intellect, shyness and
religion.’ Adam said, ‘I choose the intellect.’ Gabriel told shyness and
religion to return. They replied, ‘O Gabriel! We are ordered to be
wherever the intellect is.’ Gabriel said, ‘Do as you please.’ And then
Gabriel returned.”

ONE’S INTELLECT CAN BE MEASURED BY THREE THINGS
-----------------------------------------------

3-60 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Sahl ibn Zyad, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn
Bashar, on the authority of Ubaydullah al-Dihqan, on the authority of
Durost ibn Abi Mansoor, on the authority of Abdul Ali - the servant of
the Sam Clan - that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “One’s intellect
can be measured by three things: long beard, marking on his ring and
nickname.”

OUR FOLLOWERS ARE IN THREE GROUPS
---------------------------------

3-61 Hamzih ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Alavi - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Barqy, on the authority of Khalaf
ibn Himmad, on the authority of Muawiyah ibn Wahab that Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Our followers can be divided into three groups.
There are those who are our true friends. They are from us. There are
those to whom we lend beauty, and lend beauty to us. And there are those
who attach themselves to us to attain worldly gains. Whoever tries to
attain worldly gains by attaching himself to us will get poor.”

OUR FOLLOWERS WILL BE TESTED UNDER THREE CIRCUMSTANCES
------------------------------------------------------

3-62 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his father quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Harun leftover ibn Muslim, on the authority of Al-Laysee
that Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Our followers will be
tested under three circumstances. They will be tested as how well they
guard their prayers. They will be tested as how well they keep our
secrets from our enemies. And they will be tested as how they use their
wealth to help their brethren.”

##### خير آدم من ثلاثة خصال واحدة

#### 3-59 حدثنا علي بن أحمد بن عبد الله البرقي - رحمه الله - عن أبيه، عن جده أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن عمرو بن عثمان، عن أبي جميلة المفضل بن صالح، عن سعد بن طريف، عن الاصبغ بن نباته، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام قال: هبط جبرئيل عليه السلام على آدم عليه السلام فقال: يا آدم إني امرت أن اخيرك واحدة من ثلاث، فاختر واحدة ودع اثنتين، فقال له آدم: وما الثلاث يا جبرئيل؟ قال: العقل والحياء والدين، قال آدم: فاني قد اخترت العقل، فقال جبرئيل للحياء والدين: انصرفا، فقالا: يا جبرئيل إنا أمرنا أن نكون مع العقل حيثما كان، قال جبرئيل: فشأنكما، وعرج.

##### يعتبر على الرجل في ثلاث

#### 3-60 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن سهل بن زياد، عن جعفر بن محمد بن بشار، عن عبيدالله الدهقان، عن درست بن أبي منصور، عن عبدالاعلى مولى آل سام، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: يعتبر عقل الرجل في ثلاث: في طول لحيته، وفي نقش خاتمه، وفي كنيته.

##### الشيعة ثلاث

#### 3-61 حدثنا حمزة بن محمد بن أحمد العلوي رضي الله عنه قال: أخبرني علي ابن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن خالد البرقي، عن خلف بن حماد، عن معاوية ابن وهب قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: الشيعة ثلاث: محب واد، فهو منا، ومتزين بنا، ونحن زين لمن تزين بنا. ومستأكل بنا الناس، ومن استأكل بنا افقر.

##### امتحان الشيعة عند ثلاث

#### 3-62 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن هارون بن مسلم، عن الليثي، عن جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام قال: امتحنوا شيعتنا عند ثلاث: عند مواقيت الصلاة كيف محافظتهم عليها، وعند أسرارهم كيف حفظهم لها عند عدونا، وإلى أموالهم كيف مواساتهم لاخوانهم فيها.

WHOEVER POSSESSES THREE CHARACTERISTICS HAS PERFECT FAITH
---------------------------------------------------------

3-63 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Hisan, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Asim ibn Hameed, on the authority
of Salih ibn Maysam that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “There are
three qualities which if one possess he has perfect faith: perseverance
over oppression, quenching one’s anger and leaving it up to God,
forgiving and forgetting. Such people would be taken into Paradise
without any Reckoning and God would accept their intercession on behalf
of as many people as there were in the tribes of Rabiat and Mezr (who
were always cited as highly populated tribes).”

3-64 Abul Abbas Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Taleqani - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabary quoted Abu
Salih al-Kanani, on the authority of Yahya ibn Abdul Hamid al-Himmani,
on the authority of Sharik that Hosham ibn Mu’az said that once he was
accompanying the Caliph Umar ibn Abdul-Aziz on a journey to Medina. Then
it was announced that whoever has been oppressed can come to see the
Caliph. Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB) went there. The Caliph was told
by his gate-keeper Mozahim that Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB) has come
to see him. Umar ibn Abdul-Aziz said, “O Mozahim. Please let him in.”
Mozahim asked the Imam to enter while Umar was wiping off his tears.
Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB) asked Umar, “O Umar! Why are you
crying?”

Then Hosham (ibn Ma’az) said, “O grandson of the Prophet of God! Such
and such are the reasons why he is crying.”

Then Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB) said, “O Umar! Indeed this world is
only like a shop in a supermarket. Some people take things from it due
to which they suffer a loss. Others take things from it from which they
benefit. There are many people who engage themselves in things similar
to what we engage in until their time of death arrived and they suffered
from a great loss. They left this world in a state of being sorry since
they had not hesitated to do bad deeds and had not taken anything for
their Hereafter. Those who would not be grateful divided up all the
inheritance which they had left behind in this world, but they had to go
to Him who would not accept any excuses! It would be advisable to review
the affairs of this world and avoid doing wicked deeds. Fear God and be
determined to do two things. First try to take some good deeds with you
which would be with you when you face your Lord. Secondly, abstain from
evil deeds and do not take

##### ثلاث خصال من كن فيه فقد استكمل الايمان

#### 3-63 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد ابن أحمد، عن محمد بن حسان، عن إبراهيم بن عاصم بن حميد، عن صالح بن ميثم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ثلاث خصال من كن فيه استكمل خصال الايمان: من صبر على الظلم، وكظم غيظه واحتسب، وعفى وغفر كان ممن يدخله الله الجنة بغير حساب، ويشفعه في مثل ربيعة ومضر.

#### 3-64 حدثنا أبوالعباس محمد بن إبراهيم بن إسحاق الطالقاني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن جرير الطبري قال: أخبرنا أبوصالح الكناني عن يحيى بن عبدالحميد الحماني عن شريك، عن هشام بن معاذ قال: كنت جليسا لعمر بن عبدالعزيز حيث دخل المدينة فأمر مناديه فنادى: من كانت له مظلمة أو ظلامة فليأت الباب، فأتى محمد بن علي يعني الباقر عليهما السلام فدخل إليه مولاه مزاحم فقال: إن محمد بن علي بالباب، فقال له: أدخله يا مزاحم، قال: فدخل وعمر يمسح عينيه من الدموع، فقال له محمد بن علي: ما أبكاك يا عمر؟ فقال هشام: أبكاه كذا وكذا يا ابن رسول الله، فقال محمد بن علي: يا عمر إنما الدنيا سوق من الاسواق، منها خرج قوم بماينفعهم ومنها خرجوا بما يضركم، وكم من قوم قد ضرهم بمثل الذي أصبحنا فيه حتى أتاهم الموت فاستوعبوا فخرجوا من الدنيا ملومين لما لم يأخذوا لما أحبوا من الآخرة عدة، ولا مما كرهوا جنة، قسم ما جمعوا من لا يحمدهم، والوا إلى من لا يعذرهم، فنحن والله محقوقون أن ننظر إلى تلك الاعمال التي كنا نغبطهم بها فنوافقهم فيها ونظر إلى تلك الاعمال التي كنا نتخوف عليهم منها فكنف عنها، فاتق الله، واجعل في قلبك اثنتين: تنظر الذي تحب أن يكون معك إذا قدمت على ربك فقدمه بين يديك وتنظر الذي تكره أن يـكون مـعك إذا قـدمت على ربـك

with you something which will cause you to be sorry when you face your
Lord. O Umar! Fear God the Honorable the Exalted! Open the door and
raise the curtain (to let the people in to see you). Assist the
oppressed ones and defeat the oppressors.”

Then the Imam (MGB) added, “There are three things which would perfect
one’s belief in God.”

Once Umar heard this, he sat down on his knees and asked, “O Member of
the Holy Household of the Prophet! What are they?”

The Imam (MGB) said, “Yes, Umar! That is that once you are pleased, your
pleasure doesn’t cause you to engage in wrongful deeds. Also once you
are angry, your anger would not lead you to do what is not rightful, and
once you are powerful, you do not devour what is not yours.”

Then Umar asked for ink and a quill and wrote, ‘In the Name of God the
Compassionate the Merciful. I - Muhammad ibn Abdul-Aziz - hereby return
the tract of land called Fadak**[[203]](footnotes_1.htm#b0203)** which
belongs to Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB).’”

3-65 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob,
on the authority of Abi Ayoob al-Khizaz, on the authority of Abi Ubaydat
al-Haza’a that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “A believer is one whose
pleasure would not lead him into sin and wrongful deeds. A believer is
one whose anger would not lead him away from rightful statements. A
believer is one whose power would not force him to act unjustly and to
acquire what doesn’t rightfully belong to him.”

3-66 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ali ibn al-Salt
quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn
Ali ibn Faz’zal, on the authority of Asim ibn Hamid, on the authority of
Abi Hamzih al-Somali, on the authority of Abdullah ibn al-Hassan, on the
authority of his mother Fatimah - the daughter of Al-Hussein ibn Ali
(MGB), on the authority of her father Al-Hussein (MGB), on the authority
of his father Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There are three
characteristics which if one possesses would perfect one’s faith. If one
is pleased, his pleasure doesn’t lead him into sin and wrongful deeds;
when one is angered, his anger doesn’t lead him away from the right; and
when one is in power, his power doesn’t lead him to acquire what doesn’t
rightfully belong to him.”

#### فاتبغ فيه البدل ولا تذهبن إلى سلعة قد بارت على من كان قبك ترجو أن تجوز عنك. واتق الله عز وجل يا عمر، وافتح الابواب وسهل الحجاب وانصر المظلوم، ورد الظالم. {.t0}

#### ثم قال: ثلاث من كن فيه استكمل الايمان بالله فجثى عمر على ركبتيه.

#### ثم قال: إيه يا أهل بيت النبوة، فقال: نعم يا عمر، من إذا رضي لم يدخله رضاه في الباطل وإذا غضب لم يخرجه غضبه من الحق، ومن إذا قدر لم يتناول ما ليس له.

#### فدعا عمر بدواة وقرطاس وكتب "بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم هذا ما رد عمر بن عبد العزيز ظلامة محمد بن علي فدك."

#### 3-65 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري قال: حدثني أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن أبي أيوب الخزاز، عن أبي عبيدة الحذاء، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: إنما المؤمن الذي إذا رضي لم يدخله رضاه في إثم ولا باطل، وإذا سخط لم يخرجه سخطه من قول الحق، والمؤمن الذي إذا قدر لم تخرجه قدرته إلى التعدي وإلى ما ليس له بحق.

#### 3-66 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني محمد بن أحمد بن علي بن الصلت عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد، عن الحسن بن علي بن فضال، عن عاصم بن حميد، عن أبي حمزة الثمالي عن عبد الله بن الحسن، عن امه فاطمة بنت الحسين بن علي عليهما السلام عن أبيها عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ثلاث خصال من كن فيه استكمل خصال الايمان: الذي إذا رضي لم يدخله رضاه في إثم ولا باطل وإذا غضب لم يخرجه الغضب من الحق، وإذا قدر لم يتعاط ما ليس له.

3-67 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Khalid, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Safvan ibn
Yahya, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Sin’an, “A believer’s name was
mentioned to Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB). The Imam (MGB) said, ‘Indeed a
believer is one who when angered, his anger would not lead him away from
the right. A believer is one who when pleased, his pleasure would not
lead him into the wrong. A believer is one who when in power, his power
would not lead him to acquire what doesn’t rightfully belong to him.’”

THREE WHOM GOD SHALL NOT TALK TO, LOOK AT, OR PURIFY
----------------------------------------------------

3-68 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Tayalesi, on the authority of Abdul
Rahman ibn U’an, on the authority of Ibn Abi Najran al-Tamime, on the
authority of Asim ibn Hamit al-Hanat, on the authority of Abi Basir: “I
heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, ‘There are three to whom God
shall not Talk to, Look at, or Purify on the Resurrection Day. They
shall suffer from a great punishment. They are the one who picks at his
white beard, the one who masturbates and the one who is gay.’”

3-69 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ali ibn Isma’il al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Abi Malik al-Jihni that Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “There are three people with whom God shall not
Speak to, Look upon, or Purify on the Resurrection Day. There shall be a
great punishment for them. They are those who follow leaders whose
leadership is not Divinely Ordained by God; those who deny the
leadership of Divine Leaders whose Leadership is Divinely Ordained by
God the Honorable the Exalted; and those who consider the previous two
groups of people to be Muslims.”

3-70 Abu Ahmad al-Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Abdoyeh al-Siraj -
the ascetic in Hamedan in the year 354 A.H. (965 A.D.) on the way back
from the House of God narrated that Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Nasr ibn
Mansoor al-Toosi quoted Muhammad ibn Uthman ibn Keramat, on the
authority of Ubaydullah ibn Musa, on the authority of Sheiban, on the
authority of Al-A’amash, on the authority of Abi Salih, on the authority
of Abi Hurayrih that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There are three people
with whom God shall not Speak to, Look upon, or Purify on the
Resurrection Day. There shall be a great punishment for them. They are
those who pledge allegiance to a leader for the sake of this world such
that they adhere

#### 3-67 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد، عن أبيه، عن صفوان بن يحيى، عن عبد الله بن سنان قال: ذكر رجل المؤمن عند أبي عبد الله عليه السلام، فقال:إنما المؤمن: الذي إذا سخط لم يخرجه سخطه من الحق، والمؤمن [الذي] إذا رضي لم يدخله رضاه في باطل والمؤمن: الذي إذا قدر لم يتعاط ما ليس له [بنفسه].

#### ثلاثا لا يكلمهم الله عز وجل يوم القيامة ولا ينظر اليهم ولا يزكيهم ولهم عذاب اليم

#### 3-68 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن خالد الطيالسي، قال: حدثنا عبدالرحمن بن عون عن ابن أبي نجران التميمي قال: حدثنا عاصم بن حميط الحناط، عن أبي بصير قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: ثلاثة لايكلمهم الله يوم القيامة ولاينظر إليهم ولا يزكيهم ولهم عذاب أليم: الناتف شيبه، والناكح نفسه، والمنكوح في دبره.

#### 3-69 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن علي بن إسماعيل الاشعري قال: حدثنا محمد بن سنان، عن أبي مالك الجهني قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: ثلاثة لايكلمهم الله يوم القيامة ولا ينظر إليهم ولا يزكيهم ولهم عذاب اليهم: من ادعى إماما ليست إمامته من الله، ومن جحد إماما إمامته من عند الله عز وجل ومن زعم أن لهما في الاسلام نصيبا.

#### 3-70 حدثنا أبوأحمد القاسم بن محمد بن أحمد بن عبدويه السراج الزاهد الهمذاني بهمذان منصرفنا من بيت الله الحرام سنة أربع وخمسين وثلاثمائة قال: أخبرنا الحسن بن علي بن نصر بن منصور الطوسي قال: حدثنا محمد بن عثمان بن كرامة قال: حدثنا عبيدالله بن موسى، عن شيبان، عن الاعمش، عن أبي صالح، عن أبي هريرة قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:ثلاثة لا يكلمهم الله عز وجل يوم القيامة ولا ينظر إليهم ولا يزكيهم ولهم عذاب اليم: رجل بايع إماما لا يبايعـه إلا

to the leader for as long as the leader attends to their needs, but
abandon him once he doesn’t. They are also those who sell goods to
others and falsely swear by God the Honorable the Exalted that they have
paid such and such an amount for the goods which they are selling and
the buyer believes it. They are also those who possess extra drinking
water in the desert, but do not let passers-by needing it use that
water.”

THE MOST HORRIBLE INSTANCES FOR PEOPLE
--------------------------------------

3-71 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan**[[204]](footnotes_1.htm#b0204)** - may God
be pleased with him - narrated that Sa'ad ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Hamzih al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Yasir -
the servant**[[205]](footnotes_1.htm#b0205)** that he had heard
Abal-Hassan al-Reza (MGB) say, “There are three days which are the most
horrible for man: the day he is born, leaves his mother’s stomach and
sees this world; the day that he dies and sees the Hereafter and its
people; and the day he is resurrected and sees decrees which he has not
seen in this world. In these three instances, the Honorable the Exalted
God sends peace on John (Yahya) and says, ‘So Peace on him the day he
was born, the day that he dies, and the day that he will be raised up to
life (again)!’**[[206]](footnotes_1.htm#b0206)** Jesus the son of Mary
(MGB) has also sent peace on himself on these three instances and said,
‘So peace is on me the day I was born, the day that I die, and the day
that I shall be raised up to life
(again)!’”**[[207]](footnotes_1.htm#b0207)**

THE THREE PARTNERS IN OPPRESSION
--------------------------------

3-72 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Al-Abbas ibn Ma’ruf, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Sin’an, on the authority of Talha ibn Zayd, on the authority of Ja’far
ibn Muhammad (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on the
authority of his grandfather (MGB) that Ali (MGB) said, “Those who know
about oppression, who assist it and who are content with it are all
partners in it.”

ONE WHO DIVULGES WHAT OTHERS SAY HAS KILLED THREE PEOPLE
--------------------------------------------------------

3-73 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his
father on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, who linked it up
through a chain of narrators to Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “One who
divulges what others have said has killed three people. He has killed
himself. He has killed the one to whom he divulges what is said, and one
whose sayings he divulges.”

THREE PLACES FOR A BELIEVER AND THREE FOR AN INFIDEL
----------------------------------------------------

3-74 Hamzih ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Alavi - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Amr ibn Uthman, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn
Abdul-Hamid,

#### للدنيا، إن أعطاه منها مايريد وفى له وإلا كف. ورجل بايع رجلا بسلعته بعد العصر فحلف بالله عز وجل لقد أعطى بها كذا وكذا فصدقه فأخذها ولم يعط فيها ما قال، ورجل على فضل ماء بالفلاة يمنعه ابن السبيل. {.t0}

##### أوحش ما يكون الخلق في ثلاثة مواطن

#### 3-71 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن حمزة الاشعري قال: حدثني ياسر الخادم قال: سمعت أبا الحسن الرضا عليه السلام يقول: إن أوحش ما يكون هذا الخلق في ثلاثة مواطن يوم يولد ويخرج من بطن امه فيرى الدنيا، ويوم يموت فيرى الآخرة وأهلها، ويوم يبعث فيرى أحكاما لم يرها في دار الدنيا وقد سلم الله عز وجل على يحيى في هذه الثلاثة المواطن وآمن روعته فقال: " وسلام عليه يوم ولد ويوم يموت ويوم يبعث حيا " وقد سلم عيسى بن مريم عليه السلام: على نفسه في هذه الثلاثة المواطن فقال: " والسلام علي يوم ولدت ويوم أموت ويوم ابعث حيا ".

##### الشركاء في الظلم ثلاثة

#### 3-72 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن العباس بن معروف، عن محمد بن سنان، عن طلحة بن زيد، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده عليهم السلام قال: كان علي عليه السلام يقول: العامل بالظلم والمعين عليه والراضي به شركاء ثلاثة.

##### الساعي قاتل ثلاثة

#### 3-73 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير يرفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: الساعي قاتل ثلاثة: قاتل نفسه، وقاتل من يسعى به، وقاتل من يسعى إليه

##### للمؤمن ثلاثة مساكن سجن وحصن ومأوى وللكافر ثلاثة مساكن

#### 3-74 حدثنا حمزة بن محمد بن أحمد العلوي رضي الله عنه قال: أخبرني علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن عمرو بن عثمان، عن إبراهيم بن عبد الحميد، عن

on the authority of Abil Hassan - the first
(MGB)**[[208]](footnotes_1.htm#b0208)** that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB)
said, “This life is a prison for a believer. The grave is a refugee for
a believer, and Paradise is a believer’s Final Abode. This world is
Paradise for an infidel. The grave is an infidel’s prison and the Fire
is his place of Final Abode.”

THE DAYS OF THE HONORABLE THE EXALTED GOD’S ARE THREE
-----------------------------------------------------

3-75 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Maysami, on the authority of
Masni al-Han’nat that he had heard Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) say, “The
days of the Honorable the Exalted God are three: the Day on which the
Riser (MGB) shall rise; the Day of Return and the Resurrection Day.”

THREE PEOPLE WILL BE PUNISHED ON THE RESURRECTION DAY
-----------------------------------------------------

3-76 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quote on
the authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
al-Hassan al-Maysami, on the authority of Hosham ibn Ahmar and Abdullah
ibn Miskan, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Marvan that he had heard
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, “There are three groups of people who
will be punished on the Resurrection Day. The first are those who
construct the face of an animal. They will be punished constantly until
they give it life which they cannot do! The second group are those who
make up false dreams. They will be punished until they tie up two pieces
of barley which cannot be tied together. The third group are those who
eavesdrop on someone while this is considered to be bad to do. Molten
lead (or molten solder) shall be poured into their ears.”

3-77 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad narrated that Abu Ja’far al-Daybali quoted on
the authority of Abu Abdullah, on the authority of Sufyan, on the
authority of Ayoob Al-Sakhtiani, on the authority of Akrama, on the
authority of Ibn Abbas**[[209]](footnotes_1.htm#b0209)** that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “Whoever constructs an image shall be punished and
will have to give it life which he cannot do. Whoever lies about a dream
will be punished until he ties up two pieces of barley which cannot be
tied together. On the Resurrection Day, molten lead shall be poured into
the ears of whoever eavesdrops on someone as this is considered to be
bad to do.” Sufyan said, “Molten lead comes from solder.”

THREE CHARACTERISTICS MAKE YOU IMMUNE FROM HAUGHTINESS
------------------------------------------------------

3-78 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Abdul Rahman ibn Abi
Najran who linked it up through a chain of narrators to Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB), “Whoever patches up his collar, mends his shoes and
carries his merchandise will be saved from haughtiness.”

#### أبي الحسن الاول، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: الدنيا سجن المؤمن، والقبر حصنه. والجنة مأواه، والدنيا جنة الكافر، والقبر سجنه، والنار مأواه. {.t0}

##### أيام الله عز وجل ثلاثة

#### 3-75 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن الحسن الميثمي، عن مثنى الحناط قال: سمعت أبا جعفر عليه السلام يقول: أيام الله عز وجل ثلاثة: يوم يقوم القائم، ويوم الكرة، ويوم القيامة.

##### ثلاثة يعذبون يوم القيامة

#### 3-76 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن الحسن الميثمي، عن هشام بن أحمر، وعبد الله بن مسكان، عن محمد بن مروان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: سمعته يقول: ثلاثة يعذبون يوم القيامة من صور صورة من الحيوان يعذب حتى ينفخ فيها، وليس بنافخ فيها. والمكذب في منامه يعذب حتى يعقد بين شعيرتين، وليس بعاقد بينهما. والمستمع إلى حديث قوم وهم له كارهون يصب في اذنه الآنك وهو الاسرب.

#### 3-77 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد قال: حدثنا أبوجعفر الديبلي قال: حدثنا أبوعبد الله قال: حدثنا سفيان، عن أيوب السختياني، عن عكرمة، عن ابن عباس قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: من صور صورة عذب وكلف أن ينفخ فيها، وليس بفاعل.و من كذب في حلمه عذب وكلف أن يعقد بين شعيرتين، وليس بفاعل، ومن استمع إلى حديث قوم وهم له كارهون، يصب في اذنيه الآنك يوم القيامة: قال سفيان: الآنك من الرصاص.

##### ثلاث خصال تبرئ من الكبر

#### 3-78 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن عبدالرحمن بن أبي نجران، يرفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من رقع جيبه هكذا وخصف نعله، وحمل سلعته فقد أمن من الكبر.

THREE CHARACTERISTICS ENABLE ENJOINING GOOD AND BIDDING EVIL
------------------------------------------------------------

3-79 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Yaqoob ibn Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi
Umayr who linked it up through a chain of narrators to Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB), “The one who has three characteristics can enjoin to do
good and admonish against evil. He should be a doer of what he orders
others to do and he should abandon what he admonishes others against
doing. He should be moderate about ordering to do good and admonishing
against evil. He should be kind in ordering to do good and admonishing
against evil.”

THREE ARE NOT PURE
------------------

3-80 Al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn Idris - may God have Mercy upon him -
quoted his father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Ali al-Hamedany who linked it up through a
chain of narrators to Davood ibn Farqad, on the authority of either Abi
Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) or Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “Three groups of
people are not pure: Those whose right eye is blind; those whose pupils
are like the stone on a ring, and those who are born as
Sindi**[[210]](footnotes_1.htm#b0210)** (in some versions we read: those
who have been born after one year of
pregnancy.)**[[211]](footnotes_1.htm#b0211)**”

HAVING THREE CHARACTERISTICS IS ENOUGH FOR ONE TO BE BAD
--------------------------------------------------------

3-81 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of Bakr ibn Salih, on the
authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Faz’zal, on the authority of Abdullah
ibn Ibrahim, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Zayd, on the authority
of his father, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB),
on the authority of his father (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said,
“Indeed the reward of doing good deeds will arrive much sooner than any
good deeds, the punishment for doing evil deeds will reach one much
faster than any evil deeds. Having three characteristics is enough for
one to be bad. These characteristics are: attending to other people’s
faults while ignoring your own; admonishing others against evil deeds
without being able to abandon them yourself and hurting your companion
for nothing.”

THREE REASONS FOR NOT LOVING THE FAMILY OF THE PROPHET
------------------------------------------------------

3-82 Al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn Idris - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that his father quoted on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad,
on the authority of Abi Nasr al-Baghdady, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Ja’far al-Ahmar, on the authority of Isma’il ibn al-Ab’bas ibn Yazid
ibn Jobayr, on the authority of Davood ibn al-Hassan, on the authority
of Abi Rafeá, on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “There are three reasons why one may not like my family. Either he
is a hypocrite, was born out of adultery or was conceived when his
mother was not in a purified state (that is when intercourse is not
allowed).”

##### يأمر بالمعروف وينهى عن المنكر من كانت فيه ثلاثة خصال

#### 3-79 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار قال: حدثني محمد بن أحمد، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن محمد بن أبي عمير رفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إنما يأمر بالمعروف وينهى عن المنكر من كانت فيه ثلاثة خصال: عامل بما يأمر به وتارك لما ينهى عنه، عادل فيها يأمر، عادل فيما ينهى، رفيق فيما يأمر ورفيق فيما ينهى.

##### ثلاثة لا ينجبون

#### 3-80 حدثنا الحسن بن أحمد بن إدريس - رحمه الله - ، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن محمد بن علي الهمداني يرفعه إلى داود بن فرقد، عن أبي جعفر أو أبي عبد الله عليهما السلام قال: ثلاثة لاينجبون أعور يمين، وأزرق كالفص، ومولد السند

##### كفى بالمرء عيبا ان يكون فيه ثلاث خصال

#### 3-81 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي. عن بكر بن صالح. عن الحسن بن علي بن فضال، عن عبد الله بن إبراهيم، عن الحسين بن زيد، عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:إن أسرع الخير ثوابا البر وإن أسرع الشر عقابا البغي،وكفى بالمرء عيبا أن ينظر من الناس إلى ما يعمى عنه من نفسه، ويعير الناس بما لا يستطيع تركه، ويؤذي جليسه بما لا يعنيه.

##### من لم يحب عترة النبي صلى الله عليه وآله فهو لاحدى ثلاث

#### 3-82 حدثنا الحسن بن أحمد بن إدريس رضي الله عنه، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن أبي نصر البغدادي، عن محمد بن جعفر الاحمر. عن إسماعيل بن العباس بن يزيد بن جبير عن داود بن الحسن، عن أبي رافع، عن علي عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: من لم يحب عترتي فهو لاحدى ثلاث إما: منافق، وإما لزنية. وإما امرء حملت به أمه في غير طهر.

THE BEST THREE DEEDS IN THE OPINION OF GOD
------------------------------------------

3-83 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Qasim ibn
Muhammad al-Isfahani, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Davood
al-Minqari, on the authority of Sufyan ibn Ayyineh, on the authority of
Al-Zuhra, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hussein (MGB), “The last advice
of al-Khizr (MGB) to Moses - the son of Imran (MGB) was as follows:
‘Never blame anyone for their sins. The best deeds in the Opinion of God
are the following three deeds: moderation at times of being wealthy;
forgiving at times of being in power; and being kind to the servants of
God (i.e. the people). If anyone treats others with kindness in this
world, God the Honorable the Exalted will treat him with kindness on the
Resurrection Day. The foremost form of wisdom is fearing the Blessed the
Sublime God.’”

FIRE SHALL SPEAK TO THREE PEOPLE ON THE RESURRECTION DAY
--------------------------------------------------------

3-84 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Abbas ibn Ma’ruf, on the
authority of Abi Himmam - Isma’il ibn Himam, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Sa’id ibn Qazvan, on the authority of Al-Sakoony, on the
authority of Aba Abdullah Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the
authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his forefathers
(MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that the Prophet (MGB) said, “The
Fire shall speak to three people on the Resurrection Day: rulers,
knowledgeable ones and the wealthy. The Fire shall tell the ruler, ‘O ye
to whom God granted power but you did not act justly!’ Then it will
devour him just as a bird devours a sesame seed. The Fire will tell the
knowledgeable one, ‘O ye who were proud of yourself near the people and
disobeyed God!’ It will devour him also. The Fire will tell the wealthy,
‘O ye to whom God granted a lot of wealth in the world but were greedy
and did not even grant a small loan to those who were in need asking you
for small loans.’ It will devour him also.”

THREE BACK-BREAKING THINGS
--------------------------

3-85 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abdulhamid, on the authority of Amir ibn
Ribah, on the authority of Amr ibn al-Walid, on the authority of Sa’d
al-Iskaf that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “Three things are back-
breaking: overestimating one’s deeds; forgetting one’s sins and being
conceited.”

##### احب الامور إلى الله ثلاثة

#### 3-83 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن القاسم بن محمد الاصبهاني، عن سليمان بن داود المنقري عن سفيان بن عيينة، عن الزهري، عن علي بن الحسين عليهما السلام قال: كان آخر ما أوصى به الخضر موسى بن عمران عليهما السلام أن قال له: لا تعيرن أحدا بذنب، وإن أحب الامور إلى الله عز وجل ثلاثة: القصد في الجدة والعفو في المقدرة، والرفق بعباد الله، وما رفق أحد بأحد في الدنيا إلا رفق الله عز وجل به يوم القيامة ورأس الحكمة مخافة الله تبارك وتعالى.

##### تكلم النار يوم القيامة ثلاثة

#### 3-84 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني أحمد ابن محمد بن عيسى، عن العباس بن معروف، عن أبي همام إسماعيل بن همام عن محمد ابن سعيد بن غزوان، عن السكوني، عن أبي عبد الله جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه عن علي عليهما السلام عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: قال: تكلم النار يوم القيامة ثلاثا أميرا وقاريا وذاثروة من المال، فتقول للامير: يا من وهب الله له سلطانا فلم يعدل، فتزدرده كما يزدرد الطير حب السمسم وتقول للقارئ: يا من تزين للناس وبارز الله بالمعاصي فتزدرده. وتقول للغني: يا من وهب الله له دنيا كثيرة واسعة فيضا وسأله الفقير اليسير قرضا فأبى إلا بخلا فتزدرده.

##### ثلاث قاصمات الظهر

#### 3-85 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن محمد بن عبدالحميد، عن عامر بن رباح. عن عمرو بن الوليد، عن سعد الاسكاف، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: ثلاث قاصمات الظهر: رجل استكثر عمله، ونسي ذنوبه، وأعجب برأيه.

3-86 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Safvan ibn Yahya, on the authority of Abdul
Rahman ibn al-Haj’jaj that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Satan (May
God Damn him) told his followers, ‘There are three things which once a
man does I will overcome him and not worry about his other deeds. These
things are: Overestimating his deeds; forgetting his sins and becoming
conceited.’”

GOD HAS HONORED HIS SERVANTS WITH THREE THINGS
----------------------------------------------

3-87 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn Abdul
Jab’bar, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isma’il, on the authority of
Ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim that Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Indeed God the Honorable the exalted has said, ‘I
have honored my servants by granting them three blessings. First, I have
made their corpse stink after their soul leaves their body. Had it not
been so, no one’s relatives would ever bury their deceased loved ones. I
have granted them a relief after mourning. Had it not been so, no one
could enjoy life. I have created bugs and gave them dominion over wheat
and barely. Had it not been so, the Kings and the rulers would have
stored them in their houses just as they store gold and silver.”

YOU SHOULD ONLY STAY UP LATE AT NIGHT FOR THREE CAUSES
------------------------------------------------------

3-88 Ja’far ibn Ali ibn al-Hassan al-Kufy - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his grandfather Al-Hassan ibn Ali quoted on the
authority of his great grandfather Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih, on the
authority of Al-Sakoony, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father Al-Baqir (MGB) that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “You should only stay up late at night for three
causes: studying the Quran; seeking knowledge or taking a bride to her
husband.”

WERE IT NOT FOR THREE REASONS, MAN WOULD NEVER BOW DOWN
-------------------------------------------------------

3-89 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far quoted on the
authority of Harun ibn Muslim, on the authority of Mus’adat ibn Zyad, on
the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad As-Sadia (MGB), on the authority of
his father Al-Baqir (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Were it not
for three reasons, man would never bow down. They are illness, poverty
and death. He is subject to all of them and they are with him. Yet, he
will not stop boasting.”

#### 3-86 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن صفوان بن يحيى، عن عبدالرحمن بن الحجاج، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام، قال قال إبليس لعنه الله عليه لجنوده: إذا استمكنت من ابن آدم في ثلاث لم أبال ما عمل فانه غير مقبول منه: إذا استكثر عمله، ونسي ذنبه، ودخله العجب.

##### تطول الله عز وجل على عباده بثلاث

#### 3-87 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني محمد بن عبدالجبار، عن محمد بن إسماعيل، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن هشام بن سالم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إن الله عز وجل يقول: إني تطولت على عبادي بثلاث: ألقيت عليهم الريح بعد الروح ولو لا ذلك ما دفن حميم حميا، وألقيت عليهم السلوة بعد المصيبة ولو لا ذلك لم يتهن أحد منهم بعيشه، وخلقت هذه الدابة وسلطتها على الحنطة والشعير ولولا ذلك لكنزهما ملوكهم كما ينكزون الذهب والفضة.

##### لا سهر الا في ثلاث

#### 3-88 حدثنا جعفر بن علي بن الحسن الكوفي رضي الله عنه عن جده الحسن ابن علي، عن جده عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: لا سهر إلا في ثلاث: متهجد بالقرآن، أو في طلب العلم، أو عروس تهدى إلى زوجها.

##### لولا ثلاث في ابن آدم ما طأطأ رأسه شيء

#### 3-89 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني عبد الله بن جعفر، عن هارون بن مسلم، عن مسعدة بن زياد، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: لولا ثلاث في ابن ادم ما طأطأ رأسه شيء: المرض والفقر والموت، كلهم فيه وإنه معهن لو ثاب.

THE RULES OF THE RELIGION ARE SUMMARIZED IN THREE THINGS
--------------------------------------------------------

3-90 Ja’far ibn Ali ibn al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih
al-Kufy narrated that his grandfather Al-Hassan ibn Ali quoted on the
authority of Amr ibn Uthman al-Saqafy, on the authority of Sa’id ibn
Sharhabil, on the authority of Ibn Lahay’at, on the authority of Abi
Malik, “I asked Ali ibn al-Hussein to inform me of all the rules of the
religion. The Imam (MGB) replied, ‘Speaking fairly, ruling justly and
respecting one’s pledge.’”

THREE SOURCES OF SEDITION
-------------------------

3-91 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn al-Hussein al-Sa’ed Abady quoted on the authority
of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Sin’an, on the authority of Zyad ibn al-Monzar, on the authority of
Sa’ed ibn Tarif, on the authority of Al-Asbaq ibn al-Nobatat that the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said, “There are three sources
of sedition. They are: love for women - that is Satan’s sword; drinking
wine - that is Satan’s trap; and love for gold and silver - that is
Satan’s bullet! Whoever loves women will not benefit from his life!
Whoever drinks wine will not be let into Paradise! Whoever loves gold
and silver will be a servant of this world!”

The Commander of the Faithful (MGB) added, “Jesus - the son of Mary
(MGB) said, ‘Gold is the ailment for religion! The knowledgeable one is
the doctor for religion! Whenever you notice that the doctor is ill, do
not expect him to be able to treat you!’”

THERE ARE THREE FRIENDS FOR A MUSLIM
------------------------------------

3-92 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted
Harun ibn Muslim, on the authority of Mus’adat ibn Zyad, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his
father Al-Baqir (MGB), on the authority of his grandfather (MGB) that
Ali (MGB) said, “There are three friends for a Muslim. There is a friend
who says, ‘I will be with you in your life and death!’ That is his
deeds! There is a friend who says, ‘I will be with you until you are put
into the grave. Then I will abandon you.’ That is his child! There is a
friend who says, ‘I will be with you until your death.’ That is his
wealth which will be that of his inheritors once he dies.’”

3-93 Abu Ahmad al-Hassan ibn Abdullah ibn Sa’id al-Askari narrated that
Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Dareed quoted the following on the
authority of Abu Hatam (Muhammad ibn Idris ibn al-Monzar), on the
authority of Al-Abasi Abu Muhammad Ubaydullah, on the authority of his
father. The same was narrated by Abdullah ibn Shobayb al-Basry, on the

##### جميع شرايع الدين ثلاثة أشياء

#### 3-90 حدثنا جعفر بن علي بن الحسن بن علي بن عبد الله بن المغيرة الكوفي قال: حدثني جدي الحسن بن علي، عن عمرو بن عثمان الثقفي، عن سعيد بن شرحبيل. عن ابن لهيعة عن أبي مالك قال: قلت لعلي بن الحسين عليهما السلام: أخبرني بجميع شرايع الدين، قال: قول الحق، والحكم بالعدل، والوفاء بالعهد.

##### الفتن ثلاث

#### 3-91 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين السعد آبادي قال: حدثنا أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي. عن أبيه، عن محمد بن سنان، عن زياد بن المنذر عن سعد بن طريف. عن الاصبغ بن نباتة قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: الفتن ثلاث: حب النساء وهو سيف الشيطان، وشرب الخمر وهو فخ الشيطان وحب الدينار والدرهم وهو سهم الشيطان، فمن أحب النساء لم ينتفع بعيشه، ومن أحب الاشربة حرمت عليه الجنة، ومن أحب الدينار والدرهم فهو عبد الدنيا، وقال: قال عيسى بن مريم عليه السلام: الدينار داء الدين. والعالم طبيب الدين فاذا رأيتم الطبيب يجر الداء إلى نفسه فاتهموه، واعلموا أنه غير ناصح لغيره.

##### للمرء المسلم ثلاثة أخلاء

#### 3-92 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري، عن هارون بن مسلم، عن مسعدة بن زياد، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده عليهم السلام قال: قال علي عليه السلام: إن للمرء المسلم ثلاثة أخلاء فخليل يقول: أنا معك حيا وميتا وهو عمله، وخليل يقول له: أنا معك إلى باب قبرك ثم أخليك وهو ولده، وخليل يقول له: أنا معك إلى أن تموت وهو ماله. فاذا مات صار للوارث.

#### 3-93 حدثنا أبوأحمد الحسن بن عبد الله بن سعيد العسكري قال: حدثنا أبوبكر محمد بن الحسن بن دريدقال: أخبرنا أبوحاتم عن العبسي يعني أبا محمد عبيـد الله

authority of Zakariya ibn Yahya al-Monqari, on the authority of Al-Ala’
ibn al-Fazl (ibn Abdul Malik al-Monqari), on the authority of his
father, on the authority of his grandfather, on the authority of Qays
ibn Asim, “I went to see God’s Prophet (MGB) along with a group of the
people of Tamim! Then we entered and Al-Salsal ibn al-Dahms was with the
Prophet (MGB). I asked, ‘O Prophet of God! Please give us some advice to
use since we are a group of people who live in the desert.’ The Prophet
of God (MGB) said, ‘Indeed there is humiliation associated with pride!
There is death associated with life! There is the Hereafter associated
with this world! There is an accounting for everything! There is a
guardian associated with everything! There is a reward associated with
every good deed! There is a chastisement associated with every evil
deed! There is a set period for everything!

O Qays! There will undoubtedly be a companion with you in the grave! He
will be alive when he is buried along with you while you will be dead!
If he is noble, he will honor you! However, if he is vile, he will
torment you. He will be with you and will be resurrected along with you!

No questions will be put to you; they will all be directed to him.
Choose, then a worthy and righteous companion, for if your companion is
righteous he will comfort you, but if he be wicked, you will wish to
flee from him in terror. This everlasting companion is nothing but your
very own deeds!”

Then I said, “O Prophet of God! I wish these to be put in a few verses
of poetry so that I can be honored with them amongst the Arabs!” The
Prophet (MGB) called Hisan ibn Sabit to put these into a poetic form. I
immediately put them in a poetic form before Hisan came and recited them
for the Prophet (MGB) and said that I hope they portray what the Prophet
(MGB) had said. The poems are as follows:

***Choose a companion from your deeds so that  
 may accompany you in the grave what you prepared!  
 You have no alternative after death but to be ready  
 for the day on which you are called to him to accept  
 Engage not in affairs in this world  
 in which there is not God’s contentment  
 Man will not have a companion after his death  
 and even before death but his own deeds  
 Indeed man is only a guest of his household  
 He would spend a short while with them before he departs***

GOD REVEALED THREE WORDS TO THE PROPHET REGARDING ALI
-----------------------------------------------------

3-94 In Kufa in the year 354 A.H. (965 A.D.) Al-Hassan ibn Muhammad
al-Sahkooni al-Mazaki**[[212]](footnotes_1.htm#b0212)** narrated that
Muhammad ibn Abdullah al-Hazrami quoted on the authority of Al-Qasim ibn
Zakaria ibn Dinar, on the authority of Ishaq ibn Mansoor, on the
authority of Ja’far al-Ahmar, on the

#### عن أبيه، وأخبرنا عبد الله بن شبيب البصري قال: حدثنا زكريا بن يحيى المنقري قال: حدثنا العلاء بن الفضل عن أبيه، عن جده قال: قال قيس بن عاصم: وفدت مع جماعة من بني تميم إلى النبي صلى الله عليه وآله فدخلت وعنده الصلصال بن الدلهمس فقلت: يا نبي الله عظنا موعظه فانا قوم بغير في البرية، فقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إن مع العز ذلا، وإن مع الحياة موتا، وإن مع الدنيا آخرة، وإن لكل شيء حسيبا، وعلى كل شيء رقيبا. وإن لكل حسنة ثوابا، ولكل سيئة عقابا، ولكل أجل كتابا"، وإنه لا بد لك يا قيس من قرين يدفن معك وهو حي. وتدفن معه وأنت ميت، فان كان كريما أكرمك، وإن كان لئيما أسلمك، ثم لا يحشر إلا معك ولا تبعث إلا معه، ولا تسئل إلا عنه، فلا تجعله إلا صالحا فانه إن صلح آنست به، وإن فسد لا تستوحش إلا منه، وهو فعلك،

#### فقال: يانبي الله احب أن يكون هذا الكلام في أبيات من الشعر نفخربه على من يلينا من العرب وندخره، فأمر النبي صلى الله عليه وآله من يأتيه بحسان بن ثابت قال: فأقبلت افكر فيما اشبه هذه العظة من الشعر فاستتب لي القول قبل مجئ حسان فقلت: يا رسول الله قد حضرتني أبيات أحسبها توافق ما تريد، فقلت:

 

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="50%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">قرين الفتى في القبر ما كان يفعل</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">تخير خليطا من فعالــك إنما</h4></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">ليـــوم ينـــادى المرء فيه فيقبل</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">ولا بد بعد الموت من أن تعده</h4></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">بغيـــر الذي يرضى به الله تشغل</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">فان كنت مشغولا بشيء فلا تكن</h4></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">ومن قبله إلا الذي كان يعمل</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">فلن يصحب الانسان من بعد موته</h4></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">يقيم قليلا بينهم ثم يرحل</h4></td>
<td align="left"><h4 style="text-align: center">ألا إنما الانسان ضيف لاهله</h4></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

##### أوحى الله إلى النبي في علي ثلاث كلمات

#### 3-94 حدثنا الحسن بن محمد السحكوني المزكي بالكوفة سنة أربع وخمسين وثلاثمائة قال: حدثا محمد بن عبد الله الحضرمي قال: حدثنا القـــاسم بن زكريا بن

#### قرين الفتى في القبر ما كان يفعل {style="text-align: center"}

#### تخير خليطا من فعالــك إنما {style="text-align: center"}

#### ليـــوم ينـــادى المرء فيه فيقبل {style="text-align: center"}

#### ولا بد بعد الموت من أن تعده {style="text-align: center"}

#### بغيـــر الذي يرضى به الله تشغل {style="text-align: center"}

#### فان كنت مشغولا بشيء فلا تكن {style="text-align: center"}

#### ومن قبله إلا الذي كان يعمل {style="text-align: center"}

#### فلن يصحب الانسان من بعد موته {style="text-align: center"}

#### يقيم قليلا بينهم ثم يرحل {style="text-align: center"}

#### ألا إنما الانسان ضيف لاهله {style="text-align: center"}
