Section 2
=========

**Section 2**

authority of Ummi al-Sayrafi, on the authority of Abi Kathir al-Ansari,
on the authority of Abdullah ibn As’ad ibn Zurarah that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “When I ascended**[[213]](footnotes_1.htm#b0213)** to my
Lord, He revealed to me three words regarding Ali (MGB): he is the
leader of the pious ones; he is the master of the believers; and he is
the leader of the radiant ones.”

MEN ARE OF THREE KINDS
----------------------

3-95 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of Al-Hassan
ibn Ali ibn Faz’zal, on the authority of Sa’alabat ibn Maymun that Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Men are of three kinds: A man (can be
known) by his wealth, a man by his position, and a man by his tongue.
And that is the best of the three.”

3-96 And with these same documents he narrated that the Commander of the
Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said, “Men are of three types: intelligent,
stupid and corrupt. For the intelligent, religion is his way; patience
is his nature, and thinking is in his character. If questioned, he will
respond. If he talks, he says the right words. If he listens, he
perceives. If he speaks, he tells the truth. If someone trusts him, he
will be loyal to him. However, if you direct a stupid person to the
good, he will neglect it. If he is directed away from the good, he will
follow. If he is guided towards ignorance, he becomes ignorant. If he
talks, he lies. He doesn’t understand. Even if you try to make him
understand, he will not understand. And a corrupt person is such that if
you entrust him with something, he will cheat you. If you become his
companion, he will debase you. And if you trust him in some affairs, he
will not be sincere to you.”

NO ONE DESERVES TO BE A LEADER UNLESS HE HAS THREE CHARACTERISTICS
------------------------------------------------------------------

3-97 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Abdul Samad ibn
Muhammad, on the authority of Han’nan ibn Sadeer, on the authority of
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that his father (MGB) said, “No one deserves
to be a leader unless he has three characteristics: piety which would
hinder him from doing the forbidden deeds; patience which would help him
control his anger; and good deputyship over those whom he leads just as
if he is their kind father.”

3-98 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil Khat’tab, on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr al-Bazanty that Abul-Hassan
(MGB) was asked, “How can one tell who the next Divine Leader will be
after a Divine Leader?”

#### دينار قال: حدثنا إسحاق بن منصور قال: حدثنا جعفر الاحمر، عن امي الصيرفي، عن أبي كثير الانصاري، عن عبد الله بن أسعد بن زرارة قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أسرى بي ربي فأوحى إلي في علي عليه السلام بثلاث: إنه إمام المتقين وسيد المؤمنين وقائد الغر المحجلين. {.t0}

##### الرجال ثلاثة

#### 3-95 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن الحسن بن علي بن فضال، عن ثعلبة بن ميمون، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: الرجال ثلاثة: رجل بماله، ورجل بجاهه، ورجل بلسانه، وهو أفضل الثلاثة.

#### 3-96 وبهذا الاسناد قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: الرجال ثلاثة: عاقل وأحمق وفاجر، فالعاقل الدين شريعته، والحلم طبيعته، والرأي سجيته، وإن سئل أجاب، وإن تكلم أصاب، وإن سمع وعى، وإن حدث صدق، وإن اطمأن إليه أحد وفى، والاحمق إن استنبه بجميل غفل، وإن استنزل عن حسن نزل، وإن حمل على جهل جهل، وإن حدث كذب، لا يفقه وإن فقه لا يتفقه، والفاجر إن ائتمنته خانك، وإن صاحبته شانك وإن وثقت به لم ينصحك.

##### الامامة لا تصلح الا لرجل فيه ثلاث خصال

#### 3-97 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد ابن أحمد، عن عبدالصمد بن محمد، عن حنان بن سدير، عن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه عليهما السلام قال: إن الامامة لاتصلح إلا لرجل فيه ثلاث خصال: ورع يحجزه عن المحارم، وحلم يملك به غضبه، وحسن الخلافة على من ولي حتى يكون له كالوالد الرحيم.

#### 3-98 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي قال: سئل أبوالحسن عليه السلام الامام بأي شيء يعرف بعد الامام؟

The Imam (MGB) replied, “Indeed there are certain signs for him (MGB).
First of all, he (MGB) shall be the oldest son of the existing Divine
Leader. He (MGB) will be the one most deserving that position. He will
be so well-known as the trustee of his father that when a group of
newcomers to the town ask anyone about the Trustee of the Divine Leader,
everyone refers to him (MGB) as the Trustee of the Divine Leader. The
position of armaments near us is like that of the coffin near the
Israelites**[[214]](footnotes_1.htm#b0214)** that is the Divine Leader
is the one who is holding the Prophet’s armaments.”

3-99 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn
Musa al-Khishab, on the authority of Al-Yazid ibn Ishaq She’r, on the
authority of Harun ibn Hamzih al-Qanavi that Abdul Ali ibn A’ayn said,
“I asked as-Sadiq (MGB) about the way to disprove one who falsely claims
to be a Trustee of the Divine Leader. The Imam (MGB) said, ‘There are
three signs which should all exist in anyone who truly claims to be a
Trustee of the Divine Leader. He should be the
closest**[[215]](footnotes_1.htm#b0215)** to the Divine Leader. He
should possess the Prophet’s armaments and he should be so clearly the
one declared by the Divine Leader to be his Trustee that when you enter
the town and ask the children or the common people about whom the Divine
Leader has established as his Trustee, everyone refers to him (MGB).’”

ON THREE HAJJ PILGRIMAGES **[[216]](footnotes_1.htm#b0216)**
------------------------------------------------------------

3-100 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority of
Al-Sindy ibn al-Rabi’a, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Qasim ibn
Fuzayl ibn Yasar, on the authority of Aiman ibn Mohraz, who quoted on
the authority of Al-Qasim and ibn Faz’zal that Harizat said, “Whoever
goes on the Hajj pilgrimage**[[217]](footnotes_1.htm#b0217)** for three
consecutive years it is as if he has gone on the Hajj pilgrimage every
year whether he continues to go on the Hajj or not in the following
years.”

The compiler of the book - may God increase his honor - said, “The chain
of narrations of this tradition is weak. However, I have cited it as it
was in my manuscript. However, there is a correct form of this tradition
on the authority of Imam as-Sadiq (MGB) that is cited next.”

3-101 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil Khat’tab, on the authority
of Al-Hijal, (on the authority of Safvan ibn Yahya,) on the authority of
Safvan ibn Mihran al-Jamal, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB), “Whoever goes on the Hajj
pilgrimage**[[218]](footnotes_1.htm#b0218)** thrice will never suffer
from poverty.”

#### قال: إن للامام علامات أن يكون أكبر ولد أبيه بعده ويكون فيه الفضل وإذا قدم الركب المدينة قال: إلى من أوصى فلان؟ قالوا: إلى فلان، والسلاح فينا بمنزلة التابوت في بني إسرائيل يدور مع الامام حيث كان.

#### 3-99 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمدبن يحيى العطار، عن محمد ابن أحمد، عن الحسن بن موسى الخشاب، عن يزيد بن إسحاق شعر قال: حدثني هارون ابن حمزة الغنوي، عن عبدالاعلى بن أعين قال: قلت لابي عبد الله عليه السلام: ما الحجة علي المدعي لهذا الامر بغير حق؟ قال: ثلاثة من الحجة لم يجتمعن في رجل إلا كان صاحب هذا الامر: أن يكون أولى الناس بمن قلبه، ويكون عنده سلاح رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله، ويكون صاحب الوصية الظاهرة الذي إذا قدمت المدينة سألت العامة والصبيان إلى من أوصى فلان؟ فيقولون: إلى فلان.

##### في من حج ثلاثة حجج

#### 3-100 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، عن السندي بن الربيع، عن محمد بن القاسم بن فضيل بن يسار، عن أيمن بن محرز يرويه عن القاسم [وا] بن فضال إن حريزا قال: من حج ثلاث سنين متوالية ثم حج أولم يحج فهو بمنزلة مدمن الحج.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب أدام الله تأييده: هذا الاسناد مضطرب ولم اغيره لانه كان هكذا في نسختي، والحديث صحيح.

#### 3-101 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن الحسين ابن أبي الخطاب، عن الحجال [عن صفوان بن يحيى] عن صفوان بن مهران الجمال، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: من حج ثلاث حجج لم يصبه فقر أبدا.

3-102 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar and Ahmad ibn Idris
quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari, on the
authority of Abu Abdullah al-Razi, on the authority of Mansoor ibn
al-Ab’bas, on the authority of Amr ibn Sa’id, on the authority of Isa
ibn Hamzih that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Any camel on which
they go on the Hajj pilgrimage**[[219]](footnotes_1.htm#b0219)** for
three years shall be amongst the animals in Paradise.”

In other traditions we read ‘for seven years.’

ON WHOEVER SENDS THREE BELIEVERS TO THE HAJJ PILGRIMAGE **[[220]](footnotes_1.htm#b0220)**
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-103 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority
of Salamat ibn al-Khat’tab, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Ali, on the
authority of Al-Hussein ibn Ali al-Daylami - the servant of Al-Reza
(MGB) that he had heard al-Reza (MGB) say, “Whoever sends three
believers on the Hajj pilgrimage has indeed bought himself from God with
that money. God will not ask him where he has brought the money from -
whether it is legitimately earned or illegitimately earned.”

THERE ARE THREE SIGNS IN JOSEPH’S SHIRT
---------------------------------------

3-104 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn al-Hussein al-Sa’ad Abady quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim, on the
authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “There were three signs in the
Prophet Joseph’s (MGB) shirt as God the Honorable the Exalted says,
‘They stained his shirt with false
blood…’**[[221]](footnotes_1.htm#b0221)** And God the Honorable the
Exalted says, ‘…(thus):- If it be that his shirt is rent from the front,
then is her tale true, and he is a
liar!’**[[222]](footnotes_1.htm#b0222)** And God the Honorable the
Exalted says, ‘Go with this my shirt, and cast it over the face of my
father: he will come to see (clearly). Then come ye (here) to me
together with all your family.’**[[223]](footnotes_1.htm#b0223)**”

THERE ARE THREE FORMS OF OPPRESSION
-----------------------------------

3-105 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted on the authority
of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Harun ibn al-Jahm, on the authority of Al-Mufaz’zal ibn
Salih, on the authority of Sa’ed ibn Tarif, on the authority of Abi
Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (MGB), “There are three forms of
oppression: ones that God the Honorable the Exalted would forgive, ones
that God the

#### 3-102 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، وأحمد بن إدريس جميعا قالا: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى ابن عمران الاشعري قال: حدثني أبوعبد الله الرازي، عن منصور بن العباس، عن عمرو ابن سعيد، عن عيسى بن حمزة، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام: أنه قال: أي بعير حج عليه ثلاث سنين جعل من نعم الجنة، وروي سبع سنين.

##### في من حج بثلاثة نفر من المؤمنين

#### 3-103 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد ابن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، عن سلمة بن الخطاب، عن أحمد بن علي، عن الحسن ابن علي الديلمي، مولى الرضا قال: سمعت الرضا عليه السلام يقول: من حج بثلاثة نفر من المؤمنين فقد اشترى نفسه من الله عز وجل بالثمن ولم يسأله من أين كسب ماله من حلال أو حرام.

##### كان في قميص يوسف ثلاث آيات

#### 3-104 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي ابن الحسين السعد آبادي قال: حدثنا أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن محمد ابن أبي عمير عن هشام بن سالم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: كان في قميص يوسف عليه السلام ثلاث آيات في قوله عز وجل: "وجاؤا على قميصه بدم كذب" وقوله عز وجل: "إن كان قميصه قد من قبل الی آخر الايه..." وقوله عز وجل: "اذهبوا بقميصي هذاالآية".

##### الظلم ثلاثة

#### 3-105 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني عمي محمد ابن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن هارون بن الجهم، عن المفضل ابن صالح، عن سعد بن طريف، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: الظلم الثلاثة: ظلم

Honorable the Exalted would not forgive, and ones that God the Honorable
the Exalted would not overlook. The form of oppression which God the
Honorable the Exalted would not forgive is associating partners with God
the Honorable the Exalted. The form of oppression which God the
Honorable the Exalted would forgive is the oppression that one has done
to himself which is related to what goes on between a person and God the
Honorable the Exalted. The form of oppression which God the Honorable
the Exalted would not overlook is related to oppressing other people.”

THREE WAYS HAVING INTERCOURSE BECOMES LEGITIMATE
------------------------------------------------

3-106 Ahmad ibn Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his father quoted his grandfather, on the authority
of Al-Nawfaly, on the authority of Al-Sakoony, on the authority of
Ja’far ibn Muhammad (MGB)**[[224]](footnotes_1.htm#b0224)** , on the
authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his forefathers (MGB)
that the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said, “There are three
ways by which having intercourse becomes legitimate. They are marriage
with right to inherit**[[225]](footnotes_1.htm#b0225)** , marriage by
possessing the woman (who is a slave), and marriage without the right to
inherit**[[226]](footnotes_1.htm#b0226)** .”

ALL THE NATION BUT THREE CAN HOPE TO BE SAVED
---------------------------------------------

3-107 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Qasim ibn
Muhammad al-Isfahani, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Davood
al-Minqari, on the authority of Hafs ibn Qiyath al-Nakha’ee that Ja’far
ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Anyone in this nation who has
recognized our right can hope to be saved but three: one who helps the
oppressive King; one who follows his selfish desires; and one who
engages in corrupt deeds in public.”

THE WORST THREE TIMES FOR MAN
-----------------------------

3-108 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Al-Qasim ibn Muhammad, on the authority of Suleiman ibn
Davood, on the authority of Abdul Raz’zaq, on the authority of Mu’amir,
on the authority of Al-Zuhra that Ali ibn al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn Abi
Talib (Imam as-Sajjad (MGB)) said, “The worst times for man are three:
the time at which the angel of death comes to take his life; the time at
which he is risen out of the grave; and the time at which he shall stand
before the Honorable the Exalted God to see whether he shall go to
Paradise or be taken into Hell.” As-Sajjad (MGB) added, “O Children of
Adam! If you are saved at the time of death, then you are saved. Else
you shall be destroyed. If you are saved when you are being placed in
the grave, then you are saved. Else you shall be destroyed. If you are
saved when they are taking the people towards the
Bridge**[[227]](footnotes_1.htm#b0227)** , then you are saved. Else you
shall be destroyed.”

#### يغفره الله عز وجل، وظلم لا يغفره، وظلم لا يدعه، فأما الظلم الذي لا يغفره فالشرك بالله عز وجل وأما الظلم الذي يغفره الله فظلم الرجل نفسه فيما بينه وبين الله عز وجل، وأما الظلم الذي لا يدعه فالمداينة بين العباد. {.t0}

##### تحل الفروج بثلاثة وجوه

#### 3-106 حدثنا أحمد بن علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم رضي الله عنه. عن أبيه، عن جده، عن النوفلي، عن السكوني عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه عليهم السلام قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: تحل الفروج بثلاثة وجوه: نكاح بميراث، ونكاح بملك اليمين، ونكاح بلا ميراث.

##### ترجى النجاة لجميع الامة الا لاحد ثلاثة

#### 3-107 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن القاسم ابن محمد الاصفهاني، عن سليمان بن داود المنقري، عن حفص بن غياث النخعي، عن جعفر ابن محمد عليهما السلام قال: إني لارجو النجاة لهذه الامة لمن عرف حقنا منهم إلا لاحد ثلاثة: صاحب سلطان جائر، وصاحب هوى، والفاسق المعلن.

##### أشد ساعات ابن آدم ثلاث ساعات

#### 3-108 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني القاسم بن محمد، عن سليمان بن داود قال: حدثنا عبدالرزاق، عن معمر، عن الزهري قال: قال علي بن الحسين بن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام: أشد ساعات ابن آدم ثلاث ساعات: الساعة التي يعاين فيها ملك الموت.والساعة التي يقوم فيها من قبره، والساعة التي يقف فيها بين يدي الله تبارك وتعالى، فاما إلى الجنة وإما إلى النار، ثم قال: إن نجوت يا ابن آدم عند الموت فأنت أنت وإلا هلكت، وإن نجوت يا ابن آدم حين توضع في قبرك فأنت أنت، وإلا هلكت، وإن نجوت حين يحمل الناس على الصراط فأنت أنت وإلا هلكت، وإن نجوت حين يقوم الناس لرب العالمين فأنت أنت وإلا هلكت.

Then As-Sajjad (MGB) recited the following verse of the Holy Quran:
‘…Before them is a Partition till the Day they are raised
up.’**[[228]](footnotes_1.htm#b0228)** Then As-Sajjad (MGB) added, “This
Partition refers to the grave in which life is hard. I swear by God that
the grave can be one of the gardens of Paradise or one of the ditches of
Hell!” Then As-Sajjad (MGB) faced a man who was present there and said
to him, “Indeed the Residents of the Heavens know the Residents of
Paradise and the Residents of Hell! Which group do you belong to? With
which of the two shall be your Final Abode?”

THE WORST THREE DEEDS OF MAN NEAR GOD
-------------------------------------

3-109 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Qasim ibn Muhammad, on the authority
of Suleiman ibn Davood, on the authority of several of his companions
that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) narrated that the Prophet (MGB) said,
“The Children of Adam would not do any deeds that are worse than the
following three deeds near the Blessed the Sublime God: When a man kills
a Prophet or a Divine Leader; when a man destroys the Ka’ba which God
the Honorable the Exalted has established as a turning point to worship
Him; or when a man illegitimately has sex with a woman.”

A MAN WOULD NOT MIGRATE EXCEPT FOR THREE REASONS
------------------------------------------------

3-110 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Qasim ibn
Muhammad, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Davood, on the authority of
several of his companions, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB), “It is recorded in the Wise Sayings of Alih Davood (MGB) that a
man would not migrate except for the following three reasons: to attain
the necessities for the Hereafter, to improve the affairs of this life,
or enjoy what is not forbidden.” Then he (MGB) added, “Whoever loves
this life would be debased.”

THREE BEDS
----------

3-111 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Qasim ibn
Muhammad, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Davood, on the authority of
Hammad ibn Isa that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) saw several beds in
someone’s house and said, “One bed is for the man of the house. A second
bed is for the woman of the house. A third bed is for house guests. Any
extra beds would be for Satan.”

3-112 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Sejezy narrated that Umar ibn Hafs quoted
Suleiman ibn Ash’as, on the authority of Yazid ibn Khalid al-Ramli, on
the authority of Ibn Wahab, on the authority of Abi Hani, on the
authority of Aba Abdul Rahman al-Hibli, on the authority of Jabir ibn
Abdullah that God’s Prophet (MGB) said the following regarding beds, “A
bed for the man and a bed for the woman and a bed for the guest. The
fourth bed would be for Satan.”

#### ثم تلا: "وَمِنْ وَرَائِهِمْ بَرْزَخٌ إِلَى يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ." قال: هو القبر، وإن لهم فيه لمعيشة ضنكا، والله إن القبر لروضة من رياض الجنة أو حفرة من حفرالنار، ثم أقبل على رجل من جلسائه فقال له: لقد علم ساكن السماء ساكن الجنة من ساكن النار، فأي الرجلين أنت، وأي الدارين دارك.

##### لن يعمل ابن آدم عملا أعظم عند الله عز وجل من ثلاثة

#### 3-109 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن القاسم بن محمد، عن سليمان بن داود قال: سمعت غير واحد من أصحابنا يروي عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام أنه قال: قال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: لن يعمل ابن آدم عملا أعظم عند الله تبارك وتعالى من رجل قتل نبيا أو إمام، أو هدم الكعبة التي جعلها الله عز وجل قبلة لعبادة أو أفرغ ماء‌ه في امرأة حراما.

##### لا يظعن الرجل الا في ثلاث

#### 3-110 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني القاسم بن محمد، عن سليمان بن داود قال: أخبرني غير واحد من أصحابنا، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: مكتوب في حكمة آل داود عليه السلام: لا يظعن الرجل إلا في ثلاث: زاد لمعاد، أو مرمة لمعاش أو لذة في غير محرم، ثم قال: من أحب الحياة ذل.

##### الفرش ثلاثة

#### 3-111 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن القاسم ابن محمد، عن سليمان بن داود قال: حدثني حماد بن عيسى، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام أنه نظر إلى فرش في دار رجل فقال: فراش للرجل وفراش لاهله وفراش لضيفه، والفراش الرابع للشيطان.

#### 3-112 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد السجزي قال: حدثنا عمر بن حفص قال: حدثنا سليمان بن الاشعث قال: حدثنا يزيد بن خالد الرملي قال: حدثنا ابن وهب، عن أبي هانئ عن [أبي] عبدالرحمن الحبلي، عن جابر بن عبد الله قال: ذكر رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله الفرش فقال: فراش للرجل وفراش للمرأة وفراش للضيف والرابع للشيطان.

THE THREE SIGNS
---------------

3-113 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Al-Qasim ibn Muhammad, on the authority of Suleiman ibn
Davood, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB) narrated that Luqman told his son, “O my son! There are signs for
everything by which they are known and which indicate those things.
There are three signs for religion which are knowledge, faith and acting
accordingly. There are three signs for knowledge which are knowledge of
God, knowledge of what God likes and what God disapproves of. There are
three signs for faith which are faith in God, His Book and His
Messenger. There are also three signs for acting accordingly which are
praying, fasting and paying the alms-tax. There are three signs for one
who is a show-off which are quarrelling with ones who are better;
speaking out of ignorance; and seeking what is extremely hard to find.
There are three signs for the oppressor which are oppressively harming
those who are superior; being forceful with those who are inferior; and
helping those who are oppressors. There are three signs for the corrupt
which are constant disagreement between what he says and what is in his
heart; constant disagreement between his heart and his deeds; and
constant disagreement between his outward appearance and his inward
thoughts. There are three signs for the sinner which are he is
treacherous, he lies and he acts opposite to what he says. There are
three signs for the show-off which are he is lazy, but he acts as if he
is steadfast in public and he always seeks to be praised. There are
three signs for the haughty which are he blames others in their absence;
he boastfully praises others in front of them; and he blames the events
which bring about calamities. There are three signs for the wasteful
which are he buys what he doesn’t deserve to have; he wears what he
doesn’t deserve to wear; and he eats what he doesn’t deserve to eat.
There are three signs for the lazy which are he is so sluggish that he
starts to commit criminal acts; he has shortcomings that lead him to
being ungrateful; and he wastes things so much that he becomes a
criminal. There are three signs for the ignorant which are
inattentiveness, playfulness and forgetfulness.” Hammad ibn Isa added
that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “For each of these signs there
are more than a thousand indications. O Himad! Seek knowledge during the
day and the night. Stop being greedy for what others possess, if you
wish to be able to see the good in this world and attain the Eternal
Abode. Consider yourself to be amongst the dead. Do not consider
yourself to be superior to anyone else. Keep your mouth shut and keep
your aspirations to yourself.”

##### العلامات الثلاث

#### 3-113 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني القاسم بن محمد، عن سليمان بن داود قال: حدثني حماد بن عيسى، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال لقمان لابنه: يا بني لكل شيء علامة يعرف بها ويشهد عليها، وإن للدين ثلاث علامات: العلم والايمان والعمل به، وللايمان ثلاث علامات: الايمان بالله وكتبه ورسله. وللعالم ثلاث علامات: العلم بالله وبما يحب وبما يكره، وللعامل ثلاث علامات: الصلاة والصيام والزكاة، وللمتكلف ثلاث علامات: ينازع من فوقه، ويقول مالا يعلم ويتعاطى ما لا ينال وللظالم ثلاث علامات: يظلم من فوقه بالمعصية ومن دونه بالغلبة ويعين الظلمة. وللمنافق ثلاث علامات: يخالف لسانه قلبه، وقلبه فعله، وعلانيته سريرته. وللاثم ثلاث علامات: يخون، ويكذب، ويخالف ما يقول: وللمرائي ثلاث علامات: يكسل إذا كان وحده، وينشط إذا كان الناس عنده، ويتعرض في كل أمر للمحمدة.وللحاسد ثلاث علامات: يغتاب إذا غاب، ويتملق إذا شهد، ويشمت بالمصيبة. وللمسرف ثلاث علامات: يشتري ماليس له، ويلبس ماليس له، ويأكل ما ليس له. وللكسلان ثلاث علامات: يتواني حتى يفرط ويفرط حتى يضيع ويضيع حتى يأثم. وللغافل ثلاث علامات: السهو واللهو والنسيان.قال حماد بن عيسى: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: ولكل واحدة من هذه العلامات شعب يبلغ العالم بها أكثر من ألف باب وألف باب وألف باب، فكن يا حماد طالبا للعلم في آناء الليل وأطراف النهار فان أردت أن تقر عينك وتنال خير الدنيا والآخرة فاقطع الطمع مما في أيدي الناس وعد نفسك في الموتى ولا تحدثن نفسك إنك فوق أحد من الناس واخزن لسانك كما تخزن مالك.

THREE SITUATIONS IN WHICH GOD TAKES CARE OF ONE’S AFFAIRS
---------------------------------------------------------

3-114 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Qasim ibn
Muhammad, on the authority of Suleiman ibn Davood, on the authority of
Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said, “Luqman has said the
following amongst the wise advice he gave his son, ‘O my son! One who is
weak in Certitude and whose belief about the provision of his sustenance
is weak can be reassured considering the three occasions on which God
the Blessed the Sublime would take care of his affairs and provide for
his sustenance, while he is not able to do anything and cannot earn his
sustenance. The first occasion is during the time he is in his mother’s
womb where he has no power to do anything, but God provides his
sustenance and maintains him in a safe and stable place where he is
protected against heat and cold. The second occasion is after he is born
and has no power to do anything, but is fed with his mother’s milk until
he grows up and stops being breastfed. The third occasion is after he is
no longer being breastfed and has no power to do anything but God
provides his sustenance through his father’s earnings and by the love He
has placed in his father’s heart, such that he always puts a higher
priority to feeding and clothing him than he does to feeding and
clothing himself. Then once a man grows up he goes out to work to
provide for his sustenance. Whenever he has shortcomings and cannot earn
enough, he forgets this and is badly suspicious about God the Blessed
the Sublime providing his sustenance and makes life hard for his spouse
and children. O my son! Such a person would be a bad worshipper!’”

THREE TYPES OF PEOPLE
---------------------

3-115 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Vasha, on
the authority of Ahmad ibn A’ez, on the authority of Abi Khadijeh that
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “The people can be divided into three
groups: the knowledgeable scholars, the seekers of knowledge and the
scum. We are the knowledgeable scholars. Our followers are the seekers
of knowledge and the rest of the people are the scum.”

3-116 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Salamat ibn
al-Khat’tab, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Sayf, on the authority
of Salih ibn Aqabah that Abil Hassan Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB)
said, “The people are of three groups: Arabs, friends and the debased.
We are the Arabs. The friends are those who love and follow us. However,
the debased ones are the Nasabites**[[229]](footnotes_1.htm#b0229)** who
dislike us.”

##### خلق الله عز وجل العبد في ثلاثة أحوال من أمره

#### 3-114حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن القاسم بن محمد، عن سليمان بن داود قال: حدثني حماد بن عيسى، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: كان فيما وعظ به لقمان ابنه أن قال له يا بني ليعتبر من قصر يقينه وضعفت نيته في طلب الرزق، إن الله تبارك وتعالى خلقه في ثلاثة أحوال من أمره، وآتاه رزقه، ولم يكن له في واحدة منها كسب ولا حيلة: إن الله تبارك وتعالى سيرزقه في الحال الرابعة، أما أول ذلك فانه كان في رحم امه يرزقه هناك في قرار مكين حيث لا يؤذيه حر ولا برد، ثم أخرجه من ذلك وأجرى له رزقا من لبن امه يكفيه به ويربيه وينعشه من غير حول به ولا قوة، ثم فطم من ذلك فأجرى له رزقا من كسب أبويه برأفة ورحمة له من قلوبهما لا يملكان غير ذلك حتى أنهما يؤثرانه على أنفسهما في أحوال كثيرة حتى إذا كبر وعقل واكتسب لنفسه ضاق به أمره وظن الظنون بربه وجحد الحقوق في ماله وقتر على نفسه وعياله مخافة اقتار رزق وسوء يقين بالخلف من الله تبارك وتعالى في العاجل والآجل، فبئس العبد هذا يا بني.

##### الناس ثلاثة

#### 3-115 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن علي الوشاء.عن أحمد بن عائذ، عن أبي خديجة عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال:الناس يغدون على ثلاثة عالم ومتعلم وغثاء، فنحن العلماء وشيعتنا المتعلمون وسائر الناس غثاء.

#### 3-116 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن سلمة بن الخطاب، عن الحسين بن سيف، عن صالح بن عقبة، عن أبي الحسن موسى بن جعفر عليهما السلام قال: الناس ثلاثة: عربي ومولي وعلج، فأما العرب فنحن، وأما المولى فمن والاونا، وأما العلج فمن تبرأمنا وناصبنا.

3-117 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his
father Muhammad ibn Khalid, on the authority of Safvan ibn Yahya, on the
authority of Abi Ayoob al-Khizaz, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Muslim and others, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that
God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Be either a knowledgeable one, a student or a
friend of the knowledgeable ones. Do not be of any other group since
then you would be destroyed due to their enmity.”

THREE INEXCUSABLE CHARACTERISTICS
---------------------------------

3-118 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja’far ibn Abi Ja’far
al-Kumaydany quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr that Al-Hussein ibn Mus’ab al-Hamedany heard
As-Sadiq (MGB) say, “There are three things that no one has any excuses
not to do. Return what you are entrusted with whether it belongs to a
good-doer or a wicked man. Fulfill your promise whether it be to a
good-doer or a wicked man. Treat your parents kindly whether they are
good-doers or wicked ones.”

THREE CHARACTERISTICS ONE WOULD SUFFER BEFORE DEATH
---------------------------------------------------

3-119 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Khalid, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the authority
of Malik ibn Atiye, on the authority of Abi Ubaydat that Abi Ja’far
al-Baqir (MGB) said that it is recorded in Ali’s Book, “There are three
characteristics which if one possesses he shall not die until he suffers
from them: Oppression, cutting off ties with the relations of kin and
falsely swearing by God which is a form of fighting with God. The best
rewarded form of worshipping is having relations with one’s ties of kin.
Some people get wealthier even though they are evildoers since they have
relations with their ties of kin. Their kindness would increase their
life-span. Falsely swearing by God and cutting off the relations of kin
would destroy homes and would overburden the wombs which would cause an
interruption in the continuation of generations.”

A MUSLIM IS PERFECTED WITH THREE CHARACTERISTICS
------------------------------------------------

3-120 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of Al-Mo’ali ibn
Muhammad al-Basry, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Jumhoor al-Ummi,

#### 3-117 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي. عن أبيه محمد بن خالد، عن صفوان بن يحيى، عن أبي أيوب الخزاز. عن محمد بن مسلم وغيره، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:اغد عالما أو متعلما أو أحب العلماء، ولا تكن رابعا فتهلك ببغضهم.

##### ثلاث خصال لا عذر فيها لاحد

#### 3-118 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني علي بن موسى بن جعفر بن أبي جعفر الكميداني، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن الحسين ابن مصعب الهمداني قال:سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: ثلاثة لا عذر لاحد فيها: أداء الامانة إلى البر والفاجر، والوفاء بالعهد للبر والفاجر، وبر الوالدين برين كانا أو فاجرين.

##### ثلاث خصال لا يموت صاحبهن حتى يرى وبالهن

#### 3-119 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن مالك بن عطية عن أبي عبيدة، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال:في كتاب علي عليه السلام ثلاث خصال لا يموت صاحبهن أبدا حتى يرى وبالهن: البغي وقطيعة الرحم واليمين الكاذبة يبارز الله بها وإن أعجل الطاعة ثوابا لصلة الرحم، وإن القوم ليكونون فجارا فيتواصلون فتنمى أموالهم ويبرون فتزداد أعمارهم، وإن اليمين الكاذبة وقطيعة الرحم لتذران الديار بلاقع من أهلها ويثقلان الرحم، وإن تثقل الرحم انقطاع النسل.

##### ثلاث بهن يكمل المسلم

#### 3-120 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد ابن أبي عبد الله قال: حدثنا المعلى بن محمد البصري، عن محمد بن جمهور العمي، عن جعفر

on the authority of Ja’far ibn Bashiral-Bajaly, on the authority of Abi
Bahr, on the authority of Sharih al-Hamedany, on the authority of Abi
Ishaq al-Sabi’e, on the authority of Al-Harith al-A’oar that the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said, “A Muslim is perfected by
three characteristics: knowledge of the affairs of the religion;
moderation in the affairs of life; and patience during calamities.”

THREE ADVICES THE PROPHET GAVE TO ALI
-------------------------------------

3-121 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his
father, on the authority of Isma’il ibn Marar, on the authority of Yunus
ibn Abdul-Rahman who linked it up through a chain of narrators to Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “The following is amongst the pieces of advice
given by the Prophet (MGB) to Ali (MGB): ‘O Ali! I admonish you against
three major characteristics: jealousy, greed and lying. O Ali! The
following three deeds are the master of the deeds: treating the people
fairly; being kind to your brethren for the sake of the Honorable the
Exalted God and remembering the Blessed the Sublime God in all
circumstances. O Ali! A believer has the following three sources of
happiness: visiting his brethren; breaking his fast and praying at the
end of the night. O Ali! There are three things lacking which means
nothing of what you do is perfected: piety which prevents you from
disobeying the Honorable the Exalted God; good temper which assists him
to treat the people with moderation and patience which helps him forgive
the ignorance of the people. O Ali! Three things are due to real faith:
generosity in spite of poverty; recognizing that others are right
regarding oneself and teaching knowledge to its seekers. O Ali! Three
characteristics are due to nobility: giving to those who have denied
things of you; associating with those who have cut-off ties from you and
forgiving those who have oppressed you.’”

3-122 Abul Hassan Muhammad ibn Ali ibn ash-Shah al-Marv al-Ruzi narrated
that Abu Hamid Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hussein quoted Abu Yazid Ahmad
ibn Khalid al-Khalidy, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Salih
al-Tamimy, on the authority of Anas ibn Muhammad Abu Malik, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority
of his grandfather (MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB)
that the Prophet (MGB) said, “O Ali! There are three things with which
whoever visits God he will be of the noblest of the people. Whoever
performs whatever is incumbent upon him would be of the best of the
worshippers. Whoever abstains from whatever is forbidden for him to do
would be of the most pious ones and whoever is content with whatever
sustenance God has provided for him would be of the most needless ones.

#### بن بشير البجلي، عن أبي بحر، عن شريح الهمداني، عن أبي إسحاق السبيعي. عن الحارث الاعور قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: ثلاث بهن يكمل المسلم: التفقه في الدين، والتقدير في المعيشة، والصبر على النوائب. {.t0}

##### ماجاء على ثلاثة في وصية النبي صلى الله عليه وآله لامير المؤمنين

#### 3-121 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن إسماعيل بن مرار، عن يونس بن عبدالرحمن يرفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: كان فيما أوصى به رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله عليا عليه السلام، يا علي أنهاك عن ثلاث خصال عظام: الحسد والحرص والكذب، يا علي سيد الاعمال ثلاث خصال: انصافك الناس من نفسك، ومواساة الاخ في الله عز وجل: وذكر الله تبارك وتعالى على كل حال، يا علي ثلاث فرحات للمؤمن في الدنيا: لقاء الاخوان والافطار في الصيام والتهجد من آخر الليل، يا علي ثلاث من لم تكن فيه لم يقم له عمل: ورع يحجزه عن معاصي الله عز وجل، وخلق يداري به الناس، وحلم يرد به جهل الجاهل. يا علي ثلاث من حقائق الايمان: الانفاق في الاقتار، وانصاف الناس من نفسك، وبذل العلم للمتعلم. يا علي ثلاث خصال من مكارم الاخلاق: تعطي من حرمك، وتصل من قطعك وتعفو عمن ظلمك.

#### 3-122 حدثنا أبوالحسن محمد بن علي بن الشاه المرو الروذي قال: حدثنا أبوحامد أحمد بن محمد بن الحسين قال: حدثنا أبويزيد أحمد بن خالد الخالدي قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن صالح التميمي قال: حدثنا أبي قال: حدثني أنس بن محمد أبومالك عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال في وصيته له: يا علي ثلاث من لقى الله بهن فهو من أفضل الناس: من أتى الله بما افترض الله عليه فهو من أعبد الناس، ومن ورع عن محارم الله فهو من أورع الناس، ومن قنع بما رزقه الله فهو من أغنى الناس.

O Ali! There are three things which my followers find it hard to do:
being sympathetic with their brethren during times of being wealthy;
being fair with others regarding themselves and remembering God at all
times. This doesn’t mean saying God’s glorifications by saying
‘Subhanallah valhamdulilah va la illaha ilallaho allaho akbar!’ No. It
means to fear the Honorable the Exalted God whenever you run across a
forbidden deed and abstain from doing that forbidden deed. O Ali! There
is fear of insanity in three deeds: sleeping in the graveyard; walking
wearing only one shoe and sleeping alone. O Ali! Associating with three
groups of people will spoil the heart: associating with mean people,
associating with the rich people and talking with women. O Ali! Three
things would strengthen memory and fend off ailments: drinking milk;
brushing the teeth and reciting the Quran. O Ali! The following three
acts are due to obsession: eating clay, biting one’s nails, and chewing
one’s beard. O Ali! I admonish you against three characteristics: envy,
greed and haughtiness. O Ali! There are three things which would make
the heart perish: listening to vain talk; going hunting, and going to
the door of the king's palace. O Ali! Life depends on three things: big
house, beautiful woman, and a slim horse.’”

The compiler of the book - may God increase his honor - said, “A slim
horse is a thin horse whether male or female.”

THREE OCCASIONS IN WHICH ONE IS PRAYED FOR IN THE PLURAL
--------------------------------------------------------

3-123 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority
of Ja’far ibn Bashir, on the authority of Abi Ayeenat, on the authority
of Mansoor ibn Hazim that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “On three
occasions one is prayed for in the plural although he is singular. The
first occasion is when one sneezes. They tell him ‘Yarhamakumullah that
means ‘May God have Mercy upon you’ as if someone else is with him. The
second occasion is when one greets others. They return his greeting by
saying ‘Assalumalaykum as if others are with him. The third occasion is
when one prays for someone else to be healed and says ‘Afakumullah as if
he is praying for more than one person.”

The compiler of the book - may God increase his honor - said, “They say
‘Yarhamakumullah to the opponents once they sneeze which refers to the
two appointed accompanying angels, but say ‘Yarhamakullah to a believer
when he sneezes.”

#### يا على ثلاث لا تطيقها هذه الامة: المواساة للاخ في ماله، وانصاف الناس من نفسه، وذكرالله على كل حال، وليس هو " سبحان الله والحمد لله ولا إله إلا الله والله أكبر " ولكن إذا ورد على مايحرم عليه خاف الله عز وجل عنده وتركه. يا علي ثلاثة يتخوف منهن الجنون: التغوط بين القبور، والمشي في خف واحد، والرجل ينام وحده. يا علي ثلاثة مجالستهم تميت القلب: مجالسة الانذال ومجالسة الاغنياء، والحديث مع النساء. يا علي ثلاثة يزدن في الحفظ، ويذهبن السقم: اللبان والسواك. وقراء‌ة القرآن. يا علي ثلاثة من الوسواس أكل الطين، وتقليم الاظفار بالاسنان، وأكل اللحية، يا علي أنهاك عن ثلاث خصال: الحسد والحرص والكبر. يا علي ثلاثة يقسين القلب: استماع اللهو، وطلب الصيد، واتيان باب السلطان. يا علي العيش في ثلاثة: دار قوراء وجارية حسناء، وفرس قباء.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب أدام الله عزه -: الفرس القباء -: الضامر البطن، يقال فرس أقب وقباء، لان الفرس يذكر ويؤنث، ويقال للانثى: قباء لا غير.

##### ثلاثة يرد عليهم الدعاء بلفظ الجماعة

#### 3-123 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد ابن الحسن الصفار، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن جعفر بن بشير. عن أبي عيينة، عن منصور بن حازم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ثلاثة يرد عليهم الدعاء جماعة وإن كانوا واحدا، الرجل يعطس فيقال له: "يرحمكم الله" فإن معه غيره، والرجل يسلم على الرجل فيقول: "السلام عليكم" والرجل يدعو اللرجل فيقول: "عافاكم الله".

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب أدام الله عزه -: يقال للعاطس إذا كان مخالفا "يرحمكما الله" والمراد به الملكان الموكلان به، فأما المؤمن فإنه يقال له: "يرحمكم الله" إذا عطس.

WHAT IS SAID TO WHOEVER SNEEZES THREE TIMES
-------------------------------------------

3-124 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Wahab ibn Monbat, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq
(MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB) that Ali (MGB) said, “They
say ‘Yarhamakumullah to one who sneezes three times. Any more sneezing
is due to the air.”

3-125 In another tradition we read, “If one sneezes for more than three
times they tell him, ‘May God heal you!’ since that is due to an
illness.”

THREE THINGS GOD NEVER GRANTS A HYPOCRITE OR A CORRUPT
------------------------------------------------------

3-126 Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Masroor - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Al-Hussein ibn Muhammad ibn Amer quoted his uncle Abdullah
ibn Amer, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the authority of
Ebad ibn Saheeb that he had heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, “God
will never grant a hypocrite or a corrupt person insight, knowledge and
a good-temper.”

THREE ARE GOD’S GUESTS AND UNDER HIS PROTECTION
-----------------------------------------------

3-127 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil Qasim quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the authority of
Ebad ibn Saheeb, “I heard Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB) say,
‘Whoever performs the Hajj and the Umra pilgrimage will be the Honorable
the Exalted God’s guest until he returns home. Whoever is praying is
under the protection of God until he is finished. Whoever goes to visits
his believing brother for the sake of the Honorable the Exalted God is
as if he has gone to visit God and will benefit from the rewards in the
world and the treasures of God’s Mercy.’”

THE BUYER HAS THREE DAYS TO RETURN THE ANIMAL HE BUYS
-----------------------------------------------------

3-128 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of Jamil, on the authority of Fuzayl ibn Yasar that he asked
Aba Abdullah Imam as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “What is the condition for
dealing when buying an animal?” The Imam (MGB) replied, “The buyer has
three days (to return it if he doesn’t want it).” Then he asked, “And
what are the conditions for buying things other than an animal?” The
Imam (MGB) replied, “Either the buyer or the seller has the right to
call off the deal before they separate. Once they separate, they cannot
call off the deal unless both sides agree.”

##### يسمت العاطس ثلاثا

#### 3-124 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن وهب بن منبه، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه عليهما السلام إن عليا عليه السلام قال: يسمت العاطس ثلاثا فما فوقها فهو ريح.

#### 3-125 وفي حديث آخر: أنه إن زاد العاطس على ثلاث قيل له: "شفاك الله" لان ذلك من علة.

##### ثلاث خصال لا يجمعها الله عز وجل لمنافق ولا فاسق

#### 3-126 حدثنا جعفر بن محمد بن مسرور رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا الحسين بن محمد بن عامر. عن عمه عبد الله بن عامر، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن عباد بن صهيب قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: لا يجمع الله لمنافق ولا فاسق حسن السمت والفقه، وحسن الخلق أبدا.

##### ثلاثة من أضياف الله عز وجل وزواره وفى كنفه

#### 3-127 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني عمي محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن عباد بن صهيب قال:سمعت جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام يحدث قال: إن ضيف الله عز وجل رجل حج واعتمر فهو ضيف الله حتى يرجع إلى منزله، ورجل كان في صلاته فهو في كنف الله حتى ينصرف. ورجل زار أخاه المؤمن في الله عز وجل فهو زائر الله في عاجل ثوابه وخزائن رحمته.

##### الشرط في الحيوان ثلاثة أيام للمشترى

#### 3-128 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن جميل، عن فضيل بن يسار، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قلت له: ما الشرط في الحيوان؟ قال: ثلاثة أيام للمشتري، قلت: فما الشرط في غير الحيوان؟ قال: البيعان بالخيار مالم يفترقا، فاذا افترقا فلا خيار بعد الرضا منهما.

THREE THINGS GOD HAS NOT GIVEN ANYONE ANY EXCUSE NOT TO DO
----------------------------------------------------------

3-129 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted
Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority of Al-Hassan
ibn Mahboob, on the authority of Malik ibn Atiye, on the authority of
Anbast ibn Mus’ab that he had heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say,
“There are three things that God has not given anyone any excuse not to
do:

1- Return what you are entrusted with whether it belongs to a good-doer
or a wicked man.

2- Fulfill your promise whether to a good-doer or a wicked man,

3- Treat your parents kindly whether they are good-doers or wicked
ones.”

3-130 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of Zayd al-Shoham that Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said,
“Nothing is a harder (divine) test for a believer than giving charity
from what he has earned from God the Almighty, being just and frequently
remembering God.” He (MGB) then said, “I do not mean that you should
often recite praises of God, but remember God in what you do regarding
what is allowed and what is forbidden.”

THERE WOULD HAVE COME A SEVERE PUNISHMENT FROM GOD WERE IT NOT FOR THE FOLLOWING THREE
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-131 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar and Ahmad ibn Idris quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn Mus’ab that Abu
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “God sends down an angel every day to
announce: O people! Stop disobedience to God! Were it not for pasturing
animals, breast-feeding babies and bent back white bearded old men there
would have come to you such a hard punishment that would utterly destroy
you.”

THREE DAMNED ONES
-----------------

3-132 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Nawfaly,
on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn al-Mukhtar who linked it up through a
chain of narrators to God’s Prophet (MGB) who said, “Damned is anyone
who has gone blind not being able to see the Trusteeship of the Members
of my Household. Damned is anyone who is a slave of gold and silver.
Damned is anyone who has sex with beasts.”

##### ثلاث لم يجعل الله عز وجل لأحد من الناس فيهن رخصة

#### 3-129 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن مالك بن عطية، عن عنبسة بن مصعب قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: ثلاث لم يجعل الله لاحد من الناس فيهن رخصة: بر الوالدين برين كانا أو فاجرين، ووفاء بالعهد للبر والفاجر وأداء الامانة إلى البر والفاجر.

##### ما ابتلي المؤمن بشيء أشد عليه من ثلاث خصال يحرمها

#### 3-130 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله. عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن زيد الشحام قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: ما ابتلي المؤمن بشيء أشد عليه من خصال ثلاث يحرمها، قيل: وما هن؟ قال: المواساة في ذات يده بالله والانصاف من نفسه وذكر الله كثيرا، أما إني لا أقول لكم " سبحان الله والحمد لله ولا إله إلا الله والله أكبر " ولكن ذكر الله عندما أحل له، وذكر الله عندما حرمه عليه.

##### لولا ثلاث لصب الله العذاب على عباده صبا

#### 3-131 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، وأحمد بن إدريس جميعا، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن الحسين ابن مصعب قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: إن الله في كل يوم وليلة ملكا ينادي: مهلا مهلا عبادالله من معاصي الله فلولا بهائم رتع، وصبية رضع، وشيوخ ركع لصب عليكم العذاب صبا وترضون به رضا.

##### ثلاثة ملعونون

#### 3-132 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد ابن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن محمد بن إبراهيم النوفلي، عن الحسين بن المختار باسناده يرفعه قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:ملعون ملعون من أكمه أعمى [عن ولاية أهل بيتي]، ملعون ملعون من عبد الدينار والدرهم، ملعون ملعون من نكح بهيمة.

THREE THINGS REGARDING WHEN WISE MEN WRITE TO EACH OTHER
--------------------------------------------------------

3-133 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Al-Nawfaly, on the authority of Al-Sakoony, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his
father (MGB), on the authority of his forefathers (MGB) that the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said, “When some of the wise
men and the jurisprudents write each other they write about three things
as follows. God will provide for the worldly affairs of whoever engages
in preparations for the Hereafter. God will purify the appearance of
whoever purifies his inner soul. God will improve the relationship
between the people and whoever improves his relationship with God.”

THREE CHARACTERISTICS NOT OF A BELIEVER
---------------------------------------

3-134 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Al-Haysam ibn
Abi Masruq al-Nehdi, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of Ali ibn Re’ab, on the authority of Al-Halabi that he had
heard Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) say, “A believer will not engage in
lying, miserliness and adultery. It could happen that he turns to these
acts, but he will not continue doing them.” The Imam (MGB) was asked,
“Will he commit adultery?” The Imam (MGB) said, “Yes. He may fall into
that trouble, but he would repent and no child will be born from that
sperm.”

3-135 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Khalid, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of Ishaq ibn Am’mar, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Sin’an,
on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB)
said, “God - may His Majesty be Exalted - said, ‘I have divided up the
world amongst My servants. I will reward whoever grants Me a loan from
it ten to seven-hundred times. I will take a loan by force from whoever
doesn’t give me a loan. Instead I will reward him with three things each
of which would please the angels if it is granted to them. The three
things given as a reward are blessings, guidance and mercy. Regarding
the first of these three God has said, ‘Who say, when afflicted with
calamity: "To God We belong, and to Him is our return":- They are those
on whom (descend) blessings from God,’**[[230]](footnotes_1.htm#b0230)**
The second thing is ‘His Mercy’ and the third thing is guidance.” Then
Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) added, “This is for the person from whom
something has been taken by force.”

GOD HAS A PARADISE INTO WHICH ONLY THREE GROUPS SHALL ENTER
-----------------------------------------------------------

3-136 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father, may God be
pleased with him, narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad

##### كانت الحكماء والفقهاء اذا كاتب بعضهم بعضا كتبوا بثلاث ليس معهن رابعة

#### 3-133 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه عن النوفلي، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن أمير المؤمنين عليهم السلام قال: كانت الفقهاء والحكماء إذا كاتب بعضهم بعضا كتبوا ثلاثة ليس معهن رابعة: من كانت الآخرة همته كفاه الله همه من الدنيا، ومن أصلح سريرته أصلح الله علانيته، ومن أصلح فيما بينه وبين الله عز وجل أصلح الله فيما بينه وبين الناس.

##### المؤمن لا تكون سجيته ثلاث

#### 3-134 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن الهيثم بن أبي مسروق النهدي، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن علي بن رئاب، عن الحلبي قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: إن المؤمن لا تكون سجيته الكذب والبخل والفجور ولكن ربما ألم بشيء من هذا لا يدوم عليه. فقيل له: أفيزني؟ قال: نعم هو مفتن تواب ولكن لا يولد له [ابن] من تلك النطفة.

##### ثلاث خصال لمن يؤخذ منه شيء من دنياه قسرا

#### 3-135 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني أحمد بن محمد بن خالد، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن إسحاق بن عمار، عن عبد الله بن سنان قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: قال الله جل جلاله: "إني أعطيت الدنيا بين عبادي قيضا فمن أقرضني منها قرضا أعطيته بكل واحدة منهن عشرا إلى سبعمائة ضعف وما شئت من ذلك، ومن لم يقرضني منها قرضا فأخذت منه قسرا أعطيته ثلاث خصال لو أعطيت واحدة منهن ملائكتي لرضوا: الصلاة والهداية والرحمة". إن الله عز وجل يقول: "الَّذِينَ إِذَا أَصَابَتْهُمْ مُصِيبَةٌ قَالُوا إِنَّا لِلَّهِ وَإِنَّا إِلَيْهِ رَاجِعُونَ أُوْلَئِكَ عَلَيْهِمْ صَلَوَاتٌ مِنْ رَبِّهِمْ" واحدة من الثلاث "ورحمة" اثنتين "و اولئك هم المهتدون" ثلاثة، ثم قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: هذا لمن أخذ [الله] منه شيئا قسرا.

##### لله عز وجل جنة لا يدخلها الا ثلاثة

#### 3-136 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محـمد

ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the authority of
Abi Ayoob, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Qays that Abi Ja’far
al-Baqir (MGB) said, “The Honorable the Exalted God has a Paradise into
which only three groups shall enter. The first group are men who judge
fairly regarding themselves. The second group are those who go to visit
their believing brothers for the sake of God. And the third group are
those who prefer their brethren to themselves for the sake of the
Honorable the Exalted God.”

THREE CHARACTERISTICS THAT SHIITES DO NOT HAVE
----------------------------------------------

3-137 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn
al-Nue’man, on the authority of Ali ibn Asbat, on the authority of some
of our friends that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Whatever faults
our Shiites may have, they do not have any of the following faults: none
of them beg, none of them are miserly, and none of them are gay.”

THE HARDEST THREE THINGS FOR THE SERVANTS TO DO
-----------------------------------------------

3-138 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Abdullah ibn al-Muqayrih, on the authority of Abil Sabah al-Kanani, on
the authority of Abi Basir that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “The
following three are the hardest things to do for a believer: to be fair
regarding oneself, to help others, and remember God in all
circumstances. One should remember God whenever he is about to commit a
sin as the Honorable the Exalted God said, ‘Those who fear God, when a
thought of evil from Satan assaults them, bring God to remembrance, when
lo! they see (aright)!’**[[231]](footnotes_1.htm#b0231)**.”

3-139 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn al-Hussein al-Sa’ed Abady
quoted Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of Al-Hussein
ibn Ali ibn Faz’zal, on the authority of Ali ibn Aqabah, on the
authority of Abil Jarud Zyad ibn al-Monzar that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq
(MGB) said, “The following three are the hardest things to do for a
believer: to be fair regarding oneself and not wanting anything for
others unless we want that for ourselves too; financially helping our
brothers and remembering God in all circumstances - that is not just
saying ‘Glory to God, Praise to God, There is no god but God’, but
accepting any commands of God and abstaining from what God has
forbidden.”

#### بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن أبي أيوب، عن محمد بن قيس، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: لله عز وجل جنة لا يدخلها إلا ثلاثة: رجل حكم في نفسه بالحق، ورجل زار أخاه المؤمن في الله، ورجل آثر أخاه المؤمن في الله عز وجل. {.t0}

##### ثلاث خصال لا تكون في الشيعة

#### 3-137 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثني الحسن بن علي بن النعمان، عن علي بن أسباط عن بعض أصحابنا، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ما كان في شيعتنا فلا يكون فيهم ثلاثة أشياء: لا يكون فيهم من يسأل بكفه، ولا يكون فيهم بخيل، ولا يكون فيهم من يؤتى في دبره.

##### ثلاث خصال من أشد ما عمل العباد

#### 3-138 حدثنا محمد بن علي ما جيلويه رضي الله عنه، عن عمه محمد بن أبي القاسم عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أبيه، عن عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن أبي الصباح الكنانى، عن أبي بصير، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: ثلاث من أشد ما عمل العباد: انصاف المؤمن من نفسه، ومواساة المرء أخاه، وذكر الله على كل حال، وهو أن يذكر الله عز وجل عند المعصية يهم بها فيحول ذكر الله بينه وبين تلك المعصية وهو قول الله عز وجل "إِنَّ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا إِذَا مَسَّهُمْ طَائِفٌ مِنْ الشَّيْطَانِ تَذَكَّرُوا فَإِذَا هُمْ مُبْصِرُونَ."

#### 3-139 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن الحسين السعد آبادي، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن الحسين بن علي بن فضال، عن علي بن عقبة، عن أبي الجارود زياد بن المنذر، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: أشد الاعمال ثلاثة: انصاف الناس من نفسك حتى لا ترضى لها منهم بشيء إلا رضيت لهم منها بمثله، ومواساتك الاخ في المال، وذكر الله على كل حال، ليس "سبحان الله والحمدلله ولا إله إلا الله والله أكبر" فقط، ولكن إذا ورد عليك شيء من أمر الله أخذت به وإذا ورد عليك شيء نهى الله عز وجل عنه تركته.

3-140 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Aba Abdullah Muhammad ibn Khalid
al-Barqy, on the authority of Ahmad ibn an-Nazr, on the authority of Amr
ibn Shimr, on the authority of Jabir that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB)
said, “When Noah (MGB) prayed to his Lord - the Honorable the Exalted
God - and cursed his nation, Satan - May God damn it - said, ‘O Noah! I
am indebted to you and wish to give you a reward.’ Noah said, ‘I swear
by God that you do not owe me anything. What could it be?’ Satan said,
‘I am indebted to you since you did me a favour by your praying to God
to drown everyone in your nation. Now until there comes another
generation, no one is left to need my leading him astray.’ Noah said,
‘Yes. What reward do you want to give me?’ Satan said, ‘Remember me in
three situations where I am closest to my servants: whenever you get
angry; whenever you want to judge between two people and remember me
whenever you are left alone with another unfamiliar
woman.**[[232]](footnotes_1.htm#b0232)**”

SATAN’S SAYING THAT THE CHILDREN OF ADAM CANNOT DEFEAT ME IN AT LEAST THREE SITUATIONS
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-141 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Aba Abdullah Muhammad ibn Khalid
al-Barqy, on the authority of Abdul Rahman ibn Muhammad al-Arzami, on
the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “Satan - may God damn
him - said, ‘The Children of Adam (i.e. the people) will not defeat me
in three situations even if they do so in other respects: taking what is
not rightfully theirs; blocking someone else’s due rights and spending
things not in their due way.’”

THREE THINGS THAT ARE REALLY HARD FOR THE PEOPLE
------------------------------------------------

3-142 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of his father, on
the authority of Al-Nazr ibn Soweed, on the authority of Durost ibn Abi
Mansoor, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Abi Ya'fur that Abu Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “There are three things that are really hard for
the people: forgiving the faults of others; accepting that others have
more wealth than they do; and remembering God often.”

THREE ACTS TO PERFECT GOOD DEEDS
--------------------------------

3-143 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that his uncle Muhammad ibn Abil-Qasim quoted on the authority
of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Sa’dan ibn Muslim, on the authority of Hatam that Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Good deeds will not be perfected unless
you

##### قول ابليس لعنه الله لنوح اذكرنى في ثلاثة مواطن

#### 3-140 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن أبي عبد الله محمد بن خالد البرقي، عن أحمد بن النضر، عن عمروبن شمر، عن جابر، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: لما دعا نوح عليه السلام ربه عز وجل على قومه أتاه إبليس لعنه الله فقال: يا نوح إن لك عندي يدا اريد أن أكافيك عليها، فقال نوح: والله إني لبغيض إلي أن يكون لك عندي يد فماهي؟ قال: بلى دعوت الله على قومك فأغرقتهم فلم يبق أحد اغويه، فأنا مستريح حتى ينشأقرن آخر فاغويهم، فقال له نوح: ما الذي تريد أن تكافئني به؟ قال له: اذكرني في ثلاثة مواطن فاني أقرب ما أكون إلى العبد إذا كان في إحديهن: اذكرني إذا غضبت، واذكرني إذا حكمت بين اثنين. واذكرني إذا كنت مع امرأة خاليا ليس معكما أحد.

##### قول ابليس لعنه الله ما أعيانى في ابن ادم فلن يعيينى منه واحدة من ثلاث

#### 3-141 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن محمد بن خالد البرقي، عن عبدالرحمن بن محمد العرزمي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال:يقول إبليس لعنه الله -: ما أعياني في ابن آدم فن يعييني منه واحدة من ثلاث: أخذ مال من غير حله، أو منعه من حقه، أو وضعه في غير وجهه.

##### ثلاث خصال لا يطيقهن الناس

#### 3-142 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن النضر بن سويد، عن درست بن أبي منصور، عن عبد الله بن أبي يعفور قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: ثلاث لا يطيقهن الناس: الصفح عن الناس، ومواساة الاخ أخاه في ماله، وذكر الله كثيرا.

##### المعروف لا يصلح الابثلاث خصال

#### 3-143 حدثنا محمد بن علي ماجيلويه رضي الله عنه، عن عمه محمد بن أبي القاسم، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن سعدان بن مسـلم، عن حـاتم، عن

do the following three acts: underestimate them, cover them up, and
expedite them. They will be well-noticed by those to whom you do a
favour once you underestimate them. They will be perfected when you
cover them up. And they will be enjoyed by those to whom you do the
favour if you expedite them. Otherwise, you would spoil them.”

THE THREE HANDS
---------------

3-144 Al-Hassan ibn Abdullah ibn Sa’id al-Askari narrated that Muhammad
ibn Abdul Aziz quoted Al-Hassan ibn Muhammad al-Za’ferani, on the
authority of Ubaydat ibn Hamid, on the authority of Abul
Za’ra**[[233]](footnotes_1.htm#b0233)** , on the authority of Abil
Ahvas, on the authority of his father Malik ibn Nazlat that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “There are three hands. First and foremost is the
Honorable the Exalted God’s Hand. And the hand of the donor which is
near it. And then there is the lower hand which is that of the beggar.
Then give in charity (from what is in excess of your and your family’s
need) and do not belittle yourself (by overdoing charity such that you
yourself become needy.”

3-145 Hamzih ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Alavi - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad al-Ash’ari, on the authority of
Abdullah ibn Maymun al-Qad-dah, on the authority of Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his forefathers (MGB), on the
authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Any good deed is
a form of charity. Anyone who guides others to do good is like those who
do good. God loves attending to the affairs of the needy.”

THE THREE DONORS
----------------

3-146 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Yaqoob
ibn Yazid, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Abi Samak, on the authority
of Ali ibn Shahab ibn Abdeh Rab’beh, on the authority of his father that
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “There are three donors: God - the
Lord of the Two Worlds: those who own the property given for charity;
and those who act as mediators for charity.”

3-147 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Khalaf ibn
Himmad, on the authority of Umar ibn Aban al-Kalbi, on the authority of
Abi Basir that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “There are three donors:
God who donates; those who donate from their property; and those who try
to donate.”

#### أبى عبد الله عليه السلام قال: رأيت المعروف لا يصلح إلا بثلاث خصال: تصغيره وستره وتعجيله، فانك إذا صغرته عظمته عند من تصنعه إليه، وإذا سترته تممته، وإذا عجلته هنئته وإن كان غير ذلك محقته ونكدته. {.t0}

##### الايدي ثلاث

#### 3-144 حدثنا الحسن بن عبد الله بن سعيد العسكري قال: أخبرنا محمد بن عبدالعزيز قال: حدثنا الحسن بن محمد الزعفراني قال: حدثنا عبيدة بن حميد قال: حدثني أبوالزعراء عن أبي الاحوص، عن أبيه مالك بن نضلة قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الايدي ثلاث فيد الله عز وجل العليا ويد المعطي التي تليها، ويد السائل السفلى، فأعط الفضل ولا تعجز نفسك.

##### ثلاث خصال مستحبة

#### 3-145 حدثنا حمزة بن محمد بن أحمد العلوي رضي الله عنه قال: أخبرني علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد الاشعري، عن عبد الله بن ميمون القداح، عن أبي عبد الله، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: كل معروف صدقة، والدال على الخير كفاعله، والله يحب إغاثة اللهفان.

##### المعطون ثلاثة

#### 3-146 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن يعقوب بن يزيد، عن إبراهيم بن أبي سماك، عن علي بن شهاب بن عبد ربه، عن أبيه عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال:.المعطون ثلاثة: الله رب العالمين وصاحب المال، والذى يجري على يديه.

#### 3-147 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله عن أبيه، عن خلف بن حماد، عن عمر بن أبان الكلبى، عن أبي بصير، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال:المعطون ثلاثة: الله المعطي، والمعطي من ماله، والساعي في ذلك معط.

IT IS NOT PROPER TO BEG UNLESS UNDER ONE OF THREE CONDITIONS
------------------------------------------------------------

3-148 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of his father, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn
Salim, on the authority of Abdul Hamid ibn Avaz al-Ta’ee that Abu
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “It is not proper to beg unless one is in
one of three conditions: a large amount of blood-money, extensive debt
or extreme poverty.”

3-149 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ibrahim ibn
Hashim and Sahl ibn Zyad al-Razi, on the authority of Isma’il ibn Marar
and Abdul Jab’bar ibn al-Mobarak, on the authority of Yunus ibn
Abdul-Rahman, on the authority of some of his friends that Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “A man went to Uthman ibn Affan while he was
sitting at the door of the mosque and begged for five
Dirhams**[[234]](footnotes_1.htm#b0234)**. He also asked Uthman to guide
him towards benevolent people. Uthman pointed to a corner of the mosque
where Al-Hassan (MGB), Al-Hussein (MGB) and Abdullah ibn Ja’far were
sitting. The man went to them, greeted them and begged of them. Then
Al-Hassan (MGB) and Al-Hussein (MGB) told him, ‘O so and so! It is not
permitted to beg unless for one of three reasons: for a large amount of
blood-money, heavy debt or extreme poverty. Why are you begging?’ The
man said, ‘It is for one of these reasons.’ Then Al-Hassan (MGB) donated
fifty Dinars .**[[235]](footnotes_1.htm#b0235)** Al-Hussein (MGB)
granted him forty-nine Dinars and Abdullah ibn Ja’far donated him
forty-eight Dinars. Then the man left them and went back to Uthman.
Uthman asked him, ‘Well! What did you do?’ The man said, ‘I begged of
you but you gave me only a little bit, but did not ask me what I needed
that for. However, when I begged of one of those long-haired people, he
asked me what I was asking them for. He told me that it is not permitted
for me to ask unless it was for one of three reasons. I told him my
reason and he granted me fifty Dinars. The second man gave me forty-nine
Dinars and the third man gave me forty-eight Dinars.’ Then Uthman said,
‘Where else could you find people like them. They have cut off all
knowledge and have gathered all good and wisdom for themselves (‘Fatamul
Ilm Fatman’).’”

The compiler of the book - may God increase his honor - said, “What is
meant by ‘Fatamul Ilm Fatman’ here is that they have cut off all
knowledge from others and have gathered all of it for themselves.”

##### لا تصلح المسألة الا في ثلاث

#### 3-148 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبى عبد الله، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن هشام بن سالم، عن عبدالحميد بن عواض الطائي قال: قال أبوعبد الله عليه السلام:لا تصلح المسألة إلا في ثلاث: في دم منقطع، أو غرم مثقل، أو حاجة مدقعة.

#### 3-149 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن إبراهيم بن هاشم، وسهل بن زياد الرازي، عن إسماعيل بن مرار، وعبدالجبار بن المبارك، عن يونس بن عبدالرحمن، عمن حدثه من أصحابه، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إن رجلا مر بعثمان بن عفان وهو قاعد على باب المسجد فسأله فأمر له بخمسة دراهم، فقال له الرجل: أرشدني فقال له عثمان: دونك الفتية التي ترى وأومأبيده إلى ناحية من المسجد فهيا الحسن والحسين وعبد الله بن جعفرفمضى الرجل نحوهم حتى سلم عليهم وسألهم فقال له الحسن والحسين عليهما السلام: يا هذا إن المسألة لا تحل إلا في إحدى ثلاث دم مفجع، أو دين مقرح، أو فقر مدقع، ففي أيها تسأل؟ فقال: واحدة من هذه الثلاث، فأمر له الحسن عليه السلام بخمسين دينارا، وأمر له الحسين عليهما السلام بتسعة وأربعين دينارا، وأمر له عبد الله بن جعفر بثمانية وأربعين دينارا، فانصرف الرجل فمر بعثمان فقال له: ما صنعت؟ فقال: مررت بك فسألتك فأمرت لي بما أمرت ولم تسألني فيما اسأل وإن صاحب الوفرة لما سألته قال لي: يا هذا فيما تسأل فان المسألة لا تحل إلا في إحدى ثلاث فأخبرته بالوجه الذي أسأله من الثلاثة فأعطاني خمسين دينارا، وأعطاني الثاني تسعة وأربعين دينارا، وأعطاني الثالث ثمانية وأربعين دينارا، فقال عثمان: ومن لك بمثل هؤلاء الفتية اولئك فطموا العلم فطما، وحازوا الخير والحكمة.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: معنى قوله " فطموا العلم فطما " أي قطعوه عن غيرهم قطعا، وجمعوه لانفسهم جمعا.

THREE THINGS WITH WHICH GOD HAS HONORED THE CHILDREN OF ADAM
------------------------------------------------------------

3-150 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Muhammad ibn Isa al-Ubaydi, on the authority of Zakariya (ibn Muhammad)
al-Mumin, on the authority of Ali ibn Abi Na’eem, on the authority of
Abi Hamzih that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) that the Blessed the Sublime
God said, “O Children of Adam! I have honored you with three
characteristics: I have covered up some of your ugliness. Had your
family known about them, they would not have buried you in the ground. I
granted you an extension of sustenance. Then I asked you for a loan. You
did not rush to do good. I granted you a choice to make a will as to how
one third of your property should be spent after your death. But, you
did not rush to do good.”

ONE WOULD NOT BE A POLYTHEIST UNTIL HE DOES ONE OF THREE THINGS
---------------------------------------------------------------

3-151 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Al-Hassan ibn Musa al-Khishab, on the authority of Al-Yazid ibn Ishaq
She’r, on the authority of Ab’bas ibn Yazid, “I told Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB), ‘The common people think that polytheism is harder to
see than the footstep of an ant on a black cloak at night.’ The Imam
(MGB) replied, ‘One would not become a polytheist unless he prays to
other than God; makes an offering for other than God; or prays to anyone
other than the Honorable the Exalted God.’”

THIS NATION HAS NOT BEEN GIVEN ANY LESS THAN THREE
--------------------------------------------------

3-152 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn al-Qasim, on the authority of Abdullah ibn
Sin’an, on the authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, “My nation has not been given any less than the
following three: beauty, a good voice and a good memory.”

THE THREE WORST AFFLICTIONS
---------------------------

3-153 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his
father, on the authority of Al-Nawfaly, on the authority of Al-Sakoony,
on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority
of his forefathers (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The worst three
afflictions are: being bent for your head to be chopped off; being a
captive in chains; and seeing another man sleeping with your wife.”

##### ثلاث خصال تطول الله بها عز وجل على ابن آدم

#### 3-150 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن محمد بن عيسى العبيدي، عن زكريا المؤمن، عن علي بن أبي نعيم، عن أبي حمزة، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: إن الله تبارك وتعالى يقول: [يا] ابن آدم تطولت عليك بثلاث: سترت عليك ما لو يعلم به أهلك ما واروك وأوسعت عليك فاستقرضت منك فلم تقدم خيرا، وجعلت لك نظرة عند موتك في ثلثك فلم تقدم خيرا.

##### لا يكون العبد مشركا حتى يفعل احدى ثلاث خصال

#### 3-151 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن الحسن بن موسى الخشاب، عن يزيد بن إسحاق شعر، عن عباس بن يزيد، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قلت: إن هؤلاء العوام يزعمون أن الشرك أخفى من دبيب النمل في الليلة الظلماء على المسح الاسود فقال: لا يكون العبد مشركا حتى يصلي لغير الله، أو يذبح لغير الله، أو يدعو لغير الله عز وجل.

##### لم تعط هذه الامة اقل من ثلاث

#### 3-152 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار عن محمد بن أحمد عن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن عبد الله بن القاسم، عن عبد الله بن سنان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:لم تعط امتي أقل من ثلاثة الجمال والصوت الحسن والحفظ.

##### جهد البلاء في ثلاثة

#### 3-153 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن النوفلي، عن السكوني، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن ابائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: جهد البلاء أن يقدم الرجل فيضرب عنقه صبرا والاسير مادام في وثاق العدو، والرجل يجد على بطن امرأته رجلا.

THREE THINGS NOT IN MY NATION
-----------------------------

3-154 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Abil
Jo’aza al-Monabat ibn Abdullah, on the authority of Al-Hussein ibn
Alvan, on the authority of Amr ibn Khalid, on the authority of Zayd ibn
Ali, on the authority of his forefathers, on the authority of Ali (MGB)
that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There is no monastism; tourism, and
(fast of) silence in my nation.”

THE ANGELS WOULD NOT ENTER A HOUSE IN WHICH THERE ARE THREE THINGS
------------------------------------------------------------------

3-155 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ayoob ibn
Nooh, on the authority of Safvan ibn Yahya, on the authority of Abdullah
ibn Miskan, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Marvan, on the authority of
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “Gabriel
(MGB) descended down to me and said, ‘We - the angels - will not enter
any house in which there is a dog or a statue or a vessel in which they
pee.’”

THREE PEOPLE ARE PARTNERS IN ENJOINING TO DO GOOD AND FORBIDDING TO DO EVIL
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-156 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Al-Nawfaly, on the authority of Al-Sakoony, on the
authority of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), on the authority of his
forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali (MGB) that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “Whoever enjoins to do good or forbids to do evil or guides
to goodness or points towards it is a partner in its reward. Whoever
orders to do evil, guides one towards evil or points towards it is also
a partner in its chastisement.”

3-157 Muhammad ibn Musa al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the authority of
Abi Ayoob al-Khizaz, on the authority of Abdul-Mumin al-Ansari that Abi
Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “God has granted three things to believers:
nobility in the world and his religion; prosperity in the Hereafter; and
dignity in the hearts of the people of the world.”

FEAR THREE PEOPLE REGARDING YOUR RELIGION
-----------------------------------------

3-158 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Umar ibn Azineh, on the authority of

##### ليس في هذه الامة ثلاثة أشياء

#### 3-154 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثني محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن أبي الجوزاء المنبه بن عبد الله، عن الحسين بن علوان، عن عمرو بن خالد، عن زيد بن علي عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:"ليس في امتي رهبانية، ولا سياحة، ولازم" يعني سكوت.

##### لا تدخل الملائكة بيتا فيه ثلاثة أشياء

#### 3-155 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أيوب ابن نوح، عن صفوان بن يحيى، عن عبد الله بن مسكان، عن محمد بن مروان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إن جبرئيل عليه السلام أتاني فقال: إنا معشر الملائكة لا ندخل بيتا فيه كلب، ولا تمثال جسد، ولا إناء يبال فيه.

##### ثلاثة يشتركون في الامر بالمعروف والنهى عن المنكر

#### 3-156 حدثنا محمد بن علي ما جيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن النوفلي، عن السكوني، عن أبي عبد الله، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:من أمر بمعروف أو نهى عن منكر أو دل على خير أو أشار به فهو شريك، ومن أمر بسوء أو دل عليه أو أشار به فهو شريك.

##### اعطى الله عز وجل المؤمن ثلاث خصال

#### 3-157 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله ابن جعفر الحميري، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن أبي أيوب الخزاز، عن عبدالمؤمن الانصاري، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: إن الله عز وجل أعطى المؤمن ثلاث خصال: العز في الدنيا في دينه، والفلج في الآخرة والمهابة في صدور العالمين.

##### يحذر على الدين ثلاثة

#### 3-158 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسـى، عن أبيـه، عن حمـاد بن عيسـى، عن عمـر بن اذينة عن أبان بن أبي

Aban ibn Abi Ayyash, on the authority of Salim ibn Qays al-Hilaly that
he had heard the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) say, “Once I
heard the Commander of the Faithful Ali (MGB) say, ‘Fear the following
three people regarding your religion: One who has learned the Quran, but
starts to fight with his neighbour and kills him with the excuse that he
is an atheist as soon as the brightness of the Quran lights up his
face.’ I said, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Who is more likely to be a
polytheist?’ The Commander of the Faithful (MGB) replied, ‘The one who
makes accusations; the one who reinforces what he says and restates the
lies; and the man to whom God has granted the rule but considers being
obeyed to be God’s obedience and being opposed to be opposition to God -
such a person is a liar since neither disobedience to the Creator in
obeying a creature is allowed nor is it proper for any created person to
like another created person in disobedience to God. You should not obey
him in acts of disobedience to God. Obedience is for God, His Messenger
and the Trustees in charge of the Affairs. Indeed the Honorable the
Exalted God has ordered us to obey His Messenger, since he is pure and
immaculate and would not order us to do acts of disobedience. God has
also ordered us to obey the Trustees in charge of the Affairs since they
are pure and immaculate and would not order us to do acts of
disobedience to God.’”

THREE QUESTIONS BY A CHRISTIAN FROM JA’FAR AS-SADIQ
---------------------------------------------------

3-159 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al- Valid - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted
Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn Abil-Khat’tab, on the authority of Al-Hikam
ibn Meskin al-Saqafy, on the authority of Abu Saéed al-Makari, on the
authority of Salma - the slave seller, “One of my friends asked me to
stay at his threshing floor as a guard. When I was there I made
ablutions and prayed at noon every day. One day the Christian in the
monastery asked me, ‘What is this manner of praying? I have never seen
anyone pray like this.’ I replied, ‘I have learned it from the
(grand)son of God’s Prophet (MGB).’ The man asked, ‘Is he
knowledgeable?’ I replied, ‘Yes.’ The man said, ‘Then ask him about the
following three things: what eggs, fish and birds are forbidden to eat?’
I went on Hajj pilgrimage**[[236]](footnotes_1.htm#b0236)** that year
and went to see Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) and told him, ‘A man has
asked me three things.” He (MGB) said, “What are they?” I said, “He
asked me which eggs, fish and birds are forbidden to eat?” The Imam
(MGB) replied, “You should not eat any eggs whose tips are the same (the
top of which you cannot distinguish from its
bottom).**[[237]](footnotes_1.htm#b0237)** You should not eat fish which
has no scales. You should not eat any birds which do not have any
gizzards” Upon my return from Mecca, I went to see the Christian man and
gave him the answer. He said, “The man who has provided this answer is
either a Prophet or a Trustee of a Prophet.”

#### عياش عن سليم بن قيس الهلالي قال: سمعت أمير المؤمنين عليا عليه السلام يقول: احذروا على دينكم ثلاثة: رجلا قرأ القرآن حتى إذا رأيت عليه بهجته اخترط سيفه على جاره ورماه بالشرك، فقلت: يا أمير المؤمنين أيهما أولى بالشرك؟ قال: الرامي، ورجلا استخفته الاحاديث كلما احدثت أحدوثه كذب مدها بأطول منها، ورجلا آتاه الله عز وجل سلطانا فزعم أن طاعته طاعة الله ومعصيته معصية الله وكذب لانه لا طاعة لمخلوق في معصية الخالق، لا ينبغي للمخلوق أن يكون حبه لمعصية الله فلاطاعة في معصيته ولا طاعة لمن عصى الله، إنما الطاعة لله ولرسوله ولولاة الامر، وإنما أمر الله عز وجل بطاعة الرسول لانه معصوم مطهر، لايأمر بمعصيته وإنما امر بطاعة اولى الامر لانهم معصومون مطهرون لا يأمرون بمعصيته. {.t0}

##### سؤال الديراني جعفر بن محمد عن ثلاث خصال

#### 3-159 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن محمد بن الحسين بن أبي الخطاب، عن الحكم بن مسكين الثقفي قال: حدثني أبوسعيد المكاري، عن سلمة بياع الجواري قال: سألني رجل من أصحابنا أن أقوم له في بيدر وأحفظه، فكان إلى جانبي دير فكنت أقوم إذا زالت الشمس فأتوضأ واصلي فناداني الديراني ذات يوم فقال: ما هذه الصلاة التي تصلي؟ فما أرى أحدا يصليها، فقلت: أخذناها عن ابن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله فقال: وعالم هو؟ فقلت له: نعم، فقال: سله عن ثلاث خصال عن البيض أي شيء يحرم منه، وعن السمك أي شيء يحرم منه، وعن الطير أي شيء يحرم منه؟ قال: فحججت من سنتي فدخلت على أبي عبد الله عليه السلام فقلت له: إن رجلا سألني أن أسألك عن ثلاث خصال، قال: وماهي؟ قلت: قال لي: سله عن البيض أي شيء يحرم منه، وعن السمك أي شيء يحرم منه، وعن الطير أي شيء يحرم منه، فقال [أبوعبد الله عليه السلام] قل له: [أما] البيض كل ما لم تعرف رأسه من إسته فلا تأكله وأما السمك فما لم يكن له قشر فلا تأكله، وأما الطير فما لم تكن له قانصة فلا تأكله. قال: فرجعت من مكة فخرجت إلى الديراني متعمدا فأخبرته بما قال، فقال: هذا والله هو نبي أووصي نبي.

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “You can
eat any of the sea birds that have gizzards or spur. You can eat birds
which flap their wings when they fly. You should not eat birds which
glide. Regarding birds that both glide and flap their wings when they
fly, you can eat birds which flap their wings more often than they
glide. However, you should not eat those which glide more often than
they flap their wings.”

THE WORST THREE THINGS OF WHICH THE EARTH COMPLAINED
----------------------------------------------------

3-160 Muhammad ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on
the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn
abil-Hassan al-Farsi**[[238]](footnotes_1.htm#b0238)** , on the
authority of Suleiman ibn Hafs al-Basry, on the authority of Ja’far ibn
Muhammad as-Sadiq that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The three worst things
of which the Earth has complained of to God are: undue blood that is
shed on it; the washing off after fornication, and sleeping on it (after
praying) before the sun rise.”

THREE PEOPLE WHOM GOD WILL NOT PROTECT
--------------------------------------

3-161 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted
Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hussein who
linked it up through a chain of narrators to God’s Prophet (MGB), “The
Honorable the Exalted God will not protect the following three people:
those who reside in a ruined house; those who stand to pray on the road;
and those who leave their vehicle unlocked.”

THREE WILL BE UNDER THE SHADE OF THE GOD’S THRONE ON THE RESURRECTION DAY
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-162 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of
Al-Nahikee**[[239]](footnotes_1.htm#b0239)** , on the authority of Ali
ibn Ja’far**[[240]](footnotes_1.htm#b0240)** , on the authority of his
brother Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (MGB), “The following three groups
shall be under the Shade of the Honorable the Exalted God’s On the
Resurrection Day in which there shall be no shade but God’s Shade: those
who marry off their Muslim brother; those who help their Muslim brother
and those who safeguard the secrets of their Muslim brother.”

THREE WILL COMPLAIN TO GOD
--------------------------

3-163 Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutevakil - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted (Muhammad ibn) Ahmad,
on the authority of Musa ibn Umar (and Sa’ed ibn Abdullah, on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah), on the authority of Ibn Fazal,

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه -: يؤكل من طير الماء ما كانت له قانصة أو صيصية ويؤكل من طير البر مادف، ولا يؤكل ما صف فإن كان الطير يصف ويدف وكان دفيفه أكثر من صفيفه أكل، وإن كان صفيفه أكثر من دفيفه لم يؤكل.

##### ما عجت الارض إلى ربها عز وجل كعجيجها من ثلاثة

#### 3-160 حدثنا محمد بن علي ما جيلويه رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن الحسن بن أبي الحسن الفارسي، عن سليمان بن حفص البصري، عن جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ما عجت الارض إلى ربها عز وجل كعجيجها من ثلاثة.من دم حرام يسفك عليها، أو اغتسال من زنا، أو النوم عليها قبل طلوع الشمس.

##### ثلاثة لا يتقبل الله لهم بالحفظ

#### 3-161 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد ابن أحمد، عن محمد بن الحسين بإسناده رفعه إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله أنه قال: ثلاثة لا يتقبل الله عز وجل لهم بالحفظ: رجل نزل في بيت خرب، ورجل صلى على قارعة الطريق ورجل أرسل راحلته ولم يستوثق منها.

##### ثلاثة يستظلون بظل عرش الله عز وجل يوم القيامة

#### 3-162 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن النهيكي، عن علي بن جعفر، عن أخيه موسى بن جعفر عليه السلام قال: ثلاثة يستظلون بظل عرش الله يوم لا ظل إلا ظله: رجل زوج أخاه المسلم، أو أخدمه أو كتم له سرا.

##### ثلاثة يشكون إلى الله عز وجل

#### 3-163 حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن [محمد بن] أحمد، عن موسى بن عمر [وسـعد بن عبـد الله، عـن

on the authority of someone who linked it up through other narrators to
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “There are three who will complain to the
Honorable the Exalted God: a ruined mosque in which no one prays;
scientists caught amongst ignorant people; and the Quran that is left
unread with a layer of dust on it.”

THERE ARE THREE GROUPS OF PEOPLE WHO RECITE THE QURAN
-----------------------------------------------------

3-164 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Aba Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of Isma’il ibn Mihran, on
the authority of Ubays ibn Hisham al-Nasheri, on the authority of
someone who linked it up through other narrators to Abi Ja’far al-Baqir
(MGB), “There are three groups of people who recite the Quran. Firstly
there are those who have turned the Quran into their source of income.
They use it to approach the rulers and act haughty with the people. Then
there are those who recite the Quran and memorize it bit by bit, but
violate its bounds and do not act accordingly. Lastly, there are those
who recite the Quran and use it as a medication for their hearts. They
use it at night to say supplications and use it in the daytime while
suffering from the thirst of fasting. They use the Quran to worship in
the mosque and stay out of their comfortable beds. The Honorable the
Omnipotent God fends off calamities for them; takes revenge from the
enemies by means of them and sends down rain from the sky for them. I
swear by God that such recitors of the Quran are as scarce as red
matches are.**[[241]](footnotes_1.htm#b0241)**”

THERE ARE THREE GROUPS OF RECITORS OF THE HOLY QURAN
----------------------------------------------------

3-165 Ahmad ibn Zyad ibn Ja’far al-Hamedany - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim quoted his father, on the authority
of Ibn Abi Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim, on the authority
of Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB), “There are three groups of people who
recite the Quran. First there are those who use the Quran to approach
the rulers and act haughty with the people. They are of the residents of
Hell. Secondly there are those who recite the Quran and memorize it bit
by bit, but violate its limits. They are of the residents of Hell.
Lastly, there are those who recite the Quran, develop it in their minds
and act according to the strong decrees, believe in the similitudes,
practice its obligatory deeds, consider allowed what it has allowed and
forbid what it has forbidden. Thus, God protects them from the harms of
the occasions of going astray. They are of the residents of Paradise.
They can intercede on behalf of whomever they wish.”

#### أحمد بن أبي عبد الله] عن ابن فضال، عمن ذكره، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ثلاثة يشكون إلى الله عز وجل: مسجد خراب لا يصلي فيه أهله، وعالم بين جهال، ومصحف معلق قد وقع عليه غبار ولا يقرء فيه. {.t0}

##### قراء القرآن ثلاثة

#### 3-164 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن إسماعيل بن مهران، عن عبيس بن هشام الناشري، عمن ذكره، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قراء القرآن ثلاثة رجل قرأ القرآن فاتخذه بضاعة واستدر به الملوك واستطال به على الناس، ورجل قرأ القرآن فحفظ حروفه وضيع حدوده، ورجل قرأ القرآن فوضع دواء القرآن على داء قلبه، فأسهر به ليله، وأظمأ به نهاره. وقام به في مساجده، وتجافى به عن فراشه، فبأولئك يدفع الله العزيز الجبار البلاء، وبأولئك يديل الله من الاعداء وباولئك ينزل الله الغيث من السماء، فوالله هؤلاء قراء القرآن أعز من الكبريت الاحمر.

##### القراء ثلاثة

#### 3-165 حدثنا أحمد بن زياد بن جعفر الهمداني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن هشام بن سالم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: القراء ثلاثة قارئ قرأ [القرآن] ليستدر به الملوك. ويستطيل به على الناس فذاك من أهل النار وقارئ قرأ القرآن فحفظ حروفه وضيع حدوده فذاك من أهل النار، وقارئ قرأ [القرآن] فاستتر به تحت برنسه فهو يعمل بمحكمه ويؤمن بمتشابهه ويقيم فرائضه ويحل حلاله ويحرم حرامه فهذا ممن بنقذه الله من مضلات الفتن، وهو من أهل الجنة ويشفع فيمن شاء.

YOU SHOULD NOT TRAVEL TO ANY EXCEPT FOR THREE MOSQUES
-----------------------------------------------------

3-166 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father and Muhammad
ibn Ali Majiluyih - may God be pleased with them - narrated that
Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn
Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority of some companions, on the authority
of Al-Hassan ibn Ali and Abil Sakhr who linked it up through a chain of
narrators to the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (MGB), “Do not
travel unless to visit three mosques: the Al-Haram Mosque (the Ka’ba),
the Prophet’s Mosque and the Kufa Mosque.”

3-167 Ahmad ibn Zyad ibn Ja’far al-Hamedani - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted his father, on the
authority of Yasir - the servant (of Imam al-Reza (MGB)) that Ali ibn
Musa al-Reza (MGB) said, “You should not travel to any tombs other than
our tombs. I have been oppressively poisoned to death and buried in a
strange place. I hope the prayers of those who travel to visit my tomb
are accepted and also their sins are forgiven.”

THERE ARE THREE BENEFITS IN RADISHES
------------------------------------

3-168 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah al-Barqy, on the authority of some companions, on the authority
of Han’nan ibn Sadeer, “I was eating at the same table with Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB). He (MGB) gave me some radishes to eat and told me, ‘O
Han’nan! There are three benefits in radishes. The leaves help let off
internal gas, it helps clean the passageway of urine, and its roots help
alleviate the phlegm.’”

THERE IS NO HARM IN THREE THINGS
--------------------------------

3-169 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Aba Abdullah, on the authority of
Al-Nahikee**[[242]](footnotes_1.htm#b0242)** , on the authority of
Mansoor ibn Yunus that he had heard Abal-Hassan Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim
(MGB) say, “There are no harms in the following three things: Al-Razeqi
grapes, sugar canes and Lebanese apples.”

THE PROPHET GUARANTEES THREE PLACES OF RESIDENCE IN PARADISE FOR WHOEVER ABANDONS THREE CHARACTERISTICS
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3-170 Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Sejezy narrated that Abul Abbas al-Suraj
quoted Qutaybat, on the authority of Qazat, on the authority of Isma’il
ibn Umayat, on the authority of the Jiblat al-Efriqi that God’s Prophet
(MGB) said, “I guarantee one house in the prairies of Paradise, one in
the middle of Paradise and one in the highest parts of Paradise for
whoever abandons quarrelling even though he may be right, abandons lying
even as a joke, and is good-tempered.”

##### لا تشد الرحال الا إلى ثلاثة مساجد

#### 3-166 حدثنا أبي، ومحمد بن علي ما جيلويه رضي الله عنهما قالا: حدثنا محمد ابن يحيى العطار قال: حدثنا محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، عن بعض أصحابنا، عن الحسن بن علي، وأبي الصخر جميعا يرفعانه إلى أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام أنه قال:لا تشد الرحال إلا إلى ثلاثة مساجد: المسجد الحرام، ومسجد رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله، ومسجد الكوفة.

#### 3-167 حدثنا أحمد بن زياد بن جعفر الهمذاني رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبيه، عن ياسر الخادم قال: قال علي بن موسى الرضا عليه السلام: لا تشد الرحال إلى شيء من لاقبور إلا إلى قبورنا، ألا وإني لمقتول بالسم ظلما، ومدفون في موضع غربة، فمن شد رحله إلى زيارتي استجيب دعاؤه وغفر له ذنبه.

##### في الفجل ثلاث خصال

#### 3-168 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي قال: حدثنا عدة من أصحابنا، عن حنان بن سدير قال: كنت مع أبي عبد الله عليه السلام على المائدة فناولني فجلة، وقال لي: يا حنان كل الفجل فان فيه ثلاث خصال، ورقه يطرد الرياح. ولبه يسربل البول واصوله تقطع البلغم.

##### ثلاثة لاتضر

#### 3-169 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله، عن النهيكي، عن منصور بن يونس قال: سمعت أبا الحسن موسى بن جعفر عليهما السلام يقول: ثلاثة لا تضر: العنب الرازقي، وقصب السكر، والتفاح اللبناني.

#### النبي صلى الله عليه وآله زعيم بثلاثة بيوت في الجنة لمن ترك ثلاث الخصال

#### 3-170 أخبرني الخليل بن أحمد السجزي قال: حدثنا أبوالعباس السراج قال: حدثنا قتيبة قال: حدثنا قزعة، عن إسماعيل بن امية، عن جبلة الافريقي أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله قال:أنا زعيم ببيت في بض الجنة وبيت في وسط الجنة، وبيت في أعلى الجنة لمن ترك المراء وإن كان محقا، ولمن ترك الكذب وإن كان هازلا، ولمن حسن خلقه.

THE COMMANDER OF THE FAITHFUL WAS ORDERED TO FIGHT THREE
--------------------------------------------------------

3-171 Abu Sa’id Muhammad ibn al-Fazl ibn Muhammad ibn Ishaq al-Mozakir
narrated that Abu Abdullah al-Ra’avasani quoted Ali ibn
Salma**[[243]](footnotes_1.htm#b0243)** , on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Bashr, on the authority of Fatr ibn Khalifat, on the authority of
Hakim ibn Jobayr, on the authority of Ibrahim (al-Nakha’ee), on the
authority of Al-Qamat (ibn Qays) that he had heard Ali ibn Abi Talib
(MGB) say, “I was ordered to fight with the perfidious party, the
deviators, and the apostates.”

The compiler of the book - may God be pleased with him - said, “The
perfidious party refers to those in the Battle of Jamal. The deviators
refers to those who were from Syria and were associated with Muawiyah
and the apostates refers to those who were from
Nahravan**[[244]](footnotes_1.htm#b0244)** . I have included all that I
have seen in this regard in the book Vasfe Qital al-Sharat al-Mareqin.”

THREE CHARACTERISTICS WITHOUT WHICH YOU ARE NOT FROM GOD OR THE PROPHET
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

3-172 Suleiman ibn Ahmad ibn Ayoob al-Lakhmy narrated that Abdul Wahhab
ibn Kharajat quoted Abu Kurayb, on the authority of Ali ibn Ja’far
al-Abasi**[[245]](footnotes_1.htm#b0245)** , on the authority of
Al-Hassan ibn al-Hussein al-Alavi, on the authority of his father
Al-Hussein ibn Zayd, on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq
(MGB), on the authority of his father (MGB), on the authority of his
forefathers (MGB), on the authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB), “God’s
Prophet (MGB) said, ‘There are three characteristics which whoever
doesn’t possess is neither from me nor from the Honorable the Exalted
God.’ The Prophet (MGB) was asked, ‘O Prophet of God! What are they?’
The Prophet (MGB) replied, ‘Patience with which you forgive the
ignorance of the ignorant ones; being good-tempered with the people; and
piety which restrains you from rebelling against the Honorable the
Exalted God.’”

THREE THINGS TO RESPECT FOR GOD
-------------------------------

3-173 Suleiman ibn Ahmad al-Lakhmy narrated that Yahya ibn Uthman ibn
Salih, Mutalib ibn Shoayb al-Azodi and Ahmad ibn Rashid - the two from
Basra**[[246]](footnotes_1.htm#b0246)** , on the authority of Ibrahim
ibn Himad, on the authority of Abi Hazim al-Madinee, on the authority of
Imran ibn Umar ibn Sa’id al-Mosayeb, on the authority of his father, on
the authority of his grandfather, on the authority of Abi Sa’id
al-Khidry that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “There are three things to
respect so that God will protect your religion and worldly affairs. And
if you disrespect them, God will not protect anything for you. These
three things to respect are Islam, me and my Itrat (being God’s Book and
my progeny).”

##### أمر أمير المؤمنين بقتال ثلاث فرق

#### 3-171 حدثنا أبوسعيد محمد بن الفضل المذكر قال: حدثنا أبوعبد الله الراوساني قال: حدثنا علي بن سلمة قال: حدثنا محمد بن بشر قال: حدثنا فطر بن خليفة، عن حكيم بن جبير، عن إبراهيم قال: سمعت علقمة يقول: سمعت علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام يقول:امرت بقتال الناكثين والقاسطين والمارقين.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب رضي الله عنه: الناكثون أصحاب الجمل، والقاسطون أهل الشام ومعاوية، والمارقون أهل النهروان، وقد أخرجت كل ما رويته في هذا المعنى في كتاب وصف قتال الشراة المارقين.

##### ثلاث من لم تكن فيه فليس من الله عز وجل ولا من رسوله

#### 3-172 أخبرني سليمان بن أحمد بن أيوب اللخمي قال: حدثنا عبدالوهاب ابن خراجة، قال: حدثنا أبوكريب قال: حدثنا علي بن جعفر العبسي قال: حدثنا الحسن بن الحسين العلوي، عن أبيه الحسين بن زيد، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي بن أبي طالب عليهم السلام، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله قال: ثلاث من لم تكن فيه فليس مني ولا من الله عز وجل، قيل: يا رسول الله وما هن؟ قال: حلم يرد به جهل الجاهل، وحسن خلق يعيش به في الناس، وورع يحجزه عن معاصي الله عز وجل.

##### لله عز وجل حرمات ثلاث

#### 3-173 أخبرنا سليمان بن أحمد اللخمي قال: حدثنا يحيى بن عثمان بن صالح ومطلب بن شعيب الازدي وأحمد بن رشيد البصريون قالوا: حدثنا إبراهيم بن حماد عن أبي حازم المديني قال: حدثنا عمران بن عمر بن سعيد المسيب، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن أبى سعيد الخدرى قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إن لله حرمات ثلاث من حفظهن حفظ الله له أمر دينه ودنياه ومن لم يحفظهن لم يحفظ الله له شيئا: حرمة الاسلام وحرمتي، وحرمة عترتي.

3-174 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
Abdulhamid, on the authority of Ibn Abi Najran, on the authority of Asim
ibn Hamid, on the authority of Abi Hamzih al-Somali, on the authority of
Akrama, on the authority of Ibn Abbas**[[247]](footnotes_1.htm#b0247)**
, “There are three unique things which you should respect regarding God:
His Book that is His Light and Wisdom; His House that He has established
as a place for people to turn towards (in prayer) and will not accept
anyone who turns his face towards anywhere else; and the Household of
your Prophet Muhammad (MGB).”

THE TRUTH OF FAITH ARE IN THREE CHARACTERISTICS
-----------------------------------------------

3-175 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Muhammad ibn
al-Hussein ibn Abil Khat’tab, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isma’il
ibn Bazi’a, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Azafer, on the authority of
his father that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “God's Prophet ran into
a group of camel- riders during one of his trips. They greeted him and
he asked them who they were. They said they were believers. The Prophet
(MGB) asked them about the truth of their faith. They replied,
‘Contentment with what God has destined, entrusting themselves to God,
and submitting to God's orders.’ Then God's Prophet (MGB) said, ‘These
are wise and knowledgeable people with such a high rank, near that of
the Prophets.’ Then he (MGB) faced them and said, ‘If you are truthful,
do not build what you shall not reside in; do not collect what you shall
not eat; and fear God to Whom you shall return.’”

3-176 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr
al-Bazanty, on the authority of Ali ibn Abi Hamzih, on the authority of
Abi Basir and Zurarah ibn A’ayan that Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said,
“One may perform the Hajj pilgrimage in either one of three ways: 1-
Hajj Al-Kira'an with the offering; 3-Hajj Ifra'ad without taking the
offering and 3- Hajj Tamatu in which the pilgrim puts on
Ihram**[[248]](footnotes_1.htm#b0248)** and goes to Mecca during the
months of Hajj.**[[249]](footnotes_1.htm#b0249)**”

3-177 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr
al-Bazanty, on the authority of Mufaz’zal ibn Salih, on the authority of
Jabir al-Jo’afy, on the authority of Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) that
God’s

#### 3-174 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن عبدالحميد، عن ابن أبي نجران، عن عاصم بن حميد، عن أبي حمزة الثمالي، عن عكرمة، عن ابن عباس قال: إن لله عز وجل حرمات ثلاث ليس مثلهن شيء: كتابه وهو نوره وحكمته، وبيته الذي جعله للناس قبلة لايقبل الله من أحد وجها إلى غيره، وعترة نبيكم محمد صلى الله عليه وآله.

##### حقيقة الايمان ثلاث خصال

#### 3-175 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن الحسين ابن أبي الخطاب، عن محمد بن إسماعيل بن بزيع، عن محمد بن عذافر، عن أبيه، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: بينا رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ذات يوم في بعض أسفاره إذ لقيه ركب فقالوا: السلام عليك يا رسول الله فالتفت إليهم فقال: ما أنتم؟ قالوا: مؤمنون، قال: فما حقيقة إيمانكم؟ قالوا: الرضا بقضاء الله، والتسليم لامر الله، والتفويض إلى الله، فقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: علماء حكماء كادوا أن يكونوا من الحكمة أنبياء، فان كنتم صادقين فلا تبنوا ما لاتسكنون، ولا تجمعوا ما لا تأكلون، واتقوا الله الذي إليه ترجعون.

##### الحاج على ثلاثة وجوه

#### 3-176 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي، عن علي بن أبي حمزة، عن أبي بصير، وزرارة بن أعين، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: الحاج على ثلاثة وجوه: رجل أفرد الحج بسياق الهدي، ورجل أفرد الحج ولم يسق، ورجل تمتع بالعمرة إلى الحج.

#### 3-177 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد ابن عيسى، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي، عن مفضل بن صالح عن جابر الجعفي، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الحاج

Prophet (MGB) said, “The Hajj pilgrims can be divided into three groups.
The ones who gain the most benefit from the Hajj are those whose past
and future sins are forgiven, and God safeguards them from the Fire of
Hell. The second group are those whose past sins are forgiven, but are
going to be held responsible for their future actions. The third group
are those whose wealth and children are protected.”

YOU ARE ADMONISHED AGAINST HAVING THREE CHARACTERISTICS
-------------------------------------------------------

3-178 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ali ibn Isa quoted Hammad ibn Isa, who
linked it up through other narrators to Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) that
in his will to his son Muhammad ibn al-Hanifeh, the Commander of the
Faithful Imam Ali (MGB) said, “I admonish you against haughtiness, ill
temperedness and impatience since then you will have no friends and
everyone will avoid you. Try to be kind with people and be patient with
the losses which the people make you suffer. Be generous with your
friends regarding yourself and your wealth. Accept the company of your
friends and associate with them. Be warm and kind to the general public.
Treat your enemy justly. Protect your religion and honor. This is much
better for your religion and worldly life.”

THE COLOR BLACK IS DETESTABLE EXCEPT FOR THREE THINGS
-----------------------------------------------------

3-179 Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that his father Muhammad ibn Yahya quoted on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah al-Barqy, who linked it up through a chain of narrators to Aba
Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) who narrated that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “The
color black is detestable except for three things: for the turban, the
slippers and the garment.”

3-180 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr
al-Bazanty, on the authority of Mufaz’zal ibn Salih, on the authority of
Maysar (ibn Abdul Aziz), on the authority of Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB),
“Should a pilgrim to this House (of God) lack the following three
characteristics his visit shall not be accepted. He is so pious that he
is restrained from rebellion against the Sublime God. He is so patient
that his anger is controlled. He is friendly with his companions.”

BEING A GUEST IS LIMITED TO A MAXIMUM OF THREE DAYS
---------------------------------------------------

3-181 Al-Hussein ibn Ahmad ibn Idris - may God be pleased with him -
narrated that his father quoted Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran

#### ثلاثة فأفضلهم نصيبا رجل غفر له ما تقدم من ذنبه وماتأخر، ووقاه الله عذاب النار، وأما الذي يليه فرجل غفرله ماتقدم من ذنبه ويستأنف العمل فيما بقي من عمره، وأما الذي يليه فرجل حفظ في أهله وماله. {.t0}

##### النهي عن ثلاث خصال

#### 3-178 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن حماد بن عيسى، عمن ذكره، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام في وصيته لابنه محمد بن الحنفية: إياك والعجب، وسوء الخلق، وقلة الصبر، فانه لا يستقيم لك على هذه الخصال الثلاث صاحب، ولا يزال لك عليها من الناس مجانب، وألزم نفسك التودد، وصبر على مؤونات الناس نفسك، وابذل لصديقك نفسك ومالك، ولمعرفتك رفدك ومحضرك، وللعامة بشرك ومحبتك، ولعدوك عدلك وإنصافك، واضنن بدينك وعرضك عن كل أحد، فانه أسلم لدينك ودنياك.

##### يكره السواد الا في ثلاثة أشياء

#### 3-179 حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه، عن أبيه محمد بن يحيى، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي باسناده يرفعه إلى أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: يكره السواد إلا في ثلاثة: العمامة، والخف، والكساء.

##### ما يعبأ بمن يؤم البيت اذا لم يكن فيه ثلاث خصال

#### 3-180 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي قال: حدثني مفضل بن صالح عن ميسر، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال:مايعبأ بمن يؤم هذا البيت إذا لم يكن فيه ثلاث خصال: ورع يحجزه عن معاصي الله تعالى، وحلم يملك به غضبه، وحسن الصحابة لمن صحبه.

##### الضيافة ثلاثة ايام

#### 3-181 حدثنا الحسين بن أحمد بن إدريس رضي الله عنه، عن أبيه، عن محمد ابن أحمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، عن أبي عبد الله الرازي، عن سجـادة واسـمه

al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Aba Abdullah al-Razi, on the authority
of Aba Abdullah al-Razi, on the authority of Sajada (al-Abed) -
al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abi Uthman, on the authority of Vasel, on the
authority of Abdullah ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) that God’s Prophet (MGB) said, “A guest deserves to be
served for one, two or three days at the most. Thereafter, servicing a
guest is a form of charity by the host.” He (MGB) then added, “Do not
stay in your brother’s home so long as to make him commit a sin.” Then
he (MGB) was asked, “How could that be?” The Prophet (MGB) said, “If you
stay there so long that he no longer has anything left to spend for
you.”

THREE THINGS NO MUSLIMS WOULD EVER DOUBT
----------------------------------------

3-182 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah Al-Barqy, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr
al-Bazanty, on the authority of Hammad ibn Uthman, on the authority of
Abdullah ibn Abi Ya'fur that Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “Once
during the Last Pilgrimage to Mecca the Prophet of God (MGB) delivered a
sermon in the Al-Khayf Mosque of Mina. He (MGB) started out by saying
God’s Praises and His Glorifications. Then the Prophet (MGB) added, “May
God assist any servant who hears me, remembers what I say and delivers
it to whoever has not heard it. There are many who utter what they do
not understand, but there are listeners who benefit from what they have
said. There are many knowledgeable ones who state things for people of a
better understanding and they benefit more from what is said. There are
three things which a Muslim’s heart doesn’t doubt: having sincerity in
what you do for the sake of God; being united with the nation’s leaders;
and being associated with the Muslims, since inviting the Muslims
includes anyone who supports them. Muslims are brothers one to another
and their blood is all of the same color. Even the pledge of their
youngest one is binding upon them all. All Muslims are united together
against their enemies.”

THE PROPHET (MGB) SWEARS THAT THREE THINGS ARE JUST
---------------------------------------------------

3-183 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan - may God be pleased with him - narrated
that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Isa, on the authority of Abdullah ibn Muhammad al-Hijal, on the
authority of Nasr al-Attar who linked it up through a chain of narrators
to God’s Prophet (MGB) who told Ali (MGB), “I swear that there are three
things that are just: you and the Trustees after you are the ones who
teach the way to get to know God. No one can get to know God unless he
goes he gets to know you. You are the ones to teach the way to Paradise.
No one can get to go to Paradise unless he gets to know you and you get
to know them. You are the passage to Hell for the residents of Hell. No
one would go to Hell unless he denies you and you deny him.”

#### الحسن بن علي بن أبي عثمان عن واصل، عن عبد الله بن سنان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الضيافة أول يوم حق والثاني والثالث. وما بعد ذلك فانها صدقة تصدق بها عليه، ثم قال عليه السلام: لا ينزلن أحدكم على أخيه حتى يوثمه قيل: يا رسول الله وكيف يوثمه؟ قال: حتى لايكون عنده ما ينفق عليه. {.t0}

##### ثلاث لا يغل عليهن قلب امرء مسلم

#### 3-182 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر البزنطي، عن حماد بن عثمان، عن عبد الله بن أبي يعفور، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: خطب رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله الناس بمنى في حجة الوداع في مسجد الخيف فحمد الله وأثنى عليه، ثم قال: نصر الله عبداسمع مقالتي فوعاها، ثم بلغها إلى من لم يسمعها فرب حامل فقه غير فقيه، ورب حامل فقه إلى من هو أفقه منه، ثلاث لا يغل عليهن قلب امرء مسلم إخلاص العمل لله، والنصيحة لائمة المسلمين، واللزوم لجماعتهم، فان دعوتهم محيطة من ورائهم المسلمون إخوة، تتكافأ دماؤهم، يسعى بذمتهم أدناهم. وهم يد على من سواهم.

##### قول النبي صلى الله عليه وآله ثلاث اقسم انهن حق

#### 3-183 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن عبد الله بن محمد الحجال، عن نصر العطار عمن رفعه باسناده قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله لعلي عليه السلام:ثلاث أقسم أنهن حق: إنك والاوصياء من بعدك عرفاء لا يعرف الله إلا بسبيل معرفتكم، وعرفاء لا يدخل الجنة إلا من عرفكم وعرفتموه، وعرفاء لا يدخل النار إلا من أنكركم وأنكرتموه.

ONE WOULD CONTINUE TO BE REWARDED FOR ONLY THREE THINGS
-------------------------------------------------------

3-184 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Homayry quoted
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob,
on the authority of Ali ibn Re’ab, on the authority of Al-Halabi that
Aba Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “No one would get any added rewards
after he dies unless for three things: an on-going charity which he has
established during his lifetime and is in effect after he dies all the
way up until the Resurrection Day; a public donation left which is not
to be inherited by anyone; a good rule he has established which he
followed and others follow after his demise; and a well-mannered child
who prays for his forgiveness.”

3-185 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Ahmad ibn Idris quoted on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ash’ari, on the authority of Sahl ibn
Zyad, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Hussein ibn
Zayd**[[250]](footnotes_1.htm#b0250)**, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Sin’an, on the authority of Monzar ibn Yazid, on the authority of Abu
Harun al-Makfoof, “Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (MGB) told me, ‘O Aba Harun!
Indeed the Blessed the Sublime God has sworn by Himself not to be
neighbors with treacherous ones.’ I asked, ‘Who would that refer to?’
the Imam (MGB) replied, ‘That refers to anyone who takes even a penny of
a believer’s money for himself or deprives him of worldly things.’ I
said, ‘I seek refuge in God from God’s Wrath!’ Then the Imam (MGB)
added, ‘Indeed the Blessed the Sublime God has sworn by Himself not to
house any of the following three groups in Paradise: those who reject
God’s judgement; those who reject the judgement of a righteous Divine
Leader, and those who disregard a believer’s rights.’ I asked, ‘Should
one give a believer what he has a lot more of than his own needs?’ The
Imam (MGB) replied, ‘One should not hesitate to do anything for him.
Should he hesitate to give him his own self and soul, he is not of his
brethren. Rather he would be of the progeny of Satan.’”

The compiler of the book - may God increase his acknowledgement - said,
“What is meant here by not hesitating to give from one’s self and soul
is to assist him whenever he needs any assistance and to help him to
fulfill his needs.”

THE THREE FIRST FATHERS
-----------------------

3-186 Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid - may God be pleased
with him - narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isma’il, on the
authority of Al-Hassan ibn Zarif, on the authority of Aba Abdul

##### ليس يتبع الرجل بعد موته الا ثلاث خصال

#### 3-184حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن علي بن رئاب، عن الحلبي، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال:ليس يتبع الرجل بعد موته من الاجر إلا ثلاث خصال: صدقة أجراها في حياته فهي تجري بعد موته إلى يوم القيامة صدقة موقوفة لا تورث -، أو سنة هدى سنها فكان يعمل بها، وعمل بها من بعده غيره، أو ولد صالح يستغفر له.

##### لا يسكن الله عز وجل جنته ثلاثة أصناف

#### 3-185 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد بن يحيى بن عمران الاشعري، عن سهل بن زياد، عن محمد بن الحسين بن زيد، عن محمد بن سنان، عن منذر بن يزيد قال: حدثني أبو هارون المكفوف قال: قال لي أبوعبد الله عليه السلام: يا أبا هارون إن الله تبارك وتعالى آلى على نفسه أن لا يجاوره خائن قال: قلت: وما الخائن؟ قال: من ادخر عن مؤمن درهما أو حبس عنه شيئا من أمر الدنيا، قال: أعوذ بالله من غضب الله، فقال: إن الله تبارك وتعالى آلى على نفسه أن لا يسكن جنته أصنافا ثلاثة: راد على الله عز وجل، أو راد على إمام هدى، أو من حبس حق امرء مؤمن، قال: قلت: يعطيه من فضل ما يملك؟ قال: يعطيه من نفسه وروحه، فان بخل عليه مسلم بنفسه فليس منه، إنما هو شرك الشيطان.

#### قال مصنف هذا الكتاب أدام الله تأييده -: الاعطاء من النفس والروح إنما هو بذل الجاة له إذا احتاج إلى معاونته، وهو السعي له في حوائجه.

##### الاباء ثلاثة

#### 3-186 حدثنا محمد بن الحسن بن أحمد بن الوليد رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا محمد بن الحسن الصفار قال: حدثني أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن محمد بن إسماعيل، عن

Rahman, on the authority of Muawiyah ibn Ammar that Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “There are three first fathers: Adam who had a
believing son; John (Yahya) who had both a believing and an infidel son;
and Satan who had an infidel offspring who do not reproduce in the usual
way. They only lay eggs and a new male is produced. There are no females
in their line.”

3-187 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn Aba
Abdullah Al-Barqy, on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Mahboob, on the
authority of Abi Ayoob, on the authority of Abdul-Mumin al-Ansari that
Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (MGB) said, “The Honorable the Exalted God has
granted the believers three characteristics: honor in this world;
prosperity in the Hereafter and grandeur in the hearts of the
oppressors.” Then he (MGB) went on and recited the following verse of
the Holy Quran, ‘…But honour belongs to Allah and His Messenger, and to
the Believers; but the Hypocrites know
not.’**[[251]](footnotes_1.htm#b0251)** And he (MGB) also recited the
following verses, ‘The believers must (eventually) win through,- Those
who humble themselves in their prayers; Who avoid vain talk; Who are
active in deeds of charity; Who abstain from sex, Except with those
joined to them in the marriage bond, or (the captives) whom their right
hands possess,- for (in their case) they are free from blame, But those
whose desires exceed those limits are transgressors;- Those who
faithfully observe their trusts and their covenants; And who (strictly)
guard their prayers;- These will be the heirs, Who will inherit
Paradise: they will dwell therein (for ever). ’

THE BEST THREE THINGS FOR THE BEST THREE TO WISH FOR
----------------------------------------------------

3-188 (The compiler of the book narrated) that his father - may God be
pleased with him - narrated that Sa’ed ibn Abdullah quoted Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Khalid, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Sin’an, on the authority of Ibn Miskan that Aba Abdullah
as-Sadiq (MGB) said, “The misers are the ones most deserving to hope for
everyone else to be rich, since then no one would ask them for anything.
Those with faults are the ones most deserving to hope for everyone else
to be perfect, since then no one else would find faults with them. Those
who are ignorant are the ones most deserving to hope for everyone else
to be patient, since they are the ones most in need of other’s patience
to forgive them. Unfortunately, the misers hope for others to be poor;
the faulty hope for others to be faulty; and the foolish hope for others
to be foolish, while poverty brings about stinginess, faultiness causes
finding faults with others, and foolishness brings about the commitment
of sins.”

#### الحسن بن ظريف، عن أبي عبدالرحمن، عن معاوية بن عمار، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: الآباء ثلاثة: آدم ولد مؤمنا، والجان ولد مؤمنا وكافرا، وإبليس ولد كافرا وليس فيهم نتاج، إنما يبيض ويفرخ، وولده ذكور ليس فيهم إناث. {.t0}

##### اعطي المؤمن ثلاث خصال

#### 3-187 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا أحمد ابن أبي عبد الله البرقي، عن الحسن بن محبوب، عن أبي أيوب، عن عبدالمؤمن الانصاري، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال:إن الله عز وجل أعطى المؤمن ثلاث خصال العزة في الدنيا، والفلح في الآخرة، والمهابة في صدور الظالمين، ثم قرأ "وَلِلَّهِ الْعِزَّةُ وَلِرَسُولِهِ وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ." وقرأ " قَدْ أَفْلَحَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ…" إلى قوله "هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ."

##### أحق الناس بتمني ثلاثة أشياء ثلاثة نفر

#### 3-188 حدثنا أبي رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا سعد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن سنان، عن ابن مسكان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إن أحق الناس أن يتمنى للناس الغنى البخلاء، لان الناس إذا استغنوا كفوا عن أموالهم، وأحق الناس أن يتمنى للناس الصلاح أهل العيوب، لان الناس إذا صلحوا كفوا عن تتبع عيوب الناس،وأحق الناس أن يتمنى للناس الحلم أهل السفه الذين يحتاجون إلى أن يعفى عن سفههم، فأصبح أهل البخل يتمنون فقر الناس، وأصبح أهل العيوب يتمنون معايب الناس، وأصبح أهل السفه يتمنون سفه الناس، وفي الفقر الحاجة إلى البخيل، وفي الفساد طلب عورة أهل العيوب، وفي السفه المكافأة بالذنوب.
