Between Declaring Al-salam & Its Application
============================================

It is important to understand the remote distance between the sincerity
of one who merely declares peace and verbally seeks the same for the
mazur ('the visited one') and one who personifies peace in every
dimension of his being and actively struggles to ensure the same for the
mazur. In fact some of our traditions clearly emphasize the vital role
of the practical application of al-Salam. Look at the following
traditions: 1.Ibn Shahr \`shub narrates in his well-known al-Manaqib
from Anas that he said:

<p dir="rtl">
جَاءَتْ جَارِيَةٌ لِلْحَسَنِ(ع) بِطَاقِ رَيْحَانٍ فَقَالَ لَهَا أَنْتَ
حُرٌّ لِوَجْهِ اللَّهِ فَقِيلَ لَهُ فِي ذَلِكَ فَقَالَ أَدَّبَنَا
اللَّهُ تَعَالَى فَقَالَ إِذا حُيِّيتُمْ الْآيَةَ وَكَانَ أَحْسَنُ
مِنْهَا إِعْتَاقَهَا.
</p>

One of the slave women of Imam al-hasan ('a) came to him with a boquet
of aromatic plants, whereupon the Imam ('a) said to her: You are free
for the sake of Allah. So I asked the Imam ('a) as to why did he free
her, and he said: 'Almighty Allah educated us and said: 'And When you
are greeted with a greeting, greet with a better one than it, or return
it… '[^65] And to let her free is better than her gift.[^66]

Here is an example of how practical Salam can be. Many of us do not
realize this very important point and conjecture that we have earned
ample blessings and reward for our Salams as the holy Qur'an and the
sacred traditions of the Holy Prophet (s) and his infallible progeny
clearly exemplify.

The Holy Qur'an says:

The Holy Prophet (s) is reported to have said:

When one enters his house, he must say salam, for that sends down
blessings and the angels become fond of him.[^67] Should we restrict
these luminant words of guidance to the realm of speech or do they
portray the loftier aspects of the reality of al-Salam ?. In fact if
there is no coherence between what the tongue utters and what the heart
and mind feel and what the actions portray, then how can we claim the
honesty of the musallim (greeter)?

<p dir="rtl">
ياَ اَباَ عَبْدِ اللهِ.
</p>

Ya Aba 'Abdillah

The word 'Ya' is an interjection employed to call the vocative
(munada). In simple terms it is word used to call someone. However,
lexists hold that يا'ya' is employed for a vocative (munada) who is at a
far distance. For example, if we would like to call 'Ali who is at a far
distance, we say ياعلي 'Ya 'Ali!.

The distance considered here was physical and spatial. Lexists however
employ the same when they would like to praise an exalted personality
even if he/she was very near. In fact we also address Almighty Allah Who
is closer to us than our jugular veins as ياالله Ya Allah, because the
Essence of Allah is Infinitely Exalted. In the well-known verse of the
Throne (\`yat al-Kursi) we declare this reality of Allah's Exalted
Essence as:

<p dir="rtl">
وَهُوَ الْعَلِيُّ الْعَظِيْمِ.
</p>

And He Alone is the Extremely Exalted & Great Forever [^68]

In our present situation our vocative and addressee is Imam al-Hussein
('a) who due to his freedom from the limitations of the material world
and comprehensive being is too close to us and can see and hear us too.
Hence the reason why we employ the interjection 'ya and say 'Ya Aba
'Abdillah' is to express his exaltedness and confess our lowliness.

The people of heart, however, can well appreciate the implication
manifested when the 'the lover calls the beloved'. The implication is to
get near to the Beloved. Hence when we call Aba 'Abdillah (whose import,
as we shall soon expound means 'the utterly submissive slave of Allah)
we are seeking his closeness, or in other words 'the attributes that
personifies his exalted being'.

<p dir="rtl">
اَبَا عَبْدِ اللهِ
</p>


Aba 'Abdillah

The words Aba 'Abdillah literally mean 'the father of the submissive
slave of Allah'. Arabs honorify their fellow brothers by calling them
with a kunya (a name that mostly mentions the first or one of the
offsprings of the 'named one'.) Hence if a person had a son called
'Abdullah, he is called Abu 'Abdillah, which means 'father of
'Abdullah'. In fact one of our traditions indicates that it is better to
call someone by his offspring's name in front of him than to use his
real name. Imam al-Riza ('a) is reported to have said:

<p dir="rtl">
إذَا ذَكَرْتَ الرَّجُلَ وَهُوَ حَاضِرٌ فَكَنِّهِ وَإِذَا كَانَ غائباً
فسَمِّهِ.
</p>

If you mention a man in his presence, then do so using his agnomen
(kunya), and if he were to be absent, then call him by his name.[^69] One
of the variable reasons given behind the Imam ('a) being called Abu
'Abdillah is that he had an offpring called 'Abdullah, famously known
الرضيع al-radi' (one who is still breastfeeding). He is one of the
members of the Imam's noble family who was mercilessly martyred in the
plains of Karbala. In the well-known Ziyarat al-Nahiya al-Muqaddasah we
say:

<p dir="rtl">
السّلام عَلى عَبْدِ اللهِ بن الحسين الطفل الرَّضِيْعِ...
</p>

Perpetual peace be unto 'Abdillah, the one who was still breastfeeding
[^70]

<p dir="rtl">
اَبَا عَبْدِ اللهِ
</p>

Aba 'Abdillah

Sometimes however, someone is attributed with an agnomen (kunyah) not
because he is the father of so and so, but because he enjoys a certain
quality. For example, one who is well known for his open-handedness and
generosity is called Abu Jawad. In this context, a number of
commentators of this exalted ziyarah, opine that one of the reasons why
the holy Imam ('a) was given the agnomen Abu 'Abdillah was his extreme
submissiveness to Allah. In other words, he was the true servant of
Allah.

Traditions indicate that Imam al-Hussein ('a) was given the agnomen
after his birth by Almighty Allah himself through the revelation of the
Arch Angel Gabriel, which subtly alludes to the submissive state of Imam
('a) ever since his birth:


