1- Teach the Child To Think
===========================

The sports teacher is asking the boy if he would like to join the
school sports. The boy curves his lips into an uncertain shy smile as he
turns to his father who promptly obliges with a reply: "yes; certainly
yes". The teacher is now asking the boy direct- ly what sports he is
fancying and the boy again turns to his father with the repetition of
that clumsy smile on his face. The father replies:

"Cricket. Yes, he should like it". The teacher is asking the boy:
"Which team"? And the father replies: "The Green". The teacher now turns
to the father and inquires if cricket is the boy's own choice because it
requires a good deal of learning and practicing and that meant also
thinking………by him!

As the couple were leaving the sports ground, the father wished there
was someone to assure him that the teacher was not rude to him, and that
someone could only be the boy who had heard the teacher's last remark in
the conversation, but then he sighed - if only the boy was thinking the
same thing! No, the boy was not because he was not let to do thinking.
He was affectionately being protected from making wrong decisions by not
letting him make any decisions.

Teach the child the practice of thinking. Once the practice is
mastered, he will then do more than thinking. He will learn and want to
reflect and ponder "naturally" which is not always normal with all
adults! No wonder, Islam wants the believers to exercise the
independence of mind in order to cultivate conviction about Truth
(Haq).

The Qur'an compares those who do not think as worse than the vilest of
animals. "Surely, the vilest of animals in Allah's sight, are the deaf,
the dumb who do not think". (8:22). With the practice of thinking
rooted, the mind will be prone to critical scrutiny:

and independent judgment. Such mind will not easily be susceptible to
the out- side or alien influence especially in the present age of
electronic media which is employed to control the mind of the viewers
and manipulate "public opinion" to suit the establishments with vested
interests. With mind shielded, values remain intact and decisions pop up
prompt and sound.

In Two Hands.

With the rein of mind tight in one's own two hands, the child when
adult, will not waver or be fickle in making important decisions
judiciously. He will not borrow for himself decisions from others who
can never put themselves squarely in his place; will never take refuge
in the false safety of a status quo and leave matters unresolved simply
because to him, to take the initiative of making decision is to
gamble.

The passage of this life is punctuated with problems. When a problem is
born approach it to dictate your terms before it grows big enough to
approach you and dictate its terms while looking down on you with your
back to the wall. But that calls for an immediate and bold
decision-making capacity. Good many people lack it because they as
children were not allowed to build it up. They were not taught to
think.

So engage the child in the exercise of decision-making on matters that
concern him, though he should fully know that the final decision is the
parents'. Would he prefer a school bus with a larger seating capacity or
smaller and why? A lunch box to the school or money for purchase from
the school canteen and why? Should he choose a desk right in front
tomorrow when he. with other students, moves to a promoted class? Would
he want his bed placed this way or that? These are only examples and
there arise a number of occasions for such decision-making.

Result Is Stupendous.

The result is stupendous in terms of fast thinking and self-confidence.
The parents will often find the child coming up with certain requests in
which there are options and he had already considered all of them and
preferred one with ready reasons, even if the reasons are weak or bad.
This is true as the child grows up.

A child so trained, when faced with a proposal from his teenage friends
for a leisure programme out, which does not seem quite alright, will
say: "No" on his own authority instead of the meek: "No, my parents will
not approve of it".

The exercise will naturally include the situations where the child will
consider also the economic options with a view to saving money. This is
because in the course of the engagement in the exercise of reasoning and
decision-making the issue of money will be surfacing and he will have
learnt in some degrees the discipline in money management.

A child who has not been raised to think and therefore, to do reasoning
invites emotions to help and fill the gap. As adult, he is likely to
make worse decisions for himself more through emotions than reasoning.
The road to hell in this life is paved with emotional decisions!


**2- Treat the Child as an Adult
**
A child on his first day in the school leaves his desk, walks to his
class teacher and whispers to her something which she fails to
understand until later. The child was using that funny word which was
coined for him by the parents for "toilet" since he was a toddler.

Perhaps the child even at the schooling age was still being soothed to
sleep with the lullaby songs! He was not let to grow up mentally also.
It is a real problem facing the child if he is the only child in the
family.

Talk to the child -almost - as you would to an adult. Do not
under-estimate his grasping power. Even if. his grasping level "seems"
low, this approach will trigger it up. It will develop at a greater
pace.

When the child inquires. as he would often do as any inquisitive child,
about the natural phenomena or historical events or a simmering
political issue or a debate raging among adults on a social or communal
issue or any aspect of Islam, do not ignore him believing that they are
beyond his grasp; nor provide a cursory or simplistic explanation to
reveal that you find him not worthy for a full and sincere answer.

By doing so, you will be impressing upon him quite disastrously that he
is mentally too far behind for this "information" or that the subjects
inquired are the exclusive purview of the adults and that he should not
be trespassing such mental domains of "others". When the child catches
up as an adult, he will be having too many other new and intimate things
to inquire and know about and. perhaps not any more those that he had
asked about and was spurned. Is it wonder therefore, that we have among
us adults who have shallow or no knowledge about the causes of the
natural phenomena!

like earthquake, volcano, eclipse, lunar vis a vis solar calendars or
the two world wars or slavery or the origin of his sect, etc. An
inquisitive mind of a child is also retentive. It is a different mind
when he is later in a primary school.

Never ask the child to leave the adults' company in the lounge and go
to his room when visitors have arrived on a courtesy call or a social
visit. On the contrary, grab the opportunity by asking him to leave the
recluse of his room and join the group. The purpose is manifold and the
results diverse. Develops Personality.

Let the child witness and learn what the adults talk about and how they
talk or argue. He will find that they do not interject, they do not all
talk at the same time. they do not raise their voice, they do not swear.
In fact the child may find that the behaviour of the visitor or visitors
is refined and polished as compared to that of his parents! Do not fail
to introduce him to the visitors if they are meeting him for the first
time.

This gives him a self-confidence and with it, develops his personality.
His presence in the adult group will create in him an appetite for
adult-subjects. In the course of talk, create a suitable opportunity of
raising a subject of the child's interest, like his studies, school,
madrassa, sports and ask him for a latest information in order to join
him in the talk of the group and break the ice.

Or ask him for information which will be of interest to the visitors
and which you know he has. like: "what do we have for our guests -hot or
cold"? or "I forgot, who preached last Thursday"? or "What was the
subject of the preaching"? In fact there can be a number of likely
current and pertinent information that the child can be asked. The
psychological effect is startling. He will perceive himself a
knowledgeable part of the, adult group. But at the same time do not
detain him longer if the visitors are boring f or the anchor types!

The typical child's shyness will evaporate paving way for the in-flow
of self,-confidence. The child on approaching the youth age is most
likely to engage in matured conversation on his own right with the
adults who are a generation or two ahead. He will have broaden his
horizon and enhanced his vision of what the world is all about and
tailor his social inter-action accordingly ahead of his age.

How disturbing instead to find some parents still using that funny word
coined for "wash-room" for the child when he was a toddler! The child is
not allowed to grow mentally.

Live on Wits. The whole purpose is to prepare the child mentally for
the responsibilities of the earthly life and spiritual obligations much
earlier while others of his age are behind and in the hard way of
self-preparation -so that he fares better. Remember, this is a cold
cruel world after all. Those who live on the wits of certainties and
self-confidence survive better than those on the vicissitudes of
chances.

In about the year 1954 a public meeting was convened for the purpose of
forming a Tenants Association and seeking legislation to protect the
interest of the tenants.

When a reporter asked why a young boy of about 22 was elected to the
responsible I post of the Secretary, the Chairman of about 60 replied
that the boy too came for- ward and spoke his mind seeing himself equal
to those elderly who spoke their mind; and that they all being equal,
the big difference in his age was the plus point for his unopposed
election!

According to the holy Qur'an, one earns according to what one struggles
for. "And that man shall have nothing but what he strives for"(53:39).
Age is not a barrier. Parents should steer and set the child onto the
fields of struggle. Taqwa is a crucial one among such fields: "And
whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it as he ought to strive
and he is a believer; (as for) these, their striving shall surely be
accepted. " (17: 19).

It is reported that in a community of boat people somewhere in a Far
East jungle, children are let into the water and learn to float, like
adults, even before they can walk!


