19-slip of Expletives in Conversation - As a Habit
==================================================

An agent who was supplying certain brands of goods on credit to his
clients based in the interior towns during the colonial rule found that
he could no longer do so. The company which was the sole importer of the
popular brands had cancelled the arrangement for sales on credit to the
agent. The reason was a misunderstanding with the clerical staff of the
company for which the agent was not to blame. The Sales Manager was a
son of the Managing Director of the family-company. He would not see the
agent who was anxious to clear the misunderstanding.

There was a distinct fear that the agent would lose his clients to
other agents. He therefore confided his problem to a friend with a
request that the friend talks to the Manager.

As the friend did not know the Manager personally, he first made some
discreet inquiries about him. He learnt that the Manager was a graduate,
made decisions on behalf of the Managing Director and was keeping
extremely busy during the office hours. He often referred his visitors
whom he did not know to his subordinates. A call at his residence after
the dinnertime was likely to result in an opportunity of a meeting with
him. It did.

Apologetic Approach.

The pompous set up of the lounge where the agent and his friend were
seated added to the already intimidating atmosphere under which they
were to explain the misunderstanding. Both had decided earlier that
their approach to the subject would be meek and apologetic.

The formal introduction was interrupted by a telephone call to the
Manager, followed by one more after a short interval. It was obvious
that one call was of a business nature involving some hard bargaining
and the other from a friend enthusing the Manager in a friendly jovial
conversation. However, on both occasions of the telephone conversation,
the language of the Manager was punctuated now and then by the slip of
expletives (foul words) from his mouth obviously as a habit -apparently
without his being even aware of the slip. Encounter And Not Entreaty.
.

Suddenly and strangely enough, the haunting effect of the previous
intimidation on the friend disappeared. He gained a sense of
superiority. Encounter instead of entreaty became the impulsive key to
the opening of the talk by the friend when they came down to it.

The weaknesses of the staff in the Sales Department were pointed out to
the Manager without fear. All this was said firmly, however in a
language which was decent and respectful when it came to choice of
words, in contrast to the language used by the Manager in his telephones
conversation. The encounter paid off through the sense of superiority.

The habit of uncontrollable slips of expletives is a liability. A host
of such a loathsome habit can never be also a host of a refined and
polished or a commanding personality' however educated or rich or both
he may be. Such persons are seen small. This habit begins either in
childhood at home by the child seeing his father deeply smirched in a
similar habit or through his bad company of friends in the school or
sports ground while the parents fail to nip it in the bud when it begins
to show up at home. Equally Worse.

There is also a culture, equally worse, of a liberal use of slang words
or phrases I which wrongly appear to be figurative. They are in common
use without the awareness that they can also convey obscene meanings.

Children when adult will be judged also not by who or whose sons they
are but by their habitual language. However, those who drop expletives
by an uncontrollable habit as they speak are not worthy of even being
judged. They fare poorly in a society where the road to recognition,
credibility, matrimony and trust is paved with ethics. A respectable
language is part of ethics. :

c ,~. Watch a disorganised group of boys playing at an open space in a
residential area I during a weekend or a school holiday. Often a quarrel
erupts in the Course of the rivalry in a sports game. Note that while
almost all would shout at one another in heated arguments, only a few
would be seen dragging the arguments later into an exchange of a foul
language if the quarrel remained unresolved and the rest would begin
only to look on in silence with some embarrassment. They are different.
They are culturally not orphaned.

Now if the difference seen in the example of the behaviour among the
boys is bad, it will be much worse if the behaviour is allowed to take
roots as the boys grow up as adults. There will always be a price for
the lack of a polished personality however high their station of life.
The price is bigger if the station of life is low.


**20- Foster Charitable Nature in the Child**

A poor widow went to someone's house for a small financial aid. She was
known to the family; and that was not her first visit. However, on this
occasion her small daughter was with her.

A child of the family slightly older than the visitor's daughter
immediately collected his junk of toys and brought them forth to show to
the other child and play them with her. She took great fancy in one
particular piece of his toys. It was not in a good shape though and
should have been thrown away long before. However, the child retrieved
his toy from her hand as the widow stood up to leave with her.

The widow's daughter behaved normally as a small child who craves for
toys and so did the other child who wants to cling to his. However, the
miserly possessiveness of the child in the family was normal only
because the parents had failed to do what was normal on their part: -to
teach him being charitable. He therefore would not let the toy go when
asked for by anyone of his age or told to do so by the parents.

He would however abandon it later with little interest in it -in this
case, after the orphan had left. Sadakaat (giving alms and charity) even
under difficult circumstances is a sign of nobility of a family. It is
also believed to be a good divine shield against impending calamities.
It averts calamities by divine grace without one being aware that they"
were imminent.

When Old and Infirm.

The parents therefore should foster in their child the habit or
character of being charitable and generous. They too will reap its
benefits from the child when he is adult because, if he has been raised
to be compassionate and generous to others, he would be more so to his
parents when they are old and infirm -and perhaps needy also.

There are instead some sad, examples of children witnessing their
parents driving away the seekers of alms or charity without offering
any, or humiliating them while giving it when the holy Qur'an forbids
this. "And as for him who asks, do not chide (him). (93: 10). The
Qur'anic word for "chide" in the verse is "tanhar" which is strong for
admonition as used In the verse 17:23 with regard to scolding aged
parents.

The child can be rooted in the nature of giving charity generously by
their own parents setting examples for emulation, and explaining to him
its obligations as " a duty ordained by Allah " (9:60), and its
spiritual benefits.

The child should be allowed to hold certain small amounts of money for
regular sadakaat under the supervision of the parents. Certain cases of
sadakaat can be arranged through the hands of the child physically. A
child belongs to where his child- hood memories linger. Giving sadakaat
becomes a part of his memories linking his parents after they are
deceased. Portions However Small.

When making donations to charitable or religious institutions, some
portions, how- ever small, of the donations are paid in the name of the
child and the receipts in his name are handed over to him. He may want
to show them off to his friends or the children in the neighbourhood in
the beginning when this tradition is first put into practice.

A conducive environment cannot be created for the child to learn to be
charitable if it is a tradition of the family to be charitable to others
generally but absolutely not to their house-servants, whose welfare is
the religious responsibility of the employer. A portrayal of such an
inexplicable contradiction to the child undermines the effect of the
whole exercise.

A worse example for the child is to see one parent reproving the other
for giving alms or meeting the needs of others in charity. Even still
worse as an example is for a parent to stereotype (generalise) alms
seekers as pretenders or fake or raise doubts about their eligibility
for alms.

A person who stretches out his hands for charity or financial aid is
already a victim of a humiliating loss of self-respect, The holy Prophet
wants us not to suffer him a further humiliation by spurning those
hands. The child will surely ponder positively if the parents are
charitable enough to him to explain the strings of humiliation suffered
by the needy -to cultivate sympathy for them, Allah's Wrath.

The holy Qur'an is eloquent about Allah's wrath against those who are
miserly, as shown by the following few verses out of other similar
verses:

"They who taunt those of the faithful who give their alms freely, and
those who give to the extent of their earnings, and scoff at them, Allah
will pay them back their scoffing, and they shall have a painful
chastisement" (9: 79),

"And as for him who is niggardly and considers himself free from need
(of Allah); And rejects the best, We will facilitate for him the
difficult end; And his wealth will not avail him when he perishes, (92 :
8,9, 10, 11 ) "And let not those who are niggardly in giving away that
which Allah has granted them out of His grace, deem that it is good for
them; nay, it is worse for them they shall have that whereof they were
niggardly made to cleave to their necks on the resurrection day""",â€¦,"
(3:180) "Those who are niggardly and bid people to be niggardly and hide
what Allah has i given them out of His grace; and We have prepared for
the unbelievers a disgraceful chastisement" (4:37) .

'Behold! you are those who are called upon to spend in Allah's way, but
among you I are those who are niggardly, and whoever is niggardly is
niggardly against his own soul;" (47:38),

Not teaching or wanting to teach their children to be charitable itself
is a sign of miserly (bukhal) on the part of the parents, There are said
to be those in whose proverbial dictionary the word "give" does not
exist while the word "take" is repetitive. If one of them, having fallen
from a roving boat, has to be rescued from drowning, the effective
pleading to him is not: "quick! ! 'give' me your hand" but: "take" my
hand" for his own successful rescue!

Equally important is to reach the child, by setting examples, the
Islamic values of the maintenances of cordial relation with the
relatives, especially those with lesser means despite being at odds
periodically, all the context of benevolence and generosity. Such a
relation often pays off handsomely in one's lifetime in this world also.
Allah swt makes the relatives the cause or agency for the grant of His
grace.


