21- Childhood Nickname Can Stunt Personality
============================================

A girl

confided to her friend that a proposal for her marriage had 'been
received by her parents and that she was yet to be consulted before a
decision was made. After congratulating her for the matrimonial
prospects, the friend inquired the name of the suitor and then burst
into a hilarious laughter when it was given to her much to the
embarrassment of the girl.

The boy appeared to be popularly known by a funny nickname which was
attached to his name.

There was nothing that the boy could do about it. It stuck firmly as if
it was stated in his Birth Certificate. The girl could not fancy herself
being known in the community as Mrs. of the husband bearing that funny
nickname. Her children too who were to follow from the marriage and
would include daughters would suffer bearing that funny surname!

Strangely the girl's dislike welled up in her for any boy with that
nickname when she had not even known or met the boy yet. It would
however be silly on her part to give to her parents that silly nickname
as the not-very-silly reason for her refusal of the proposal.

Later when the couple met according to the arrangements made by the
parents for each to assess each other's liking, she felt, or she thought
that she felt. much to her relief, that she did not like him after all,
as she had prayed even before having seen him, though to all others in
the family he was a suitable young suitor with an average likeable
stature and complexion, apart from his other good merits. She tried hard
not to link her dislike of his fair appearance to his funny nickname.

How should the parents of the girl handle the refusal of their daughter
when they take her decision as sincere though surprisingly a wrong one
with regard to such a goodproposal?

Life-long Torture.

The practice of slapping nick-names, though demeaning, is not uncommon
in any community. However, nicknames which are funny or outright
abhorrent are a life-long torture for the victims (bearers) unless they
choose to resign to them in order to get on with their lives. That would
mean accepting and answering to the nick-names when called or
addressed.

Some of the nick-names are the type which is so derogatory that one
would hesitate to repeat, in order to clear the doubt, when the bearers
introduce themselves by their nicknames. Strangely enough" a fair number
of cases of nick-naming originate at home.

One common example is of a tradition which perhaps still exists. The
grandfather or an elderly person in the family fondly allots nicknames
to the small children in the family, such as would befit their
appearance, complexion or other physical peculiarities. They then become
known in the family more by such names, however funny or embarrassing
these may happen to be, than by their real names, and later on in the
community also during their adult life. Such a nickname is likely to
become later in the life a Substitute for the family-surname also or
attached to the surname for the victims and also for their Children to
be borne.

There is yet one more example. Some older children, in rare cases, have
a temporary weakness of bed-wetting. There is a tendency of the parents
slapping a pertinent nickname to such a child in the false assumption
that it will humiliate him and therefore deter bed-wetting. Instead of
sympathising for the weakness, the child is humiliated, as intended, and
agonised further only to prolong the weakness. What is Worse, however,
is that the nickname assumes permanency even after the weakness has
disappeared.

The holy Prophet said: "Give good names to the children". There are
cases where this advice is followed rightly only to be Spurned rudely by
supplanting the very good name with a nickname often by no other than
the parents themselves.

Odd Exception.

A person with an abhorrent nickname sees himself as an odd exception
with regard to his social status. He has the nagging feeling of having
been debased and made odd in the society. It nags him as a slur on his
personality. "i.e however resigns to it because he finds that there is
nothing else he can do about. To resist it is to intensify its agony.

No wonder that the holy Qur'an has specifically prohibited calling
others by nick- names in the verse 49;11; "0 you who believe! and do not
find fault with your own people nor call one another by nicknames; evil
is a bad name after faith, and whoever does not turn (lamm yatub), these
it is that are the unjust". A person is therefore deemed to be sinfully
wronged each time he is addressed or referred to by a nickname which
offends him.

As nick-naming is common in a society which chooses to tolerate the
practice, children have to be taught to be alert not to attract or fall
for it. It is a constant exercise of caution and tact. To ignore a
nickname when it is given is being wise, while to, respond to it is
being stupid. To show anger amounts to offering oneself as a source of
fun to other children and is a guarantee for the nickname to remain
stuck for life-time. There are examples of deceaseds being identified by
their names with-nick- names on the grave's head-stone.

The advice to the parents therefore is not to allow nicknaming at home.
They should also brief the child how to be circumspect to ward off any
such a possibility outside the home; and how to ignore and defeat a
start of any nickname. More importantly, the parents should instruct the
child not to call others by their nicknames.

The extended family should also avoid giving cousins similar names
under a common surname. When a similarity of names exists in a local
community, one child is then distinguished from the other by a
nickname.


**22- Disciplinarian Parents on the Wrong Footing**

Arguments between father and son are not uncommon in a family. However,
on one such occasion this argument between a father and his adolescent
son was more energetic. The energy was in the form of more 'heat' to
intensify the argument than ht' to pacify it. The argument came to an
abrupt stop when the son suddenly blurted: "You have always showed a
dislike for me - more when I was a child".

The father later questioned the mother of the son whether he was not
affectionate ugh to their son when a child, to buy him things he wanted
by stretching his own limited means, - and whether he did not generally
act as a good father to the son during his childhood.

And then the father asked a very pertinent question: Was he not a good
disciplinarian father out of affection for his child? "Disciplinarian"
he was, but the attempt was discipline not the child but also the nature
in the child over which the child himself j no control, and therefore
the affection for the child was seen by the child as a like for him.
Bundle Of Energy.

A child gains and therefore expends the physical energy more than the
mental one. is virtually a bursting bundle of physical energy. He cannot
keep himself still for I long period of time. When he wants to walk, he
finds himself running. He would instead of walking briskly to the
refrigerator for a can of juice. He would sprint ahead and then wait for
his parents to catch up with him when they all stroll together- in the
street. Even in the state of sleep, the child shows his bursting energy.
He changes his sides quickly flinging his limbs in the process in his
sleep.

While on a pilgrimage, watch the young children who join their parents
in the congregation of salaat-al-sub'h in the haram of Mecca or Medina
when the recitation from the Qur'an during Qiyaam is long. They, though
young for the obligatory prayers, but being from the foreign countries,
join the parents in the prayers. Their hands and legs cannot remain
still while the long recitation from the Qur'an continues. With some
there are also sudden body-jerks as if caused by a prick of a pin. This
is a typical nature of a child; a healthy one.

I Now what can be more hateful to the child than to be made to sit
still and quiet in a corner as a punishment or for want of silence in
the house while the father is entertaining visitors or quietly engaged
in reading news-papers. The father even forgets for some moments the
restraint which he has imposed on the child.

How unkind it is to the child when he is made to sit erect on a chair
with his eyes glued boringly into a book while he can hear his friends,
among the children in the neighbourhood, expending their extra energy by
playing in the backyard of the house, and he is normally with them as
usual at that time of the day or week- end.

Dictates Of His Nature.

,Why should the child be subjected to sitting still and quiet for even
half an hour when his productive concentration even in a lively class in
the school is not that much long, and for good reason. A child may be
watching his favourite programme of sports on the TV, and yet, despite
his intense engrossment, he would suddenly stand up and go through a
solo motion of imitating the players in short spells of
energy-releasing- stunts, only to sit back and resume watching the
programme. Here is a healthy child responding to the dictates of the
nature in him while the parents want to discipline him against that
nature.

When the parents choose to be disciplinarian on the wrong footing, the
likely reaction from the child can be either to rebel against any such
measures of discipline which militate against a child's nature or to
tolerate the measures only to misconstrue, " them as the parents'
dislike or indeed hatred for the child. Both are an unhealthy way of
manifesting parental concern or affection. The memory keeps lingering
when the childhood experiences are emotionally unpleasant.

One more caution. Engaging the child in long sessions of prayers
regularly with adults or like them is most likely' to develop in him a
dislike for the prayers while the intention for such engagement is to
make him to like the prayers. The reason for this is no different from
what has been discussed hereinabove.

So when the child is heard jumping noisily under the shower while also
shouting and splashing in the bath- room, bring on the face not a frown
in silent protest of his heady behaviour. but a broad smile in silent
acknowledgment of his healthy behaviour.

Of course, the expression on the face can be anything but smiling when
or if the behaviour exceeds the acceptable norm of a child's nature. And
that is when the disciplinarian parents are on the right footing with
their disciplining to earn the child' respect and not hatred!

To each of us, childhood isn't a matter of moments but memories. , '


