25- the Child and His World of Fantasy
======================================

The married son with a child was more than happy with his employment in
a prestigious international company. The position, the salary. the
fringe benefits and the annual increments were all enviable until that
morning when he learnt that the senior position above him was to fall
vacant and someone younger from another branch was to fill it because
according to the rules that position was for a university graduate. He
was not a graduate.

The son informed his parents of his decision to quit his employment. He
would work and prosper in employment elsewhere. Yes. And he would rise
through successive promotions and reach a position even much
higher -that of the Chief Executive -and they would be proud of his
successes; of course, his modest basic education notwithstanding .

The son's fantasy of the successes awaiting him despite the reality on
the ground indicating to the contrary reminded the parents of similar
refuge in fantasy to which the son would resort when he was a boy. .

Fantasy of Successes.

As one past example: the administrators of a Youth Sports Complex would
not I include the boy in any of the sports teams for a league
competition that season, I because of his lack of minimum hours of prior
practice according to the established I rules. He declined the offer of
inclusion in parallel friendly games outside the com- petition. Instead
he chose to confront the administrators on the rules assuring his
parents of what appeared to them a mere fantasy of predictions of his
successful confrontation. He lost both. the fight in the confrontation
and a participation in that season.

We can understand when a child makes a visitation to his world of
fantasy by applying more fantasy than hard reasoning in the attempt to
solve his problems or achieve his aspirations because at that age his
ability to grasp the reality on the ground is limited and his past
experiences are almost none.

It is therefore normal for children also to fantasies themselves in the
roles of their heroes and see themselves able to perform even better
than them -to the extent that the feats fancied are superhuman.

Fanciful Dreams.

It is normal for a child also to talk (or bag) about his fanciful
dreams of what he wants to be or do then or when he is grown up. Their
dreams have no or little relation to the hard reasoning or the practical
aspects of life.

However. parents should not commit the mistake of laughing off the
child's fanciful dreams as a normal passage of a phase of childhood. if
the child continues with the luxury of fantasy as he grows up or is
found gaining more and more comfort by taking a refuge in his world of
fantasy.

The child will be aspiring for more than what is practical or indeed.
praise-worthy, within his "normal" ability. Upon failing to advance
towards his fanciful aspirations. he will create yet one more world of
his own for refuge and that is the one of self-pity. Realm of
Reasoning.

Children should be seen making lesser and lesser visitations to their
world of fantasies and more and more to the realm of reasoning as they
grow up and begin to realise that when facts cannot be changed. the
attitude has to be changed. A refuge in a world of fantasy while waiting
for the facts to change is an unhealthy trait.

Sadly. there are those among children who. instead of growing out of
the fantasy- visitation grow up with the habit of taking a refuge in
fanciful planning devoid of reasoning. This is because they would not
want to accept facts over which they have no control nor change their
attitude over which they have control. However. this weakness varies in
degrees from person to person.

There was this guest who got busy pouring out his frustration to the
host at the Arrival Reception of the Airport. He said he was late in
checking out because there were the health. immigration and customs
procedures to comply with. And that was not all. There were the baggage
to identify and collect! He did not say that all other passengers were
doing the same and many were still behind in the queue. He had a cause
for the frustration because he had fancied coming across different facts
or changing them, at least for himself in his travel.

No person need be a victim of having to create a fanciful substitute
world of his own to overcome the vicissitudes of the real world, and
fail worse.

What is required is that he is impressed since his childhood that there
is a better and eternal world to look forward to much better than the
human fantasy can conjure or conceive. He will understand the purpose of
this transient world and accept that it is attendant with test,
tribulation and tears. He will bring himself much nearer to knowing
Islam and transit himself with a comfortable conviction. He will be a
contented man with his priorities right whatever the reality on the
ground may confront him.


**26- The Child's "Books & Buddies"**

A parent on meeting his next door neighbour, also a parent, in a
communal corridor of the same building thanked him profusely for
devoting some of his leisure time to coaching his child also together
with his own in school lessons after the dinner time. He was pleased
that his child had been showing great improvement in his school work
since his regular visits to the neighbour's apartment.

The neighbour, surprised and also embarrassed, replied that it was
hardly a bother to him to let both the children talk to him about their
work and marks as he cursorily browsed through the pages of their
exercise books and then gave them back with a word or two of
compliments. It did not take him more than five minutes for each of
them.

The neighbour added that he wished he had more time to spare for the
children but then he brought the shop-accounts home for daily posting.
These kept him busy till bedtime.

The visits started when the child found that the neighbour's child
regularly showed to his father his school work and "talked" his marks of
the day with him while his own father showed no similar interest
whenever he wanted to talk his work with him. His father did not want to
be disturbed when he was watching TV programmes which ended when the
child was already fast asleep. So the neighbour's child was moved by
sympathy and made an offer: "Why don't you come over to my place and you
too show your work to my Dad"? A Word of Compliment.

Regular interest of the parents in the child's work at least by mere
inspection of his books for a few minutes serves as a great boost to the
child's confidence and efforts to do well in the school. A word of
compliment costs nothing but would save a good deal of costs if the
child. so complimented, completed his studies sooner and with higher
ranks.

There will continue to be TV programmes. if that is the lasting
interest of the father, when he is old and cared for by the son when
adult. The son will have become financially fairly settled, through good
education, to facilitate this leisure for his father.

If the importance of inspection of the school books of the child can be
appreciated so should the importance of investigation of the buddies
(close friends) of the child. The importance of the two is linked for a
successful completion of the child's education.

It is the bad buddies more than the good ones who can cast a greater
influence on the child. Their companionship serves as a source of
encouragement or prodding for all that, which is restrained or
restricted by the parents; it is therefore, attractive to the child. The
examples are an unbridled liberty of movement and loafing about,
truancy, relaxation in the discipline, unruly "group behaviour" in the
streets and other public places, and. worse still, immoral
inclination.

What is even more attractive to that child who is well under
disciplinary control at home and apparently worthy of the parents' trust
is the sense of sharing secrets among the friends and loyalty to each
other with regard to their secrets of misbehaviour outside home.
Collective Adventurism.

In fact, children are tempted to misbehave among their friends out of
collective adventurism for its sake. The adventure of sailing across the
previously unchartered waters of the excitement of permissiveness in a
group. all urging one another to paddle on, is the greater pull than the
products of the adventure. And yet the products can include serious
addictions which hook some of the children to ruin their prospects for
good education and ethics.

It is such an alluring spectrum of friendship which poses the risk of
the child's obedience to his parents to become eroded and subordinated
or tampered by his collective loyalty with other children to their peers
among the friends.

The child may be uncomfortably unwell or indisposed. He would however
not reveal his state of health to his parents for fear of being grounded
at home and missing seeing his friends; or he would still slip out to
meet them against the instruction of the parents which was to take rest.
Parents should have a cause for concern and begin a discreet
investigation if the child's attachment and loyalty to his group of
friends are disproportionately this much excessive.

To have friends and want to be with them almost regularly is not only
normal but also healthy for the child. However, this normalcy imposes a
great responsibility upon the parents. It is essential therefore that
the parents keep a track of the movements and behaviour of the child
outside the home.

They should get to knowing closely his friends individually by inviting
them home and maintaining regular contact with them through the child to
the extent that the parents should also show some interest in knowing
their performances and conduct in the school so as to be reassured and
relieved regarding the caliber of the child's close companions.

What is more important is for the child to be made aware of the
"temporary" phase of the temptation for the adventurism which is
attendant with the risks of the child acquiring certain "permanent"
addictions in result.


