3- Allow the Child To Speak
===========================

A prisoner misbehaving in the prison is sometimes punished by a
confinement in a solitary cell. Sometimes the prisoner shouts to satisfy
himself that he spoke. at least to the wall.

The human ability to speak is the Creator's blessing. To be able to
speak in as many languages as possible is even a greater blessing. To
prevent a person from speaking at all or for a period of time is an
emotional agony. It is for this reason that a patient who is in a coma
is more likely to show an eager sign of some slight response temporarily
when spoken to repeatedly.

Do you allow your child to speak?

Speak? Indeed he does -loud and clear -and perhaps. at times.
Incessantly; but not in as many languages as his parents speak or his
grand-parents spoke. And there can be no valid reasons for it except
that the parents never thought about the importance of the tradition of
teaching the child all the family-languages as a resplendent string of a
family-legacy.

It is said that a child can acquire the ability to speak up to seven
languages by the age of nine if he is faced with the necessity of
communicating in those languages for this daily needs -such is the
natural propensity or aptitude for languages in a child - while he is a
child -and this is by the divine design of the Creator not without a
purpose. Examples of four languages are not rare yet in certain
communities in East Africa. What does the holy Qur'an reveal to us about
this?

"And one of His signs is the creation of the heaven and the earth and
the diversity of your tongues and colours; most surely there are signs
in this for the learned"(30:22)

Legacy of Languages.

There are other communities too across the world who speak more than
one language, - three or four. This comes about because the parents and
teachers in the communities speak with the children in the languages
which the parents know. The result is a legacy of languages in the
family not for the sake of it, but for ensuring that the children, who
will later find themselves in their life on their own, are well equipped
for a competitive and gainful interaction in the human society. Speaking
more than one language is a social accomplishment.

The slaves on their transportation across the Atlantic were laid down
flat and chained together in the tiered bunks like tinned salmon (fish).
They had to be brought up onto the upper deck of the ship periodically
for a short spell of the essential sunshine and physical exercise. The
only possible weapon they could have and of which the captain and the
crew were afraid was the knowledge of more than one tribal language
among the slaves. They were shipped in such groups as would comprise
them of different tribes speaking one different language so as to daunt
any attempt of staging a mutiny with the precision planning and timing.
This was because communication is power; the more the language-media for
it, the stronger the base of this power.

Language As an Asset.

For a person speaking more languages is a socio-cultural asset with
economic dimensions. Every language is a worthy component of the asset.
This asset is enviable by those who as a community or a nation speak
only one language - generation after generation.

To let the child gain the asset during the period of early childhood is
within the control of the parents who themselves have so gained. When
the period of childhood is over, and if the child has not been let to
gain the asset in the family in continuation of the legacy, a 'crime'
will have been committed against the child by no others than his own
parents. The child when adult will have no legacy of 'competitiveness in
languages' to pass on. The child will remember the parents, not kindly,
for this thoughtless and myopic omission or, worse still, parental
negligence.


**4- "Touch & Tie" the Child**

An Indian mother sits on the floor with her legs stretched close
together. She lays her baby on her lap with its head resting on her
knees. And the exercise or "ritual" of massaging and caressing of the
entire body of the baby begins with a liberal use of oil, abundant
manifestation of affection and derivation of pleasure; and this goes on
and on. She never seems to tire while the oil lasts -though no spot has
been missed. The baby responds to the caressing and cooing by the
mother - by purring like a kit- ten who has its neck tickled.

This is a common scene in homes in India and Pakistan; and was so in
East Africa too. Whether the traditional massage with "religious
regularity" during the infancy is a culture or a healthcare or both, the
distinct significance and effect of the mother's touch and caress on the
baby cannot be under-estimated.

I would call the culture "Touch & - Tie" for it is believed to have the
effect of tying the baby subconsciously in devotion and loyalty towards
the mother and the family for ) manifestation prominently later in his
adult life. Touch & Caress.

It should not be viewed as surprising if some of the small children in
an orphanage are on occasions seen leaving their separate beds at night
to join others asleep in their separate beds. The touch of legs or hands
provides the satisfaction of human- warmth and a sense of security when
the touch and caress from their mothers are missing.

Reportedly, patients in hospitals appear to be closer and warmer to
their physiotherapists than their general physicians whose services. on
the other hand, are even more important to them.

The spell of quality-life a person has is during the infancy period of
touch and caress at the time of breast-feeding -without however, being
able to realize or quantify the benefits of its effect on his adult life
later. Fortunately, no one normally misses the spell. What can be
missing is a complimentary benefit from the touch and caress through
massaging during that period.

Oil massage is messy, of course, to that mother who is unprepared for
it; and so is 'cooking', but then the family needs affection and loyalty
as much as the 'daily food'. How interesting! Is it not the mutual
affection and loyalty within the family which also ensures the provision
of daily food for all in the family?


