7- Intruct the Child Once Only For Better
=========================================

Attention & Compliance

Many years ago a father, accompanied by his son, visited me for a
professional advice. He introduced himself as a landlord. The son
appeared to be in his late twenties.

On the conclusion of a satisfactory consultation. the father turned
directly to the son and instructed him what to do in the matter. The
father chose to give the instruction in my presence perhaps to ensure
that it was correctly articulated as discussed. However, as if the
articulation was not assuring enough and the time already taken was not
long enough. the father repeated the instruction. This time he repeated
also some words, the planned timing, and the names and places concerned
in the con- tents of the instruction over and over again much to my
concealed disgust and to the visible boredom of the son.

Now! I got the clue why the son was not so attentive to the instruction
at the first " time. It was obviously because he was well trained since
childhood to wait for a repetition of every instruction given.

And yet one more clue! The father had also kept on repeating to me his
questions to prompt me into repeating my answers during the discussion.
It was obvious that he too was made a victim of this family-trait in his
childhood and he was dutifully pass- Mental Hazard The indications were
that the repetition of the instruction in my office was not going to be
last one from the father to the son.

The full sympathy is for the wife, the work-subordinates or the
employees and the house-servants of such a person, because this type of
a chain of onslaught of boredom can be a mental hazard and therefore, a
cause for parting ways!

With the complexities of the present life as we know of. let us be
conscious of the dictum that: "Time has become a precious commodity;
making and retaining friends an art and to be counted as being among the
per- sons with a polished or refined personality a challenge." Nothing
is more un-nerving than listening to a same piece of information, advice
or instruction repetitively at the same moment. It goes against the
dictum.

For any errand or assignment, have the habit of saying your instruction
once only to the child and surprise yourself with the results. Your
instruction wins his sharp attention and a secured place in his memory
for a perfect compliance -because it was said once, as always! He too
will adopt and pass on this polished culture down in the family.

Another Dimension.

However, there is also another dimension to this unpleasant weakness.
The child who has been made habituated to responding only after a
repeated instruction is likely to grow up as an adult with yet a greater
weakness. While he would show immediate willingness to do a favour upon
a request, he would act only after the request has been repeated even if
the favour was small or simple. There are those amongst us who express a
request only once for a favour. Repeating the request is avoided because
it amounts to begging.

A person makes an inconsiderate spouse in the family; also an unkind
son or a daughter to the aged parents if the person habitually needs a
repetition of almost every small request before he would remember to
oblige. Often the repetition awaited never appears and the request
drifts from the memory as if it never existed. The favour is deemed to
have been denied when the intention was not so.


**8- The Child's FIrst Participation in a Religious**

Congregation There always comes a time when a child is seen old enough
to be taken for the first time to a mosque. He has some knowledge of
tahaarat (cleanliness) and ehteraam (respect) for the mosque.

Incidentally, that is also the age when the child can be allowed the
benefit of his "first impression to be his lasting one" with regard to
his first experiences that he comes across in his life and the values
attached to them.

Parents need to believe and make the child also believe that his first
participation in a congregational prayer is a momentous occasion for him
and for the family, which indeed is, if only they knew!

The first impact and impression of the child regarding the occasion
will leave lasting imprints in his memory. A person belongs to where his
memories are. Some child- hood memories always survive sharply to create
the desire to relive the occasions. And he later in his adult life
relives the occasion like this sub-consciously by maintaining regularity
in the attendance of daily prayers.

Planning & Preparation

But this has to be preceded by an enthusiastic planning and
ostentatious preparation for the child to notice. So the child's
inquisitive nature makes him attentive to the talk going on around him
about certain prior arrangements and time-schedules, and he knows in his
own small way that there is in the air an important occasion out.

His interest however, sharpens with great expectations when he hears
the debate whether he is old enough for his first participation -and if
he is, what smart clothes he can put on.

The child's first attendance inside a mosque should be planned as a big
favour from the parents and accorded an appropriate ostentation and
importance. To register a maximum importance of the occasion on the
child, the day fixed is later than earlier to plunge him into a longer
duration of raised expectations so that he has also time to raise the
subject of the anticipated big day in the family and reveal it in
confidence to the neighbours' children.

Self-identity

The plan should provide for an early arrival at the mosque to enable
the child, in his new suitable dress for the occasion, to be taken round
for the inspection of the facilities and general familiarisation so that
he begins to feel "at home". He is introduced to relatives and
family-friends in the mosque before and to some after the congregational
prayer and later to the Imam of the congregation also. The introduction
is by his name to accord him a self-identity and acknowledge his
distinct personality.

What is needed to be avoided however, is the regimental warning of 'dos
and donts' while in the mosque or pointing out to the child his mistakes
in observing the discipline of the congregational prayer, and more
importantly, avoiding the day when there is a sermon and lengthy
proceedings. Children cannot maintain concentration longer at a
stretch.. Spells of boredom are counter-productive.

The first participation in the mosque serves only as a maiden
experience to sink in and not as a start for a regular attendance. The
subsequent attendance should be at intervals, preferably at the child's
own request to be followed by an incentive like a visit to a candy shop
or an ice-cream parlour before returning home.

The child, when adult and himself a parent, will cherish the memory of
such first experience and think very kindly of his parents when they are
deceased. The parents and the mosque become linked for a centre place in
the memory. He cannot belong to the parents when they are no more in
this world, but he belongs to the euphoric memories in which they
feature!

In a good Muslim family a child's best and lingering memories are of
the parents taking pain to teach him the obligations in Islam.


