9- Introduce the Child To the Clock
===================================

An office-messenger who was sent to collect some important papers was
asked to come back for them precisely in 20 minutes because of the
urgency. When he came back in ten minutes instead. he was asked to
return once again in ten minutes. He reappeared much later. He should
have been given the exact time. It would have been easy for him to keep
a track of it by consulting those who kept a wrist watch. He never kept
one and therefore he had never gained a dependable sense of the pas-
sage of time even if it were for a small span of five minutes.

When the messenger is idle and anxiously waiting for a due time for an
assignment, the due-time arrives faster; and when he is busy with
another interim job in the mean- time. the due-time arrives later for
the assignment! If the exact known-time due is in 15 minutes. he would
still ask people for time-information or go to consult the clock about
three times.

There can be no efficient .management of the daily affairs and no trust
earned in the society without a deligent adherence to a time management;
and the time manage- men-t is elusive without mastering the sense and
value of time. Islam also teaches a meticulous observance of time which
has disciplinary variables.

That was with regard to the earthly clock. Graphic and Vivid.

A man of about 80 years of age in the course of a normal talk was
narrating to his son during one leisurely week-end a family event which
had taken place when he was in his twenties and his own father was the
head of the family. His narration to the end was graphic and vivid and
his face-expression lively as if the aged personthere was a re-enactment
of " the event before his eyes. Then strangely, after remaining quiet
and thoughtful for rose from his seat, stood still thoughtful, and then
slowly walked away to retire in his room.

sometime, It should be easy to guess why the old man suddenly fell into
a deep thought with all r the visible sign of desolation and melancholy.
He felt that the event had taken place " only "yesterday", and there he
was an old person "today" and the relatives will argue at the cemetery
"tomorrow" whether that old weather-beaten grave was indeed his! The
span of some sixty years since the event was now a mere 24 hours to him!
And that is precisely what the Holy Qur'an wants us to remember.

"He will say: How many years did you tarry in the earth? They will say:
We tarried a day or part of a day, but ask those who keep account. He
will say: You did tarry but a little -had you but known (it)" (23 :
112,113,114). Now this is the celestial (heavenly) clock, Time will
tell. Introduce the child to the earthly time-clock in time so that he
later as an adult becomes aware of the celestial clock also in time and
is not caught by a rude shock like the old man. What a great pity when
there are people in the society who were raised and conditioned to be
oblivious to the dictates of both the clocks!

Sense and Value of Time

Observe our children. They think of a number of things to do in a day,
more on a holiday, but when asked, they will be seen having no idea at
all of the respective time normally necessary for each of them. The
things are just too many for a day even if sleep is skipped! It means
that the parents have not yet introduced them to the clock. Children
must grow up as adults with a smart sense and value of time.

If the child says that he was going to a certain shop to buy a book,
ask him as if for a mere interest to know, how long that will take him
until he returns home. He will begin to think, estimate -perhaps
wrongly -and then reply. That is a good start if such casual inquiries
are made as a normal practice.

When the child mentions a duration of time for a particular job or
assignment, challenge him that it will take him longer, to make him
conscious of the time. He will try to accomplish it much sooner with an
eye on the clock not only to meet the challenge r but also to impress.

If the child invites friends at home for a small afternoon party, ask
him when will it be over and then teasingly question: why so late, not
because it matters whether late or not. He will immediately direct his
mind to the time-management to explain and justify why so late, though
to te parents it may not be late. All these are a part of the exercise
and practice of time-orientation to teach the child time-management
through a cultivation of a sharp sense and value of time. This is
essential.

Parents should also impress the child, when grown up as a youth, that
only "yesterday" they were young like him and "tomorrow" he will be old
like them. As an adult the child will always know that time is
constantly slipping by "fast" beyond his control according to the
earthly clock and death is always "the same day" -according to the
celestial (heavenly) clock even if it were forty or sixty years hence!


**10- The Child with Culture of Reading is More**

Visionary

An anxious husband away from home reads quickly important pieces of
news from the letter he has just received from his family and then reads
them all over again. If the anxious husband had been illiterate. he
would have got the letter read out to him by someone who would have then
folded and returned it to him only to see him unfolding the letter and
looking intently into it as if he was now able to read it. The action in
both cases reveals a particular pattern of the human mind. It wants to
register and familiarise the pieces of news at its own independent
pace.

If the husband is reading about his baby being sick, his mind is also
registering a likely perception, familiar to his mind, of the background
against which the baby is in the state of sickness. The pace for reading
is influenced by the pace at which each piece of the news undergoes such
a mental registration in a wider perspective.

The mind works the same natural way for an illiterate person too.
Unfolding the letter only to be looking into it is to prompt a mental
registration of the picture depict- ed from the news which is in the
letter. The only disadvantage is that when a letter is read out, the
pace at which he hears may not be the leisurely he would like if he were
reading the letter himself for an efficient registration. His mind is
always alert about what is next to be heard and this disturbs the
efficiency-pace of registration. He therefore takes the letter to
someone else for a favour of being read out to him again, though he now
knows mostly what is next in the line of hearing.

The Difference

This is precisely the difference also when a person listens to a
programme of a series of national and international news in a quick
succession from radio or TV channels r. and when he reads them in the
newspapers. The latter facilitates a mental treatment of each piece in a
wider perspective at an acceptable pace; and this helps in avoiding the
absorption of any hidden message planted behind the presentation of the
s by the electronic media.

The electronic media therefore has an effective capability as compared
to the print media of manipulating the public opinion in this way. No
wonder that the electronic media has captured a wider market and is
capable of influencing large segments of public on the issues of faith
(religion), socio-culture, politics, economy and such others, because it
"conveniently saves" those gullible among the public-viewers from
exercise of smart thinking and scrutiny.

Fertile Mind

As a result, more and more among the succeeding generations lose the
culture of serious minding reading. Gone are the days when a child was
seen in his room engrossed in ling a book and weighing or questioning
mentally the merits of the thoughts and s of the author. It is this
process which helped the child to widen the horizon of his critic mind,
and it is such a child who grew up able to also develop a creative mind
formulate his own ideas and then be able to write or express them.

He possessed a fertile mind of originality and creativeness because he
had conditioned the mind into a critical thinking while feeding it
regularly with a serious reading. He grew better equipped to formulate
his independent thoughts and visions -and to advise lead.

The mind in a child wants to explode into an expansive horizon such is
the thirst for absorption of knowledge and information and he can draw
on a number of sources to satisfy this: the sources being family;
school, electronic media, friends etc. The source is, however, reading
which means a flow of one's own critic thoughts as E continues to
read.

While there is always plenty of reading around - in the school, places
of business and work, etc, none of these can serve as a substitute for
the taste and culture of the leisurely at home or in a library for the
reasons explained above.

Message is Simple

"The message is simple and yet crucial: do not let your child grow up
without having cultivated the habit of reading as a family culture or
hobby. A certain time is set during a week-end and school holidays when
the child is alone in his room with arrangement of no access t TV,
radio, Computer, game or telephone chat, and he picks up a suitable
children-book to kill the initial boredom, preferably one of those with
a good moral story or fiction and an attraction to complete it.

Some parents may perceive this arrangement as an unnecessary toll on
their dear child for such an apparently minor habit. It is probable that
they themselves lack or under-rate the culture of reading and any idea
of its richness in the mental nourishment. Reading is a culture with no
compensatory substitute; and no culture is minor.


