11- the Child and His Concept of Allah Swt
==========================================

Talking about a small child's "initial concept" of Allah, one person
was reminiscing his childhood's mis-concept. A member in the family
died. His father had an explanation: Someone called Allah took him away.
This information created a fear in him of who- ever takes people away.
Incidentally whenever he misbehaved in the street while walking along
with his mother, she would point out at a police constable if one hap-
pened to be in sight and scare him that she would ask the constable to
take him away. So during his early childhood he, in his misplaced
concept, likened Allah. when mentioned at home, to a man in a khaki
uniform.

As Allah is not visible and yet He is often mentioned at home, children
form their own independent picture of Him in their mind. It varies from
child to child. Such pictures are influenced mostly by what the parents
mention about Allah's pleasure and displeasure in the context of a
child's misbehaviour and his "sinning" against Him because of the
misbehaviour.

Such incidental and cursory introduction of Allah with the depiction of
human emotions in Him gives a mis-leading representation of His
attributes. For example, the mention of Allah as punishing for a
wrong-doing makes a child liken Him to a teacher he knows in the
neighbourhood who punishes students in the school. And yet, the mention
of Allah being Wise and all the time Alive gives to another child the
picture of an old and knowledgeable grandfather who is getting older and
older and yet keeps on living.

Polishing or Polluting!

Everyone is born with a natural in-born belief that there exists power
and control over himself by his Creator (al imaan bil ghaib - belief in
himself by his Creator (al imaan bil ghaib -belief in the Unseen)) and
this nagging belief is general for the mankind. The human mind cannot
remain blank or shed this belief. He has either to run the path to
polishing the belief or run the risk of polluting it. There is no third
option. In the case of a child, therefore, under the inspiration of this
inborn belief, he senses a thirst for information in order to polish the
belief. In the absence of adequate and balanced information, his
imaginative mind tries to fill in the gaps and comes up with an
incorrect interim concept of his Creator Who he finds often mentioned as
Allah in the family. This mis-concept is common with small children.

Therefore, it is an Islamic obligation of the parents to ensure that as
the child grows up, his thirst, which often goes unknown to them, is
quenched amply with a flow of pure and proper information. The risk of
the child drawing information from other doubtful Sources, as an
alternative, becomes diminished. He is spared from his belief being
tampered with doubts later in his adult life.

Religious Duty.

The parents therefore have a religious duty to ensure that the child is
purposefully engaged in the proper learning of correct and balanced
concept of Allah as early ''as possible" essentially based on His
attributes. The perfect concept of His being and existence is however,
beyond human comprehension. The initial childhood picture of Allah as a
being with a human physique, image, emotions, needs or limitations must
not stay on longer.

And this is only possible when the entire package of His attributes,
including those of His benevolence, compassion, forgiveness, generosity
and such others are addressed. There therefore develops a balanced
concept of Him as the loving and lovable Being, and yet also a
reasonably feared One if disobeyed or angered -all in the context of
tauhid (absolute onennes). Common God is not Allah.

What is even more important is to impress upon the child that there
exists only Allah and there is no god besides Him and that the mention
by others, of god or God, who lacks all the combined attributes of Allah
is not Allah. And no god other than Allah exists. Therefore, the
universally common God worshiped by all others does not exist if he is
not Allah.

While it is true that great "thawab" is earned by those parents who are
the first to teach their children to recite or read the verse: Bi'simi
Laahi Rahman Raheem", its importance is not confined to teaching the
recitation of the verse or its translation only. The importance
essentially lies also in helping the children to form a correct and
balanced Islamic concept of "Allah" mentioned in the verse.

It has to be reiterated that Allah has created Man in the nature of
wanting to know Him. Human reasoning, which is attuned to his nature,
leads to knowing Him rightly. Therefore, children's ability to reason,
when prodded by the parents, to gain the right concept of Allah should
not be under-rated.

When the growing child is taught to address his dua (supplication) to
Allah, the impact of his faith in the dua is tremendous only if he has
also been made to gain the right Islamic concept of Him.


**12- The Culture of Talking to Allah swt**

If rooted deeply and practiced earnestly during one's lifetime. this
culture can make a difference in one's fate in this and the next world.
but then it needs to be commenced and cultivated in one's childhood.

It is not common to see a child moved on his own accord to talking to
Allah in the form of dua (supplication). .It never dawns upon the
children the need to talk to Allah, Their parents make available for
them almost all that they need, desire or hope for, They provide a
dependable sense of security. When children fall sick they see the
parents bring medicine to make them feel well again.

There was however this child who did talk to Allah. No one in the
family had asked him to. though. His mother. half crying. was telling
his grandmother on the phone that his baby sister with signs of a
serious dehydration was to be rushed to the hospital that very moment.
The baby was in danger of her life and the family doctor who had just
left after examining her would join them after a short while. She ended
the conservation hurriedly with a frantic plea to the grandmother for a
dua to Allah.

After the parents had left with the baby for the hospital. the child.
realising for the first time how helpless and weak his parents can be
after all, talked to Allah in a few stuttering words of his language. He
felt less anxious after that. He would however not let his parents know
about this secret monologue because children do not talk to Allah!.'

What normally the child sees at home as a familiar scene perhaps almost
daily is of the parents individually "reciting" what they call "dua" and
that too in the language which the child knows as not theirs. He does
not know the reason for this recitation in a language not understood
except that it is no different from what he sees as Salaat (daily
prayers) in regularity. He however, notices the parents also talk to
Allah. The parents' apparent secrecy of such talking in low whispers is
beyond his comprehension ( Q.7:55)\* He thinks that the whole
participation in this secretive monologue is for adults only.

Family is the Loser.

Parents may falsely presume that children do understand why parents
"recite" dua or address it in low whispers, and that children also
understand that their needs are provided because of the blessing of
Allah to the parents through duas. They also presume, again falsely,
that children's duas to Allah. if they are made to address, produce no
results because of their age. By such a presumption the family is the
loser. We mortals are poor in the sight of Allah (Q. 35: 15)\*\*. The
only thing we own is the means of dua.

Allah has asked us to call upon Him and promised grant of duas. (2:
186; 40:60)\*\*\* He is the Best of Promise-keepers. We can expect the
pleas of the children to be more readily granted not only because of
their innocence (ismat) but also because teaching them to turn to Allah
is pleasing to Him.

Street beggars apply the "salesmanship" of taking out their children
together to elicit sympathy. We should get our children to join us in
expressing our humbleness to our Lord in the form of dua. Let us
remember that if the sight of a child sitting in a quiet corner and
engaged in imploring Allah in low and shy whispers with small hands
raised up together moves the heart of the mother, then it is reported
that the love of Allah for His creatures (servants -ibaad) is seventy
times of that of the mother for her child.

It Is Simple.

Parents should make the best of the opportunities presented in the form
of dua when they have small children in the family to facilitate the dua
to be answered sooner. It is simple. When the child eagerly requests for
a special thing, not common in his wants, direct him to address a dua to
Allah for it, without revealing whether the inten- tion is to buy it for
him or not, and then leave him in suspense while he keeps repeating the
daily dua before the request is met. The parents should also teach the
child to resign to the dua not being granted by making the child to
address dua even where the intention is not to comply with his
request.

"Dua is a gist of ibaadat (worship)"; "The best prayer (ibaadaV is
dua" -Ahaadith of the Holy Prophet. Why not get children to participate
in this form of ibaadat, which is simple in performance and convenient
in the discretion of time and yet tremendously rewarding.

Parents should experience the thrill on seeing their small child
praying to Allah for lots of things, big and small, for them while they
strain their ears to catch his words with- out letting him know. for he
will have been taught to pray for them also, as for himself, in his own
language. So let the child "play" adult in this euphoric role of talking
to Allah and the "score" will be real!

"Call on your Lord humbly and secretly..." (7:55) "0' men! you are
(fuqaraa) they who stand in need of Allah..." (35: 15). "I answer the
prayer of the supplicant when he calls on Me " (2:186). "Call upon Me
and I will answer you..." (40:60).


