Chapter 2: If the system of creation is not mentally posited, how could its reality be?
=======================================================================================

In other words: Of what kind are these hidden secrets that are concealed
in the shariah?

**We Say:** Intellectual arguments unanimously agree that causality and
effect are like perfection and deficiency, and diffusion is like the
diffusion of a shadow from the object that casts it.

They also agree that deficiencies are among the exigencies of the level
of effect, and that this world has other worlds prior to it in a cause
and effect manner, until it arrives at the First Almighty Truth.

What can be concluded from this discussion in general is that all
perfections that exist in this world exist in what is above it in a
higher and nobler form and the deficiencies in this world are specific
to this world, do not exist in the levels above it, and of course are
not transferred to them.

This is a short explanation, and to explain and comment on this subject
to its full capacity and afford it the credibility it deserves is very
difficult, or impossible.

**An example:** The perfections of this world, like delicious food,
quenching drinks, beautiful pictures, and the like are some of the
greatest things one enjoy in this realm. The first thing about them is
that they do not exist permanently; they appear only for a limited time
and are beset by myriads of natural afflictions and external defects or
possible deformities which, if one of them is experienced the beauty of
these perfections would disappear.

The pleasure sought in these things, and indeed the pleasure itself and
the subject of pleasure are all posited between thousands and thousands
of negating factors which if [any of these three] incline towards them,
the pleasure will become nullified and be ruined.

Moreover, if we contemplate enough we will find that all of these
deficiencies and negative factors like physical and delusional
deficiencies, go back to matter, whether from the beginning or through
the mediation of something else. Accordingly, if there was no matter
then there would have been no deficiency to go back to.

Therefore, these pleasures are restricted to this world only, and the
world that is above this one is devoid of these deficiencies and free of
these defects. For indeed without argument, they are forms without
matter and are imaginal pleasures.

What we mean by matter is non-sensual that is disposed towards passivity
and not corporeality which is a non-material form, so understand this.

Furthermore, if we contemplate again we will find that the limits of the
imaginal are deficient in their very selves, and the limited in itself
has a rank that is free from limitation, as it is external to its
essence. This has been demonstrated in its proper place.

Therefore, there is another world in which these same pleasures and
perfections exist in pure form, meaning free from limitations. For
example, the pleasure of eating, drinking, sex, hearing and seeing in
the realm of the imaginal all have levels that they do not go beyond.
For example, you will not find the pleasure of sex in hearing or in
eating; or the perfection of eating in drinking; o what one individual
desires in food and what is desired in it by another individual. One can
compare the other pleasures in the same way.

The reason for this is because of existential limitations where the
capacity of existence is concerned. The world that is above the world of
the imaginal is a realm in which limitations disappear and all these
perfections and pleasures are found in a unitary, integrated, universal
and unlimited form.

All of these matters are truths that are the ramifications of principles
that have been intellectually demonstrated in their proper places and
are agreed upon by the specialists.

All of this is related to that which exists before this material world.
As for its relationship to what is after the world, it involves the same
argument as has already been explained, with the difference that from
our existential standpoint, the imaginal realm in its return comes
before the intellectual and immaterial realm, whereas from the
standpoint of the beginning and the origin, the intellectual realm comes
before the imaginal.

Indeed, there is another difference between the origin and the return,
and that is that the ground of imaginal forms is the soul *(nafs)* in
which these forms are brought about for it, by the will of its Lord. The
imaginal forms exist in the material realm for a period of time and are
attached to it, and this is also the realm of the illusory and the
mentally posited where it acquires ingrained habits and states that may
or may not be in conformity with its previous realm.

Therefore, this realm is both immersed in and veils what exist beyond
it. The ingrained habits that were acquired in this world might become
entrenched and become veils when the heart becomes focused on this world
and neglects the truth.

These aptitudes could also be the opposite, for example, in abandoning
the adornments of this world, renouncing this vile world and cutting the
attachments to it –as the necessity of attachment to the material world
demands-, and turning towards what exist beyond the material world and
becoming intimately acquainted with it.

Therefore, this soul, after detaching itself from materiality,
spiritually surveys the forms in the world of the imaginal and spiritual
lights that are in harmony with its essence.

This soul had been familiar with these forms in the past and so it has
become cognizant of *“ease, abundance and a garden of bliss,” Quran
56:89,* and the forms of perfection of the soul and its spiritual
pleasures will multiply and increase in relation to the descending
imaginal world that is prior to the material world.

The completely immaterial realm is also similar to this by necessity
with respect to the increase of acquired knowledge in the material
realm. Accordingly, it witnesses lights, secrets, imaginal angels,
spirits whose forms are of the intermediate world and in the most
desirable way possible, all kinds of pleasures that the soul had
witnessed while being attached to materiality in its realm, like eating,
drinking, clothes, sex, hearing, seeing and other things.

All these pleasures in this realm will be acquired through
representative forms higher than them in capacity and in the same manner
as the levels below it.

In the immaterial world there is no suffering, whether material or
imagined nor is there any pain or sickness, for all of these
[deficiencies] do not exist in the imaginal world.

If the self *(nafs)* has certain aptitudes that are not veiled from the
universals, it will in certain times oversee the lights of the
immaterial world and its existence, and it will acquire radiance,
sublimity, beauty and perfection in a way that cannot be compared by
forms or cannot be measured with imaginal measurements. This overseeing
of the self-repeats itself until the self completely masters itself and
takes it as its station *(maqam),* elevating it level by level until it
then oversees the realm of the Names *(al-Asma’)*, which is the realm of
the pure nature *(mahd)* of all meanings and the sheer form of all
radiance and sublimity.

It will witness everything sheer and pure; like pure knowledge, pure
power, pure life, existence and consistency, radiance and sublimity,
beauty and majesty, perfection and felicity, dignity, happiness and
delight. This pure witnessing will continue until the self-connects with
the Names and Attributes and then it will merge in the Transcendent
Essence, and will vanish in its vanishing, annihilate in the
annihilation of its self and will stay with the subsistence of Allah,
may Thee be Exalted from any deficiency:

***“And that the terminus is toward your Lord.” Quran 53:42***

***“Indeed to your Lord is the return.” Quran 96:8***

The achievement of this status is possible if the aptitudes of the self
are holy and compatible with the realm of the Holy *(alam al-quds)*.

However, if the self is more complementary with the material realm, and
not complementary with the realm of the Holy, then it will be the
opposite. Whatever the self-experiences, it will endure pain and
punishment in its various forms, and whenever it seeks to escape from
this sorrowful situation, trying to use the impure habits it has, it
will always return to that same state and it will be said to it:

***“Taste the punishment of the burning.” Quran 3:181***

It is not, as the common people might claim, that the heavens of the
felicitous is nothing but a garden and the hell of the wretched is only
a hole of fire. Rather, it is a complete and vast realm, vaster than
this world to such an extent that it cannot be described.

It has become clear from what we have presented that from two aspects,
there is a difference between the beginning and the return [of the
self]:

The first: The return is vaster than the beginning in that the self is
vaster in its acquisition of knowledge in the material realm.

The second: The self in returning [ascending] is different to the
beginning [descending], in that it is given two paths: the felicitous
and the wretched, pleasure and pain, heaven and hell contrary to the
beginning.

This of course does not conflict with the matter of the precedence of
the wretchedness of the wretched and that there is no interference from
Divine Providence.

Know that in the meanings of these things, some are self-evident and do
not require validation, and some can be proven through arguments which
have been accomplished where it is necessary.

From what has been explained above, the relation between the acts and
exercises according to the shariah and that which has been promised and
pledged by Allah Almighty through the teachings of the sent prophets
become clear, and this will soon be explained in detail.

Addendum: References from the Holy Quran and Traditions regarding the aforementioned
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**We Say:** If we contemplate upon the particulars of the shariah of
Islam, or rather all the divine religions, we will find that the
ultimate goal they have is to steer humankind towards the world beyond
this natural realm. This is their method, which is to call to Allah with
insight, thus this is the absolute objective of religion in all its
perspectives and which encompasses this criterion in any way possible.

People, according to their level of devotion to Allah and their
abandonment of this material realm, are divided into three levels:

The first level: Those that are completely prepared, who are able to
detach their hearts from this world with complete certainty in the
essentials of the divine teachings and with submission to the Almighty
Truth. This enables them to witness what is beyond this material realm
and, like the prophets (a.s) they become able to oversee the divine
lights. This is the level of ‘Those brought near’ *(al-muqarrabin).*

The second level: Those with complete certainty but not with complete
detachment from the material world. They are still under the influence
of mental states and despairing thoughts that make them lose hope in
yielding to the possibility of submitting to what is beyond this
material realm while being in it.

This group worships Allah as if they see Him. They worship with truth
and without amusement, but behind a veil believing in the unseen, and
they are benevolent in their actions.

The Prophet (s.a.w.) was asked about benevolence *(ihsan)* and He said:

“It is to worship Allah as if you see Him and if you do not see Him, He
sees you.”

The difference between this level and the previous one is like the
difference between the word ‘verily’ and ‘almost’.

The third level: Those who belong to neither of the two former levels
and who comprise the remainder and majority of people. This group, with
the exception of obstinate and stubborn deniers, is a group that has the
capacity to believe in true doctrines related to the Beginning and the
Hereafter and act according to it, but in an overall general form, and
not in the particulars.

This is because of their attachment to this earth, their submission to
desires and to their personal love of this world. Love of this world and
its adornments will inevitably make one become excessively occupied with
it and hence makes one obsessed with it and take it as the goal in all
his movements and actions.

This necessitates the self-becoming devoted to this world and limits it
to being concerned about the world alone. It [the self] will become
inattentive to the world of the hereafter and to the states and deeds
that come about from true beliefs. This will necessitate the slackening
of the self and it becomes inactive in becoming acquainted with true
beliefs in their proper forms.

It is not affected by them nor does it become active in this regard.
Physical activity and exercises will be stagnant in their outer forms
and appearance without transmitting their outward states, effects and
actual conditions to the heart. What is mentioned here is evidently
clear and sufficient.

An example: If we were to be in the presence of a king we would find
that our inner state would change and this change in our [internal]
state will appear in our outward physical actions. But complete focus,
humility and submissiveness are things that we would certainly not find
in our prayers although we are in the presence of the Lord of kings.

If a king was to oversee what we were doing, our souls would be in an
unusual state, one that we would not have been in before, yet we believe
that Allah Almighty sees and hears and that He is closer to us than our
jugular veins.

We rely on normal causes that are sometimes correct and sometimes
incorrect in such a way that we won’t find Him in our hearts, yet we
believe that all affairs are in the hands of Allah; He does according to
what He wishes and rules what He wants.

We would place great reliance upon people’s promises or certain actions
of theirs, yet we would not rely on one part in a thousand of the
promises of Allah Almighty concerning life after death and the
resurrection.

Examples of this contradiction in our beliefs and actions are infinite,
and all of this is because of our reliance on this world. This is
because the total devotion of the self to worldly ways will result in
the self-achieving the power of assuming worldly forms upon itself which
would make worldliness dominate it. The world both excludes forms from
being assumed by the self and creates forms and continues to do so
repeatedly.

This will force the forms of these true fundamentals and teachings to
weaken, which in turn would weaken the souls acquisition of the
prerequisites of these fundamentals and teachings:

“Love of this world is the origin of all sins”.

This third group is not able to acquire any absolute attachment to Allah
Almighty more than having true beliefs in the general sense, and
performing certain physical actions which do bring, to a certain extent,
a kind of general attentiveness and direction to the Origin Almighty in
acts of worship.

Moreover, if we were to contemplate the state of these three levels, we
would find that they converge on certain things and diverge regarding
others, thus there are types of attentiveness and devotion that exist on
the third level and which can exist on the second and first, but the
opposite is not the case. Likewise, what exists in the second also exist
in the first, but again not the opposite.

It therefore becomes clear that: The disciplining of these three levels
share convergent and divergent things. It is for this reason we find
that the sacred Islamic shariah stipulates general theoretical and
practical laws, and none of these levels can neglect any of them, for
they comprise obligatory or forbidden acts.

Then, as is appropriate to the taste of the third level, the Islamic
shariah then establishes all the acts outside those two according to the
particulars and universals of things, as recommended *(mustahab)*,
disliked *(makruh)*, and neutral *(mubah)*.

These rules are strengthened in their essence by the promises and
threats of heaven and hell, and this, in turn is protected by the
practice of the enjoining of good and the forbiddance of the wrong, as
repetition is the best arguments among the common people.

These laws and methods are applied to the second group the same way as
that of the third group, with particular additions of moral laws and
other dimensions. As you now, the main difference between the two groups
is in the strength and weakness of knowledge and its effects.

This rule applies to the first group in a more precise way than the
second and the third. An act might be neutral, recommended or disliked
for the second and the third, and might be an obligatory or prohibited
act for the first group, because [the Prophet (s.a.w.) said] *‘the good
deeds of the righteous are the sins of those who are near’*, so this
station is for those of the first group and not of any other.

There are other issues and laws that are particularly exclusive to this
group which do not exist in the second and third, and these other levels
would not understand anything concerning these specialties and will not
be guided to the path of learning them.

All the differences this group has with the others are due to the fact
that its foundation is based on the Divine Love they possess and not on
love of the self. The difference between this group and the other two
groups is in the form of knowledge and perception they have, and not in
the strength and weakness of knowledge and its effects and non-effects.

If you would like to comprehend in general any of this then you must
deeply contemplate the states of unification *(ittihad)*.

Relationships have laws, and so do friendship, amity, and such subjects
like love, passion, ecstasy, enthrallment and what is called
annihilation, each of which has its own laws. Each law is special for
the level it is designated for and does not ever go beyond its level
into another.

In summary, the Divine shariah, and in particular the shariah of Islam
in all its general and particular dimensions aim towards this goal,
which is directing people towards Allah and having them turn only to Him
Almighty.

This goal is achieved by acquiring the appropriate aptitudes and states
through the appeal to true beliefs and the performance of deeds that
produce pure inner states that will make one attain sacred aptitudes.

This will be manifested in its most complete way to those who follow the
contents of the Quran and Traditions, and it is clearly understood from
this that the criterion is obedience and defiance, and nearness and
remoteness in relation to the Exalted Truth with differences in the kind
of laws and duties.

Moreover, what Allah Almighty has promised them in His Book and through
the tongue of His Messenger (s.a.w.) is clearly stated in the shariah
concerning stations (*maqam),* miracles *(karamat)* and other qualities,
in accordance to their different states and aptitudes.

These stations being related to aptitudes means that the soul attains
stations and miracles through these states and habits, and these
stations and miracles have been explained by the sacred Islamic shariah
within the teachings on the Origin and End.

It has been explained in the addendum of the end of the first chapter
that it is these teachings that have realities and inner secrets that
are above the level of explanation and that they are beyond the
endurance of common people whose mind cannot tolerate, which has also
been explained.


