Publisher’s Preface
===================

**In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful**

The more science and technology advances, the greater the need for the
implementation of the teachings of divinely sent prophets throughout
human societies, as science and technology provide only machines and
instruments – they do not provide the means to prevent their misuse by
humans. The rise in murders, felonies, cases of individual and corporate
corruption and other crimes clearly point to this fact.

If morality, which forms a significant part of the teachings of the
divinely appointed prophets does not prevail and govern over human
society, not only will the advanced science and technology fail to
ensure human peace and prosperity, but they will actually add to the
problems and miseries.

Indeed, the only factor which can halter man’s restive soul and control
his stormy instincts and passions, permitting him to utilize science and
technology for prosperity and success in life is morality, which
originates in faith in Allah (God).

The moral teachings and precepts of the divinely ordained prophets and
their own moral conduct are the best means of leading humanity to their
ideal life. It goes without saying that in both personal and social
life, the observance of moral principles is required of everyone -
however this requirement is much greater for those who must lead
societies and guide the people, since:

First: The one who is the instructor of society must himself be a model
of supreme moral behavior and excellent human characteristics so that he
may be able to wipe out moral decay from the people’s hearts and minds.
Obviously if he himself is lacking in morality, he will fail to lead the
people to the path of humanity and virtue.

Secondly: The responsibility of leading the human society is so great
and crucial that no one can successfully perform it unless he himself
has perfect morals.

For this reason, Allah (God) selected His prophets from amongst those
who possessed exalted spirits, great tolerance, extraordinary patience,
and other excellent moral characteristics. It was with the weapon of
morality that the divinely commissioned prophets overturned the debased
societies which were plunged in corruption and through which they led
the ignorant people who had gone astray, back to the path of virtue and
salvation.

In the Noble Qur’an, Allah (SWT) has addressed the Prophet Muhammad (S):

***“Thus it is due to the mercy from Allah that you deal with the people
gently, and had you been rough and hard-hearted, they would certainly
have dispersed from around you.”*** ***(3:159)***

The sublime celestial morals of the Prophet Muhammad (S) brought about
the waves of the revolution of Islam - first in the ‘Arabian society and
afterwards throughout the world.

In the light of this all-embracing spiritual and intellectual
resurrection, dispersion turned into unity; unchastity into chastity and
virtue; idleness into hard work and industry; selfishness to altruism;
and ‘Arab arrogance to modesty and affection. Men and women were trained
to become models of good moral behavior and to possess altruistic
manners. Indeed, the morals of the Prophet (S) were so sublime and
praiseworthy that Allah (SWT) has regarded them as great by saying:

**“*****And truly you (Muhammad) possess great morals.”*** **(68:4)**

The Noble Prophet of Islam (S) possessed the magnificent status of
prophecy and divinely-granted leadership - but his manners in dealing
with the people and his way of life were so simple and gentle that when
he was among the people and a newcomer wanted to know about him, he had
to ask, *“Which one of you is the Prophet?”*

The Prophet (S) treated everyone with great respect and considered
nobility and honor to be owing to faith, piety, and good behavior. He
was not interested in wealth or status, nor did he revere anybody for
his riches or position.

The Noble Prophet (S) never attempted to retaliate against the insults
not did he disrespect anyone – rather, he forgave people’s mistakes or
their misconduct. His reaction to the torment and disregard of the
ignorant people was forgiveness and tolerance..

The Prophet of Islam (S) was fond of scent and spent more money on
buying perfume than on food. In addition, he used to brush his teeth
frequently and washed his blessed hands both before and after meals.

Whenever the Messenger of Allah (S) was about to leave his house, he
would look into a mirror or into water to ensure he looked presentable -
he always left home with a clean, pleasant appearance.

The final Prophet (S) had great love for ritual prayers such that during
the night, he would get up several times, brush his teeth, and then
offer the most devoted prayers. He would stand worshipping Allah (SWT),
talking sincerely to the Almighty Creator for such a long period that
his legs became swollen.

The Noble Prophet (S) took lessons from watching the sky, moon, sun, and
every other thing in nature - and these phenomena attracted him to their
creator more than to themselves.

In short, the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) was a perfect model of all
excellent virtues and sublime human qualities.

In such a small book, it is not possible to describe all his
praise­worthy manners and morals. In fact, this work contains merely a
pale reflection of his celestial, resplendent portrait so that people
all over the world can make his morals and conduct their own model of
behavior and learn divinely inspired and taught morality and the correct
program for life from him.

We would like to sincerely thank Tahir Ridha Jaffer for rendering this
important work of the late ‘Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Taba’taba’i
into a fluent and easy to read English and pray that Allah (SWT) rewards
him in full for his painstaking efforts to bring to light the Prophetic
teachings as conveyed by the immaculate Ahlul Bayt (as) and that this
work serves to guide all of us as we strive to perfect our morals and
character.

We would also like to thank all of those people who have contributed
towards the publication of this book - especially *The* *Mohsin and
Fauzia Jaffer Foundation, Inc.* – your reward is with Allah and his
Noble Prophet (S). Without the support of everyone involved, the
publication of this important work would not have materialized.

May Allah’s greetings be upon the one who was the selected Prophet and
the best of pious human beings and may the greetings of the Angels be
upon the faithful.

May the Almighty Allah (God) help all of us to follow the blessed
footsteps of the Noble Prophet (S), whose path is sure to lead us into
eternal salvation and paradise.

Islamic Publishing House  
 22nd of August, 2006 ce  
 27th of Rajab, 1427 ah


