Chapter 6: His Sunnah in the dwellings
======================================

1. From Ibn Fahd in Kitab al-Tahsin: The Holy Prophet (S) passed away
from this world without laying brick upon brick.[^1]

2. In Lubb al-Lubab: The Noble Prophet (S) said: Masjids are the
gathering places of the prophets (as).[^2]

3. In al-Kafi: Narrated from al-Sakuni from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said:
If the Holy Prophet (S) wanted to come out from his home in the summer,
he would leave on a Thursday and when he intended to enter in the
winter, he would do so on a Friday.[^3]

Note: A similar narration has been mentioned in al-Khisal.[^4]

4. In the book al-’Adad al-Qawiyyah of Shaykh ‘Ali ibn al-Hasan ibn
al-Mutahhar (brother of the ‘Allamah): From Khadijah - may Allah be
pleased with her – who said: When the Prophet (S) entered the house, he
would ask for a basin and perform ablution for prayer. Then he would
pray a short two-rak’ah prayer after which he would go to bed.[^5]

5. In al-Kafi: Narrated from ‘Abbad ibn Suhaib who said: I heard Aba
‘Abdillah (as) saying: The Holy Prophet (S) would never ambush his enemy
at night ever.[^6]

Addendum to this Chapter
------------------------

1. In al-Makarim: From Anas who said: The Holy Prophet (S) said: “The
white rooster is my friend, and its enemy is the enemy of Allah. It
safeguards its owner and (those in) seven (neighboring) houses”. The
Prophet (S) used to keep it with him in his house.[^7]

2. In al-Khisal: From Muhammad ibn ‘Isa al-Yaqtini who said: al-Rid’a
(as) said: “The white rooster has five qualities from the qualities of
the prophets (as): A knowledge of the prayer times, honor, generosity,
courage and increased intimate relations.”[^8]

Note: It is also narrated in al-’Uyun.[^9]

3. In al-Makarim: From Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: All the prophets had
pigeons in their houses, because the foolish jinn play around with the
children of the house but when there are pigeons in the house, they play
with the pigeons and leave the people alone.[^10]

4. In al-Kafi: From Aban from someone from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said:
The Holy Prophet (S) had a pair of red pigeons in his house.[^11]

5. Also: From Talha ibn Zayd from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: The Noble
Prophet (S) would dislike entering a dark house except with a lamp.[^12]

6. Also: From ‘Abdillah ibn Sinan from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: The
Holy Prophet (S) would prefer that in winter, when he entered or came
out of (his home), it should be on a Thursday night.[^13]

7. In al-Da’aim: From ‘Ali (as) who said: It is from the *sunnah* (that)
when you enter the masjid, you should sit facing the Qiblah.[^14]

8. In al-Tahdhib: In his narration from Jarrah al-Mada’ini from Abi
‘Abdillah (as) who said: “Do not paint (pictures) on the roofs of your
houses for the Holy Prophet (S) disliked this.”[^15]

9. Muhib al-Din al-Tabari has narrated: The Holy Prophet (S) owned a
white rooster and the companions used to travel with roosters in order
to know the times of *salah*.[^16]

10. The Prophet (S) had it (i.e. a rooster) at home and at the
masjid.[^17]

16. The Noble Prophet (S) used to like looking at citron trees and red
pigeons.[^18]

11. From ‘Aishah: The Holy Prophet (S) liked admiring greenery and red
pigeons.[^19]

12. The Holy Prophet (S) used to visit some of the houses of a tribe
from the Ansar but he would not visit others, so they spoke to him about
this and he said: “It is because you have dogs in your houses.”[^20]

13. In al-Kafi: In his narration from ‘Abdullah ibn al-Mughirah, from
someone who said: When the Holy Prophet (S) entered a house, he would
sit at the nearest (available) seat.[^21]

The ‘Allamah said: This has been narrated by the grandson of al-Tabari
in al-Mishkat quoting from al-Mahasin and others.[^22]

14. When the Holy Prophet (S) woke up from his sleep, he would praise
Allah.[^23]

15. From Fadhlah ibn ‘Abid aba Barzah al-Aslami: The Holy Prophet (S)
disliked sleeping before the *‘Isha* prayer and talking (to the people)
after it.[^24]

[^1]: Also narrated by al-Nuri in al-Mustadrak 3:466 and in ‘Uddat
al-Da’i: 119

[^2]: Narrated by al-Nuri in al-Mustadrak 3:323

[^3]: al-Kafi 6:532, Uddat al-Da’i: 45, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 128

[^4]: al-Khisal: 391

[^5]: Narrated by al-Majlisi in al-Bihar 16:80

[^6]: al-Kafi 5:28, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 6:174

[^7]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 130

[^8]: al-Khisal: 298

[^9]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rid’a: 277

[^10]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 131

[^11]: al-Kafi 6:548

[^12]: Ibid., 6:534

[^13]: al-Kafi 3:413, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 3:4

[^14]: Da\`aim al-Islam 1:148, In Bihar al-Anwar 83:380

[^15]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 1:461

[^16]: Bihar al-Anwar 65:7

[^17]: Ibid.

[^18]: Bihar al-Anwar 65:26

[^19]: Ibid.

[^20]: Bihar al-Anwar 65:67

[^21]: al-Kafi 2:662

[^22]: Mishkat al-Anwar: 204

[^23]: Bihar al-Anwar 15:292

[^24]: Bihar al-Anwar 76:118, al-Khisal: 520


