Chapter 7: On the Adab of sleeping and the bedside
==================================================

1. In al-Makarim: The bedding of the Holy Prophet (S) was a cloak and
his pillow was made of skin stuffed with palm fiber. One night his cloak
was folded in two and when he woke up, he said: “The bedding has
prevented me from reciting my (night) prayer.” So he ordered that a
single layer be placed for him. He had a cushion made from skin and
stuffed with palm fiber, and he had a cloak that would be folded in two
and used by him as bedding when he was out of his home.[^1]

2. Also: He (S) used to sleep on a mat with nothing else underneath
it.[^2]

3. Also: From Abi Ja’far (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) never woke
up from his sleep but that he would immediately fall in prostration to
Allah.[^3]

Addendum to this Chapter
------------------------

1. In al-Khisal: From Abi al-Qasim ‘Abdullah ibn Ahmad ibn ‘Amir
al-Ta’i, from his father, from al-Rid’a, from his fathers from ‘Ali ibn
Abi Talib (as) who said: The prophets (as) sleep lying on their
backs.[^4]

Note: The longer version of this hadith is narrated in al-’Uyun and
al-Faqih.[^5]

2. In Majmu’at Warram: It is said that the Noble Prophet (S) had nine
wives and between them, they shared a single bedspread that was dyed
either with ‘*wurs’*[^6] or with saffron. When it was the night of one
wife, they would send this bedspread to her and some water would be
sprinkled on it so that it would emit a fragrance.[^7]

3. In al-Khisal: From Muhammad ibn Muslim, from Abi ‘Abdillah, from Abi
Ja’far, from his fathers from ‘Ali (as) who said: “Staying awake in the
(last part of the) night is healthy for the body, pleasing to the Lord
Almighty, a means of Divine Mercy and adherence to the *akhlaq* of the
prophets (as).[^8]

Note: This has also been narrated by Ibn Shu’bah in Tuhf al-’Uqul and
al-Barqi in al-Mahasin from Abi Basir from Abi ‘Abdillah (as).[^9]

4. In al-Kafi: In his narration from Ibn al-Qaddah from Abi ‘Abdillah
(as) who said: When the Holy Prophet (S) went to bed he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ بِسْمِكَ أَحْـيَا وَ بِسْمِكَ أَمُوتُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! By Your name do I live and by Your name do I die.”*

and when he awoke he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ الَّذِي أَحْـيَانِي بَعْدَ مَا أَمَاتَـنِي وَ
إِلَيْهِ النُّشُورِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“All praise be to Allah who gave me life after causing me to die, and
to Him is the return*.”[^10]

Note: This is also narrated by al-Saduq in al-Faqih and al-Tabarsi in
al-Makarim.[^11]

5. In al-Kafi: In his narration from Muhammad ibn Marwan who said: Abu
‘Abdillah (as) said: “Should I not tell you what the Holy Prophet (S)
used to say when retiring to bed?” I said: “Yes.” He said: “He (S) would
recite *Ayat al-Kursi*[^12] and then he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ. آمَنْتُ بِاللٌّهِ وَ كَفَرْتُ بِاطَّاغُوتِ.
أَللٌّهُمَّ احْفَظْنِي فِي مَنَامِي وَ فِي يَقْظَتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In the name of Allah, I believe in Allah and disbelieve in the false
gods. O Allah protect me in my sleep and when I am awake.*”[^13]

6. In al-Makarim: He (S) would frequently rest on a cushion made of skin
stuffed with palm fiber and would also sit leaning on it.[^14]

7. Also: If the Noble Prophet (S) saw something scary in his sleep he
would (remember Allah and) say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ اللٌّهُ الَّذِي لاَ شَرِيكَ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“He is Allah – the one who has no partner”.*

And when he stood for prayer he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ نُورُ السَّمٌوَاتِ وَ الأَرْضِ وَ الْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ
قَـيُّومُ السَّمٌوَاتِ وَ الأَرْضِ وَ الْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ رَبُّ
السَّمٌوَاتِ وَ الأَرْضِ وَ مَنْ فِيهِنَّ. أَنْتَ الْحَقُّ وَ قَوْلُكَ
الْحَقُّ وَلِقَائُكَ الْحَقُّ وَ الْجَنَّةُ حَقٌّ وَ النَّارُ حَقٌّ وَ
السَّاعَةُ حَقٌّ. أَللٌّهُمَّ لَكَ أَسْلَمْتُ وَبِكَ آمَنْتُ وَ
عَلَيْكَ تَوَكَّلْتُ وَ إِلَيْكَ أُنِيبُ وَ بِكَ خَاصَمْتُ وَ إِلَيْكَ
حَاكَمْتُ. فَاغْفِرْ لِي مَا قَدَّمْتُ وَ مَا أَخَّرْتُ وَ مَا
أَسْرَرْتُ وَ مَا أَعْلَنْتُ. أَنْتَ إِلٌهِي لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ أَنْتَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“All praise is due to Allah, the Light of the heavens and the earth and
the Sustainer of the heavens and the earth. All praise is for Allah, the
Lord of the heavens and the earth and all therein. You are the Truth and
Your words are true, the return to You is true, Paradise is true, Hell
is true and the Appointed Time is true. O Allah! To You have I submitted
and in You do I believe. In You do I put my trust and to You do I turn.
With Your strength do I fight my enemies and from You do I seek justice.
Please forgive my sins, of past and present, those I have done in hiding
and those done openly. You are my God - there is no god but You* - then
he would brush his teeth before performing ablution.”[^15]

Note: There are some other narrations that will come in the section on
supplications if Allah wills.

8. In Falah al-Sa’il: From al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-’Alawi, from ‘Ali ibn
Muhammad ibn Musa al-Rid’a (as) who said: We, the Ahlul Bayt, have ten
qualities when we sleep: Purification (by ablution), laying on the right
side, reciting *“Subhanallah”* thirty-three times, reciting
*“Alhamdulillah”* thirty-three times, reciting *“Allahu Akbar”*
thirty-four times, facing the Qiblah, reciting *Fatihat al-Kitab* (Surah
al-Hamd) and *Ayat al-Kursi* and bearing witness to Allah that there is
no god but He and the one who performs these actions has taken his share
of benefit from the night.[^16]

9. In al-Kafi: In his narration from Muhammad ibn Marwan who said: Abu
‘Abdillah (as) said: “Should I not tell you what the Holy Prophet (S)
used to say when retiring to bed?” I said: “Yes.” He said: “He (S) would
recite *Ayat al-Kursi*[^17] and then he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ. آمَنْتُ بِاللٌّهِ وَ كَفَرْتُ بِاطَّاغُوتِ.
أَللٌّهُمَّ احْفَظْنِي فِي مَنَامِي وَ فِي يَقْظَتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In the name of Allah, I believe in Allah and disbelieve in the false
gods. O Allah protect me in my sleep and when I am awake*.”[^18]

10. In al-Tahdhib: Abu ‘Abdillah (as) said: Keep up the night prayer for
verily it is from the *sunnah* of your Prophet (S).[^19]

[^1]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 38, Amali al-Saduq: 377, Bihar al-Anwar 16:217

[^2]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 38, Ihya Ulum al-Din 2:376

[^3]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 39, Muhasibat al-Nafs: 36

[^4]: al-Khisal: 263

[^5]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rid’a: 246, al-Faqih 4:365

[^6]: A yellow plant (resembling sesame) that blooms just after the
winter and is used as a dye. (Tr.)

[^7]: Majmu’at Warram: 266

[^8]: al-Khisal: 121, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:121

[^9]: Tuhf al-’Uqul: 101, al-Mahasin: 53

[^10]: al-Kafi 2:539

[^11]: al-Faqih 1:480, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 39

[^12]: Surat al-Baqarah (2): 255-257

[^13]: al-Kafi 2:536

[^14]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 38

[^15]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 292

[^16]: Falah al-Sa\`il: 280

[^17]: Surat al-Baqarah (2): 255-257

[^18]: al-Kafi 2:536

[^19]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:120, Da\`wat al-Rawandi: 272


