Chapter 9: On Foods, Drinks and Table Manners
=============================================

1. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Hisham ibn Salim and others, from Abi
‘Abdillah (as) who said: There was nothing more loved by the Prophet of
Allah (S) than remaining hungry and fearful in front of Allah (SwT).[^1]

2. From al-Saduq in al-Amali: From al-’Ays ibn al-Qasim who said: I said
to al-Sadiq (as): A hadith has been narrated from your father that he
said: “The Noble Prophet (S) never became sated with wheat bread,” is
this correct? He replied: No, the Holy Prophet (S) never ate wheat
bread, and he never became sated with bread made from barley.[^2]

3. In al-Tabarsi’s al-Ihtijaj: In his narration from Musa ibn Ja’far,
from his fathers, from Husayn ibn ‘Ali (as) in a long hadith on the
questions of the Jewish man from Damascus to Amir al-Mu’minin (as): The
Jew said to him: “They assert that ‘Isa (as) was an ascetic?” ‘Ali (as)
said to him: “He was thus; and Muhammad (S) was the most abstemious of
all the prophets. He had thirteen wives aside from numerous slave-girls,
yet not once were leftovers picked up from his table-spread. He never
ate wheat bread and never became sated with barley bread for three
consecutive nights.”[^3]

4. In Nahj al-Balagha: He (as) said: You should follow your Prophet, the
pure, the chaste of all the people of the world he was the least sated
and the most empty of stomach He left this world hungry but entered upon
the next world perfect.[^4]

5. From al-Qutb in his Da’awat, he said: It is narrated that the Holy
Prophet (S) never ate in a reclined posture except once, then (upon
realizing) he sat upright and said: “O Allah! I am your servant and your
messenger.”[^5]

Note: This has also been narrated by al-Kulayni and al-Tusi with
numerous different chains of narrators; and similarly by al-Saduq,
al-Barqi; and al-Husayn ibn Sa’id in his book al-Zuhd.[^6]

6. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Zayd al-Shahham from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who
said: The Noble Prophet (S) never ate sitting in a reclined posture,
from the time he was sent by Allah (SwT), until Allah took him from this
world. He used to eat like a slave and sit like a slave. I asked: “Why
(was this)?” He said: “Out of humility towards Allah (SwT).”[^7]

7. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Abi Khadijah who said: Bashir al-Dahhan
asked Aba ‘Abdillah (as) when I was present: “Did the Holy Prophet (S)
eat while leaning on his right and his left?” He replied: “The Prophet
of Allah (S) never leaned on his right or his left, rather he sat like a
slave.” I asked: “Why was this?” He replied: “Out of humility towards
Allah (SwT).”[^8]

8. Also: Narrated from Jabir from Abi Ja’far (as) who said: The Holy
Prophet (S) ate like a slave and sat like a slave. He would eat on the
ground and sleep on the ground.[^9]

Note: The three respected scholars, al-Barqi, al-Husayn ibn Sa’id and
al-Tabarsi have narrated many similar narrations.[^10]

9. From al-Ghazali in al-Ihya: When he (S) sat to eat, he would sit with
his knees and feet together as one who is praying sits, except that one
knee would be above the other and one foot above the other, and he would
say: “I am only a slave, I eat as a slave eats and I sit as a slave
sits.”[^11]

10. In the book al-Ta’rif of al-Safwani: From Amir al-Mu’minin (as):
When the Prophet of Allah (S) sat down on the table-spread (to eat), he
sat as a slave sits and would sit resting on his left thigh.[^12]

11. In al-Makarim: From Ibn ‘Abbas who said: The Noble Prophet (S) used
to sit on the ground, and would restrain the ewe (in order to milk it),
and accept the invitation of the slave to (join him in eating) barley
bread.[^13]

12.From al-Barqi in al-Mahasin: Narrated from Abi Khadijah from Abi
‘Abdillah (as): He (S) would sit like a slave and place his hand on the
ground and eat with three fingers. He (as) said: The Prophet of Allah
(S) used to eat like this and not as those who are arrogant eat.[^14]

Note: It is evident from this that when it is said that the Holy Prophet
(S) never used to lean, it does not include leaning on the hand which is
placed on the ground, rather it refers to the leaning on a cushion or
pillow and such things as was commonly practiced by kings and others.
This can be seen in the words of al-Sadiq (as) to the person who told
him not to lean on his hand (while eating). When he said this the third
time, the Imam (as) said to him: “By Allah! The Holy Prophet (S) never
forbade this – ever.”[^15]

13. Also: Narrated from Hammad ibn ‘Uthman from Abi ‘Abdillah from his
father (as) who said: The Noble Prophet (S) used to lick his fingers
after he ate.[^16]

Note: This has also been narrated with another chain of narrators and
al-Tabarsi has also narrated it in al-Makarim with an incomplete chain
of narrators.[^17]

14. In al-Makarim: When he (S) ate a pomegranate, he would not share it
with anyone.[^18]

15. In al-Makarim, quoting from the book ‘Mawalid al-Sadiqin’, he said:
The Holy Prophet (S) used to eat different types of foods. He would eat
what Allah had made permissible for him, with his family and servants
and with the one who had invited him from among the Muslims, (sitting)
on the ground or on what they sat on to eat and (eating) from what they
ate, except when a guest would arrive, in which case he would eat with
his guest and the food that he liked the most was that from which most
people partook.[^19]

16. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Ibn al-Qaddah from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who
said: When the Holy Prophet (S) ate with the people, he was the first to
start eating and the last to stop, so that the people could eat (without
feeling embarrassed).[^20]

17. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad, from
his fathers from ‘Ali (as) who said: When the Noble Prophet (S) opened
his fast with a group of people, he would say (to them): “Those who were
fasting have opened their fast with you and the pious have eaten your
food and the chosen ones have asked for (Allah to send His) blessings on
you.”[^21]

Note: This has also been narrated by al-Kulayni in a narration from
al-Sakuni from Abi ‘Abdillah (as).[^22]

18. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Muhammad ibn Muslim from Abi Ja’far (as)
who said: Amir al-Mu’minin (as) said: The prophets eat dinner after the
‘Isha prayers so do not abandon it, for not eating dinner is harmful to
the body.[^23]

19. Also: Narrated from ‘Ansabah ibn Bajad from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who
said: Never was food that included dates served to the Holy Prophet (S)
but that he would start with the dates.[^24]

20. In al-Iqbal: From the second volume of Tarikh al-Naishaburi in the
explanation of Hasan ibn Bashir who, in his narration, said: The Holy
Prophet (S) would praise Allah (SwT) between every two morsels.[^25]

21. In Sahifah al-Rid’a from his fathers (as) who said: When the Noble
Prophet (S) ate dates, he would place the kernel of the dates onto the
back of his hand and then throw it (to dispose of it).[^26]

Note: al-Kulayni has also narrated this in al-Kafi.[^27]

22. Also: In his narration from his fathers (as) who said: When the
Prophet of Allah (S) had milk, he would rinse his mouth saying: “It has
fat.”[^28]

23. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Wahab ibn ‘Abd al-Rabbih who said: I saw
Aba ‘Abdillah (as) picking his teeth and I watched him, so he said: The
Holy Prophet (S) used to pick his teeth; and it gives the mouth a good
odor.[^29]

24. In al-Makarim: Quoting from the book Tibb al-A’immah he says: The
Holy Prophet (S) picked his teeth with whatever he could use, except
date palm leaves and reeds.[^30]

25. Also: When the Noble Prophet (S) drank water, he started with the
name of Allah (SwT). He drank the water in sips and would not gulp it
down, and he would say: “Liver ailments are caused by gulping down
water.”[^31]

26. Also: From ‘Abdillah ibn Mas’ud: The Holy Prophet (S) would drink
from the bowl with three draughts, mentioning Allah in (the beginning
of) each draught and thanking Allah in the end (of each draught).[^32]

27. Also: From Ibn ‘Abbas who said: I saw the Holy Prophet (S) drinking
water and he rested twice between draughts.[^33]

28. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his
fathers from ‘Ali (as) who said: I saw the Noble Prophet (S) more than
once - when he drank (water), he would have three draughts and with each
draught, he would begin in the name of Allah and glorify Him when he
finished, so I asked him about this and he said: “Thanking Allah is done
by glorifying Him and beginning in His name is a protection from
ailments.”[^34]

29. In al-Makarim: He (S) would not breathe in the cup when he drank,
and if he wanted to breathe, he would move the cup away from himself and
then breathe.[^35]

30. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his
fathers from ‘Ali (as): When the Holy Prophet (S) wanted to supplicate
on the water (for the purpose of using it as a cure), he would bring the
bowl close to his mouth and supplicate as much as Allah willed without
spitting into it.[^36]

31. In al-Mahasin: Narrated from Hatim ibn Isma’il, from Abi ‘Abdillah
from his father (as) that Amir al-Mu’minin (as) used to drink whilst he
was standing. One day he drank the excess water from his ablution while
he was standing, then he turned to al-Hasan (as) and said: “O my son! I
saw your grandfather the Prophet of Allah (S) doing this.”[^37]

32. From al-Saduq in al-’Uyun: Narrated from Darim ibn Qabisah, from
al-Rid’a from his fathers (as): The Holy Prophet (S) used to eat the
spadix and the pith of the palm tree along with dates saying: Iblis –
may Allah curse him – is getting angry and saying: “The son of Adam (as)
has lived (so long) that he ate the old with the new.”[^38]

33. From al-Ghazali in Ihya: When he (S) ate meat, he did not lower his
head to it, rather he brought it to his mouth raising it and then he
took a bite out of it ... and especially when he ate meat, he would wash
his hands properly, then, with the excess water, he would wipe his
face.[^39]

34. Also: He (S) would eat whatever was available.[^40]

35. In al-Makarim: From the Noble Prophet (S) that he used to eat
different types of food ... he used to eat cucumber with fresh dates,
and he liked to have watermelon with grapes, and he would eat watermelon
with sweet melon and sometimes with sugar. Sometimes he ate watermelon
with dates and when he was fasting, he would open his fast with fresh
dates when they were in season.

Sometimes he ate grapes one by one, and he used to eat cheese, he would
eat dates and drink water; and dates with water was what he ate most of
the time. He used to have milk, dates and ‘al-Harisah’ (a dish made from
mixing bulgur with meat). The food he liked the most was meat. He liked
pumpkin and squash and would pick this from the large bowl (of fruit).
He used to eat (the meat of) the fowl, the meat of wild (herbivorous)
animals and birds, bread, clarified butter, vinegar, endive,
‘al-Badhruj’ (a herb like the sweet basil) and cabbage.[^41]

Note: This has been narrated numerous times by many of the great Shi’ah
scholars as well as by the *‘ammah* with many different chains of
narrators. We have left this out in the interest of brevity.

36. From al-Shahid in al-Durus: He (S) used to eat cucumbers with
salt.[^42]

37. From al-Ghazali in al-Ihya: He (S) used to eat the meat of birds
that had been hunted, yet he never used to track or hunt (himself). He
preferred it to be hunted for him and given to him to eat.[^43]

38. From Husayn ibn Hamadan al-Husayni in the book al-Hidayah: From Abi
‘Abdillah, from his fathers from Amir al-Mu’minin (as) in a hadith: The
Holy Prophet (S) liked to eat from the meat of the arm-bone (i.e. the
area above the foreleg of the animal).[^44]

Note: al-Tabarsi and others have also narrated this.[^45]

39. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Hisham ibn Salim from Abi ‘Abdillah (as)
who said: The Holy Prophet liked honey.[^46]

Note: This has also been narrated by him and others with other chains of
narrators.[^47]

40. Also: Narrated from Sulayman ibn Ja’far al-Ja’fari who said: I came
to Abi al-Hasan al-Rid’a (as) and he had ‘Burni’ dates[^48] in front of
him and he was eating them with pleasure and desire. He said: “O
Sulayman! Come and eat,” so I ate with him. I said to him: “May I be
your ransom! I see you eating these dates with desire?” He said: “Yes, I
really like it.” I asked: “Why?” He said: “Because the Prophet of Allah
(S) used to love dates, Amir al-Mu’minin used to love dates, al-Hasan
(as) used to love dates, Abu ‘Abdillah al-Husayn (as) used to love
dates, Sayyid al-’Abidin (as) used to love dates, Abu Ja’far (as) used
to love dates, Abu ‘Abdillah (as) used to love dates, my father (as)
used to love dates and I (too) love dates. Our Shi’ahs love dates
because they have been created from our clay, whereas our enemies, O
Sulayman, they love intoxicants because they have been created from the
flames of fire.”[^49]

41. From al-Tusi in al-Amali: Narrated from Abi ‘Usamah[^50] from Abi
‘Abdillah (as) who said: The food of the Noble Prophet (S) was barley
bread if he had it, and his dessert was dates, and his firewood was
palm-branches.[^51]

42. From al-Kulayni: Narrated from ‘Umar ibn Aban al-Kalbi who said: I
heard Aba Ja’far and Aba ‘Abdillah (as) saying: There was no fruit on
earth that was more liked by the Holy Prophet (S) than the pomegranate.
And by Allah! When he ate it he did not like anyone to share it with
him.[^52]

43. In al-Makarim: The Holy Prophet (S) never used to eat food that was
hot, until it had cooled down and he would say: “Allah did not feed us
fire. Verily food which is hot does not have blessing so let it cool
(before eating it).”

When he ate, he started with ‘bismillah’. He ate using three fingers,
from what was in front of him and would not eat from what was in front
of others. When the food was brought, he was the first to start eating,
and then the people would start eating. He would eat with his three
fingers; the thumb, what followed it (i.e. the index finger) and the
middle finger, and sometimes he supported them with the fourth (finger).
He would sometimes eat with his whole hand (using all the fingers) and
he never ate with (only) two fingers saying: “Verily the eating with two
fingers is the eating of Satan.”

One day his companions came with some ‘Faludhaj’ (a kind of sweet food)
so he ate it with them and asked: “What is this made of?” They said: “We
mix clarified butter and honey and it becomes as you see it now,” so he
said: “This food is good.” He (S) used to eat bread made from unsifted
barley, and he never ate wheat bread – ever, and he never sated himself
with barley bread – ever.

He never ate on a table (laden with a variety of foods) until the day he
died. He used to eat watermelons and grapes, and would eat dates and
feed the sheep with its kernels. He never used to eat garlic, onions,
leeks or honey that had wax in it – the wax is what remains from the
plants inside the bee, which it drops into the honey; and it leaves a
smell in the mouth (when eaten).

He never criticized food – ever. If he liked it he ate it and if he
disliked it he left it, but he did not stop others from eating it. He
would wipe the bowl clean saying: “The bottom of the bowl has the most
blessed food,” and when he had finished (eating), he would lick the
three fingers that he had eaten with, one by one, and would wash his
hands until they were completely clean. He (S) would never eat
alone.[^53]

44. In al-Mahasin: Narrated from Ya’qub ibn Shu’aib from Abi ‘Abdillah
(as) who said: Amir al-Mu’minin (as) was with some of his companions in
Rahbah when a bowl of ‘Faludhaj’ was brought for him. He said to his
companions: “Take from it and eat,” so they took from it and he also
took some (to eat), then he stopped (suddenly) and said: “I remembered
that the Prophet of Allah (S) did not eat it so I disliked that I should
eat it.”[^54]

45. In al-Kafi: Narrated from al-Sakuni from Ja’far from his fathers
(as) who said: When he (S) ate (any food with) fat, he would reduce his
intake of water; so he was asked: “O Prophet of Allah! You have reduced
the amount of water you drink?” He said: “This is healthier for (the
digestion of) my food.”[^55]

Note: A similar narration has been mentioned in al-Ja’fariyat.[^56]

46. Also: Narrated from Talha ibn Zayd from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said:
The Noble Prophet (S) used to like drinking from al-Qadah al-Shami[^57]
and he used to say: “It is the cleanest of your vessels.”[^58]

Note: This has been narrated by al-Barqi and al-Kulayni with a different
chain of narrators.[^59]

47. In al-Makarim: He said: He (S) used to drink from drinking-cups made
of glasses that were brought from Damascus, and he would (also) drink
from drinking-cups made of wood, skin and clay.[^60]

48. Also: The Holy Prophet (S) used to drink with his hands, pouring
water in them and saying: “There is no vessel better than the
hand.”[^61]

49. Also: He (S) used to drink from the mouth of the large water skin or
the small water skin and he would not fold it outwards saying: “Folding
it outwards causes the water to get a bad smell.”[^62]

50. From Ibn Tawus in the book al-Muhaj, quoting from the book Zad
al-’Abidin, in a lengthy hadith: In the part mentioning how the water of
‘Naisan’[^63] is collected, it also mentions that the Holy Prophet (S)
used to use it.[^64]

51. In al-’Uyun: In his narration from al-Tamimi who said: The Noble
Prophet (S) would sacrifice (on the day of Ad’ha) two fat horned
rams.[^65]

52. In al-Kafi: Narrated from ‘Abdillah ibn Sinan who said: On the day
of Ad’ha, the Holy Prophet (S) slaughtered two rams, one from himself
and the other on behalf of the poor from among his ummah.[^66]

Note: This has been narrated from the Ahl al-Bayt (as) with numerous
chains of narrators.

Addendum to this Chapter
------------------------

1. In the introduction of Tibb al-Nabi: In a hadith, he (S) said: We are
a community that does not eat until we become hungry, and when we eat,
we do not satiate ourselves.[^67]

2. In Majmu’at Warram: From Ibn ‘Abbas who said: The Holy Prophet (S)
would (sometimes) go to sleep at night hungry, with no supper for him or
his family; and the food that he normally ate was barley bread.[^68]

3. Also: From ‘Aishah: By the One who sent Muhammad (S) with the truth!
We did not have a sieve and the Noble Prophet (S) did not eat bread made
from sifted barley since (the beginning of) his prophethood until he
passed away.[^69]

4. In al-Makarim: From Anas who said: The Holy Prophet (S) did not eat
on a table (or platform) and he did not eat from a ‘Sukurrajah’ (a
plate-like dish) and he did not eat thin sifted bread. So Anas was
asked: “On what were they eating?” He said: “On a table-spread (placed
on the ground).”[^70]

5. In Majmu’at Warram: ‘Aishah used to say: The Holy Prophet never ate
until he was sated – ever.[^71]

6. In Amali al-Tusi: In his narration from Muhammad ibn Muslim in a
hadith from Abi Ja’far (as) who said: “O Muhammad! You may be thinking
that someone must have seen the Noble Prophet (S) eating while leaning
at least once, from the time Allah sent him (as a prophet to the people)
up to his death?” Then he said: “O Muhammad! You may think that he must
have sated himself by eating wheat bread for three consecutive days at
least once, between the times Allah sent him as a prophet until he
passed away?” Then he (as) answered himself and said: “No, by Allah!

He never sated himself with wheat bread for three consecutive days until
Allah took him (from this earth). But I do not say that he (S) could not
get it. He would at times present one man with a hundred camels, and if
he wanted to eat he could have eaten. Jibra’il had brought him keys to
the treasures of the earth three times and gave him the choice,
guaranteeing that Allah would not reduce any of the reward that He had
promised him on the Day of Reckoning (if he took the keys). But he chose
to be humble in front of his Lord and he never asked for anything. He
never said ‘No’ when he was asked for a thing. If he had it he would
give and if he did not he would say: ‘God willing you will get
it’.”[^72]

7. In al-’Uyun: In his narration from al-Tamimi, from al-Rid’a from his
fathers, from ‘Ali (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) did not satiate
himself with wheat bread for three (consecutive) days until he departed
this world.[^73]

8. In Majmu’at Warram: From Abi Hurairah: The Holy Prophet (S) and his
family did not get sated with wheat bread for three consecutive days
until he left this world.[^74]

9. Also: ‘Aishah said: The Noble Prophet (S) never got sated for three
consecutive days until he left this world. If he wanted he could have
sated himself, but he preferred giving (his food) to others over (eating
it) himself.[^75]

10. Also: The Holy Prophet (S) never combined food of two different
colors in a morsel in his mouth; if it was meat it was not bread and if
it was bread it was not meat.[^76]

11. Also: It never happened that the Holy Prophet (S) had two types of
food but that he would eat one and give away the other to charity.[^77]

12. In al-Makarim: Ibn Khauli brought for the Noble Prophet (S) a bowl
containing honey and milk, but he refused to drink it and said: “These
are two drinks mixed as one and (what should be) in two bowls kept in
one,” so he did not drink it. Then he said: “I do not prohibit you from
drinking this, but I hate pride and (fear) the accounting for the
excesses of this world tomorrow; and I love humility, for surely the one
who is humble in front of Allah will be raised (in rank) by Allah
(SwT).”[^78]

13. In al-Bihar: From Lut ibn Yahya from his elders and predecessors –
in a lengthy hadith on how ‘Ali (as) was martyred until where he said to
his daughter Umm Kulthum : “I want to follow the practice of my brother
and cousin the Prophet of Allah (S). Never were two different types of
food brought for him in one plate up to the time when Allah took his
soul.”[^79]

Note: This has also been narrated in al-Manaqib.[^80]

14. In al-Makarim: As far as possible, he (S) would never eat
alone.[^81]

15. In al-Bihar: From Bisharat al-Mustafa – in a hadith on the advice of
‘Ali (as) to Kumayl ibn Ziyad until where he said: “O Kumayl! Do not be
too fussy about your food, for the Holy Prophet (S) was never particular
about it.”[^82]

16. In al-Kafi: In his narration from ‘Ali ibn Asbat from his father:
Aba ‘Abdillah (as) was asked: “Did the Holy Prophet (S) nourish his
family with healthy and nutritious food?” He said: “Yes. When one eats
food that is healthy and nutritious, he gets a sense of contentment and
his flesh starts to grow.”[^83]

17. In al-Mahasin: In his narration from ‘Amr ibn Jami’ from Abi
‘Abdillah (as) who said: The Noble Prophet (S) used to wipe the bowl of
food clean.[^84]

18. In al-Mahasin: From some of our companions from al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali
(as) who said: There are twelve qualities that one must learn to adopt
while eating. Four of them are obligatory, four are (from the) *sunnah*
and four are (basic eating) etiquette, as for the *sunnah*, it includes
sitting on the left leg, eating with three fingers, and for one to eat
from what is in front of him.[^85]

Note: This has been narrated by al-Saduq in al-Khisal and al-Faqih, by
al-Tabarsi in al-Makarim, and by al-Sayyid in al-Iqbal - and in it (is
added) “As for the *sunnah*, it includes washing ones hands before
eating ... and licking the fingers ...”[^86]

19. In al-Mustadrak: From Abi al-Qasim al-Kufi in a hadith on the
actions that are (from the) *sunnah* while eating: The *sunnah* in this
is to wash one’s hands before and after eating.[^87]

20. In al-Kafi: In his narration from Muhammad ibn al-Fadhil who
ascribes it to them (the infallibles (as)) that they said: When the Holy
Prophet (S) ate, he would put food for the person sitting opposite him
and when he drank water he would give some to the person sitting on his
right.[^88]

21. In al-Makarim: He (S) used to drink while standing and at times he
would drink while riding (an animal), and sometimes he would stop and
drink - from a water skin or an earthenware flask or from any other
vessel that was available and (sometimes) with his hands.[^89]

22. In al-Ihya: He (S) used to drink in three draughts, glorifying Allah
at the end of each draught and starting each draught with *‘bismillah
...’* After finishing the first draught he would say: ‘*alhamdulillah’*
and after the second he would add: ‘*Rabbil-’alamin’* and in the third
he would add: ‘*ar-Rahmanir-Rahim’*.[^90]

23. In al-Irshad of al-Daylami: When he (S) drank water he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ الَّذِي لَمْ يَجْعَلْهُ أُجَاجاً بِذُنُوبِنَا وَ
جَعَلَهُ عَذْباً فُرَاتاً بِنِعْمَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“All praise be to Allah, the One who did not make it (this water)
bitter as a punishment for our sins, and made it sweet and quenching by
His grace.”*[^91]

Note: al-Kulayni has mentioned this in al-Kafi and al-Ghazali in
al-Ihya.[^92]

24. In al-Iqbal: From al-Sayyid Yahya ibn al-Husayn ibn Harun al-Husayni
in his Amali: When the Holy Prophet (S) had eaten a few morsels, he
would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ لَكَ الْحَمْدُ أَطْعَمْتَ وَ سَقَيْتَ وَ أَرْوَيْتَ فَلَكَ
الْحَمْدُ غَيْرَ مَكْفُورٍ وَ لاَ مُوَدَّعٍ وَ لاَ مُسْتَغْنـى عَنْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! To You belongs all praise. You have fed, given drink and
quenched the thirst; so all praise belongs to you, without ingratitude,
and without leave, and without (seeking) independence from You.”*[^93]

25. In al-Makarim: He (S) said: The best condiment is vinegar - O Allah!
Make the vinegar a blessing for us - for it is the condiment of the
prophets before me.[^94]

26. In al-Kafi: In his narration from al-Sakuni from Abi ‘Abdillah (as)
who said: The additives most liked by the Noble Prophet (S) were vinegar
and olive oil, and he said: “This is the food of the prophets
(as)”.[^95]

27. In al-’Uyun: In his narration from al-Rid’a from his fathers from
‘Ali (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) never ate the kidney (of
animals), though he did not prohibit it, and he would say: “.because of
their closeness to the urine.”[^96]

28. In al-Kafi: In his narration from ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn al-Hajjaj in a
hadith from Abi ‘Abdillah (as): The Holy Prophet (S) was brought a bowl
of rice as a gift from the Ansar, so he called Salman, Miqdad and Aba
Dharr – may Allah be pleased with them – to join him. They began making
excuses after having eaten very little, so he (S) said: “You have not
had anything! The one from among you who loves us the most is the one
who will eat the most with us.”[^97]

29. Also: In his narration from Ibrahim al-Karkhi who said: Abu
‘Abdillah (as) said: The Prophet of Allah (S) said: “If a believer were
to invite me to eat the meat of the arm-bone of a sheep, I would accept;
and this is part of religion. If a polytheist or a hypocrite were to
invite me to eat camel-meat, I would decline; and this is from religion.
Allah has made forbidden for me the gifts of the polytheists and the
hypocrites and their food.”[^98]

30. In al-Bihar, from the ‘Allamah in al-Tadhkirah: He (S) never used to
eat garlic, onions and leeks.[^99]

31. In al-Mahasin: From al-Nawfali in his narration: The Noble Prophet
(S) said: “Take off your shoes when eating, for it is a wonderful
*sunnah* and relaxing for the feet.”[^100]

32. In al-Kafi: In his narration from Ibn al-Qaddah from Abi ‘Abdillah
(as) in a hadith: The Holy Prophet (S) used to like the meat of the
arm-bone and shoulder, and he disliked the (meat of the) hipbone because
of its closeness to the urinary tract.[^101]

Note: This has been narrated by al-Barqi in al-Mahasin and by al-Saduq
in al-’Ilal.[^102]

33. In ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: The Holy Prophet (S) never criticized food –
ever. If he had an appetite for it, he ate it otherwise he left
it.[^103]

34. Also: The Noble Prophet (S) never used to blow on food or breathe in
the cup (when drinking).[^104]

35. Also: Having vinegar and green vegetables on the table is from the
*sunnah*.[^105]

36. In al-Mahasin: In his narration from Ibn al-Qaddah from Ja’far (as)
who said: Once some ‘Khabis’ (a dish made from dates, raisins and
clarified butter) was brought for the Holy Prophet (S) but he refused to
eat it, so he was asked: “Do you prohibit it?” He said: “No, but I would
not like to accustom myself to this type of food.” Then he recited the
ayah: *‘You have exhausted your good things in the life of the
world’*.[^106]

37. In al-Majma’: The Holy Prophet (S) used to tilt the bowl for the cat
(making it easier for her to drink).[^107]

38. In al-Da’aim: From Ja’far ibn Muhammad (as) that he used to eat with
five fingers saying: This is how the Prophet of Allah (S) used to eat,
not how the arrogant eat.[^108]

39. Also: From ‘Ali (as) that he said: We would soak raisins and dates
in clean water in order to sweeten it for the Noble Prophet (S), and if
a day or two had passed he would drink it, but when it had changed (in
taste) he would instruct that it should be poured out.[^109]

40. From al-Da’aim: When the Holy Prophet (S) ate, he would sit with one
leg upright and the other relaxed.[^110]

41. When the Holy Prophet (S) ate or drank he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ الَّذِي أَطْعَمَ وَ سَقى وَ سَوَّغَهَ وَ جَعَلَ
لَهُ مَخْرَجاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“All praise is for Allah, the One who gave food and drink, and allowed
it to be consumed, and made a pathway and an outlet for it.”*[^111]

42. In al-Majma’: In the narrative of the battle of Khandaq after
mentioning the killing of Nawfal ibn ‘Abd al-Ghazza, until where he
said: The disbelievers sent twenty thousand (dirhams) to the Noble
Prophet (S) to buy his corpse, so the Holy Prophet (S) said: “It is
yours; because we do not take money for the dead.”[^112]

43. In Makarim al-Akhlaq: From an incomplete chain of narrators from
al-Rid’a (as) who said: A quince was brought for the Holy Prophet (S) so
he divided it with his hands, and he (as) used to really like it, so he
ate it and gave some to those of his companions who were with him, then
he said: “You should eat quince for it cleans the heart and removes the
covering (of phlegm) from the chest.”[^113]

44. In Makarim al-Akhlaq: In his narration from al-Rid’a (as), with an
incomplete chain: The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Allah (SwT) has made honey
a blessing. It is the cure for pains and seventy prophets have blessed
it.”[^114]

45. In ‘Uyun al-Akhbar: In the narration from al-Rid’a from ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib (as) who said: The Prophet of Allah (S) said to me: “O ‘Ali you
should eat lentils as it is a blessed and holy food. It softens the
heart and increases one’s inclination to weep (to Allah), and seventy
prophets have blessed it, the last of whom was ‘Isa ibn Maryam
(as).”[^115]

46. From Abi ‘Umar: When the Noble Prophet (S) wanted to eat a chicken
he would ask that it be brought and would keep it tethered (and would
feed it) for some days after which he would (slaughter and) eat
it.[^116]

47. In al-Mahasin: In the narration from Adim ‘Bayya’ al-Harwi’ from
al-Sadiq (as) in a hadith: ... he (S) used to like eating meat.[^117]

48. In al-Kafi: In the narration of ‘Ali about the Holy Prophet (S): He
never refused perfume and sweets.[^118]

[^1]: al-Kafi 8:129 and 163

[^2]: Amali al-Saduq: 263, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 28

[^3]: al-Ihtijaj: 225

[^4]: Nahjul Balaghah: 227

[^5]: al-Da’awat: 138, al-Mustadrak 16:225

[^6]: al-Kafi 6:272, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 9:93, al-Faqih 3:354, al-Mahasin:
456-457, al-Zuhd of Ibn Sa’id al-Ahwazi: 59

[^7]: al-Kafi 6:270, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 27, Da\`aim al-Islam 2:119,
Faydh al-Qadir 5:181

[^8]: al-Kafi 6:271, al-Mahasin: 457

[^9]: al-Kafi 6:271

[^10]: al-Kafi 6:27, al-Faqih 3:354, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 9:93, al-Mahasin:
457, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 27

[^11]: Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din 2:369, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 27

[^12]: al-Nuri has narrated this in al-Mustadrak 16:228

[^13]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 16, Amali al-Tusi 2:7

[^14]: al-Mahasin: 441, al-Kafi 6:297, Fayd’ al-Qadir 5:196

[^15]: al-Kafi 6:271, Fayd’ al-Qadir 5:128

[^16]: al-Mahasin: 443

[^17]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 30, al-Mahasin: 443, al-Kafi 6:297

[^18]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 171, al-Mahasin: 541, ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rid’a
2:43

[^19]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 26, Note: ‘Allamah Tabataba\`i says: Then
al-Tabarsi mentions the types of food that the he (S) used to eat, like
bread and meat of different kinds, watermelon, grapes, pomegranates,
dates, milk, butter, vinegar, sugar, cabbage etc. It is narrated that he
used to love dates and that he liked honey. It is also narrated that the
fruit he liked the most was the pomegranate. (Refer to al-Mizan 6:326)

[^20]: al-Kafi 6:285, al-Mahasin: 448

[^21]: al-Ja’fariyat: 60, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 27, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 6:99,
Nawadir al-Rawandi: 35

[^22]: al-Kafi 6:294

[^23]: al-Kafi 6:288, al-Mahasin: 420 (and in these two sources it is
narrated from Abi ‘Abdillah (as)), Makarim al-Akhlaq: 194, Tuhf
al-’Uqul: 110

[^24]: al-Kafi 6:345

[^25]: Iqbal al-A’mal: 116

[^26]: Sahifah al-Imam al-Rid’a: 75, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 169, ‘Uyun
Akhbar al-Rid’a 2:41

[^27]: We did not find this.

[^28]: Sahifah al-Imam al-Rid’a: 69, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 193,
al-Mustadrak 16:373

[^29]: al-Kafi 6:376, al-Mahasin: 559, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 152, al-Faqih
3:357

[^30]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 153, al-Kafi 6:377, al-Mahasin: 564

[^31]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 31

[^32]: Ibid., 151

[^33]: Ibid.

[^34]: al-Ja’fariyat: 161, Da\`aim al-Islam 2:130, al-Mustadrak 17:12

[^35]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 31

[^36]: al-Ja’fariyat: 217

[^37]: al-Mahasin: 580, al-Kafi: 383

[^38]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rid’a 2:72

[^39]: Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din 2:371, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 30-31

[^40]: Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din 2:361

[^41]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 29-30

[^42]: al-Durus al-Shar’iyyah 3:46, al-Mahasin: 558, Makarim al-Akhlaq:
185, al-Kafi 6:373

[^43]: Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din 2:371, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 30

[^44]: al-Nuri has narrated this in al-Mustadrak 16:350 – quoting from
al-Hidayah

[^45]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 30, al-Kafi 6:315, Da\`aim al-Islam 2:110

[^46]: al-Kafi 6:332, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 165

[^47]: al-Kafi 5:320 and 6:332, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 165

[^48]: A variety of reddish yellow dates that were known to be of the
best quality. (Tr.)

[^49]: al-Kafi 6:346

[^50]: In the source text: Narrated from ‘Amr ibn Sa’id ibn Hilal

[^51]: Amali al-Tusi 2:294, al-Kafi 2:137, Amali al-Mufid: 195

[^52]: al-Kafi 6:352, al-Mahasin: 541

[^53]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 28-30 ‘Allamah Tabatabai says in al-Mizan: His
words “the thumb and what followed it and the middle finger ...” shows
the eloquence of the narrator since he did not say: “ ... and the index
finger ...” out of respect for him (S) by not mentioning \`index\` to
refer to his noble finger when the thumb had been mentioned. Then the
‘Allamah says: And the one who narrated his (S) eating the Faludhaj has
contradicted what is in al-Mahasin, narrated from Ya’qub ibn Shu’aib
from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) ... [see the next hadith] (Refer to al-Mizan
6:326)

[^54]: al-Mahasin: 410, Manaqib Ale Abi Talib 2:99, Kashf al-Ghummah
1:163, In al-Da\`aim: the Noble Prophet (S) used to like the Faludhaj
and when he wanted it he would say: Take it and reduce it. Then al-Qad’i
al-Nu’mani said: I think he avoided having more from it so that it
should not harm him. (Da\`aim al-Islam 2:111)

[^55]: We did not find this in al-Kafi but it has been narrated in
Makarim al-Akhlaq: 157

[^56]: al-Ja’fariyat: 161

[^57]: A drinking cup or bowl made in Damascus. (Tr.)

[^58]: al-Kafi 6:386

[^59]: al-Kafi 6:385, al-Mahasin: 577

[^60]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 31

[^61]: Ibid.

[^62]: Ibid.

[^63]: Rain water that falls on the seventh month of the Roman Calendar
contains special properties. [Ref. Taj al-\`Arus vol. 9 pg. 28] (Tr.)

[^64]: Muhaj al-Da\`awat: 355-356

[^65]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rid’a 2:63

[^66]: al-Kafi 4:495

[^67]: Tibb al-Nabi (S) – Introduction: 3

[^68]: Majmu’at Warram: 39

[^69]: Ibid.

[^70]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 149

[^71]: Majmu’at Warram: 82

[^72]: Amali al-Tusi 2:303

[^73]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rid’a 2:64

[^74]: Majmu’at Warram: 39

[^75]: Ibid., 141

[^76]: Majmu’at Warram: 39

[^77]: Ibid.

[^78]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 32

[^79]: Bihar al-Anwar 42:276

[^80]: Manaqib Ale Abi Talib 2:99

[^81]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 31

[^82]: Bihar al-Anwar 77:268, Bisharat al-Mustafa: 25

[^83]: al-Kafi 4:12

[^84]: al-Mahasin: 443

[^85]: Ibid., 459

[^86]: al-Khisal: 485, al-Faqih 3:359, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 141, Iqbal
al-A’mal: 113

[^87]: al-Mustadrak 16:269

[^88]: al-Kafi 6:299, al-Mustadrak 16:287

[^89]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 31-32

[^90]: Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din 2:6

[^91]: We did not find it in al-Irshad, but we found it in al-Wasa\`il
17:204

[^92]: al-Kafi 6:384, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din 2:6, Qurb al-Isnad: 12

[^93]: Iqbal al-A’mal: 116

[^94]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 190, ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: 314

[^95]: al-Kafi 6:328, al-Mahasin: 483

[^96]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rid’a 2:41

[^97]: al-Kafi 6:278

[^98]: al-Kafi 6:274, al-Mahasin: 411

[^99]: Bihar al-Anwar 16:387

[^100]: al-Mahasin: 449

[^101]: al-Kafi 6:315

[^102]: al-Mahasin: 470, we did not find this in al-’Ilal

[^103]: ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: 313

[^104]: ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: 314, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din 2:5-6

[^105]: ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: 314

[^106]: al-Mahasin: 409, Surat al-Ahqaf: 20

[^107]: Majma’ al-Bayan 4:352 – Surat al-An’am

[^108]: Da\`aim al-Islam 2:119

[^109]: Ibid., 2:128

[^110]: Da\`aim al-Islam 2:118, Bihar al-Anwar 66:389

[^111]: Sunnah Abi Dawud 3:366

[^112]: Majma’ al-Bayan 8:343 – Surat al-Ahzab

[^113]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 172, Musnad al-Imam al-Rid’a: 342

[^114]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 166, Musnad al-Imam al-Rid’a: 351

[^115]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rid’a  2:40, Musnad al-Imam al-Rid’a: 342

[^116]: Bihar al-Anwar 65:6

[^117]: al-Mahasin: 460

[^118]: al-Kafi 6:513, Wasa\`il al-Shi’ah 1:444


