Chapter 11: On the Dead and anything related (to Death)
=======================================================

1. In al-Makarim: Whenever the Holy Prophet (S) saw a pustule on his
body, he would seek refuge with Allah and submit him self and cry out to
Him in supplication. He would be asked: “O Prophet of Allah! What is the
cause of your distress?” He would reply: “If Allah (SwT) willed a small
(matter) to become a big one, it would become big and if He willed a big
matter to become small, it would become small.”[^1]

2. In the book al-Tamhis: From Abi Sa’id al-Khudri (who said) that he
placed his hand on the Noble Prophet (S) and he (found that he) had a
fever, and he noticed this (while his hand was) above the blanket, so he
said: “How intensely has it (the fever) effected you O Prophet of
Allah?!” He (S) said: “This is how we are made to undergo intense trials
and our reward is (thereby) doubled.”[^2]

3. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Jabir from Abi Ja’far (as) who said: The
*sunnah* is that the bier should be carried by its four sides and
anything in addition to this is voluntary.[^3]

4. Also: Narrated from al-Fad’l ibn Yunus from Musa ibn Ja’far (as): The
(method of) carrying the bier with the dead body, according to the
practiced *sunnah*, was to start by (lifting) the side of the right hand
(of the dead body), then the right leg, then the left leg and finally
the left hand, until it was raised from all sides.[^4]

5. From ‘Abdillah ibn Ja’far in Qurb al-Isnad: From al-Hasan ibn Dharif
from al-Husayn ibn ‘Alwan from Ja’far from his father (as): al-Hasan ibn
‘Ali (as) was sitting with his companions when a funeral procession
passed by, so some of the people stood up but al-Hasan (as) did not
stand up, and when the procession had passed, some of them said: “Why
did you not stand up – may Allah grant you well-being – when the Holy
Prophet (S) used to stand for the bier when it was carried past?”
al-Hasan (as) said: “The Holy Prophet (S) only stood up once and this
was when the bier of a Jew was being carried and the place was narrow,
so the Prophet stood up because he disliked that the bier should pass
over his head.”[^5]

6. From al-Qutb in his Da’awat: When the Noble Prophet (S) followed a
funeral procession, he would be overcome by grief and would contemplate
more and talk less.[^6]

7. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his
fathers from ‘Ali (as): The Holy Prophet (S) used to throw three
handfuls of dust on the grave (of a believer).[^7]

8. al-Kafi: Narrated from Zurarah from Abi Ja’far (as) who said: The
Holy Prophet (S) would perform something special when someone from Bani
Hashim passed away; something which he never performed for any other
Muslim. After he prayed *salat al-mayyit* for the Hashimi and sprinkled
water on his grave, the Noble Prophet (S) placed his hand on the grave
until his fingers were seen to be in the soil, and when a person would
return (home from a journey) or a traveler from Madinah (would come), he
would see a new grave with the Holy Prophet’s (S) hand-print and say:
“Who has died from the family of Muhammad (as)?”[^8]

9. Also: Narrated from ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi ‘Abdillah who said: I
asked him about the placing of one’s hand on the grave – what is it and
why is it done? He replied: The Holy Prophet (S) performed it on (the
grave of) his son after sprinkling the water (on his grave). I asked
him: How should I place my hand on the graves of the Muslims? He showed
me by placing his hand on the ground and then raised it (and this was)
while he was facing the Qiblah.[^9]

10. From Shahid al-Thani in Musakkin al-Fu’ad: From ‘Ali (as): When the
Noble Prophet (S) gave condolence he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آجَرَكُمُ اللٌّهُ وَرَحِمَكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“May Allah recompense you and have mercy on you”*

And when he congratulated someone he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَارَكَ اللٌّهُ لَكُمْ وَ بَارَكَ َاللٌّهُ عَلَيْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“May Allah bless you and keep you blessed.”*[^10]

11. From al-Qutb in his Da’awat: Zayn al-’Abidin (as) said: There was
never a time when Amir al-Mu’minin (as) was faced with an affliction but
that he would pray a thousand rak’ahs on that day, give alms to sixty
beggars and fast for three days. He (as) said to his children: “When an
affliction befalls you do as I do, for I saw the Holy Prophet (S) doing
this, so follow in the footsteps of your Prophet and do not contravene
it for Allah (will thereby) be against you. Allah (SwT) has said:

***“As for him who endures patiently and forgives, that is indeed the
steadiest of courses.*****”** (Surat al-Shura (42): 43)

Zayn al-’Abidin (as) said: I still perform this action of Amir
al-Mu’minin (as).[^11]

Addendum to this Chapter
------------------------

1. In al-Makarim: From Anas ibn Malik who said: The Holy Prophet (S)
used to visit the sick and attend the funeral processions.[^12]

2. In al-Majalis of Shaykh al-Tusi: In his narration from al-Harith from
‘Ali (as) who said: When the Noble Prophet (S) visited a sick person he
would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَذْهِبِ الْبَأْسَ رَبَّ الْبَأْسِ وَاشْفِ أَنْتَ الشَّافِي لاَ
شَافِيَ إِلاَّ أَنْتَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Remove the affliction O Lord of affliction, and cure him for You are
the Healer, there is no other Healer but You.”*[^13]

Note: A similar narration is mentioned by al-Tabarsi in al-Makarim.[^14]

3. In Tibb al-A’immah: From Jabir from al-Baqir (as) who said: When the
Holy Prophet (S) or someone from his family or (close) companions was
afflicted with inflammation in the eyes, he would recite the following
supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ مَتِّعْنِي بِسَمْعِي وَ بَصَرِي وَ اجْعَلْهُمَا
الْوَارِثَـيْنِ مِنِّي وَانْصُرْنِي عَلـى مَنْ ظَلَمَنِي وَ أَرِنِي
فِيهِ ثَأْرِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Cause me to enjoy my hearing and my sight and make them
continue with me until the day I die, and help me (to gain victory) over
the one who oppresses me and take my vengeance from him.”*[^15]

4. In al-Makarim: From Ibn ‘Abbas who said: The Holy Prophet (S) would
teach us (to recite this) for all types of pains, fever and headache:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ الْكَبِيرِ. أَعُوذُ بِاللٌّهِ الْعَظِيمِ مِنْ شَرِّ
كُلِّ عِرْقٍ نَعَّارٍ وَ مِنْ شَرِّ حَرِّ النَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In the name of Allah the Great. I seek refuge with Allah the Almighty
from the evil of all that gushes in the veins and from the evil of the
heat of the Hellfire.”*[^16]

5. In Majmu’at Warram: Whenever the Noble Prophet (S) was saddened by
something, he would take recourse in fasting and prayer.[^17]

6. al-Shahid al-Thani in Musakkin al-Fu’ad: Whenever an affliction
befell the Holy Prophet (S), he would stand, perform ablution, and pray
two rak’ahs and say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ قَدْ فَعَلْتُ مَا أَمَرْتَنَا فَأَنْجِزْلَنَا مَا
وَعَدْتَنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah! I have done as you commanded, so fulfill for us what you have
promised us.*[^18]

7. In al-Kafi: From ‘Ala’ ibn Kamil who said: I was sitting in the
company of Abi ‘Abdillah (as) when (suddenly) a woman’s scream was heard
from the house, so Abu ‘Abdillah (as) stood up then he sat down and
regained his composure and returned to his talk until he had completed
it, then he said: “We (the Ahl al-Bayt) like the well-being of our
selves, our children and our possessions but when there is a divine
ordinance, it is not for us to like something which Allah does not like
for us.”[^19]

Note: al-Kulayni has narrated two other ahadith with similar a meaning
and al-Saduq has also narrated this in al-Faqih and Ikmal al-Din.[^20]

8. In al-Kafi: From ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim from his father, from (the Imam
(as)) who said: The *sunnah* with regards to ‘*Hunut’* (camphor used in
the embalmment of the dead) is (to use) the equivalent of (the weight
of) thirteen and one third dirhams. Then he (as) said: Jibra’il
descended on the Holy Prophet (S) with ‘*Hunut’* weighing the equivalent
of forty dirhams, so the Noble Prophet (S) divided it into three (equal)
portions, a portion for himself, a portion for ‘Ali (as) and a portion
for Fatimah (as).[^21]

Note: This has also been narrated by Shaykh Tusi in al-Tahdhib and by
al-Saduq in al-’Ilal, al-Faqih, Fiqh al-Rid’a and al-Hidayah.[^22]

9. Also: In his narration from Zurarah and Muhammad ibn Muslim who said:
We said to Abi Ja’far (as): “Is the turban of the dead body a part of
the shroud?” He said: “No. The obligatory shroud is made up of three
pieces of cloth or in the very least, (if these cannot be procured) one
complete cloth that shrouds the entire body. Anything more than this is
*sunnah* until it reaches five cloths, and anything more than that is an
innovation and the turban is *sunnah*.”[^23]

10. In al-Tahdhib: Using the ‘*Jarid’* (palm branches - stripped of the
leaves - which are buried along with the dead body) is also from the
*sunnah*.[^24]

11. Shaykh Tusi in his book ‘Ghaybah’: From Muhammad ibn al-Hasan
al-’Alawi and others in a long hadith from Musa ibn Ja’far (as) who
said: We the Ahl al-Bayt - the dower of our women, the pilgrimage of
those from among us who have not been for pilgrimage, and the shrouds of
our dead are (all) from our purest wealth; and I have my shroud with me
...[^25]

12. In Ja’fariyat: In his narration from ‘Ali (as): When the Holy
Prophet (S) prayed over a dead body, if it was a man, he would stand
next to his chest and if it was a woman, he would stand next to her
head.[^26]

Note: This has also been narrated in al-Da’aim, and in al-Tahdhib from
Jabir from Abi Ja’far (as).[^27]

13. In ‘Awali al-La’ali: From Abi Sa’id al-Khudri: He (S) never rode a
mount on (the day of) *‘eid* or (while attending) a funeral – ever.[^28]

14. In al-Kafi: In his narration from al-Sakuni from Abi ‘Abdillah (as)
who said: Amir al-Mu’minin (as) said: It became the *sunnah* from the
Holy Prophet (S) that none should enter the grave of a woman except
those who (were allowed to) see her in her lifetime.[^29]

15. Also: In his narration from ‘Ali ibn Yaqtin who said: I heard Aba
al-Hasan (as) saying: Do not go down into the grave wearing a turban,
cap, scarf or shoes and undo your buttons (before going in) as this was
the *sunnah* of the Noble Prophet (S); and seek refuge with Allah from
the accursed Shaitan and recite *Fatihatal Kitab* (Surah al-Hamd):
‘*al-Mu’awwadhatayn’* (Surah al-Nas Surah al-Falaq): ‘*Qul huwAllahu
Ahad’* and Ayat al-Kursi.[^30]

Note: This has also been narrated by al-Saduq in al-’Ilal and al-Shaykh
al-Tusi in al-Tahdhib.[^31]

16. Also: In his narration from ‘Umar ibn Udhaynah who said: I saw Aba
‘Abdillah (as) throw dust over the dead body (in the grave). He held the
dust in his hand for some time and then threw it and he never threw more
than three handfuls. So I asked him about this. He replied: “O ‘Umar! I
was saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
}إِيْمَانًا وَ تَصْدِيقاً بِبَعْثِكَ هٌذَا مَا وَعَدَ اللٌّهُ
وَرَسُولَهُ وَ صَدَقَ اللٌّهُ وَ رَسُولُهُ وَ مَا زَادَهُمْ إِلاَّ
إِيـمَاناً وَ تَسْلِيماً.{
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(O Allah!) I believe and confirm that you will resurrect (all human
beings); ‘ ... this is what Allah and his Prophet promised and Allah and
His promised spoke the truth - and it only increased them in faith and
submission.”*** (Surat al-Ahzab (33): 22)

This is what the Holy Prophet (S) used to do and it thus became the
*sunnah*.”[^32]

17. In Qurb al-Isnad: From ‘Ali (as): It is (from) the *sunnah* to
sprinkle some water on the grave.[^33]

18. In al-Tahdhib: In his narration from Musa ibn Ikil al-Numayri from
Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: The *sunnah* with regards to sprinkling
water on the grave is that one should face the Qiblah and start
sprinkling water from the side of the head to the side of the legs, then
go round the grave to the other side, then sprinkle water on the middle
of the grave; and this is the *sunnah*.[^34]

19. In Fiqh al-Rid’a: The *sunnah* is for the grave to be raised (to the
height of) four opened fingers from the ground, and if it is (raised)
more than this there is no problem; and the grave should be leveled and
not rounded.[^35]

20. In al-Kafi: In his narration from Hashim ibn Salim from Abi
‘Abdillah (as) who said: When Ja’far ibn Abi Talib (as) was martyred,
the Holy Prophet (S) told Fatimah (as) to take food to Asma’ bint ‘Umays
for three days and to come to her with her womenfolk and stay with her
for three days, thus it became the *sunnah* to provide food to the
grieving family for three days.[^36]

Note: A similar narration is mentioned by al-Barqi in al-Mahasin and by
al-Saduq in al-Faqih and Fiqh al-Rid’a, and by al-Shaykh al-Tusi in
al-Amali.[^37]

21. Also: In his narration from Hariz or someone else who said: Abu
Ja’far (as) bequeathed eight hundred dirhams for his obsequies and he
considered this to be from the *sunnah* because the Noble Prophet (S)
said: “Take food for the family of Ja’far (ibn Abi Talib) for they are
preoccupied (in mourning).”[^38]

22. In al-Faqih: al-Sadiq (as) said: Eating at the house of the grieving
(family) is a practice from the age of ignorance and the *sunnah* is
(only) to send the food to them.[^39]

[^1]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 357

[^2]: al-Tamhis: 34, Bihar al-Anwar 16:275

[^3]: al-Kafi 3:168, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 1:453

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Qurb al-Isnad: 42, al-Tahdhib 1:456 (with another chain of
narrators mentioning it from al-Husain )

[^6]: al-Da\`awat: 256

[^7]: al-Ja’fariyat: 202

[^8]: al-Kafi 3:200, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 1:460

[^9]: al-Kafi 3:200

[^10]: Musakkin al-Fu\`ad: 108

[^11]: al-Da’awat: Mustadrak al-Da’awat: 287

[^12]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 15, al-Manaqib 1:146

[^13]: Amali al-Tusi 2:252

[^14]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 392

[^15]: Tibb al-A\`immah: 83

[^16]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 401

[^17]: Majmu’at Warram: 255

[^18]: Musakkin al-Fu’ad: 56

[^19]: al-Kafi 3:226

[^20]: al-Kafi 3:225-226, al-Faqih 1:187, Kamal al-Din wa Tamam
al-Ni’mah 1:73

[^21]: al-Kafi 3:151

[^22]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 1:290, ‘Ilal al-Shara’i: 302, Fiqh al-Imam
al-Rid’a: 168, al-Faqih 1:149

[^23]: al-Kafi 3:144, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 1:292

[^24]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 1:326, al-Muqni’: 18, al-Faqih 1:144

[^25]: al-Ghaybah: 23, al-Mustadrak 2:231, Tuhf al-’Uqul: 412

[^26]: al-Ja’fariyat: 210

[^27]: Da\`aim al-Islam 1:235, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 3:190

[^28]: ‘Awali al-La\`ali 2:220, al-Mustadrak 2:300

[^29]: al-Kafi 3:194, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 1:325, al-Ja’fariyat: 203

[^30]: al-Kafi 3:192

[^31]: ‘Ilal al-Sharai’: 305, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 1:313

[^32]: al-Kafi 3: 198

[^33]: Qurb al-Isnad: 72, al-Ja’fariyat: 203

[^34]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 1:320

[^35]: al-Fiqh al-Mansub li al-Imam al-Rid’a: 175, al-Mustadrak 2:335

[^36]: al-Kafi 3:217

[^37]: al-Mahasin: 419, al-Faqih 1:182, Fiqh al-Imam al-Rid’a: 172,
Amali al-Tusi 2:272

[^38]: al-Kafi 3:217

[^39]: al-Faqih 1:182


