Chapter 12: On the Adab of Medication
=====================================

1. In Qurb al-Isnad: In his narration from Husayn ibn Dhareef from,
al-Husayn ibn ‘Alwan, from Ja’far from his father (as): The Holy Prophet
(S) got the center of his head cupped.[^1] Abu Dhabiyyah performed the
cupping with his special instrument and the Holy Prophet (S) gave him
one *sa’* (three kilos) of dates. He (also) said: The Noble Prophet (S)
would introduce sesame-seed oil nasally (putting it in his nose) when he
had a headache.[^2]

Note: al-Kulayni has also mentioned a similar narration.[^3] It has also
been mentioned in the section on cleanliness, he (S) would (also) put
oil on his eyebrows (to get relief) from headaches.

2. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Bakr ibn Salih, al-Nawfali and others,
attributing it to Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) did
not use any medicine for the common cold, saying: “There is nobody who
is not susceptible to leprosy, so when he catches the cold, it subdues
the leprosy.”[^4]

3. Also: Narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Fayd’ who said: I told Abi
‘Abdillah (as): “A person from among us became sick so he was ordered by
the healers to (stick to a certain) diet.” He said: “But we, the Ahl
al-Bayt, do not diet except from dates, and we use apple and cold water
as remedies.” I said: “And why do you diet from dates?” He replied:
“Because the Holy Prophet (S) prescribed this diet for ‘Ali (as) when he
was ill.”[^5]

Note: al-Saduq has narrated this in al-’Ilal[^6] and similar narrations
have also been narrated by others.[^7]

Addendum to this Chapter
------------------------

1. In Ma’ani al-Akhbar: From Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: The Noble
Prophet (S) would perform cupping on this head and would call it
‘*al-mughithah’* (the reliever) or ‘*al-munqidhah’* (the rescuer).[^8]

2. In al-Makarim: From al-Sadiq (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S)
would perform cupping on Mondays after the ‘Asr prayer.[^9]

Note: This is also narrated by al-Saduq in al-Khisal.[^10]

3. In al-Bihar: Zayd al-Nursi said: I heard Aba al-Hasan (as) saying:
Washing the head with marsh mallow on Fridays is from the *sunnah*. It
brings abundance in sustenance and averts poverty. It improves the hair
and skin and prevents headaches.[^11]

4. Also: From one of our companions who said: I heard Aba ‘Abdillah (as)
saying: The Holy Prophet would wash his head with *sidr* (lotus jujube)
saying: “The one who washes his head with *sidr*, Allah will ward off
from him the temptations of Shaitan; and the one who is not plagued by
the temptations of Shaitan does not sin, and the one who does not sin
shall enter paradise.”[^12]

Note: The first section has been narrated by al-Saduq in Thawab
al-A’mal.[^13]

5. Ibna Bastam in Tibb al-A’immah: Narrated from the chain of ‘Ammar
from Fudhayl al-Rassan who said: Abu ‘Abdillah (as) said: From the
remedies and medicines of the prophets (as) are cupping, depilatory and
(medicinal) snuff.[^14]

6. al-Qutb al-Rawandi in his Da’awat: From the Noble Prophet (S) who
said: “Should I not teach you about the medicine that was taught to me
by Jibra’eel – after which you will not need any physician or cure?”
They said: “Yes, O Prophet of Allah!” He said: “Take rain water and
recite on it *Fatihat al-Kitab* (Surah al-Hamd) seventy times: ‘*Qul
A’udhu Birabbi al-Nas’* (Surah an-Nas) seventy times: ‘*Qul A’udhu
Birabbi al-Falaq’* (Surah al-Falaq) seventy times, *Salawat* seventy
times and *‘SubhanAllah’* seventy times and then drink from this water
in the morning and at night for seven days consecutively.”[^15]

7. In al-Kafi: In his narration from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: The
Holy Prophet (S) complained to his Lord (SwT) of back pain, so He
ordered him to eat cereal with meat – meaning ‘*al-Harisah’* (a dish
made from mixing bulgur with meat).[^16]

8. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from ‘Ali (as): Whenever the Holy
Prophet (S) suffered from any pain (in his body) he would perform
cupping.[^17]

9. Ibna Bastam in Tibb al-A’immah in his narration from Abi Usama who
said: I heard Aba ‘Abdillah (as) saying: Our grandfather used nothing
but the weight of ten dirhams of sugar mixed with cold water - on an
empty stomach - to treat fever.[^18]

Note: It is apparent that when he said ‘our grandfather’ he was
referring to the Noble Prophet (S).

10. In Tibb al-A’immah: In his narration from Abi Basir from Abi
‘Abdillah (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) used to perform cupping on
the (veins of the) neck, so Jibra’il was sent to him by Allah (SwT) with
(the instruction that he should perform the cupping on) the upper back
(instead).[^19]

11. Also: In the narration from Shu’aib who said: I mentioned (the
narration about Amir al-Mu’minin (as) taking a bath after cupping) to
Abi ‘Abdillah (as). He said: When the Holy Prophet (S) performed
cupping, his blood got stirred up so he took a bath with cold water, and
when Amir al-Mu’minin (as) entered the public baths, his body
temperature rose so he poured some cold water to cool off.[^20]

[^1]: Cupping was a traditional medical practice that was used to
increase blood supply to an area of the body. (Tr.)

[^2]: Qurb al-Isnad: 52,53

[^3]: al-Kafi 6:524

[^4]: Ibid., 8:382

[^5]: Ibid., 8:291

[^6]: ‘Ilal al-Shara’i: 464

[^7]: al-Mustadrak 16:452, al-Ja’fariyat: 199

[^8]: Ma’ani al-Akhbar: 247,248

[^9]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 74

[^10]: al-Khisal: 384

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar 76:88

[^12]: Ibid., 76:88

[^13]: Thawab al-A’mal: 37

[^14]: Tibb al-A\`immah: 57

[^15]: al-Da’awat: 183

[^16]: al-Kafi 6:320

[^17]: al-Ja’fariyat: 162, al-Mustadrak 13:77

[^18]: Tibb al-A\`immah: 50

[^19]: Ibid., 58

[^20]: Ibid.


