Chapter 13: Siwak (brushing teeth)
==================================

1. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Ishaq ibn ‘Ammar from Abi ‘Abdillah (as)
who said: Brushing teeth is from the *sunnah* of the prophets.[^1]

2. In al-Khisal: In his narration from ‘Ali (as): Brushing teeth is
liked by Allah (SwT) and is a *sunnah* of the Noble Prophet (S) and a
means of cleansing the mouth.[^2]

Note: There are numerous similar narrations from various sources.

3. In al-Makarim: The Holy Prophet (S) would brush his teeth thrice
every night. Once before sleeping, once when he woke up for the nightly
worship and once before leaving for the Fajr prayer.[^3]

4. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Ibn Abi ‘Umayr from Hammad from al-Halabi
from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: When the Holy Prophet (S) had
performed the ‘Isha prayer, he would ask for a basin to perform ablution
and his *siwak* and (when they were brought) he would cover them and
place them next to himself and sleep for some time – for as long as
Allah willed – then he would wake up and brush his teeth, perform
ablution and pray four rak’ahs after which he would go back to sleep.
Then he would wake up (again) and brush his teeth, perform ablution and
pray. Then he (as) said:

 ***“Certainly you have in the Apostle of Allah an excellent
exemplar.”*** (Surat al-Ahzab (33): 21)

At the end of the hadith he said that he (S) would brush his teeth each
time he woke up from his sleep.[^4]

5. From al-Saduq in al-Muqni’: The Noble Prophet (S) would brush his
teeth before every prayer.[^5]

6. In al-Makarim: When the Holy Prophet (S) brushed his teeth, he would
brush them widthwise.[^6]

7. Also: He (S) would brush his teeth with (a *siwak* from)
‘*al-Arak’*[^7] as this is what Jibra’il (as) told him to do.[^8]

Addendum to this Chapter
------------------------

1. In al-Mahasin: From Muhammad al-Halabi from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who
said: The Holy Prophet (S) used to brush his teeth a lot.[^9]

Note: This has been narrated by al-Saduq in al-Faqih, Ibn Abi Jamhur in
Lubb al-Lubab and al-Qadhi in al-Da’aim.[^10]

2. In al-Faqih: Brushing teeth at the time of *sahar* (i.e. the final
hours of the night), before performing ablution, is from the
*sunnah*.[^11]

3. In al-Kafi: It has been narrated that it is (from the) *sunnah* to
brush one’s teeth at the time of *sahar*.[^12]

4. From al-Qutb al-Rawandi in Lubb al-Lubab from the Noble Prophet (S)
who said: “The best *siwak* is that of the blessed olive tree. It
sweetens the breath and prevents cavities; and it is my *siwak* and the
*siwak* of all the prophets before me.”[^13]

5. In Jami’ al-Akhbar: In a hadith from ‘Ali (as) from the Holy Prophet
(S): The one who brushes his teeth twice a day has perpetuated the
*sunnah* of the prophets (as).[^14]

[^1]: al-Kafi 6:495

[^2]: al-Khisal 2:611, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 51, al-Kafi 6:495,
al-Ja’fariyat: 15, al-Mahasin: 562, Tuhf al-’Uqul: 101

[^3]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 39

[^4]: al-Kafi 3:445, Majma’ al-Bayan 2:555, Tahdhib al-Ahkam: 35

[^5]: al-Muqni’: 8

[^6]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 35

[^7]: A type of tree. (Tr.)

[^8]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 39

[^9]: al-Mahasin: 563

[^10]: al-Faqih 1:53

[^11]: Ibid., 1:481

[^12]: al-Kafi 3:23

[^13]: Quoted by al-Nuri in al-Mustadrak 1:369 from Lubb al-Lubab

[^14]: Jami’ al-Akhbar: 68


