Chapter 14: The Adab of Wud'u
=============================

1. In al-Faqih: The Holy Prophet (S) would renew his *wud’u*[^1] for
every compulsory act of worship and every *salah* (ritual prayer).[^2]

2. From al-Qutb in ayat al-Ahkam: From Sulayman ibn Buraydah from his
father: The Noble Prophet (S) would perform *wud’u* for every *salah*
and when the year of the conquest (of Makkah) came, he would perform the
*salawat*[^3] with one *wud’u* so ‘Umar said: “O Apostle of Allah! You
have done something which you have not done before?” He (S) replied: “I
did it knowingly.”[^4]

3. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his
fathers (as) (who said that): ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) used to perform
*wudhu* for every *salah* and he would recite the ayah:

***“When you stand for prayer wash your faces ...”*** (Surat al-Ma\`idah
(5): 6)

Ja’far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (as) said that he would do this to attain
excellence. The Holy Prophet (S), Amir al-Mu’minin (as) and the
companions of the Holy Prophet (S) would (also) combine the prayers with
one *wud’u*.[^5]

4. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Zurarah who said: Abu Ja’far (as) said:
“Should I not tell you about the Holy Prophet’s (S) *wud’u*?” We
replied: “Yes.” He said: “Bring me a bowl with some water.” Then he
placed it in front of him and rolled up his sleeves. Then he dipped his
right hand (in it) and said: “This (is done) if your hand is *tahir*
(clean from what is deemed impure).” Then he scooped a handful of water
and placed it on his forehead and said *‘bismillah’* and let it drip
down to the edges of his beard.

Then he passed his palm on his face and forehead once. Then he dipped
his left hand and scooped out a handful of water and placed it on his
right elbow and passed his palm over his (right) arm until water had
reached the edge of his fingers. Then he scooped a handful of water with
his right hand and placed it on the left elbow and passed his palm over
his (left) arm until the water reached the edge of his fingers. He then
wiped the front part of his head and the back of his feet with the
wetness of his left hand and the remaining wetness of his right hand.

Abu Ja’far (as) said: Surely Allah is single and he likes singularity.
It is sufficient to perform *wud’u* with three handfuls (of water), one
for the face and two for the arms, and (then) wipe the front of your
head with the wetness of your right hand and with what remains of the
wetness of your right hand wipe the back of your right foot and with the
wetness of your left hand wipe the back of your left foot.

Zurarah said: Abu Ja’far (as) said: A man asked Amir al-Mu’minin (as)
about the *wud’u* of the Holy Prophet (S) so he described it to him in
this way.[^6]

Note: There are many similar narrations from Zurarah and Bukair. These
have been narrated by al-Saduq, al-Tusi, al-’Ayyashi, al-Mufid,
al-Karajiki and others, and the ahadith from Ahl al-Bayt in this regard
are numerous.[^7]

5. From Mufid al-Din al-Tusi in his Amali: Narrated from Abi Hurayrah
(that): When the Noble Prophet (S) would perform *wud’u*, he would
always start with his right side (before his left).[^8]

6. In al-Tahdhib: In his narration from al-Husayn ibn Sa’id from Ibn
Sinan from Ibn Miskan from Abi Basir who said: I asked Aba ‘Abdillah
(as) about *wud’u* and he said: “The Holy Prophet performed *wud’u* with
a *mudd* (of water) and he performed *ghusl* with a *sa’*[^9] (of
water).”[^10]

Note: There is a similar narration from Abi Ja’far (as) with a different
chain of narrators.[^11]

7. In al-’Uyun: Narrated by two chains of narrators, from al-Rid’a from
his fathers (as) – in a lengthy hadith: The Holy Prophet (S) said: It is
not permissible for us - the Ahl al-Bayt - to accept charity, and we
have been ordered to perform the ritual purification perfectly; and we
do not mate donkeys with mares.[^12]

8. In al-Tahdhib: In his narration from Husayn ibn Sa’id from Qasim ibn
‘Urwah from ‘Abdillah ibn Sinan from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said:
rinsing the mouth and putting water in the nose (while performing
*wud’u*) were from the *sunnah* of the Holy Prophet (S).[^13]

Addendum to this Chapter
------------------------

1. In al-Khisal: From al-Sakuni from Abi ‘Abdillah from his fathers from
‘Ali (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) said: There are two things
which I would not like anyone to participate in with me – my *wud’u* as
it is part of my *salah* and my charity as it is placed in the hands of
the Most Merciful.[^14]

2. In al-Manaqib: He (S) would keep his water for *wud’u* himself at
night.[^15]

3. In al-Ikhtisas: From ‘Abdillah ibn Abi Rafi’ from his father from his
grandfather who said: When the Noble Prophet (S) performed his *wud’u*
for *salah*, he moved his rings three times.[^16]

4. In Majma’ al-Bayan: The Holy Prophet (S) would wipe the front part of
his head (while performing *wud’u*) and this would be approximately one
fourth of the head (span).[^17]

5. In Amali of al-Shaykh al-Tusi: From Abi Ishaq al-Hamadani in a hadith
from ‘Ali (as) who said: Rinse your mouth three times, put water in your
nose three times, wash your face, then your right hand and then your
left hand, then wipe your head and your feet, for I saw the Apostle of
Allah (S) doing this.[^18]

[^1]: Ritual ablution performed before acts of worship esp. salah. (Tr.)

[^2]: al-Faqih 1:39, Da\`aim al-Islam 1:100, al-Mustadrak 1:294

[^3]: Plural of salah – ritual prayers. (Tr.)

[^4]: Fiqh al-Qur\`an 1:12

[^5]: al-Ja’fariyat:17, al-Mustadrak 1:295

[^6]: al-Kafi 3:25

[^7]: al-Faqih 1:36, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 1:55, al-Istibsar 1:58, Tafsir
al-\`Ayyashi 1:298 – Surat al-Ma\`idah, Kanz al-Fawa\`id: 69

[^8]: Amali al-Tusi 1:397

[^9]: An old measurement – Mudd is equivalent to about 750 ml and Sa\`
is equivalent to 3 liters. (Tr.)

[^10]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 1:136, al-Istibsar 1:121, al-Ja’fariyat: 16

[^11]: Tahdhidb al-Ahkam 1:136

[^12]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rid’a 2:28, Sahifat al-Imam al-Rid’a: 46

[^13]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 1:79, al-Ikhtisas: 36, Usul al-Sittata ‘Ashar:
157

[^14]: al-Khisal 1:33, Tafsir al-’Ayyashi 2:108 – Surat al-Tawbah,
al-Ja’fariyat:17

[^15]: al-Manaqib 1:146

[^16]: al-Ikhtisas: 160

[^17]: Majma’ al-Bayan 3:164 – Surat al-Ma\`idah (5)

[^18]: Amali al-Tusi 1:29


