Translator’s Preface
====================

Due to the untiring efforts of our past scholars, we are in possession
of vast collections of hadith literature, some of which have been
systematically arranged subject wise, mostly in sections pertaining to
different legal topics, while other compilations tackle only one subject
or make up the hadith that were narrated from one particular person,
infallible or otherwise. This book falls in the latter category.

Though it cannot be said that everything contained in this book is
recommended practice, it does serve a two-fold purpose. One is that,
indeed, many of the actions practiced by our great Prophet (S), as
highlighted in the traditions, should be emulated by us and this cannot
be overlooked. However, the second and more important purpose served by
this book is to give us a better and more complete picture about the
life of our beloved Prophet (S).

As has been noted by many, translating classical texts is always a
daunting task. Many times I would come across a hadith that was simply
incomprehensible. It was at these moments that I realized the true value
of my teachers in the hawza. I would take the source to them and at
times have lengthy sittings in an effort to break down the meanings of
some hadith. The common classical dictionaries and lexicons had also
become an invaluable asset for me during the translation.

I have tried to make this translation as simple as possible in order to
benefit a wider audience. I have, admittedly, not paid due attention to
the names of different narrators as I felt this was secondary to the
purpose. It would therefore be likely to come across a mis
transliterated name. Unfortunately, even in the hawza, there is no set
standard when it comes to names and it is common to find scholars
disagreeing between ‘Qatada’ and ‘Qutada’, for example.

At this juncture, I would like to express my appreciation firstly to
Allah (SWT) (who always comes before all else), for giving me the
ability to complete this translation, then to my beloved Prophet, for
being such a wonderful role model for all of humanity. I also wish to
thank my parents, without whom I would not be where I am today. Lastly,
but most importantly, I wish to thank Shaykh Saleem Bhimji for adding
the ‘Arabic text and transliteration characters, proofreading,
typesetting and including a brief biography of the late ‘Allamah
Taba’taba’i.

In conclusion, I pray to Allah to grant us all the ability to follow in
the footsteps of our great Prophet – May Allah send His unending
blessings on him and his progeny.

Tahir Ridha Jaffer  
 Qum, Iran  
 12th of May, 2006 ce


