Chapter 15: The Adab of Ghusl
=============================

1. In al-Tahdhib: In his narration from Husayn ibn Sa’id, from al-Nadhr,
from Muhammad ibn Abi Ja’far, from Mu’awiya ibn ‘Ammar who said: I heard
Aba ‘Abdillah (as) saying: The Holy Prophet (S) used to take *ghusl*[^1]
with one *sa’*[^2] and when he was accompanied by one of his wives he
would take *ghusl* with a *sa’* and a *mudd*[^3] (of water).[^4]

Note: Kulayni has also mentioned this from Muhammad ibn Muslim adding:
‘They both took *ghusl* from one container.’ Similarly, (it is
mentioned) by Shaykh Tusi with another chain (of narrators).[^5]

2. In al- Ja’fariyat: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his
father (as) who said: Hasan ibn Muhammad asked Jabir ibn ‘Abdallah about
the *ghusl* of the Holy Prophet (S) so Jabir said: “The Holy Prophet (S)
would pour water on his head three times.” Hasan ibn Muhammad said: “The
hair on my head is many, as you can see,” to which Jabir replied: “O
Hur[^6] do not say this, because the Noble Prophet (S) had more and
better hair.[^7]

Note: A similar tradition has also been narrated from Ja’far from his
father (as) from Jabir.

3. From Ibn Shu’bah in Tuhf al-’Uqul: From ‘Ali (as): *Ghusl* on the
days of *‘eid* is a purification for those who would like their desires
to be fulfilled and a (means of) following the *sunnah*.[^8]

Note: A similar narration can be found in al-Bihar.[^9]

4. From al-Saduq in al-Hidayah: al-Sadiq (as) said: The Friday *ghusl*
is a *sunnah* compulsory for men and women, while traveling and at home
and he (as) said: The Friday *ghusl* is a purification and an atonement
for the sins that are committed from Friday to Friday. And the reason
for the Friday *ghusl* was because the Ansar used to work tending their
camels and cattle, and on Fridays they would come to the masjid and the
people would be disturbed by the smell of their bodies. So Allah ordered
the Prophet (S) to perform *ghusl* (on Fridays) thereby making it a
*sunnah*.[^10]

Note: A similar tradition can be found in al-Muqni’[^11]

5. From Sayyid ibn Tawus in al-Iqbal: In his narration from Ibn Sinan
from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: Performing *ghusl* on the day of Fitr
is a *sunnah.*[^12]

6. In the same book, he mentions: From the section of the *aghsal*[^13]
of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Ayyash al-Jawhari in his narration from ‘Ali
(as): When the last ten days of Ramad’an would enter, the Holy Prophet
(S) would prepare himself and leave his house to perform *I’tikaf*[^14]
in the masjid. He would keep awake all night and would perform a *ghusl*
between the Maghrib and ‘Isha prayers every night.[^15]

Note: A similar narration is quoted with two other chains of
narrators.[^16] Other *aghsal* will be mentioned in the section on
*salah* – if Allah wills.

Addendum to this Chapter
------------------------

1. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from ‘Ali (as) who said: The Holy
Prophet (S) said: Jibra’il told me to move my ring while performing
*wudhu* and the *ghusl* of Janabah. [^17]

2. Also: From the Noble Prophet (S): Jibra’il told me to place my finger
in my navel and wash it while I perform the *ghusl* of *Janabah*.[^18]

3. The Holy Prophet (S) would perform *ghusl* on the following days:
Fridays, the day of ‘Arafah, the day of Fitr and the day of Ad’ha.[^19]

[^1]: Ritual Bath. (Tr.)

[^2]: An old measuring unit – approximately 3 liters. (Tr.)

[^3]: An old unit of measurement – approximately 750 ml. (Tr.)

[^4]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 1:137

[^5]: al-Kafi 22:3, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 1:137

[^6]: A free man as opposed to a slave. (Tr.)

[^7]: al-Ja’fariyat: 22

[^8]: Tuhf al-’Uqul: 101

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar 3:81

[^10]: al-Hidayah: 22-23, ‘Ilal al-Sharai’i: 285, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 3:9

[^11]: al-Muqni\`: 45

[^12]: Iqbal al-A’mal: 279, Da\`aim al-Islam 1:187

[^13]: Plural of ghusl . (Tr.)

[^14]: An act of worship where one stays in the masjid for 3-10 days.
(Tr.)

[^15]: We found this (hadith) in Da\`aim al-Islam 1:286

[^16]: Iqbal al-A’mal: 195

[^17]: al-Ja’fariyat: 18

[^18]: Ibid., 18

[^19]: Musnad Ahmad 4:78, Da\`aim al-Islam 1:319 and Sunnah Ibn Majah
1:418


