Chapter 16: The Adab of Salat (Ritual Prayer)
=============================================

1. In al-Kafi: Narrated from al-Fud’ail ibn Yasar and ‘Abdul Malik and
Bukayr who said: We heard Aba ‘Abdillah (as) saying: The Holy Prophet
(S) used to pray twice as many supererogatory prayers as the obligatory
prayers and he used to fast twice as many supererogatory fasts as the
obligatory fasts.[^1]

Note: This has also been narrated by Shaykh Tusi.[^2]

2. Also: Narrated from Hannan who said: ‘Amr ibn Harith asked Aba
‘Abdillah (as) while I was sitting (there): “May I be your ransom! Tell
me about the prayer of the Noble Prophet (S).” He (as) said: “The Holy
Prophet (S) used to pray eight rak’ahs at midday and four (rak’ahs) in
the first prayer (i.e. the Dhuhr prayer), then eight (rak’ahs) after
this and four in the ‘Asr prayer. Three (rak’ahs) in Maghrib prayer,
four after Maghrib, then four (rak’ahs) in ‘Isha prayer, eight for night
prayers and then three for Witr. And (he prayed) two rak’ahs at dawn and
two for the Fajr prayer.” I said: “May I be your ransom! What if I am
able to perform more than these - will Allah chastise me for praying
more?” He replied: “No, but He will chastise you for abandoning the
*sunnah*.”[^3]

3. In al-Tahdhib: In his narration from Husayn ibn Sa’id from Muhammad
ibn Abi ‘Umayr from Hammad ibn ‘Uthman from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said:
The Holy Prophet (S) would pray the *utmah* [^4] prayer and then he
would go to sleep.[^5]

Note: There are numerous similar narrations but we will suffice with
this one. It is apparent from this narration that the *utmah* is
considered to be separate from the fifty (daily prayers consisting of
the daily obligatory and *nawafil* prayers). Its two rak’ahs, (performed
while sitting) are counted as one rak’ah and it was prescribed as a
precautionary replacement for the Witr prayer - in case someone dies in
his sleep before being able to perform the Witr.

Al-Saduq has narrated in al-’Ilal: Narrating from Abi Basir from Abi
‘Abdillah (as) who said: The one who believes in Allah and the day of
reckoning should not sleep until after having performed the Witr. I
asked: “Meaning the two rak’ahs (performed) after the ‘Isha prayer?” He
answered: “Yes, and they are (considered to be) one rak’ah; and
whosoever performs it and then passes away, (it is as if) he has died
having performed the Witr and if he does not pass away, he should
perform the Witr in the last part of the night.” I asked him: “Did the
Noble Prophet pray these two rak’ahs?” He said: “No.” I asked: “And why
not?” He replied: “Because the revelation would descend on the Holy
Prophet (S) and he knew if he was going to die on that night or not, but
others do not know (this) and this is why he did not pray it but told
(his followers) to do so.”[^6]

The meaning of the questioner’s statement: ‘Did he pray these two
rak’ahs? ...’ is – did he (S) make this a *sunnah* by practicing it
always?

4. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Zurarah from Abi Ja’far (as) who said: The
Holy Prophet (S) would pray thirteen rak’ahs at night, which included
the Witr (prayer) and two rak’ahs for (the *nafilah*) Fajr, whether on a
journey or at home.[^7]

5. In al-Khisal: Narrated from Muhammad ibn ‘Isa ibn ‘Ubayd from
al-Rid’a (as) who said: In the white rooster are five qualities from the
qualities of the prophets, (one of them is) knowing the times of the
*salah*.[^8]

6. In al-Faqih: In his narration from Zurarah from Abi Ja’far (as): I
asked him about the time for the Dhuhr prayer. He said: “(When the
shadow is the length of) one cubit after the sun passes the meridian,
and the time for the ‘Asr prayer is (when the shadow becomes) two cubits
from the time of the Dhuhr prayer. This is equal to four feet from when
the sun passes the meridian.” Then he said: “The wall of the masjid of
the Noble Prophet (S) was (approximately) the height of a person and
when its shadow passed one cubit he prayed the Dhuhr prayer and when two
cubits had passed he prayed the ‘Asr prayer.”

Then he asked: “Do you know why one cubit and two cubits have been
stipulated?” I said: “Why has it been stipulated thus?” He said: “For
the placement of the *nafilah*. You should perform the *nafilah* from
when the sun passes the meridian until the passing of one cubit, so when
your shadow reaches the length of one cubit you should start praying the
obligatory prayer (Dhuhr) and leave the *nafilah*, and when you shadow
reaches two cubits you should pray the obligatory prayer (‘Asr) and
leave the *nafilah*.”[^9]

Note: This has also been narrated by al-Tusi in al-Tahdhib and by
al-Kulayni in al-Kafi.[^10]

7. In al-Tahdhib: In his narration from Husayn ibn Sa’id from al-Nadhr
from Musa ibn Bakr from Zurarah who said: I heard Aba Ja’far (as)
saying: The Holy Prophet (S) would not pray in the day until the sun had
crossed the meridian; and when it had passed the meridian by (casting a
shadow the length of) half a finger, he would pray eight rak’ahs and
when the shadow reached one cubit he prayed the Dhuhr prayer. Then he
prayed two rak’ahs after Dhuhr and before the time of ‘Asr he prayed
(another) two rak’ahs, and when the shadow reached two cubits he prayed
the ‘Asr prayer. When the sun had set, he prayed the Maghrib prayer, and
the time for the ‘Isha prayer entered when the twilight had passed.

The end of the time for the Maghrib prayer is at nightfall. Then the
time of ‘Isha enters and it continues up to a third of the night. After
the ‘Isha prayer, he (S) would not pray until midnight. Then (after
midnight) he would pray thirteen rak’ahs, which includes the Witr and
the two rak’ahs for the *nafilah* of Fajr, before the Fajr prayer. And
at dawn, when it became light, he prayed the Fajr prayer.[^11]

Note: The narrators have mentioned other narrations regarding the time
for the night prayer. Similarly, al-’Ayyashi has mentioned other
narrations on the time for the *nafilah* of Dhuhr as has al-Saduq and
others.[^12] It should be noted that all the rak’ahs of the *nafilah* of
‘Asr were not mentioned in this narration. Apparently the statement ‘
...and before the time of ‘Asr he prayed ...’ is just explanatory of
what precedes it.

8. In al-Tahdhib: In his narration from Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn Mahbub
from ‘Abbas ibn Ma’ruf from ‘Abdillah ibn Mughirah from Mu’awiyah ibn
Wahab who said: I heard Aba ‘Abdillah (as) saying – as he recollected
the prayer of the Holy Prophet (S): He would bring his ablution water,
cover it and place it near himself, and he would put his *siwak* under
his bed then he would sleep for as long as Allah willed. When he woke
up, he would sit, turn his eyes towards the sky and recited the ayah
from (Surah) ale ‘Imran:

***“Verily in the creation of the heavens and earth ...”*** (Surah Ale
‘Imran: 190)

then he brushed his teeth and performed ablution after which he went to
his place of prayer and performed four rak’ahs with the duration of his
*ruku’* being equal to his recitation (while standing) and the duration
of his *sujud* being equal to that of his *ruku’*.

He would bow in *ruku’* until it would be asked: “When will raise his
head?” And he would prostrate in *sujud* until it would be asked: “When
will he raise his head?” He then returned to his bed and slept for as
long as Allah willed. Then he woke and sat up and recited the ayah from
ale ‘Imran and looked towards the sky. Then he brushed his teeth,
performed ablution and went to his place of prayer where he performed
the Witr prayer and two (other) rak’ahs (i.e. the *nafilah* of Fajr) and
then he left his house (to go to the masjid) for the (Fajr) prayer.[^13]

Note: al-Kulayni has also narrated this with two different chains of
narrators.[^14]

9. It has been narrated that he (S) would shorten his *nafilah* prayer
and perform it at the beginning of dawn, then he would leave (his house
to go to the masjid) for the prayer.[^15]

10. From Shaykh Tusi in Misbah al-Mutahajjid: The Noble Prophet’s (S)
prayer consists of two rak’ahs: In every rak’ah al-Hamd is recited once
and *Inna Anzalnahu* fifteen times while standing, fifteen times in
*ruku’*, fifteen times when you stand after the *ruku’*, fifteen times
when you prostrate, fifteen times when you raise your head, fifteen
times when you prostrate for the second time and fifteen times when you
raise your head for the second time.

Then one stands and recites the second rak’ah in the same way as the
first and when you have completed the prayer and performed any other
related acts of worship that you wish, there will be no sin that you
will have committed but that Allah (SwT) will have forgiven it.[^16]

Note: Sayyid Ibn Tawus has also narrated this in Jamal al-Usbu’ – from
Yunus ibn Hashim from al-Rid’a (as).[^17]

11. In al-Tahdhib: In his narration from ‘Ali ibn Hatim from Hamid ibn
Ziyad from ‘Abdillah from ‘Ali ibn al-Hasan from Muhammad ibn Ziyad from
Abi Khadijah from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: When the Holy Month of
Ramad’an would come, the Prophet (S) increased his *salah* and I too
increase it (in the month of Ramad’an) so you should also increase
it.[^18]

12. Also: In his narration from ‘Ali ibn al-Hasan ibn Faddhal from
Isma’il ibn Mihran from Hasan ibn Muhsin al-Mirwazi from Yunus ibn ‘Abd
al-Rahman from Muhammad ibn Yahya who said: I was with Abi ‘Abdillah
(as) when he was asked: “Are the *nafilah* prayers increased in the
month of Ramad’an?” He replied: “Yes, the Holy Prophet (S) used to pray
(*nafilah* prayers) after the ‘Isha prayer and he did so copiously. And
the people would gather behind him in order to pray as he prayed, and
when the crowd grew behind him, he left them and entered his house.
After the people had dispersed, he returned to his place of prayer and
continue to pray as he was praying and when the crowd gathered behind
him (again) he left them and entered (his house) and he did this
repeatedly.”[^19]

Note: There are numerous similar narrations.[^20]

13. Also: In his narration from ‘Ali ibn Hatim from Ahmad ibn ‘Ali from
Muhammad ibn Abi Sahban from Muhammad ibn Sulayman who said: Some of our
companions concurred on this hadith; among them were: Yunus ibn ‘Abd
al-Rahman from ‘Abdillah ibn Sinan from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) and Sabbah
al-Hadha’ from Ishaq ibn ‘Ammar from Abi al-Hasan (as) and Suma’ah ibn
Mihran from Abi ‘Abdillah (as). (Then) Muhammad ibn Sulayman said: I
asked al-Rid’a (as) about this hadith so he informed me about it. All of
these (companions) said: We asked about *salah* during the month of
Ramad’an – how is it performed and how was it performed by the Noble
Prophet (S)? They all said (relating the reply of the Imam):

When the month of Ramad’an would enter, on the first night the Holy
Prophet (S) would offer the Maghrib prayer and then he prayed four
rak’ahs, that he usually performed after the Maghrib prayer every night.
He then performed eight (more) rak’ahs and when he had finished offering
the ‘Isha prayer, he prayed the two rak’ahs which he usually performed
while sitting, after the ‘Isha prayer. Then he stood and prayed twelve
rak’ahs, after which he entered his house. When the people saw this and
observed that as the month of Ramad’an entered the Holy Prophet (S)
increased his prayer, they asked him about it, so he explained to them
(saying): “I offered these prayers because of the excellence of the
month of Ramad’an (and its distinction) from the other months.”

When he (as) stood to pray in the night, the people lined up behind him
so he turned towards them and said: “O people! This is a *nafilah*
prayer and there is no congregation for the *nafilah* prayers, so each
of one should pray on their own and recite from what has been taught to
him by Allah in His book, and know that there is no congregation in
*nafilah* prayers.” So the people dispersed and each one prayed on his
own.

On the nineteenth night of the month of Ramad’an, he (S) performed
*ghusl* at sunset and offered the Maghrib prayer. After he had completed
the Maghrib and the four rak’ahs that he always prayed after the
Maghrib, he entered his house. When Bilal called out (the *adhan*) for
the ‘Isha prayer, the Noble Prophet came out and prayed with the people.
After this he prayed two rak’ahs sitting as he would pray every night.
Then he stood up and prayed a hundred rak’ahs, reciting in each rak’ah
‘Fatihat al-Kitab’ and *Qul Huwallahu Ahad* ten times and when he had
finished this he performed the prayer that he always performed in the
last part of the night and then (he offered) the Witr prayer.

On the twentieth night of the month of Ramad’an he (S) did as he had
done on the previous nights of the holy month, (he offered) eight
rak’ahs after Maghrib and twelve rak’ahs after the ‘Isha prayer. On the
twenty-first night, he performed *ghusl* at sunset and prayed as he had
on the nineteenth night. On the twenty-second night, he increased his
prayers offering eight rak’ahs after Maghrib and twenty-two rak’ahs
after the ‘Isha prayer. And on the twenty-third night he performed
*ghusl* as he had done on the nineteenth and twenty-first nights and did
as he had done on these nights.

They (the narrators) said: And they asked him about the fifty (rak’ahs
of prayer) – what happens to it in the month of Ramad’an? He said: The
Holy Prophet (S) performed this and he prayed the fifty (rak’ahs) as he
did in other months and he would not decrease anything from it.[^21]

Note: We see in other narrations that on the nights after the
twenty-third night, up to the end of the month, he would do as he had
done on the twenty-second night.[^22]

14. From al-Sayyid ibn Tawus in al-Iqbal: Narrating from Muhammad ibn
Fudhayl al-Sayrafi who said: ‘Ali ibn Musa al-Rid’a (as) reported to us
from his father, from his grandfather, from his fathers (as) who said:
The Noble Prophet (S) used to offer a two rak’ah prayer on the first day
of (the month of) Muharram.[^23]

15. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Yazid ibn Khalifah who said: I said to Abi
‘Abdillah (as): “‘Umar ibn Handhalah came to us (and narrated to us)
from you regarding the (prayer) timings.” He said: “He does not ascribe
lies to us ...” I said: “He said the time for the Maghrib prayer is when
the sun disappears (from the horizon), however when the Holy Prophet (S)
was traveling with haste, he would delay the Maghrib prayer and combine
it with the ‘Isha prayer.” He (as) said: “He has spoken the truth.”[^24]

16. In al-Tahdhib: In his narration from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Isa
from Muhammad ibn Yahya from Talha ibn Zayd from Ja’far from his father
(as): On rainy nights, the Holy Prophet (S) would delay the Maghrib
prayer and hasten the ‘Isha, praying them together and saying: “One who
shows no mercy will not be shown mercy.”[^25]

17. Also: In his narration from ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim from his father, from
Ibn Abi ‘Umayr, from Hammad, from al-Halabi, from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who
said: When the Prophet (S) was on a journey or if something urgent came
up, he would combine the Dhuhr and ‘Asr prayers and the Maghrib and
‘Isha prayers.[^26]

Note: There are numerous similar narrations from al-Kulayni, Shaykh Tusi
and his son, and al-Shahid al-Awwal.[^27]

18. In al-Faqih: In his narration from Mu’awiyah ibn Wahab from Abi
‘Abdillah (as): When the Mu’addhin (caller of the *adhan*) would come to
the Noble Prophet (S) on very hot days (to seek permission to call the
*adhan*) for the Dhuhr prayer, the Holy Prophet (S) would say: “*Abrid!
Abrid!”* (Wait for it become a little cooler).[^28]

Note: al-Saduq says: It (‘*Abrid! Abrid!’*) means ‘Hurry! Hurry!’ And he
took this from (the noun) *al-Barid*. He mentions this in the book
Madinat al-’Ilm.[^29] The apparent meaning (of this word) is to delay
something until the extreme heat reduces, as can be seen in the book
al-’Ala’ from Muhammad ibn Muslim who said: Abu Ja’far (as) saw me
praying in the Holy Prophet’s (S) masjid and when I had completed the
prayer he met me and said: “You should perform the obligatory prayer at
that (later) time; do you offer the prayer in (this) intense heat?” I
said: “I was praying the *nafilah*.”[^30]

19. From al-Ghazali in al-Ihya: Whenever anyone would come to sit beside
the Noble Prophet (S) while he was praying, he would hasten his prayer
and receive him asking: “Do you need anything?” And after having
fulfilled his needs he (S) would return to his prayer.[^31]

20. From Ja’far ibn Ahmad al-Qummi in the book Zuhd al-Nabi: When the
Holy Prophet (S) stood for prayer, his face would become pale out of
fear of Allah (SwT) and sounds of weeping would be heard from him,
similar to the sound of boiling from the cooking-pot.[^32]

21. Also: In another narration he said: When the Holy Prophet (S) would
stand for prayer, he would be like a garment that had fallen on the
ground (completely still - and submissive in front of Allah (SwT)).[^33]

22. In al-Bihar: ‘Aishah said: The Prophet (S) would talk to us and we
would talk to him, but when the time for prayer entered, it would be as
if he did not know us and we did not know him.[^34]

23. In al-Awali: The Noble Prophet (S) glanced to the right and left in
the prayer, but he did not turn his head back.[^35]

24. From Mufid al-Din al-Tusi in al-Majalis: In his narration from ‘Ali
(as) in his letter to Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr when he appointed him as the
governor of Egypt: Then observe your *ruku’* and *sujud* for the Holy
Prophet (S) was the most perfect in his prayer and the lightest in his
actions[^36] in it.[^37]

25. In al-Tahdhib: Narrated from ‘Ammar al-Sabati from Abi ‘Abdillah
(as): The Holy Prophet (S) used to pray even without having washed his
hands after eating meat but when he had milk, he would not pray until he
had washed his hands and rinsed his mouth.[^38]

26. Also: In his narration from Husayn ibn Sa’id from al-Nadhr from Ibn
Sinan who said: I said to him: “We have a Mua’ddhin who calls the
*adhan* at (while it is still) nighttime.” He said: “This may be
beneficial for the neighbors in order to wake them up for the prayer,
however the *sunnah* is that it (the *adhan*) should be called at
daybreak and the gap between the *adhan* and the *iqamah* should not
exceed (the time taken to perform) two rak’ahs.”[^39]

27. In al-Kafi: Narrated from ‘Abdillah ibn Sinan from Abi ‘Abdillah
(as) who said: When the time (for prayer) entered, the Noble Prophet (S)
would tell Bilal: “O Bilal! Climb on the wall and call out the *adhan*
loudly.”[^40]

28. In al-Faqih: In his narration from Zurarah from Abi Ja’far (as) who
said: al-Husayn (as) was slow in talking (when he was a child), until it
was feared that he would never speak. Once the Holy Prophet (S) went (to
the masjid) for *salah* carrying him between his shoulders and made him
stand on his right side.

The people lined up behind the Holy Prophet (S) for prayer. As he
started the *salah* (by reciting the *takbir*), al-Husayn (as) (also)
recited the *takbir*. When the Prophet (S) heard this he recited the
*takbir* (again), so al-Husayn (as) repeated the takbir (again). The
Noble Prophet (S) repeated this seven times and al-Husayn (as) recited
the *takbir* seven times and this became established as the
*sunnah*.[^41]

Note: This has also been narrated in al-’Ilal, by Shaykh Tusi in
al-Tahdhib and Ibn Tawus in Falah al-Sa’il and others.[^42] In some
narrations, ‘al-Hasan’ is mentioned instead of ‘al-Husayn’, however the
latter is more common.

29. In al-Da’aim: From Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his fathers from ‘Ali
(as): The Holy Prophet (S) used to raise his hands up to his ears when
reciting the ‘Takbirat al-Ihram’ (the first *takbir* in prayer) and when
he recited the *takbir* before *ruku’* and when he raised his head from
the *ruku’*.[^43]

30. From al-Sayyari in the book al-Tanzil wal-Tahrif: From Muhammad ibn
‘Ali from Muhammad ibn Fudhayl al-Azadi from Abi Ja’far (as) who said:
The Holy Prophet (S) used to recite *‘Bismillahi-Rahmanir-Rahim’* loudly
(in prayer) and would raise his voice while reciting it.[^44]

31. From al-’Ayyashi in his Tafsir: From Mansur ibn Hazim from Abi
‘Abdillah (as) who said: When the Noble Prophet (S) prayed with the
people, he would recite *‘Bismillahi-Rahmanir-Rahim’* loudly.[^45]

32. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his
fathers from ‘Ali (as) who said: Whenever the Prophet (S) yawned in
prayer, he would cover his mouth with his right hand.[^46]

33. Also: In his narration from ‘Ali (as) who said: The Prophet (S)
would sometimes touch his beard in the prayer. So we said (to him): “O
Prophet (S) we see you touching your beard in the prayer?” He said:
“When my sadness increases (I do this).”[^47]

34. From al-Shahid al-Awwal in al-Dhikra: From Abi Sa’id al-Khudri from
the Holy Prophet (S) that he used to say *‘A’udhu Billahi min
al-Shaytani al-Rajim’* before the recitation (in the prayer).[^48]

35. In al-Faqih: The Holy Prophet (S) was the most perfect in his prayer
from among the people. When he started his prayer he would say: *‘Allahu
Akbar. Bismillahi-Rahmani-Rahim.’*[^49]

36. In al-Tahdhib: Narrated from Ishaq ibn ‘Ammar from Ja’far from his
father (as): Two men from the companions of the Noble Prophet (S)
differed on the Prayer of the Holy Prophet (S) so they wrote to Ubay ibn
Ka’b: How many times did the Prophet of Allah pause (in his prayer)? He
replied: There were two instances when he was silent (briefly). First
was when he had finished reciting ‘Umm al-Kitab (Surah al-Hamd) and
second when he had completed the (other) Surah.[^50]

Note: al-Saduq has narrated this in detail and has (mentioned) that his
first silence was after the *takbir* and the second was after the
recitation (of the Surahs) – before the *ruku’*.[^51]

37. From al-Shahid in al-Dhikra: Ibn al-Junayd said: Samarah and Ubay
ibn Ka’b have narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that his first silence
was after the opening *takbir* and the second was after (reciting)
al-Hamd.[^52]

38. In al-Tahdhib: Narrated from ‘Isa ibn ‘Abdillah al-Qummi from Abi
‘Abdillah (as) who said: In the Fajr prayer, the Prophet (S) recited
Surahs such as *‘Amma Yatasa’alun* (Surah al-Naba), *Hal Ataka Hadithul
Ghashiyah* (Surah al-Ghashiyah), *Hal Ata ‘alal Insan* (Surah al-Dahr)
and *La Uqsimu bi Yaumil Qiyamah* (Surah al-Qiyamah). In the Dhuhr
prayer he recited Surahs such as *Sabbihisma* (Surah al-’A’la),
*Washamsi wa Dhuhaha* (Surah al-Shams) and *Hal Ataka Hadithul
Ghashiyah* (Surah al-Ghashiyah). He would, in the Maghrib prayer, recite
Surahs such as *Qul HuwAllahu Ahad* (Surah al-Ikhlas), *Idha Ja’a
Nasrullah* (Surah al-Nasr) and *Idha Zulzilat* (Surah al-Zilzal). In the
‘Isha prayer he would recite what he recited in the Dhuhr prayer; and in
the ‘Asr prayer he recited what he would recite in the Maghrib
prayer.[^53]

39. Also: Narrated from Ibn Abi ‘Umayr from Abi Mas’ud al-Ta’i from Abi
‘Abdillah (as): In the last rak’ah of the night prayer, the Noble
Prophet used to recite *Hal Ata ‘alal Insan* (Surah al-Dahr).[^54]

40. In al-Misbah: It has been narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) used to
recite nine Surahs in the (last) three rak’ahs (of the night prayer). In
the first (rak’ah): *Alhakumu al-Takathur* (Surah al-Takathur), *Inna
Anzalna* (Surah al-Qadr) and *Idha Zulzilat* (Surah al-Zilzal). In the
second (rak’ah): *al-Hamd* (Surah al-Fatihah), *Wal ‘Asr* (Surah
al-’Asr) and *Idha Ja’a Nasrullah* (Surah al-Nasr). And in the single
rak’ah of the Witr prayer: *Qul Ya Ayyuhal Kafirun* (Surah al-Kafirun),
*Tabbat* (Surah al-Lahab) and *Qul Huwallahu Ahad* (Surah
al-Ikhlas).[^55]

41. In al-Khisal: Narrated from al-A’mash from Ja’far ibn Muhammad (as)
who said: The Qunut is a required *sunnah* in every prayer - in the
second rak’ah before the *ruku’* and after the recitation (of the
Surahs).[^56]

42. In al-’Awali: al-Barra’ ibn ‘Azib narrated: The Prophet (S) never
offered any obligatory prayer without performing Qunut in it.[^57]

Note: This has also been narrated from al-Husayn (as).[^58]

43. From Husayn ibn Hamdan al-Hasini in al-Hidayah, from ‘Isa ibn Mahdi
al-Jawhari, from ‘Askar the slave of Abi Ja’far, al-Rayyan the slave of
al-Rid’a (as) and a group of other narrators – estimated at more than
seventy men – from al-’Askari (as) who, in a lengthy hadith, said:
Verily Allah (SwT) revealed to my grandfather the Holy Prophet (S): “I
have distinguished you and ‘Ali and My proofs (the twelve Imams (as))
from his lineage until the Day of Reckoning with ten qualities ...and
(one of the qualities is) performing the Qunut in every second
rak’ah.[^59]

44. In Ma’ani al-Akbar: Narrated from Qasim ibn Salam who said: The
(*ruku’* of the) Noble Prophet (S) was such that if water were to be
poured onto his back it would settle (without flowing).[^60]

45. In al-’Ilal: Narrated from Hisham ibn al-Hakam from Abi al-Hasan
Musa (as), he said: I asked him: “What is the reason for saying
*‘Subhana Rabbiyal ‘Adhimi wa Bihamdihi’* in the *ruku’* and saying in
the *sujud* *‘Subhana Rabbiyal ‘A’la wa Bihamdihi’*?” He said: “O
Hisham! When the Holy Prophet (S) was taken up (to the heavens on
Mi’raj) and he prayed to Allah and recalled what he had witnessed of His
magnificence, his body trembled (out of fear) and he bowed down with his
hands on this knees and started saying *‘Subhana Rabbiyal ‘Adhimi wa
Bihamdihi’* and when he stood from the *ruku’* he observed Him from a
more (spiritually) elevated position, (so) he fell in prostration to Him
saying *‘Subhana Rabbiyal ‘A’la wa Bihamdihi’* and when he had said this
seven times, the fear (he felt) was alleviated. From then on this became
established as the *sunnah*.”[^61]

46. From al-Thaqafi in the book al-Gharat: Narrated from ‘Ubayah who
said: Amir al-Mu’minin (as) wrote to Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr: Observe your
*ruku’* and *sujud* for the Holy Prophet (S) was the most perfect in his
prayer and the most submissive in it. And when he went into *ruku’* he
said *‘Subhana Rabbiyal ‘Adhimi wa Bihamdihi’* three times ... and when
he performed the *sajdah* he said *‘Subhana Rabbiyal ‘A’la wa
Bihamdihi’*.[^62]

Note: This has also been mentioned in other narrations.[^63]

47. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his
fathers from ‘Ali (as) who said: When the Noble Prophet (S) performed
the *sajdah* he would draw his knees to the ground before his
hands.[^64]

Note: In many narrations from the Ahl al-Bayt (as) we find that it is
recommended to place the hands on the ground before the knees while
performing the *sajdah*.[^65] It is possible that the above narration
points to bringing the knees close to the ground without placing them
(on it).

48. Also: In the narration from al-Husayn from ‘Ali (as) who said: When
the Prophet (S) performed the *sajdah*, he would prostrate with his
palms on the ground and would extend his forearms until it would be
possible for the person behind him to see his armpits.[^66]

49. From Sayyid Rad’i in al-Majazat al-Nabawiyyah: It has been narrated
that the Holy Prophet (S) would perform *sajdah* on the *khumrah*, which
is a small mat made from the branches of the date palm tree.[^67]

50. In al-Ja’fariyat: Muhammad informed us: Musa told me that my father
told us from his father from his grandfather, Ja’far ibn Muhammad, from
his father (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) used to pour water on the
place where he performed his *sujud*.[^68]

51. In al-Faqih: In his narration from Isma’il ibn Muslim from al-Sadiq
from his father (as) who said: The Noble Prophet (S) had a short staff,
with an iron tip at its lower end, which he would lean on. He would come
out with it on the two *‘eid* days and would pray next to it.[^69]

52. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Mu’awiyah ibn Wahab from Abi ‘Abdillah
(as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) would place the short staff in front
of him when he prayed.[^70]

53. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his
fathers from ‘Ali (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) would recite
*takbir* in the two *‘eid* prayers and in the Istisqa’ (prayer for
rain) - in the first (rak’ah) seven times (once for the ‘Takbirat
al-Ihram’, five times for the five Qunuts and once before the *ruku’*)
and in the second rak’ah five times (four times for the four Qunuts and
once before the *ruku’*).[^71]

Note: This has been narrated in al-Manaqib with a detailed
Explanation.[^72]

54. Also: In a narration from ‘Ali (as): in the two *‘eid* prayers, the
Noble Prophet (S) used to recite *Sabbihisma Rabbikal ‘A’la* (Surah
al-’A’la) and *Hal Ataka Hadith al-Ghashiyah* (Surah al-Ghashiyah).[^73]

55. In al-Faqih: In his narration from Abi Ja’far (as) who said: The
Holy Prophet (S) used to recite two rak’ahs when praying salat
al-Istisqa’ and he would ask Allah (SwT) to send rain (and supplicate)
while he was sitting.

He (as) also said: He (S) started with the *salah* before the sermon and
recited the Surahs loudly.[^74]

56. From al-Saduq in al-Hidayah: Abu Ja’far (as) said: It is from the
*sunnah* for the people who live in cities to come out of their cities
into an open field for the two *‘eid* prayers - except the people of
Makkah, for they pray the *‘eid* prayer in Masjid al-Haram.[^75]

Note: There are numerous similar narrations.[^76]

57. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his
fathers (as) who said: When the Holy Prophet (S) left (his house) to go
to the place of prayer, he would go using the route of *al-Shajarah* and
on his way back he would go through *al-Mu’arrish*. He (S) intended to
leave using the farther of the two routes and he intended to return
using the nearer of the two.[^77]

58. From al-Saduq in al-Hidayah: Amir al-Mu’minin (as) said: The
*sunnah* is that the prayer of Istisqa’ should be performed in open
plains where the people can see the sky. The prayer of Istisqa’ is not
performed inside the masjid[^78] except in Makkah.[^79]

59. From Shaykh Warram ibn Abi Firas in Tanbih al-Khawatir: From Nu’man
who said: The Noble Prophet (S) used to organize us in such a way that
we would stand in straight lines – as straight at arrows - and he would
give much importance to this especially when he saw that we had
neglected it. One day he came and stood (for prayer) and as he was about
to recite the *takbir,* he saw one man whose chest was in front of the
others so he said: “O Servants of Allah! Keep your lines straight or
else you will surely oppose each other.”[^80]

60. Also: From Ibn Mas’ud who said: The Holy Prophet (S) would put his
hand on our shoulders before the prayer and say: “Stand in a straight
line and do not differ for (if you do,) your hearts will disagree.”[^81]

Addendum to this Chapter
------------------------

61. In Asrar al-Salah of al-Shahid al-Thani: The Holy Prophet (S) used
to wait for the time of prayer and would have an intense yearning for
it. He would be mindful of the entering of the prayer-time and would
tell Bilal, his Mua’ddhin: “Gratify us O Bilal! (By announcing that it’s
time for prayer).”[^82]

62. In Majmu’at Warram: From Amir al-Mu’minin (as) who said: Neither
eating dinner nor anything else ever distracted the Noble Prophet (S)
(from the prayer) and when the time for prayer entered, it was as if he
knew neither his family member nor his close friend.[^83]

63. In al-’Ilal: From Layth from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: Nothing
distracted the Holy Prophet (S) from the Maghrib prayer when the sun had
set, (and he would attend to nothing else) until he had prayed it.[^84]

64. In al-Makarim: He (S) used to say: The coolness of my eyes[^85] was
placed in prayer and fasting.[^86]

65. In the Amali of Shaykh Tusi: From Abi Harb ibn Abi al-Aswad
al-Duwali from his father Abi al-Aswad, from Abi Dharr in a lengthy
hadith from the Holy Prophet (S) who said: “O Aba Dharr! Allah (SwT)
placed the coolness of my eyes in *salah* and He made it beloved to me
as food is loved by the hungry and water by the thirsty, and when the
hungry eats food he becomes satiated and when he drinks water he becomes
quenched but I never get satiated by the *salah* (and always have a
desire for more).”[^87]

Note: This is also narrated by al-Tabarsi in al-Makarim and Shaykh
Warram in his Majmu’ah.[^88]

66. In Jami’ al-Akhbar: When the Noble Prophet (S) used to pray, the
state of his heart was like a cooking-pot boiling - out of fear of Allah
(SwT).[^89]

Note: This has also been narrated in other books.[^90]

67. In al-Bihar from Bayan al-Tanzil of Ibn Shahr ashub: It is said that
when the Holy Prophet (S) prayed, he would raise his eyes (looking) to
the heavens but when the verse:

***‘Those who are humble in their prayers’*** (Surah al-Mu\`minun (23):
2)

was revealed, he lowered his head and cast his look on the ground.[^91]

68. In al-Faqih: It is the *sunnah* to recite the *tawajjuh*[^92] in six
prayers – they are: The first rak’ah of the night prayer, the single
Witr prayer, the first of the two rak’ahs of the midday prayer (i.e.
*nafilah* of the Dhuhr), the first of the two rak’ahs of the prayer of
Ihram, the first rak’ah of the *nafilah* of Maghrib and the first rak’ah
of (all) the obligatory prayers.[^93]

Note: He also narrated it in al-Khisal, al-Hidayah and al-Muqni’.[^94]

69. In al-Ihtijaj: From Muhammad ibn ‘Abdillah ibn al-Humayri – in a
hadith on the answers to his questions from the one who is divinely
protected: So he (S) answered him: The *tawajjuh* is entirely
non-obligatory, and the highly recommended *sunnah* which has been
agreed upon is (for one to recite):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَّهْتُ وَجْهِيَ لِلَّذِي فَطَرَ السَّمٌوَاتِ وَالأَرْضَ حَنِيفاً
مسْلِماً وَمَا أَنَا مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ. إِنَّ صَلاَتِي وَنُسُكِي
وَمَحْـيَايَ وَمَمَاتِي لِلٌّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ لاَ شَرِيكَ لَهُ،
وَبِذٌلِكَ أُمِرْتُ وَأَنَا مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ. أَللٌّهُمَّ
اجْعَلْنِي مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ. أَعُوذُ بِاللٌّه السَّمِيعِ الْعَلِيمِ
مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ الرَّجِيمِ. بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ الرَّحْمٌنِ الرَّحِيمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I have turned myself wholly towards the One who originated the heavens
and the earth and I am not from the polytheists. Verily my prayer and my
sacrifice and my life and my death are for Allah, the Lord of the
Universe – He has no partner; and this is what I was commanded and I am
from those who submit. O Allah! Place me among those who submit. I seek
refuge with Allah from the accursed Shaytan. In the name of Allah, the
All-beneficent the All-merciful ... and then recite (Surah)
al-Hamd.”*[^95]

70. In al-Khisal: From Abi al-Hasan ibn Rashid who said: I asked
al-Rid’a (as) about the opening *takbirat*[^96]. He (as) said: “(They
are) seven.” I said: “It is narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) used to
recite one *takbir*.” He said: “The Noble Prophet (S) recited one
*takbir* loudly and six softly.”[^97]

Note: al-Saduq has narrated this in al-’Uyun.[^98]

71. In Falah al-Sa’il: From Kurdin ibn Masma’ in his well-known book, in
his narration from the Holy Prophet (S): Then he would recite three
*takbirat* (after completing the prayer), raising his hands to his ears,
(and this is) a highly recommended *sunnah* which was prescribed by the
Holy Prophet (S) when he received some glad tidings.[^99]

72. In Amali of Shaykh al-Tusi: From Zurayq who said: I heard Aba
‘Abdillah (as) say: It is from the *sunnah* to remain seated between the
*adhan* and the *iqamah* in the morning (Fajr) prayer and the Maghrib
and ‘Isha prayers - there is no supererogatory prayer between the
*adhan* and the *iqamah* (in these prayers). And it is (from) the
*sunnah* to offer two rak’ahs of *nafilah* between the *adhan* and the
*iqamah* in the Dhuhr and ‘Asr prayers.[^100]

73. In al-Makarim: From Zurarah from Abi Ja’far (as) in a hadith: It was
prescribed as the *sunnah* that ladies should not raise their heads from
the *ruku’* and the *sujud* until the men have raised (their
heads).[^101]

74. In Ma’ani al-Akhbar: From Qasim ibn Salam in a hadith (from an
infallible): When he (S) performed the *ruku’* he did not lower his head
completely nor did he raise it until it was above the rest of his body,
rather (he maintained a position) between the two.[^102]

75. In al-’Ilal: From ‘Abdillah ibn Maimun from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from
his father who said: When the Noble Prophet (S) heard the sound of a
child crying while he was praying, he would hasten the prayer so that
the child’s mother could attend to her child.[^103]

76. In al-Kafi: From Abi Basir from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: The
length of the Holy Prophet’s (S) saddle was one cubit and when he prayed
(while on a journey) he would place it in front of him so that it may
act as a barrier from anyone who passed in front of him.[^104]

77. Also: From Aban ibn Taghlub who said: I asked to Aba ‘Abdillah (as):
“At what time did the Holy Prophet normally pray the Witr?” He said:
“Like the time between sunset and the Maghrib prayer (i.e. a very short
time before the Fajr prayer).”[^105]

78. In al-Faqih: From al-Halabi from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: It was
prescribed as the *sunnah* that one should eat on the day of Fitr before
going for the prayer and not to eat on the day of Ad’ha until after the
*(‘eid)* prayers.[^106]

79. In al-Kafi: From Fudhayl ibn Yasar from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said:
A small mat (used in prostration) was brought for my father on the day
of Fitr but he asked that it be taken away, then he said: “On this day
the Holy Prophet (S) used to like looking at the horizon and placing his
forehead on the earth.”[^107]

Note: This has been narrated in al-Da’aim and in al-Faqih, and in it the
day of Ad’ha is also mentioned after the day of Fitr.[^108]

80. Also: From Layth al-Muradi from Abi ‘Abdillah (as): It was said to
the Holy Prophet (S) on the day of Fitr or the day of Ad’ha: “If only
you would pray (the *‘eid* prayer) in your masjid!” He replied: “I like
to come out to the horizons of the (open) sky.”[^109]

81. In al-Muqni’ah: It is narrated that on the two *‘eids* the Prophet
(S) used to wear a *Burda* (a kind of striped garment) and a turban -
whether it was winter or summer.[^110]

82. In the ‘Allamah’s Nihayah: The Noble Prophet (S) would come out on
the day of *‘eid* reciting the *takbir* loudly.[^111]

83. In al-Kafi: From Muhammad ibn Fad’l al-Hashimi from Abi ‘Abdillah
(as) who said: There is a two rak’ah prayer that is *sunnah* to perform
only in Madinah and nowhere else, and it is to be performed in the Holy
Prophet’s (S) masjid on the two *‘eid* days before proceeding for the
*‘eid* prayers. This is not done (anywhere) except in Madinah because
(this is how) the Holy Prophet (S) performed it.[^112]

84. In al-’Uyun: From Yasir al-Khadim and from Rayyan ibn Salt and
others from those who narrated it from Abi al-Hasan al-Rid’a (as) in a
hadith: When the (day of) *‘eid* came, Ma’mun sent for al-Rid’a (as)
asking him to ride to the *‘eid* prayer and give the sermon ... and when
Ma’mun insisted, he (as) said: O Amir al-Mu’minin[^113], if you excuse
me from this it will be more pleasing to me, and if you do not excuse me
then I will come out for the *‘eid* prayer as the Prophet (S) came out
and as Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) came out ... so at
sunrise al-Rid’a performed *ghusl* and wore a white turban made of
cotton, placing one end of it on his chest and another end between his
shoulders and said to all his slaves: “Do as I have done.” Then he took
a short staff in his hand and came out and we were with him. He (as) was
barefoot, having rolled-up his trousers up to half the shank. When he
stood and we walked in front of him, he raised his head toward the
heavens and recited the *takbir* four times ... and when he came to the
door he stopped briefly and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُ أَكْبَرُ، أَللٌّهُ أَكْبَرُ، أَللٌّهُ أَكْبَرُ، عَلى مَا
هَدَانَا، أَللٌّهُ أَكْبَرُ عَلى مَا رَزَقَنَا مِنْ بَهِيمَةِ
الأَنْعَامِ، وَالْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ عَلى مَا أَبْلاَنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Allah is the Greatest, Allah is the Greatest, Allah is the Greatest
for that which He has guided us to. Allah is the Greatest for what He
has granted us of sustenance from the livestock, and all praise is due
to Allah for what He has destined for us”.*

He recited this loudly and we also recited it loudly ... and he said
this three times ... and Abu al-Hasan (as) would walk and stop briefly
after every ten steps, reciting the *takbir* four times.[^114]

85. In al-Faqih: In al-Sakuni’s narration: When the Holy Prophet (S)
went for the *‘eid* prayer, he did not return using the same route that
he had taken when he started, rather he would take another route.[^115]

Note: This has also been narrated in al-Da’aim.[^116]

86. In al-Tahdhib: In his narration from ‘Isa ibn ‘Abdillah, from his
father, from his grandfather, from ‘Ali (as) who said: The Holy Prophet
(S) never used to recite more than one *takbir* in the two ‘Eid prayers,
until the time al-Husayn (as) was slow to speak (as a child). One day,
his mother (as) dressed him and sent him with his grandfather and when
he (as) recited the *takbir*, al-Husayn (as) also recited the *takbir*,
repeating after the Noble Prophet (S) (and he did this) seven times.
Then in the second rak’ah the Holy Prophet (S) recited the *takbir* and
al-Husayn repeated it after him five times. From then on, the Holy
Prophet (S) made it a *sunnah* and this *sunnah* is still practiced
until today.[^117]

Note: This has also been narrated in al-Manaqib.[^118]

87. In Nawadir al-Rawandi: In his narration from Musa ibn Ja’far from
his fathers from ‘Ali (as) who said: It was the *sunnah* in the prayer
of Istisqa’ that the Imam should stand and pray two rak’ahs and then
extend his hands and supplicate (to Allah (SwT) for rain).[^119]

88. In al-’Ilal: In his narration from Abi Hamzah Anas ibn ‘Ayyad’
al-Laythi from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his father (as): When the
Prophet (S) prayed for rain, he looked at the heavens and turned his
cloak from right to left and left to right (inside out). He said: I
asked him: What is the meaning of this? He (S) said: It was a sign
between him and his companions (of) turning the drought into
abundance.[^120]

Note: This has also been mentioned in al-Kafi, al-Tahdhib, al-Fiqh and
al-Da’aim.[^121]

89. In al-Faqih: When the Holy Prophet (S) supplicated for rain he would
recite:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ اسْقِ عِبَادَكَ وَبَهَائِمَكَ، وَانْشُرْ رَحْمَتَكَ،
وَأَحْيِي بِلاَدَكَ الْمَيِّتَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Give water to Your servants and Your creatures, and spread
Your mercy, and give life to Your lifeless land.”*

And he would repeat it three times.[^122]

90. In al-Ja’fariyat: From ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) who said: The rain
from which comes sustenance of the animals is from under the
*‘Arsh*[^123]. It is for this reason that the Holy Prophet (S) would go
outside the first time it rained and he would stand (there) until his
head and his beard became soaking wet.[^124]

Note: This has been narrated by al-Rawandi in his Nawadir with a slight
difference.[^125]

91. Also in al-Ja’fariyat: From ‘Ali (as): When the Prophet (S) saw rain
he said: “O Allah! Make it a beneficial rainfall.”[^126]

92. In al-Tahdhib: In his narration from ‘Abdillah ibn Maimun from
Ja’far from his father (as) who said: When the Noble Prophet (S) went
for the Jumu’ah (Friday) prayer, he sat on the pulpit until the
Mua’ddhin had finished (calling the *adhan*).[^127]

93. In al-Tahdhib: From ‘Amr ibn Jami’ narrating from ‘Ali (as) who
said: It is from the *sunnah* that when the Imam ascends the pulpit, he
should salute (i.e. say ‘salamun ‘alaykum’ to) the people when he faces
them.[^128]

94. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his
father, from his grandfather (as) that the Holy Prophet (S) used to give
two sermons (separating them) by sitting (briefly) and then
standing.[^129]

95. Also: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad, from his father
(as) who said: Make your recitation (of the Surahs) audible in the
Jumu’ah prayer as this is a *sunnah*.[^130]

96. Also: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his father (as)
who said: The Holy Prophet (S) used to pray the Jumu’ah prayer when the
sun passed the midpoint of the sky.[^131]

97. Also: In his narration from ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (as) who said:
Performing the Qunut in the Jumu’ah prayer is (from the) *sunnah*.[^132]

98. In al-Da’aim: From Ja’far ibn Muhammad (as): The *sunnah* is for the
Imam to recite, in the first rak’ah of the Jumu’ah prayer, Surah
al-Jumu’ah and in the second rak’ah, Surah al-Munafiqun.[^133]

99. In al-Tahdhib: In his narration from al-Sakuni from Ja’far, from his
father, from his fathers, from ‘Ali (as): When the Noble Prophet (S)
entered the masjid while Bilal was reciting the *iqamah*, he sat down
(and did not perform any supererogatory prayers).[^134]

100. al-Shahid al-Thani in al-Dhikra: From Sahl al-Sa’idi who said:
Between the Holy Prophet’s (S) place of prayer and the wall, there was a
passage for the sheep.[^135]

101. In al-Tahdhib: In his narration from Hisham ibn Salim who asked Aba
‘Abdillah (as) about the *tasbih* (that is recited in the prayer), so he
said: You say *‘Subhana Rabbiyal ‘Adheem’* in *ruku’* and in *sujud* you
say *‘Subhana Rabbiyal ‘A’la’* then he said: The obligatory recitation
of this *tasbih* is once and the *sunnah* is thrice and excellence is in
(reciting it) seven times.[^136]

102. Also: In his narration from Muhammad ibn Abi Hamzah from Abi
‘Abdillah (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) used to recite fifteen
verses of the Holy Qur’an in every rak’ah, and his *ruku’* was the same
duration as his *qiyam* (standing), and his *sujud* was the same
duration as his *ruku’,* and the duration after raising his head from
the *ruku’* and (after raising his head from) the *sujud* was
equal.[^137]

Note: It is narrated differently in al-Kafi.[^138]

103. Also: In his narration from Zurarah from Abi Ja’far (as) who said:
The Noble Prophet (S) used to pray two rak’ahs of *subh* – that is the
Fajr prayer – when dawn came and daylight was visible.[^139]

Note: This has also been mentioned in al-Gharat of al-Thaqafi.[^140]

104. Also: In his narration from Ishaq ibn al-Fad’l (who said) that he
asked Aba ‘Abdillah (as) about performing the *sujud* on mats and woven
reeds. He said: “There is no problem, but I prefer that one should
prostrate on the earth, for the Holy Prophet (S) loved to place his
forehead on the earth - so I like for you (to do) that which the Holy
Prophet (S) loved (to do).”[^141]

105. Also: In his narration from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) – about the
*nafilah* prayers – he said: The *sunnah* regarding the daytime prayers
is that they be recited softly and the *sunnah* with regards to the
night prayers is that they should be recited audibly.[^142]

106. Also: al-Harth said: I heard him saying: *‘Qul Huwallahu Ahad’*
(Surah al-Ikhlas) is (equal to) a third of the Qur’an and *‘Qul Ya
Ayyuhal Kafirun’* (Surah al-Kafirun) is equivalent to a quarter (of the
Holy Qur’an); and the Noble Prophet (S) used to repeat *‘Qul Huwallahu
Ahad’* in the Witr prayer (three times) so that he may gain (the reward
for) the recitation of the whole Qur’an.[^143]

107. In al-Faqih: From Zurarah who said: I heard Aba Ja’far (as) saying:
The supplication (recited) after the obligatory prayer is better than
the supererogatory prayer; and this is how the *sunnah* had been
prescribed.[^144]

108. In al-Tahdhib: In his narration from Abi Harun al-Makfuf from Abi
‘Abdillah (as) who said: “O Aba Harun! We (the Ahl al-Bayt) instruct our
children to recite the *tasbih* of Fatimah (as) just as we instruct them
to recite the *salah*, so always recite it, for one who recites it will
never become miserable.”[^145]

109. In Qurb al-Isnad: From Husayn ibn ‘Alwan from Ja’far from his
father (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) said to ‘Ali (as): “O ‘Ali!
You must recite the ‘ayat al-Kursi’ after every obligatory prayer, for
surely none can persist in (doing) this except a prophet, one who is
truthful or a martyr.”[^146]

Note: This has also been narrated in al-Da’aim.[^147]

110. In al-Da’aim: The Holy Prophet (S) used to recite (the following)
in the (first) two rak’ahs before the Witr prayer: In the first (rak’ah)
*‘Sabbihisma Rabbikal ‘A’la’* (Surah al-’A’la), in the second *‘Qul Ya
Ayyuhal Kafirun’* (Surah al-Kafirun) and in the third (rak’ah), in which
the Qunut is recited, (he used to recite) *‘Qul Huwallahu Ahad’* (Surah
al-Ikhlas); and all this is after (reciting) ‘Fatihat al-Kitab’ (Surah
al-Hamd).[^148]

111. In ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: Amir al-Mu’minin (as) narrated that the
Noble Prophet (S) used to say in his *sajdah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ لَكَ سَجَدْتُ وَبِكَ آمَنْتُ وَلَكَ أَسْلَمْتُ، سَجَدَ
وَجْهِي لِلَّذِي خَلَقَهُ وَصَوَّرَهُ وَشَقَّ سَمْعَهُ وَبَصَرَهُ،
فَتَبَارَكَ اللٌّهُ أَحْسَنُ الْخَالِقِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! I have prostrated before You, and believed in You and
submitted myself to You. My face has prostrated to the One who created
it and fashioned it, giving it (the power of) hearing and sight; so
blessed is Allah the best of Creators.”*[^149]

112. In the book al-Gharat of al-Thaqafi: From ‘Ubayah who said: Amir
al-Mu’minin (as) wrote to Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr: Observe your *ruku’*
... and when the Holy Prophet (S) stood from the *ruku’* he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَمِعَ اللٌّهُ لِمَنْ حَمِدَهُ، أَللٌّهُمَّ لَكَ الْحَمْدُ مِلْءَ
سَمٌوَاتِكَ، وَمِلْءَ أَرْضِكَ، وَمِلْءَ مَا شِئْتَ مِنْ شَيْءٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Allah listens to the one who glorifies Him. O Allah! Glory be to You,
(a glory that is) filling Your heavens and filling Your earth and
filling up whatever You wish.”*[^150]

113. In al-Bihar from al-Dhikra: On the supplication recited between the
two *sajdahs* – it has been narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that he
used to say between them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ اغْفِرْ لِي وَارْحَمْنِي وَ أَجِرْنِي وَعَافِـنِي إِنِّي
لِمَا أَنْزَلْتَ إِلَيَّ مِنْ خَيْرٍ فَقِيرٌ. تَبَارَكَ اللٌّهُ رَبُّ
الْعَالَمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Forgive me, and have mercy on me, and keep me safe and grant
me well-being. I am needy of the good that You have sent down to me.
Blessed is Allah, the Lord of the Universe.”*[^151]  
 114. In al-’Awarif al-Ma’arif: Maimunah, the wife of the Holy Prophet
(S), narrated: A *khumrah*[^152] would be laid out in the masjid for the
Holy Prophet (S) to pray on.[^153]

115. In al-Hidayah of Husayn ibn Hamdan al-Hasini: From ‘Isa ibn Mahdi
al-Jawhari and many others, in a hadith from Abi Muhammad al-’Askari
(as): Allah  revealed on my grandfather, the Prophet (S): I have
distinguished you and ‘Ali, and My proofs from him until the Day of
Reckoning (i.e. from his progeny), and your followers with ten
qualities: (Performing) the *ta’fir*[^154] after every prayer.[^155]

116. In al-Majma’: When he (S) prayed, he would be steadfast in his
prayer.[^156]

117. In Durr al-La’ali of Ibn Jumhur, in a hadith: The most liked
prayers in the eyes of the Noble Prophet (S) were the ones that were
regularly offered, even if they were few. And when he would offer any
prayer from the prayers, he would do so regularly.[^157]

118. In ‘Ilal al-Sharai’: In his narration from Anas ibn Malik who said:
I heard the Holy Prophet (S) saying: “Two rak’ahs offered in the middle
of the night is surely dearer to me than the world and what is in
it.”[^158]

119. Al-Saduq in Fadha’il al-Ash’hur: In his narration from ‘Abdillah
ibn Mas’ud, from the Holy Prophet (S) who said: I swear by the One who
sent me with the Truth - Jibra’il informed me from Israfil, from his
Lord the Almighty that He (SwT) said: The one who prays on the last
night of the month of Ramad’an ten rak’ahs, reciting in every rak’ah
‘Fatihat al-Kitab’ (Surah al-Hamd) once and *‘Qul Huwallahu Ahad’*
(Surah al-Ikhlas) ten times and reciting in his *ruku’* and his *sujud*
ten times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَ اللٌّهِ وَالْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ وَلاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ اللٌّهُ
وَاللٌّهُ أَكْبَرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Subhanallahi wal Hamdu Lillahi wa La Ilaha Illallahu Wallahu Akbar”*
and recites the *tashahhud* and *salam* after every two rak’ahs. And
when he completes the last of the ten rak’ahs, after the *salam* he
recites: *‘Astaghfirullah’* one thousand times after which he goes into
sajdah and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا حَيُّ يَا قَـيُّومُ، يَا ذَا الْجَلاَلِ وَالإِكْرَامِ، يَا
رَحْمٌنُ الدُّنْـيَا وَالآخِرَةِ وَرَحِيمَهُمَا، يَا أَرْحَمَ
الرَّاحِمِينَ، يَا إِلٌهَ الأَوَّلِينَ وَالآخِرِينَ، إِغْفِرْ لَنَا
ذُنُوبَنَا، وَتَقَبَّلْ مِنَّا صَلاَتَناَ وَصِيَامَنَا وَقِيَامَنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Ever-Living! O Self-Subsisting! O Lord of Might and Majesty! O
Merciful in this world and hereafter and Compassionate in them both! O
Most Merciful of mercifuls! O Master of the first ones and the last
ones! Forgive us our sins and accept from us our prayers and fasting and
good deeds”*

...The Noble Prophet (S) said: This was a gift especially for me and the
men and women of my Ummah which Allah (SwT) did not give anyone before
me, from the prophets and others.[^159]

120. In ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: The Holy Prophet (S) used to pray upon
entering his house, before sitting down, four (rak’ahs). And in these
four rak’ahs he recited Surah Luqman, Yasin, al-Dukhan and
al-Mulk.[^160]

121. From al-Tahdhib: In his narration from Ibn Sinan from Abi ‘Abdillah
(as) who said: The *sunnah* regarding the *adhan* on the day of ‘Arafah
is that one should recite it followed by the *iqamah* for the Dhuhr
prayer, and then the prayer is performed. Then one should stand and
recite the *iqamah* for ‘Asr without the *adhan*; and the same should be
done in the Maghrib and ‘Isha prayers in Muzdalifah.[^161]

122. From al-Kafi: In his narration from Muhammad ibn Muslim from Abi
Ja’far (as) who said: When the Holy Prophet (S) heard the Mua’ddhin
calling out the *adhan*, he repeated after him (saying) everything that
he was saying.[^162]

123. From al-Tahdhib and al-Istibsar: In his narration from Zurarah and
Fud’ayl ibn Yasar from Abi Ja’far (as) who said: When the Noble Prophet
(S) was taken up (on Me’raj), as he reached the *Bayt al-Ma’mur* the
time for prayer entered. So Jibra’il recited the *adhan* and *iqamah*
and the Holy Prophet (S) came forward and the angels and the prophets
lined up behind the Prophet (S). He said: We asked him: How did he
recite the *adhan*? He replied: (He said)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُ أَكْبَرُ، أَللٌّهُ أَكْبَرُ، أَشْهَدُ أَنْ لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ
اللٌّهَ، أَشْهَدُ أَنْ لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ اللٌّهَ، أَشْهَدُ أَنَّ
مُحَمَّداً رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ، أَشْهَدُ أَنَّ مُحَمَّداً رَسُولُ اللٌّهَ،
حَيَّ عَلى الصَّلاَةِ، حَيَّ عَلى الصَّلاَةِ، حَيَّ عَلى الْفَلاَحِ،
حَيَّ عَلى الْفَلاَحِ، حَيَّ عَلى خَيْرِ الْعَمَلِ، حَيَّ عَلى خَيْرِ
الْعَمَلِ، أَللٌّهُ أَكْبَرُ، أَللٌّهُ أَكْبَرُ، لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ
اللٌّهِ، لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ اللٌّهَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And the *iqamah* was similar except that it included:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ قَامَتِ الصَّلاَةِ، قَدْ قَامَتِ الصَّلاَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Which was recited between the:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَيَّ عَلى خَيْرِ الْعَمَلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُ أَكْبَرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And the Holy Prophet (S) instructed Bilal (to recite it like this) and
he continued reciting this *adhan* until the Prophet (S) passed
away.[^163] And [^164]

124. In Majma’ al-Bayan: In his narration, Anas ibn Malik said: The
Noble Prophet (S) used to offer the sacrifice (of Ad’ha) before praying,
so he was commanded (by Allah (SwT)) to pray first then offer the
sacrifice.[^165]

125. In al-Majma’ of al-Tabarsi: In his narration from Jabir ibn
Samarah: I did not see the Holy Prophet (S) delivering a sermon but that
he would do so while standing, so whoever tells you that he delivered
sermons while sitting, know that he is lying.[^166]

Note: This has also been narrated from ‘Abdillah ibn Mas’ud.[^167]

126. In al-Khisal: In his narration from ‘Aishah that she said: “When
the Holy Prophet (S) was with me, he used to pray two rak’ahs after the
‘Asr prayer.”[^168]

127. In al-Ikhtisas: When the Holy Prophet (S) delivered a sermon, in
the end he would say: “Paradise (is) for the one whose character is
good, whose nature is pure, whose deeds performed in secret are pious,
whose actions performed in the open are virtuous, who gives away the
best of his wealth in charity, who abstains from useless talk and who
treats the people more fairly than (he treats) himself.”[^169]

128. In ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rid’a (as): With different chains of narrators
from al-Fad’l ibn Shadhan, from al-Rid’a (as) who, in his letter to
Ma’mun, said: Reciting *‘Bismillahir-Rahmanir-Rahim’* audibly in all the
prayers is (from the) *sunnah*.[^170]

Note: This means (that it is *sunnah* to do this) in all the prayers in
the day and night, whether obligatory or voluntary.

129. In Majma’ al-Bayan: In his narration from Asbagh ibn Nubatah, from
Amir al-Mu’minin (as) who said: When this Surah – al-Kawthar – was
revealed, the Noble Prophet (S) asked Jibra’il: “What is this sacrifice
that my Lord has asked of me?” He said: “It is not a sacrifice, rather
He is commanding that when you commence the prayer you should raise your
hands as you recite the *takbir,* and (again) when you go into *ruku’,*
and when you raise your head from the *ruku’,* and when you go into
*sajdah* - for this is our prayer and the prayer of the angels in the
seven heavens. Surely there is a beautification for everything, and the
beautification for the *salah* is raising the hands with the recitation
every *takbir*.”[^171]

Note: This has also been narrated in al-Durr al-Manthur.[^172]

130. From al-Tahdhib: In his narration from ‘Ali ibn Ja’far who said: I
asked Aba al-Hasan (as) about the recitation of *adhan* from the
minarets – is it a *sunnah*? He replied: At the time of the Holy Prophet
(S) the *adhan* was recited on the ground and there were no minarets in
those days.[^173]

131. From al-Faqih: In his narration from Hasan ibn al-Sirri from Abi
‘Abdillah (as) who said: It is from the *sunnah* for a man to put his
fingers in his ears when he recites the *adhan*.[^174]

Note: This has also been narrated in al-Tahdhib.[^175]

132. In al-Tahdhib: In his narration from Ibn Sinan who said: I asked
him about the call (of *adhan*) before dawn (- is it permissible?) He
said: No problem, however the *sunnah* is with the (recitation at)
dawn.[^176]

133. In al-Da’aim: From Abi ‘Abdillah Ja’far ibn Muhammad (as) that he
said: In the event of a solar or lunar eclipse, the Holy Prophet (S)
would tell the people: “Go to your masajid quickly.”[^177]

134. Also: The *sunnah* is to pray (Salat al-ayat) in the masjid if they
are praying in congregation.[^178]

[^1]: al-Kafi 3:344

[^2]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:4, al-Istibsar 1:218

[^3]: Ibid.

[^4]: Arabs used to call the darkness of the night \`utmah\` and they
also used this to refer to the prayers offered at night. (Tr.)

[^5]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:5

[^6]: ‘Ilal al-Sharai’: 331

[^7]: al-Kafi 3:446

[^8]: al-Khisal: 298, ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rid’a 1:277, also narrated by
al-Kulayni 6:550

[^9]: al-Faqih 1:217

[^10]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:20, al-Kafi 3:288, ‘Ilal al-Sharai’ 2:349

[^11]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:262-263

[^12]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:118, al-Hidayah: 30

[^13]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:334, Majma’ al-Bayan 2:555

[^14]: al-Kafi 3:445

[^15]: We have not found a reference for this.

[^16]: Misbah al-Mutahajjid: 255

[^17]: Jamal al-Usbu’: 246

[^18]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 3:60

[^19]: Ibid.

[^20]: al-Kafi 4:155, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 3:613

[^21]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 3:64-66

[^22]: al-Kafi 4:155

[^23]: Iqbal al-A\`mal: 553

[^24]: al-Kafi 3:279, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:31

[^25]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:32

[^26]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 3:233, ‘Ilal al-Sharai’: 321

[^27]: al-Kafi 3:431, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 3:234, Dhikra al-Shi’ah: 118

[^28]: al-Faqih 1:223

[^29]: Muntaha al-Matlub 1:200 – quoting from the book Madinat al-’Ilm,
al-Mustadrak 3:212, Bihar al-Anwar 44:83

[^30]: al-Usul al-Sittata ‘Ashar: 154. See al-Mustadrak 6:19 for a
narration related to this.

[^31]: Ihya\` Ulum al-Din 2:365

[^32]: Falah al-Sa\`il: 161 quoting from the book Zuhd al-Nabi,
al-Mustadrak 4:93, Bihar al-Anwar 84:248, ‘Uddat al-Da’i:151

[^33]: Falah al-Sa\`il: 161, al-Mustadrak 4:93, Bihar al-Anwar 44:248

[^34]: Bihar al-Anwar 84:258, ‘Uddat al-Da’i: 152, al-Mustadrak 3:100

[^35]: ‘Awali al-La\`ali 1:175, al-Mustadrak 4:114

[^36]: Meaning that he (S) was careful not to prolong the prayer so that
the old, weak etc. would easily be able to join the congregation. (Tr.)

[^37]: Amali al-Tusi 1:29, Amali al-Saduq: 267

[^38]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 1:350, al-Istibsar 1:97

[^39]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:53

[^40]: al-Kafi 3:307, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:58

[^41]: al-Faqih 1:305

[^42]: ‘Ilal al-Sharai’: 332, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:67, Falah al-Sa\`il:
130, al-Manaqib 4:73

[^43]: Da\`aim al-Islam 1:162, al-Mustadrak 4:144

[^44]: Narrated in al-Mustadrak 4:185, Tafsir al-’Ayyashi 2:295 – Surah
al-Isra\`

[^45]: Tafsir al-’Ayyashi 2:295 – Surah al-Isra\`

[^46]: al-Ja’fariyat: 36, al-Mustadrak 5:416, Da\`aim al-Islam 1:175

[^47]: al-Ja’fariyat: 39, al-Mustadrak 5:416

[^48]: Dhikra al-Shi’ah: 191, Bihar al-Anwar 85:5

[^49]: al-Faqih 1:306

[^50]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:297

[^51]: al-Khisal: 74

[^52]: Dhikra al-Shi\`ah: 192, Bihar al-Anwar 84:189

[^53]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:95

[^54]: Ibid., 2:124

[^55]: Misbah al-Mutahajjid: 132

[^56]: al-Khisal: 604, ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rid’a 2:122

[^57]: ‘Awali al-La\`ali 2:42, al-Mustadrak 4:396

[^58]: ‘Awali al-La\`ali 2:219 (also from al-Hasan), al-Mustadrak 4:396

[^59]: al-Mustadrak 4:395

[^60]: Ma\`ani al-Akhbar: 280, Da\`aim al-Islam 1:162

[^61]: ‘Ilal al-Sharai’ 2:332

[^62]: al-Gharat 1:246

[^63]: al-Faqih 1:300

[^64]: al-Ja’fariyat: 246

[^65]: al-Mustadrak 4:445

[^66]: al-Ja’fariyat: 41

[^67]: al-Majazat al-Nabawiyyah: 255 (and in this it is Humrah instead
of Khumrah), al-Mustadrak 4:10

[^68]: al-Ja’fariyat: 17, al-Mustadrak 1:356

[^69]: al-Faqih 1:509, al-Ja’fariyat: 184

[^70]: al-Kafi 3:296, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:322, al-Mustadrak 3:335

[^71]: al-Ja’fariyat: 45

[^72]: al-Manaqib 4:13

[^73]: al-Ja’fariyat: 40

[^74]: al-Faqih 1:535, Qurb al-Isnad: 54, al-Ja’fariyat: 45

[^75]: al-Hidayah : 53

[^76]: al-Kafi 3:461, al-Faqih 1:508, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 3:138,
al-Mustadrak 6:135

[^77]: ‘Awali al-La\`ali 2:221, al-Mustadrak 6:149, al-Ja’fariyat: 47

[^78]: Plural of masjid. (Tr.)

[^79]: al-Hidayah: 37, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 3:150, Qurb al-Isnad: 64, Bihar
al-Anwar 91:321

[^80]: Majmu’at Warram: 267

[^81]: Majmu’at Warram: 266, Usul al-Sittata ‘Ashar: 66 and 152

[^82]: Asrar al-Salah: 120

[^83]: Majmu’at Warram: 323, ‘Uddat al-Da’i: 139

[^84]: ‘Ilal al-Sharai’: 350

[^85]: This expression is used to refer to something dear and close to
one\`s heart. (Tr.)

[^86]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 34

[^87]: Amali al-Tusi 2:141

[^88]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 461, Majmu\`at Warram: 303

[^89]: Jami\` al-Akhbar: 96

[^90]: Bihar al-Anwar 84:248, Falah al-Sa\`il: 161

[^91]: Bihar al-Anwar 84:256

[^92]: The recitation \`Wajjahtu Wajhiya Lilladhi Fataras-Samawati
wal-Ardh ...\` (Tr.)

[^93]: al-Faqih 1:484

[^94]: al-Khisal: 333, al-Hidayah: 38

[^95]: al-Ihtijaj: 486

[^96]: Plural of takbir (Tr.)

[^97]: al-Khisal: 347

[^98]: \`Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha 1:217

[^99]: Falah al-Sa\`il: 135

[^100]: Amali al-Tusi 2:306

[^101]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 95, Qurb al-Isnad: 10, ‘Ilal al-Sharai’: 344

[^102]: Ma’ani al-Akhbar: 280

[^103]: ‘Ilal al-Sharai’: 344

[^104]: al-Kafi 3:296, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:322

[^105]: al-Kafi 3:448

[^106]: al-Faqih 1:508, al-Hidayah: 53

[^107]: al-Kafi 3:461

[^108]: Da’aim al-Islam 1:185, al-Faqih 1:508

[^109]: al-Kafi 3:460

[^110]: al-Muqni’ah: 202, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 3:130

[^111]: Nihayat al-Ahkam 2:66

[^112]: al-Kafi 3:461, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 3:137, al-Faqih 1:509

[^113]: This title is rightfully reserved for Imam ‘Ali (as) but Imam
al-Rid’a (as) had to use this title for Ma’mun as a form of
dissimulation.

[^114]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rid’a 2:149

[^115]: al-Faqih 1:510

[^116]: Da\`aim al-Islam 1:186

[^117]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 3:286

[^118]: al-Manaqib 4:13

[^119]: Nawadir al-Rawandi: 29, Bihar al-Anwar 91:315, al-Ja’fariyat: 49

[^120]: ‘Ilal al-Sharai’: 246

[^121]: al-Kafi 3:463, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 3:149-150, al-Faqih 1:535,
Da\`aim al-Islam 1:203

[^122]: al-Faqih 1:527

[^123]: The Exalted \`Throne\` of Allah (SwT). (Tr.)

[^124]: al-Ja’fariyat: 241, al-Mustadrak 6:191

[^125]: Nawadir al-Rawandi: 41

[^126]: al-Ja’fariyat: 217

[^127]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 3:244

[^128]: Ibid.

[^129]: al-Ja’fariyat: 43

[^130]: Ibid.

[^131]: al-Ja’fariyat: 44

[^132]: Ibid., 43

[^133]: Da\`aim al-Islam 1:183

[^134]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:281

[^135]: Dhikra al-Shi’ah: 153, al-Mustadrak 3:336

[^136]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:81

[^137]: Ibid., 2:123

[^138]: al-Kafi 3:329

[^139]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:36

[^140]: al-Gharat 1:246, al-Mustadrak 3:116, Bihar al-Anwar 83:23

[^141]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:311

[^142]: Ibid., 2:289

[^143]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:124

[^144]: al-Faqih 1:328

[^145]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:105

[^146]: Qurb al-Isnad: 56

[^147]: Da\`aim al-Islam 1:168

[^148]: Ibid., 1:205

[^149]: \`Awarif al-Ma\`arif: 284

[^150]: al-Gharat 1:246

[^151]: Bihar al-Anwar 85:137

[^152]: A mat made from branches and leaves of the date palm (Tr.)

[^153]: ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: 103

[^154]: The act of rubbing one\`s cheeks on the earth while prostrating.
(Tr.)

[^155]: al-Mustadrak 3:290 Hadith no. 7

[^156]: We did not find this in al-Majma’.

[^157]: al-Nuri has narrated it in al-Mustadrak 7:539 quoting from Durr
al-La\`ali.

[^158]: ‘Ilal al-Sharai’: 363

[^159]: Fadha\`il al-Ash\`hur al-Thalathah: 134-135

[^160]: ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: 335

[^161]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:282, Wasa\`il al-Shi’ah 4:665

[^162]: al-Kafi 3:307, Wasa\`il al-Shi’ah 4:671

[^163]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:60, al-Istibsar 1:305, Wasa\`il al-Shi\`ah
4:644

[^164]: The adhan as has been mentioned in this hadith and which is also
found in various compilations of ahadith including Bihar al-Anwar is
\`incomplete\` according to the accepted ahadith from the Prophet (S)
and A\`immah (as) who have taught us how the Adhan must be performed and
as has been detailed in the various books of jurisprudence by the
scholars. Various copies of Bihar al-Anwar were checked and all narrated
the incident the same way. Thus, it is possible that the entire hadith
has not been narrated completely from the Prophet (S) or because the
books of ahadith of the Ahlul Bayt (as) have been constantly under
attack and desecration in the past and thus, the entire hadith may have
been lost. (Ed. – As answered by the office of Ayatullah al-’Udhma Hajj
Shaykh Nasir Makarim Shirazi)

[^165]: Majma’ al-Bayan 10:549 – Surah al-Kawthar (108)

[^166]: Majma’ al-Bayan 10:289 – Surah al-Jumu’ah (62)

[^167]: Ibid.

[^168]: al-Khisal 1:71, Bihar al-Anwar 83:148

[^169]: al-Ikhtisas: 228, al-Mustadrak 11:309

[^170]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rid’a 2:122, Wasa\`il al-Shi’ah 4:758

[^171]: Majma’ al-Bayan 10:550 – Surah al-Kawthar (108)

[^172]: al-Durr al-Manthur 6:403 – Surah al-Kawthar (108)

[^173]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:284, Wasa\`il al-Shi’ah 4:640

[^174]: al-Faqih 1:284, Wasa\`il al-Shi’ah 4:641

[^175]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:284

[^176]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:53

[^177]: Da\`aim al-Islam 1:200

[^178]: Ibid., 1:202


