Chapter 18: The Adab of I’tikaf
===============================

1. In al-Faqih: In his narration from Dawud ibn al-Hasin from Abi ‘Abbas
from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) performed
*i’tikaf*[^1] in the month of Ramad’an on the first ten days, then he
performed *i’tikaf* the following year in the middle ten days and in the
third year, he performed the *i’tikaf* on the last ten days - and from
then on he always performed his *i’tikaf* on the last ten days of the
holy month of Ramad’an.[^2]

2. Also: Abu ‘Abdillah (as) said: The battle of Badr took place in the
month of Ramad’an so the Holy Prophet (S) did not perform *i’tikaf* and
the following year he performed *i’tikaf* for twenty days, ten for that
year and ten to make up for the previous year which he missed.[^3]

Note: This narration has also been mentioned by al-Kulayni.[^4]

3. In al-Kafi: Narrated from al-Halabi from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said:
When the last ten days entered, the Noble Prophet (S) would perform
*i’tikaf* in the masjid and a small tent made of fur was erected for
him, and he gathered up his covers. Someone asked: “Did he disassociate
himself from his wives?” He (as) replied: “No, he did not disassociate
himself from his wives.”[^5]

Note: There are many similar narrations and some have been mentioned
earlier and they have explained that the meaning of not disassociating
with one’s wives (during *i’tikaf*) refers to the permissibility of
mingling and mixing with them without intimacy.[^6]

[^1]: An act of worship where one stays inside a mosque for between 3-10
days, fasts by day and worships by night (Tr.)

[^2]: al-Faqih 2:189, Da\`aim al-Islam 1:286, al-Kafi 4:175,
al-Mustadrak 7:560

[^3]: al-Faqih 2:183

[^4]: al-Kafi 4:175, al-Mustadrak 7:560

[^5]: al-Kafi 4:175

[^6]: al-Faqih 2:184, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 4:287, al-Usul al-Sittata ‘Ashar:
112


