Chapter 19: The Adab of giving Charity
======================================

1. In al-Mahasin: In the advice of the Holy Prophet (S) to ‘Ali (as) -
until where he said: “ ...And sixth, follow my *sunnah* with regards to
prayer, fasting and giving charity ... As for charity, be persistent in
giving it until you say to yourself: ‘I have been extravagant’.”[^1]

2. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Zayd al-Shahham from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who
said: The Holy Prophet (S) never turned away a beggar – ever. If he had
something he would give it (away) otherwise he would say: “May Allah
bring it (to you).”[^2]

Note: This has been narrated in numerous books of both the Shi’ah and
*‘ammah*.[^3] Some similar narrations have been mentioned in section two
of this book.

3. From Sayyid Ibn Tawus in al-Muhaj in a hadith where he, meaning
al-Sadiq (as), said: “We, the Ahl al-Bayt, do not take back anything
that we have given in way of Allah.”[^4]

Addendum to this Chapter
------------------------

1. In al-Makarim: From Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S)
said: “I will never leave (three things): riding an unsaddled[^5]
donkey, eating on a mat with the slaves and feeding the beggar with my
own hands.”[^6]

2. In Tuhf al-’Uqul: From the Holy Prophet (S): Our kindness - of the
Ahl al-Bayt - is such that we forgive those who wrong us and give to
those who deprive us.[^7]

3. In Kashf al-Ghummah: The Noble Prophet (S) was the most generous of
all people. He gave without parsimony and donated without holding
back.[^8]

4. In ‘Uddat al-Da’i: He (S) said: We give to the undeserving out of
fear of turning away the deserving.[^9]

5. In al-Bihar, from Da’awat al-Rawandi: From Amir al-Mu’minin (as) who
said: When the Holy Prophet (S) was asked something, if he wanted to do
it he would say: ‘Yes’ and if he did not want to do it he would remain
silent, and he would never say ‘No’ to anything.[^10]

6. In al-’Ilal: From ‘Ali ibn al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali ibn Fadhdhal from his
father from Abi al-Hasan (as), he said: I asked him about Amir
al-Mu’minin (as): “Why did he not reclaim Fadak when he became the
khalifa?” He replied: “Because we are the Ahl al-Bayt and none takes
back our right from the one who has oppressed us except Him (Allah
(SwT)). We are the leaders of the believers, we only judge in favor of
them and take back their rights from those who have oppressed them and
we don’t take anything for ourselves.”[^11]

Note: This has also been narrated by al-Irbili in Kashf al-Ghummah from
the Holy Prophet (S).[^12]

[^1]: al-Mahasin: 17, al-Kafi 8:89, al-Faqih 4:189, Majmu\`at Warram
2:299

[^2]: al-Kafi 4:15

[^3]: Tafsir al-’Ayyashi 1:261, al-Mustadrak 7:204

[^4]: Muhaj al-Da’awat: 196

[^5]: ... using only a saddle-blanket instead (Tr.)

[^6]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 24

[^7]: Tuhf al-’Uqul: 33

[^8]: Kashf al-Ghummah 1:10

[^9]: ‘Uddat al-Da’i: 101

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar 93:327

[^11]: ‘Ilal al-Shara’i: 155

[^12]: Kashf al-Ghummah 1:494


