Chapter 20: The Adab of recitation of the Glorious Qur’an
=========================================================

1. From al-Shaykh in al-Majalis: Narrated from Abi al-Dunya from Amir
al-Mu’minin (as) who said: Nothing would stop the Holy Prophet (S) from
reciting the Qur’an except *Janabah* (ritual impurity).[^1]

2. al-Tabarsi in Majma’ al-Bayan: From Umm Salamah who said: The Holy
Prophet (S) would pause his recitation *ayah* by *ayah*.[^2]

3. From Shaykh Abi al-Fattuh in his commentary: The Noble Prophet (S)
would not sleep until he had recited the ‘*Musabbihat’* saying: “In
these *suwar*[^3] there is an *ayah* which is better than a thousand
*ayat*.” They asked: “And what are the ‘*Musabbihat’*?” He said: “Surah
al-Hadid, al-Hashr, al-Saff, al-Jumu’ah and al-Taghabun.”[^4]

Note: A similar narration can also be found in Majma’ al-Bayan from
al-’Irbas ibn Sariyah.[^5]

4. From Ibn Abi Jamhur in Durar al-La’ali from Jabir who said: The Holy
Prophet (S) would not go to sleep until he had recited ‘*Tabarak’*
(Surah al-Mulk) and *‘Alif Lam Mim al-Tanzil’* (Surah al-Sajdah).[^6]

5. In Majma’ al-Bayan: Narrated from ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) who said:
The Holy Prophet (S) used to like this Surah - ‘*Sabbihisma Rabbikal
A’la*’ (Surah al-A’la); and the first person to say ‘*Subhana Rabbiyal
A’la*’ (Praise be to my Lord the Most High) was (the angel) Mika’il
(as).[^7]

Note: The first part has also been narrated in al-Bihar and from Suyuti
in al-Durr al-Manthur.[^8]

6. Also: From Ibn ‘Abbas: Whenever the Noble Prophet (S) recited
‘*Sabbihisma Rabbikal A’la*’ he would say “Subhana Rabbiyal A’la.” This
has also been narrated by ‘Ali (as).[^9]

7. In Suyuti’s al-Durr al-Manthur: From Abi Umamah who said: I prayed
with the Holy Prophet (S) after his (last) pilgrimage and he used to
frequently recite ‘*La Uqsimu bi Yawmil Qiyamah*’ (Surah al-Qiyamah) and
when he recited:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 أَلِيسَ ذٌلِكَ بِقَادِرٍ عَلـى أَنْ يُحْيِيَ الْمَوْتَى 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Is He not able to give life to the dead?”*** (Surat al-Qiyamah (75):
40)

I heard him say: *“Yes indeed, and I am a witness to this.”*[^10]

Note: There are other similar narrations which indicate that he (S) said
something different (from what is mentioned in this narration).[^11]

8. Also: From Ibn ‘Abbas who said: When the Holy Prophet would recite
the *ayah:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَنَفْسٍ وَمَا سَوَّاهَا. فَأَلْهَمَهَا فُجُورَهَا وَتَقْوَاهَا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the soul and He who made it perfect. Then He inspired it
understand what is right and wrong for i*****t.”** (Surat al-Shams: 7-8)

 He would stop and then say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ آتِ نَفْسِي تَقْوَاهَا وَ زَكِّهَا أَنْتَ خَيْرُ مَنْ
زَكَّاهَا أَنْتَ وَلِـيُّهَا وَ مَوْلاَهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Give my soul its inspiration and purify it for You are the
best of those who purify it, You are its Lord and Master”.*

He said: And he would do this while he was in the *salah.*[^12]

Addendum to this Chapter
------------------------

1. In al-Bihar from al-Dhikra: From Abi Sa’id al-Khudhri: The Noble
Prophet (S) would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَعُوذُ بِاللٌّهِ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ الرَّجِيمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I seek protection with Allah from the accursed Shaitan,* before
reciting the Holy Qur’an.[^13]

2. In Tafsir al-’Ayyashi: From Zayd ibn ‘Ali from Abi Ja’far (as) who
said that the Holy Prophet (S) recited the Qur’an with the best voice
from all the people.[^14]

3. In al-Da’awat al-Rawandi: From the Noble Prophet (S) who said:
Jibra’il told me to recite the Qur’an while standing.[^15]

4. In Majma’ al-Bayan: From Anas who said: He (S) would draw out his
voice (while reciting the Qur’an).[^16]

5. In al-Kafi: From ‘Abdullah ibn Farqad and al-Mu’alla ibn al-Khunays
from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: “As for us, we recite according to the
recitation of Ubay.”[^17]

Note: There are some other narrations that imply the permissibility of
reciting according to the other seven (known) recitations, as mentioned
in al-Khisal.[^18]

6. In Majma’ al-Bayan, in the commentary of Surah al-Teen, from Muqatil:
Qatadah said: When the Holy Prophet (S) completed a Surah, he would say:
“Yes indeed, and I am a witnesses to this.”[^19]

7. In al-Durr al-Manthur: When the Holy Prophet (S) recited the *ayah:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 أَلِيسَ ذٌلِكَ بِقَادِرٍ عَلـى أَنْ يُحْيِيَ الْمَوْتَى 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Is He not able to give life to the dead?”*** (Surat al-Qiyamah (75):
40)

He would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
}سُبْحَانَكَ أَللٌّهُمَّ بَـلى.{
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Praise be to You O Allah - Yes indeed.”*[^20]

Note: This has been narrated by Shaykh Tusi in his commentary al-Tibyan,
from Qatadah from Abi Ja’far and Abi ‘Abdillah (as).[^21]

8. In Majma’ al-Bayan, in the commentary for the *ayah:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَمَا تَكُونُ فِي شَأْنٍ وَمَا تَتْلُوا مِنْهُ مِنْ قُرْآنٍ وَلاَ
تَعْمَلُونَ مِنْ عَمَلٍ إِلاَّ كُنَّا عَلَيْكُمْ شُهُودًا إِذْ
تُفِيضُونَ فِيهِ وَمَا يَعْزُبُ عَنْ رَبِّكَ مِنْ مِثْقَالِ ذَرَّةٍ
فِي الأَرْضِ وَلاَ فِي السَّمَاءِ وَلاَ أَصْغَرَ مِنْ ذٌلِكَ وَلاَ
أَكْبَرَ إِلاَّ فِي كِتَابٍ مُبِينٍ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And you are not (engaged) in any affair, nor do you recite
concerning it any portion of the Qur’an, nor do you do any work but we
are witnesses over you when you enter into it, and there does not lie
concealed from your Lord the weight of an atom in the earth or in the
heaven, nor anything less than that nor greater but it is in a clear
book.”***[^22] (Surat Yunus (10): 61)

He said: When the Holy Prophet (S) recited this *ayah* he wept
incessantly.[^23]

9. In Majma’ al-Bayan, under the commentary of Surah al-Ikhlas: The Holy
Prophet (S) would stop at the end of every *ayah* of this Surah.[^24]

10. In al-Durr al-Manthur: From Ahmad, Ibn al-Dharees and al-Bayhaqi
from ‘Ayisha who said: I would wake up with the Prophet (S) at night and
he (S) would recite from (Surah) al-Baqarah, ale ‘Imran and al-Nisa and
when he came to an *ayah* that gave glad tidings (to the believers) he
would supplicate and hope, and when he came to an *ayah* that threatened
(disbelievers) he would supplicate and seek refuge.[^25]

11. In Thawab al-A’mal in his narration from Husayn ibn Abi al-Ula’ from
Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: Whoever recites Surah al-Talaq and
al-Tahrim in his obligatory (prayers) will be protected by Allah from
being among those who are afraid and dejected on the Day of Judgment, he
will be protected from the Hellfire and Allah will put him in Paradise
because of his recitation of these two (Surahs) and his acting upon
them; because these Surahs are for the Noble Prophet (S).[^26]

12. In al-Mizan from al-Durr al-Manthur: From Ibn ‘Abbas who said: When
the Qur’an was revealed to the Holy Prophet (S), he would make haste in
reciting it in order to preserve it, so the *ayah:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 لاَ تُحَرِّكْ بِهِ لِسَانَكَ لِتَعْجَلَ بِهِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do not move your tongue with it to make haste with it’*** **was
revealed.”**  
 (al-Durr al-Manthur 6:289 – Surat al-Qiyamah (75), al-Mizan 20:116 –
Surat al-Waqi’ah (56))

13. Also: After this, whenever Jibra’il came to the Holy Prophet, he (S)
would remain silent and listen, and when he had gone he (S) would recite
(the *ayat*) as had been revealed to him by Allah.[^27]

14. Also: The Noble Prophet (S) would not know the end of a Surah until
‘*Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim*’ was revealed to him.[^28]

15. In Tafsir al-Qummi: The Holy Prophet (S) would sit in his room and
recite the Holy Qur’an.[^29]

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar 81:68 and 92:216, al-Mustadrak 1:465

[^2]: Majma’ al-Bayan 10:378 – Surat al-Muzammil, Fayd’ al-Qadir 5:238

[^3]: Plural of Surah. (Tr.)

[^4]: Ruh al-Jinan of Abi al-Fattuh al-Razi 11:30 – Surat al-Hadid (57),
al-Durr al-Manthur 6:170 – Surat al-Hadid (57), Bihar al-Anwar 92:312

[^5]: Majma’ al-Bayan 9:229 – Surat al-Hadid (57)

[^6]: We found this reference in Majma’ al-Bayan 8:325 and Bihar
al-Anwar 92:316

[^7]: Majma’ al-Bayan 10:472, 473 – Surat al-A’la (87)

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar 92:322, al-Durr al-Manthur 6:337

[^9]: Majma’ al-Bayan 10:473 – Surat al-A’la (87)

[^10]: al-Durr al-Manthur 6:296 – Surat al-Qiyamah (75) and from him in
Bihar al-Anwar 92:219

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar 92:291-220

[^12]: al-Durr al-Manthur 6:356 – Surat al-Shams (91), Bihar al-Anwar
92:220

[^13]: Bihar al-Anwar 85:5

[^14]: Tafsir al-\`Ayyashi 2:295 – Surat al-Isra\` (17), Bihar al-Anwar
92:326, Tafsir Furat al-Kufi: 85 and from him in al-Mustadrak 4:185

[^15]: al-Da\`awat: 47 and from him in al-Mustadrak 4:427

[^16]: Majma’ al-Bayan 10:378 – Surat al-Muzammil

[^17]: al-Kafi 2:634

[^18]: al-Khisal: 358

[^19]: Majma’ al-Bayan 10:512

[^20]: al-Durr al-Manthur 6:296 – Surat al-Qiyamah (75) and from him in
Bihar al-Anwar 92:219

[^21]: al-Tibyan 10:203 – Surat al-Qiyamah (75)

[^22]: Surat Yunus (10): 61

[^23]: Majma’ al-Bayan 5:116 – Surat Yunus (10)

[^24]: Majma’ al-Bayan 10:567 – Surat al-Ikhlas (112)

[^25]: al-Durr al-Manthur 1:18 – Surat al-Baqarah (2)

[^26]: Thawab al-a’mal: 146

[^27]: Ibid.

[^28]: Ibid.

[^29]: Tafsir al-Qummi 2:393 – Surat al-Muddathir (74), Bihar al-Anwar
9:245


