Chapter 21: Supplication (Du’a) and its Adab
============================================

1. From al-Qutb in al-Da’awat: From the Holy Prophet (S) who said:
Jibra’il instructed me to recite the Qur’an while standing, and to
glorify Allah while in the state of *ruku’*, and to praise Him while in
*sajdah* and to supplicate to him while sitting.[^1]

2. From Ahmad ibn al-Fahd in ‘Uddat al-Da’i: The Holy Prophet (S) would
raise his hands when he invoked and supplicated (to Allah) just as a
beggar does when seeking food.[^2]

Note: This has (also) been narrated by Shaykh Tusi in al-Majalis and
al-Akhbar from Muhammad and Zayd - the two sons of ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn
(as), from their father from al-Husayn (as).[^3]

His Du’a when he looked in the mirror
-------------------------------------

3. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his
fathers from ‘Ali (as) that whenever the Noble Prophet (S) looked in the
mirror, he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ الَّذِي أَكْمَلَ خَلْقِي، وَأَحْسَنَ صُورَتِي،
وَزَانَ مِنِّي مَاشَانَ مِنْ غَيْرِي، وَهَدَانِي لِلإِسْلاَمِ، وَمُنَّ
عَلَيَّ بِالنُّـبُوَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Praise be to Allah who created me perfectly, and made handsome my
face, and made graceful from me what he made disgraceful from others,
and guided me to Islam, and blessed me with prophethood.”*[^4]

4. From al-Shaykh Abi al-Fattuh in his Tafsir: From al-Sadiq (as) who
said: When the Holy Prophet (S) looked in the mirror he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ الَّذِي أَحْسَنَ خَلْقِي وَخُلْقِي، وَزَانَ مِنِّي
مَاشَانَ مِنْ غَـيْرِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Praise be to Allah who made excellent my creation and my character,
and made graceful from me what he made disgraceful from others.”*[^5]

His Du’a when sitting on his mount
----------------------------------

5. In Awali al-La’ali: About the Holy Prophet (S): Whenever he sat on
his mount as he departed for a journey, he would recite *takbir* thrice
then say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَ الَّذِي سَخَّرَ لَنَا هٌذَا وَمَا كُنَّا لَهُ مُقْرِنِينَ،
وَإِنَّا إِلـى رَبِّنَا لَمُنْقَلِبُونَ. أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنَّا نَسْأَلُكَ
فِي سَفَرِنَا هٌذَا الْبِرَّ وَالتَقْوى وَمِنَ الْعَمَلِ مَا تَرْضى.
أَللٌّهُمَّ هَوِّنْ عَلَيْـنَا سَفَرَنَا وَأَطْوِ عَنَّا بُعْدَهُ.
أَللٌّهُمَّ أَنْتَ الصَّاحِبُ فِي السَّفَرِ وَالْخَلِيفَةُ فِي
الأَهْلِ. أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ وَعَثَاءِ السَّفَرِ
وَكَآبَةِ الْمُنْقَلَبِ وَسُوءِ الْمَنْظَرِ فِي الأَهْلِ وَالْمَالِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Glory be to Allah who has made this (animal) subservient to us and we
would not be able to do it (ourselves) and surely to our Lord will we
return. O Allah! We ask that this journey be accompanied with goodness
and piety and with actions that please You. O Allah! Make this journey
easy for us and let us cover its distance quickly. O Allah! You are the
Companion in the journey and the Guardian over the family. O Allah! I
seek refuge with You from the difficulties of the journey and from the
melancholy of being in a different place and from witnessing anything
bad in the family and wealth.”*

And when he returned, he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آئِبُونَ تَائِبُونَ عَابِدُونَ لِرَبِّنَا حَامِدُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“We return (home while) repenting, worshipping and praising our
Lord.”*[^6]

His Du’a in the night while travelling
--------------------------------------

6. In al-Awali: From the Noble Prophet (S): When he was traveling on a
journey and night fell, he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَرْضُ رَبِّي وَرَبُّكِ اللٌّهُ. أَعُوذُ مِنْ شَرِّكِ وَشَرِّ مَا
فِيكِ وَشَرِّ مَا يَدُبُّ عَلَيْكِ وَأَعُوذُ بِاللٌّهِ مِنْ أَسَدٍ
وَأَسْوَدٍ وَمِنَ الْحَيَّةِ وَالْعَقْرَبِ وَمِنْ سَاكِنِ الْبَلََدِ
وَوَالِدٍ وَمَا وَلَدَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Earth! My Lord and your Lord is Allah. I seek refuge from your evil
and the evil of what is (living) on you and the evil of what walks upon
you. And I seek refuge with Allah from every lurking predator and from
the snake and the scorpion and from the inhabitants of the place - from
them and their young.”*[^7]

His Du’a when he wore new clothes
---------------------------------

7. In al-Makarim: From the Holy Prophet (S) that when he wore new
clothes he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ الَّذِي كَسَانِي مَا يُوَارِي عَوْرَتِي
وَأَتَجَمَّلُ بِهِ فِي النَّاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Praise be to Allah who clothed me with what covers my nakedness and
with what I adorn myself among the people.”*[^8]

Note: Mufid al-Din al-Tusi has narrated something similar in al-Amali
from Abi Matar, and similarly it has been narrated in al-Bihar (quoting)
from al-Manaqib from Abi Matar.[^9]

8. Also: When he (S) took off his clothes, he would take them off from
his left side first; and it was his practice that when he wore new
clothes he would praise Allah and then call a poor beggar in order to
give him his old clothes. Then he would say: “There is not a Muslim who
clothes a (needy) Muslim with his worn clothes – and none clothes him
but Allah (SwT) – but that he is under the guardianship, protection and
blessing of Allah as long as the clothes are on the body of the needy
person, whether he is alive or dead.”[^10]

9. Also: Whenever he (S) wore new clothes and stood up, and was about to
leave (his house), he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ بِكَ اسْتَتَرْتُ وَإِلَيْكَ تَوَجَّهْتُ وَ بِكَ
اعْـتَصَمْتُ وَعَلَيْكَ تَوَكَّلْتُ. أَللٌّهُمَّ أَنْتَ ثِقَتِي
وَأَنْتَ رَجَائِي. أَللٌّهُمَّ اكْفِنِي مَا أَهَمَّنِي وَمَا لاَ
أَهْـتَمُّ بِهِ وَمَا أَنْتَ أَعْلَمُ بِهِ مِنِّي عَزَّ جَارُكَ
وَجَلَّ ثَنَاؤُكَ وَلاَ إِلٌهَ غَيْرُكَ. أَللٌّهُمَّ زَوِّدْنِي
التَّقْوى وَاغْفِرْ لِي ذَنْبِي وَوَجِّهْنِي لِلْخَيْرِ حَيْثُ مَا
تَوَجَّهْتُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! By You have I covered myself and to You have I turned and
with You have I sought protection and upon You have I put my trust. O
Allah! You are my Reliance and You are my Hope. O Allah! Suffice for me
that which concerns me and that which I do not give importance to and
what You know more about than me. Revered is the one who is close to
You, exalted is Your Glory and there is no god other than You. O Allah!
Grant me the provisions of taqwa and forgive my sin and turn me towards
good wherever I turn”.*

Then he would proceed to what he needed to do.[^11]

His Du’a when he stood up from where he was sitting
---------------------------------------------------

10. From al-Ghazali in al-Ihya’: When he would stand from where he was
sitting he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَكَ أَللٌّهُمَّ وَبِحَمْدِكَ أَشْهَدُ أَنْ لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ
أَنْتَ، أَسْتَغْفِرُكَ وَأَتُوبُ إِلَيْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Praise be to You O Allah And by Your Glory! I Bear witness that there
is no god but You. I seek repentance from You and I turn to You.”*[^12]

His Du’a when entering and leaving the masjid
---------------------------------------------

11. From al-Shaykh al-Tusi in al-Majalis: Narrated from ‘Abdillah ibn
al-Hasan from his mother Fatimah bint al-Husayn from her father from
‘Ali (as): Whenever the Holy Prophet (S) entered the masjid he would
say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ افْتَحْ لِي أَبْوَابَ رَحْمَتِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Open for me the doors of Your Mercy.”*

And when he used to leave he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ افْتَحْ لِي أَبْوَابَ رِزْقِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Open for me the doors of Your Sustenance.”*[^13]

12. From al-Tabari in the book al-Imamah: Narrated from ‘Abdillah ibn
al-Hasan from Fatimah al-Sughra, from her father al-Husayn, from Fatimah
al-Kubra bint Rasulillah, peace be upon them all: When the Noble Prophet
(S) entered the masjid, he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ. أَللٌّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلـى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ وَ
اغْفِرْلِي ذُنُوبِي وَ افْتَحْ لِي أَبْوَابَ رَحْمَتِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In the name of Allah. O Allah! Bless Muhammad and the progeny of
Muhammad, and forgive my sins and open for me the doors of Your Mercy.”*

And when he came out he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ. أَللٌّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلـى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ وَ
اغْفِرْلِي ذُنُوبِي وَ افْتَحْ لِي أَبْوَابَ فَضْلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In the name of Allah. O Allah! Bless Muhammad and the progeny of
Muhammad, and forgive my sins and open for me the doors of Your
Grace.”*[^14]

His Du’a when he retired to his bed
-----------------------------------

13. In al-Makarim: When he (S) retired to his bed, he would lie down on
his right side and place his right hand under his right cheek, then he
would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ قِنِي عَذَابَكَ يَوْمَ تَبْعَثُ عِبَادَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Keep me safe from Your Wrath on the day when You resurrect
Your servants.”*[^15]

14. Also: He (S) had different types of supplications that he would
recite when he laid down to sleep ... and when he was about to sleep he
would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ أَمُوتُ وَ أَحْـيَا وَ إِلـى اللٌّهِ الْمَصِيرُ.
أَللٌّهُمَّ آمِنْ رَوْعَتِي وَ اسْـتُرْ عَوْرَتِي وَ أَدِّ عَنِّي
أَمَانَتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In the name of Allah do I die and live and to Allah is the return. O
Allah! Dispel my fears and hide my faults and (help me to) return what
has been entrusted to me.”*[^16]

15. Also: He (S) used to recite *ayat al-Kursi* before sleeping, saying:
Jibra’il (as) came to me and said: “O Muhammad! Verily there is a
mischievous jinn who deceives you in your sleep so you must recite the
*ayat al-Kursi* (to ward off his evil).”[^17]

His Du’a when the table-spread is laid out
------------------------------------------

16. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Maythami who
ascribed it to an infallible; he said: When the table-spread was laid
out in front of the Holy Prophet (S) he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَكَ أَللٌّهُمَّ مَا أَحْسَنَ مَا تَبْتَلِينَا، سُبْحَانَكَ مَا
أَكْثَرَ مَا تُعْطِيناَ، سُبْحَانَكَ مَا أَكْثَرَ مَا تُعَافِينَا.
أَللٌّهُمَّ أَوْسِعْ عَلَيْنَا وَعَلـى فُقَرَاءِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ وَالْمُسْلِمِينَ وَالْمُسْلِمَاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Glory be to You O Allah! How wonderful is that which You have tested
us with. Glory be to You, how plentiful is that which You have given us.
Glory be to You, how plentiful is that which You have bestowed on us. O
Allah! Increase for us (our sustenance) and for the poor believing men
and women and (for the poor) Muslim men and women.”*[^18]

17. In al-Makarim: When the table-spread was laid out in front of the
Holy Prophet (S) he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ. أَللٌّهُمَّ اجْعَلْهَا نِعْمَةً مَشْكُورَةً تَصِلُ
بِهَا نِعْمَةَ الْجَنَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In the name of Allah. O Allah! Make it an appreciated blessing by
means of which the bounties of paradise are attained.”*[^19]

His Du’a when he touched the food
---------------------------------

18. In al-Makarim: When he placed his hand on the food he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ، بَارِكْ لَنَا فِيمَا رَزَقْتَنَا وَعَلَيْكَ خَلْفَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In the name of Allah, (O Allah!) bless for us from what you have given
us of sustenance and upon You do we rely for its replenishment.”*[^20]

His Du’a when the table-spread was picked up
--------------------------------------------

19. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Ibrahim ibn Mahzam from someone from Abi
Ja’far (as) who said: When the table-spread was picked up, the Holy
Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ أَكْثَرْتَ وَأَطَبْتَ وَبَارَكْتَ فَأَشْبَعْتَ
وَأَرْوَيْتَ. أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ الَّذِي يُطْعِمُ وَلاَ يُطْعَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! You have increased Your bounties and made them good and
blessed, thereby making us satiated and quenched. All praise be to
Allah, The One who nourishes and is not nourished.”*[^21]

His Du’a when eating and drinking milk
--------------------------------------

20. In al-Kafi: Narrated from ‘Abdullah ibn Sulayman from Abi Ja’far
(as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) would not eat any food nor drink any
beverage but that he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ بَارِكْ لَنَا فِيهِ وَأَبْدِلْنَا بِهِ خَيْراً مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Bless it for us and replenish it with that which is better”.*

...except when he drank milk, then he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ بَارِكْ لَنَا فِيهِ وَزِدْنَا مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Bless it for us and increase it for us.”*[^22]

Note: This has also been narrated by him and by al-Barqi with a
different chain of narrators.[^23]

21. In al-Iqbal: Upon eating a morsel, the Noble Prophet (S) would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ لَكَ الْحَمْدُ أَطْعَمْتَ وَأَسْقَيْتَ وَرَوَيْتَ. فَلَكَ
الْحَمْدُ غَيْرُ مَكْفُورٍ وَلاَ مُوَدَّعٍ وَلاَ مُسْتَغْنـى عَـنْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Praise be to You. You have nourished and quenched and
satisfied (us), so to You be praise - praise without ingratitude and
without leave and without (seeking) independence from You.”*[^24]

His Du’a when he saw fresh fruit
--------------------------------

22. From al-Saduq in al-Majalis: Narrated from Wahab from Ja’far ibn
Muhammad from his fathers from ‘Ali (as) who said: When the Holy Prophet
(S) saw fresh fruit, he would kiss it and place it on his eyes and
mouth, then he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ كَمَا أَرَيْتَنَا أَوَّلَهَا فِي عَافِيةٍ فَأَرِنَا
آخِرَهَا فِي عَافِيةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Just as You have shown us its beginning in well-being, show
us its end in well-being.”*[^25]

Note: al-Tabarsi has narrated this in al-Makarim without (the phrase)
‘and his mouth’ and (also) in the book of Ma’adh al-Jawhari, narrated
from Ibn Abi ‘Umayr from Abi ‘Abdillah (as), there is a similar
narration but without the first (phrase) ‘in well-being’.[^26]

His Du’a when he entered the washroom
-------------------------------------

23. In al-Faqih: When the Holy Prophet (S) wanted to enter the washroom
he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنَ الرِّجْسِ النَّجِسِ الْخَبِيثِ
الْمُخْبَثِ الشَّيْطَانِ، أَللٌّهُمَّ أَمْطِ عَنِّي الأَذى وَأَعِذْنِي
مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ الرَّجِيمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! I seek refuge with You from the filth of the impurity of the
evil of the reviled Shaitan. O Allah! Pull away from me all
uncleanliness and protect me from the accursed Shaitan.”*

And when he sat to relieve himself he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ أَذْهِبْ عَنِّي الْقَذى وَالأَذى، وَاجْعَلْنِي مِنَ
الْمُتَطَهِّرِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Remove from me the filth and impurity and make me from among
the ones who purify themselves.”*

When he became affected with a looseness of bowels he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ كَمَا أَطْعَمْتَنِيهِ طَيِّبًا فِي عَافِيَةٍ فَأَخْرِجْهُ
مِنِّي خَبِيـثًا فِي عَافِيَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Just as You have fed me with its goodness in well-being, then
take its filth out of me in well-being.”*

And when he (S) entered the toilet he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ الْحَافِظِ الْمُؤَدِّي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Praise be to Allah, The Protector and The Fulfiller (of needs)”.*

When he came out (from the toilet) he passed his hand over his stomach
and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ الَّذِي أَخْرَجَ عَنِّي أَذَاهُ، وَأَبْقى فِيَّ
قُوَّتَهُ، فَيَالَهَا مِنْ نِعْمَةٍ لاَ يُقَدِّرُ الْقَادِرُونَ
قَدْرَهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Praise be to Allah, the One who removed from me its filth and left in
me its strength. What a (great) blessing it is – the real value of which
cannot be fully appreciated by anyone.”*[^27]

His Du’a when he passed by the graves
-------------------------------------

24. From Ibn Qulawayh in al-Kamil: In his narration from Muhammad ibn
Muslim from Abi Ja’far (as) who said: I heard him say: When the Noble
Prophet (S) passed by the graves of a group of believers he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكُمْ مِنْ دِيَارِ قَوْمٍ مُؤْمِنِينَ وَإِنَّا إِنْ
شَاءَ اللٌّهُ بِكُمْ لاَحِقُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Peace be unto you from the dwellings of the community of believers and
we shall – if Allah wills – be joining you.”*[^28]

His Du’a when visiting the graves
---------------------------------

25. From Ibn Qulawayh in al-Kamil: In his narration from Safwan
al-Jammal who said: I heard Aba ‘Abdillah (as) saying: The Holy Prophet
(S) used to come away from the people with some of his companions every
Thursday evening and go to the graveyard of Baqi in Madinah and say
three times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيكُمْ يَا أَهْلَ الدِّيَارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Peace be unto you O people of the dwellings”* – and three times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَحِمَكُمُ اللٌّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“May Allah have mercy on you”.*[^29]

His Du’a in the event of something pleasing or distressing coming upon him
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. In al-Kafi: Narrated from al-Muthanna al-Hannat from Abi ‘Abdillah
(as) who said: When something pleasing befell the Holy Prophet (S) he
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ عَلـى هٌذِهِ النِّعْمَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Praise be to Allah for this blessing”.*

And when something distressing befell him he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ عَلـى كُلِّ حَالٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Praise be to Allah in every situation.”*[^30]

His Du’a when he saw what he liked
----------------------------------

27. In al-Makarim: From Amir al-Mu’minin (as) who said: When the Noble
Prophet (S) saw what he liked he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ الَّذِي بِنِعْمَتِهِ تَتِمُّ الصَّالِحَاتُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Praise be to Allah, the One who completes (and perfects) all that is
good with His bounty.*[^31]

Note: This has also been mentioned by Shaykh Tusi in al-Amali - narrated
by al-Farra’ from al-Rid’a from his fathers from ‘Ali (as).[^32]

His Dhikr when he heard the Adhan
---------------------------------

28. In al-Da’aim: It has been narrated to us from ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn
(as) that when the Holy Prophet (S) heard the *adhan*, he would repeat
what the *mua’dhin* said, and when he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَيَّ عَلـى الصَّلاَةِ، حَيَّ عَلـى الْفَلاَحِ، حَيَّ عَلـى خَيْرِ
الْعَمَلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Hurry to the prayer. Hurry to success. Hurry to the best of actions”,*
he (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ حَوْلَ وَ لاَ قُوَّةَ إِلاَّ بِاللٌّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There is no power and no might but by (the will of) Allah."*

And when the call to prayer was completed, he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ رَبَّ هٌذِهِ الدَّعْوَةِ التَّامَةِ وَ الصَّلاَةِ
القَائِمَةِ أَعْطِ مُحَمَّداً سُؤْلَهُ يَوْمَ الْقِـيَامَةِ وَ
بَلِّغْهُ الدَّرَجَةَ الْوَسِيلَةِ مِنَ الْجَنَّةِ وَ تَقَبَّلْ
شَفَاعَتَهُ فِي أُمَّتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Lord of this perfect call and established prayer, grant
Muhammad his request on the day of Judgment, and raise his status to the
means of reaching paradise and accept his intercession for his
Ummah.”*[^33]

His Dhikr at the end of the Maghrib Prayer
------------------------------------------

29. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his
fathers from ‘Ali (as) that the Holy Prophet (S) used to recite (the
following) in the third rak’ah of the Maghrib prayer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 رَبَّنَا لاَ تُزِغْ قُلُوبَنَا بَعْدَ إِذْ هَدَيْـتَنَا وَهَبْ لَنَا
مِنْ لَدُنْكَ رَحْمَةً إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْوَهَّابُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our Lord! Make not our hearts deviate after You have guided us
aright and bestow Your mercy on us, indeed You are the
All-Munificent”.*** (Al-Ja’fariyat: 41, Surat Ale ‘Imran (3): 8)

His Dhikr and Du’a in the Qunut of the Witr Prayer
--------------------------------------------------

30. In al-Faqih: The Noble Prophet (S) used to seek forgiveness seventy
times in the Witr Prayer and then say seven times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هٌذَا مَقَامُ الْعَائِذِ بِكَ مِنَ النَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“This is the position of the seeker of protection with You from the
hellfire.”***[^34]

31. Also: The Holy Prophet (S) used to say in the *qunut* of the Witr
Prayer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ اهْدِنِي فِيمَنْ هَدَيْتَ وَ عَافِنِي فِيمَنْ عَافَيْتَ وَ
تَوَلَّنِي فِيمَنْ تَوَلَّيْتَ وَ بَارِكْ لِي فِيمَا أَعْطَيْتَ وَ
قِنِي شَرَّ مَا قَضَيْتَ إِنَّكَ تَقْضِي وَ لاَ يُقْضى عَلَيْكَ
سُبْحَانَكَ رَبَّ الْبَيْتِ أَسْتَغْفِرُكَ وَ أَتُوبُ إِلَيْكَ وَ
أُؤْمِنُ بِكَ وَ أَتَوَكَّلُ عَلَيْكَ وَ لاَ حَوْلَ وَ لاَ قُوَّةَ
إِلاَّ بِكَ يَا رَحِيمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Guide me as those whom You have guided, and grant me
well-being as those whom You have granted well-being, and take care of
my affair as those whose affairs You have taken care of, and bless me in
what You grant me, and protect me from the evil of what You have
decreed, verily You decree and nothing is decreed upon You. Glory be to
You O Lord of the House! I seek forgiveness from You and turn to You,
and I seek refuge with You and rely on You, and there is no power or
might but by Your will, O Most Merciful!”*[^35]

His Du’a when opening the Fast
------------------------------

32. In al-Kafi: Narrated from al-Sakuni from Ja’far from his
fore-fathers (as): Whenever the Holy Prophet (S) opened his fast, he
would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ لَكَ صُمْنَا وَ عَلـى رِزْقِكَ أَفْطَرْنَا فَتَقَبَّلْهُ
مِنَّا. ذَهَبَ الْظَمَأُ وَ ابْـتَلَّتِ الْعُرُوقُ وَ بَقِيَ الأَجْرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! For You have we fasted, and with Your sustenance have we
opened our fast, so accept it from us. The thirst has gone and the
canals have become full and (only) the reward (for fasting)
remains.”*[^36]

Note: There are many traditions that are similar to this.[^37]

His Du’a after the Prayer
-------------------------

33. In Majmu’at al-Shaheed, quoting from the book of Fadhl ibn Muhammad
al-Ash’ari: From Masma’ from Abi Bakr al-Hadhrami from Abi Ja’far (as)
who said: When the Noble Prophet (S) had finished reciting the
*shahadatayn* and the *salam,* he would sit down cross-legged and place
his right hand on his head, then say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ الَّذِي لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ وَ
الشَّهَادَةِ الرَّحْمٌنُ الرَّحِيمُ صَلِّ عَلـى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ
مُحَمَّدٍ وَ أَذْهِبْ عَنِّي الْهَمَّ وَ الْحُزْنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In the name of Allah, there is no god but He, the Knower of the unseen
and the seen, the Beneficent, the Merciful. O Allah! Send You blessings
on Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and take away from me all
distress and sorrow.”*[^38]

34. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Faraj who said: Abu Ja’far
ibn al-Rid’a (as) wrote to me: And when the Holy Prophet (S) had
completed his prayer, he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ اغْفِرْلِي مَا قَدَّمْتُ وَمَا أَخَّرْتُ وَمَا أَسْرَرْتُ
وَمَا أَعْـلَـنْتُ، وَإِسْرَافِي عَلـى أَمْرِي (نَفْسِي) وَمَا أَنْتَ
أَعْلَمُ بِهِ مِنِّي. أَللٌّهُمَّ أَنْتَ الْمُقَدِّمُ وَالْمُؤَخِّرُ
لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ أَنْتَ بِعِلْمِكَ الْغَيْبَ وَبِقُدْرَتِكَ عَلـى
الْخَلْقِ أَجْمَعِينَ مَا عَلِمْتَ الْحَيَاةَ خَيْراً لِي فَأَحْيِنِي،
وَتَوَفَّنِي إِذَا عَلِمْتَ الْوَفَاةَ خَيْراً لِي. أَللٌّهُمَّ
إِنِّّي أَسْأَلُكَ خَشْـيَـتَكَ فِي السِّرِّ وَالْعَلاَنِيَةِ،
وَكَلِمَةَ الْحَقِّ فِي الْغَضَبِ وَالرِّضَا، وَالْقَصْدَ فِي
الْفَقْرِ وَالْغِنـى. وَأَسْأَلُكَ نَعِيماً لاَيَنْفَدُ، وَقُرَّةَ
عَيْنٍ لاَ يَنْقَطِعُ. وَأَسْأَلُكَ الرِّضَا بِالْقَضَاءِ، وَبَرَكَةَ
الْمَوْتِ بَعْدَ الْعَيْشِ، وَبَرْدَ الْعَيْشِ بَعْدَ الْمَوْتِ،
وَلَذَّةَ النَّظَرِ إِلـى وَجْهِكَ، وَشَوقاً إِلـى رُؤْيَتِكَ
وَلِقَائِكَ، مِنْ غَيْرِ ضَرَّاءَ مُضِرَّةٍ وَلاَ فِتْنَةٍ مُضِلَّةٍ.
أَللٌّهُمَّ زَيِّنَّا بِزِينَةِ الإِيـمَانِ، وَاجْعَلْنَا هُدَاةً
مُهْدِيِّـينَ. أَللٌّهُمَّ اهْدِنَا فِيمَنْ هَدَيْتَ. أَللٌّهُمَّ
إِنِّي أَسْأَلُكَ عَزِيـمَـةَ الرَّشَادِ، وَالثَّبَاتَ فِي الأَمْرِ
وَالرُّشْدَ. وَأَسْأَلُكَ شُكْرَ نِعَمِكَ، وَحُسْنَ عَافِيَتِكَ،
وَأَدَاءَ حَقِّكَ. وَأَسْأَلُكَ يَا رَبِّ قَلْباً سَلِيماً، وَلِسَاناً
صَادِقاً، وَأَسْتَغْفِرُكَ لِمَا تَعْلَمُ وَأَسْأَلُكَ خَيْرَ مَا
تَعْلَمُ، وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ شَرِّ مَا تَعْلَمُ، فَإِنَّكَ تَعْلَمُ
وَلاَ نَعْلَمُ، وَأَنْتَ عَلاَّمُ الْغُيُوبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Forgive me for my actions of the past and future, those done
in secret and in the open; and my extravagance in my affairs and that
which You are more aware of than me. O Allah! You are The Beginning and
The End, there is no god but You; by Your Knowledge of the unseen and by
Your Power over all the creatures, if You know that life is better for
me then make me live and if death is better for me cause me to die. O
Allah! I ask for the ability to fear You in private and in public, and
to speak the truth in anger and happiness, and to be moderate in poverty
and wealth; and I ask You for blessings that do not get diminished, and
light of my eyes that does not cease; and I ask You to make me pleased
with what has been decreed, and grant me the blessing of death after
life, and the ease of life after death, and the delight of witnessing
Your presence, and the longing for seeing You and meeting You, without
any difficult trials and misguiding temptations. O Allah! Adorn us with
the embellishment of faith and make us rightly guided* *guides. O Allah!
Guide us as those whom You have guided. O Allah! I ask You for the will
to follow the right way and remain steadfast, and I ask You to help me
give thanks for Your bounties and the good health You have given me, and
to fulfill my obligations to You. And I ask You, O Lord, for an
untainted heart and a truthful tongue, and I seek forgiveness for what
You know (of my faults), and I ask You for the best of what You know (to
be good for me); and I seek refuge with You from the evil of what You
know, for surely You know and we do not know, and You are the Knower of
the unseen.”*[^39]

His Du’a after the Nafilah of the Fajr Prayer
---------------------------------------------

35. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his
fathers from ‘Ali (as) that when the Holy Prophet (S) had prayed two
rak’ahs before the morning prayer, he laid down on his right side and
placed his right hand under his right cheek, then said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِسْتَمْسَكْتُ بِعُرْوَةِ اللٌّهِ الْوُثْقى الَّتِي لاَ انْفِصَامَ
لَهَا، وَاسْتَعْصَمْتُ بِحَبْلِ اللٌّهِ الْمَتِينِ. أَعُوذُ بِاللٌّهِ
مِنْ فَوْرَةِ الْعَرَبِ وَالْعَجَمِ، وَأَعُوذُ بِاللٌّهِ مِنْ شَرِّ
شَيَاطِينِ الإِنْسِ وَالْجِنِّ. تَوَكَّلْتُ عَلـى اللٌّهِ، طَلَبْتُ
حَاجَتِي مِنَ اللٌّهِ، حَسْبِيَ اللٌّهُ ونِعْمَ الْوَكِيلُ، لاَ حَوْلَ
وَلاَ قُوَّةَ إِلاَّ بِاللٌّهِ الْعَلِيِّ الْعَظِيمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I have laid hold of the firmest handle of Allah which shall not break
off and I have clung to the strong rope of Allah. I seek refuge with
Allah from the outbursts of the Arab and the non-Arab, and I seek refuge
with Allah from the evil of the devils from the man and jinn. I trust in
Allah. I seek the fulfillment of my needs from Allah. Allah is enough
for me and He is the best Procurator, there is no power or might but by
(the will of) Allah the Sublime, the Mighty.”*[^40]

His Du’a after the Fajr Prayer
------------------------------

36. From Mufid al-Din in al-Majalis: Narrated from Abi Barzah al-Aslami
from his father who said: When the Noble Prophet (S) had offered the
Fajr Prayer, he raised his voice until his companions could hear him,
and said :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ أَصْلِحْ لِي دِيْـنِيَ الَّذِي جَعَلْتَهُ لِي عِصْمَةً.
أَللٌّهُمَّ أَصْلِحْ لِي دُنْـيَايَ الَّتِي جَعَلْتَ فِيهَا مَعَاشِي.
أَللٌّهُمَّ أَصْلِحْ لِي آخِرَتِيَ الَّتِي جَعَلْتَ إِلَيْهَا
مَرْجَعِي. أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِرِضَاكَ مِنْ سَخَطِكَ،
وَأَعُوذُ بِعَفْوِكَ مِنْ نِقْمَتِكَ. أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ
لاَ مَانِعَ لِمَا أَعْطَـيْتَ وَلاَ مُعْطِيَ لِمَا مَنَعْتَ وَلاَ
يَنْفَعُ ذَا الْجَدِّ مِنْكَ الْجَدُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Set right for me the religion that You have made a safeguard
for me [three times]. O Allah! Set right for me this world that You have
made me live in [three times]. O Allah! Set right for me my hereafter
that you have made my place of return [three times]. O Allah! I seek
refuge with Your pleasure from Your ire and I seek refuge with Your
forgiveness from Your wrath [three times]. O Allah! I seek refuge with
You – nobody can deny to the one whom You have* *given, and nobody can
give to the one whom You have denied, and nobody’s efforts come to
fruition without You.”*[^41]

37. From al-Qutb in his Da’awat: When the Holy Prophet (S) had offered
the morning prayer he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهَمَّ مَتِّعْنِـي بِسَمْعِي وَ بَصَرِي وَاجْعَلْهُمَا
الْوَارِثَيْنِ مِنِّي وَ أَرِنِـي ثَارِي مِنْ عَدُوِّي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Grant me the use of my hearing and sight and let them stay
with me till my death and show me the destruction of my enemies.”*[^42]

His Dhikr after the Fajr Prayer
-------------------------------

38. From Sayyid Ibn Tawus in al-Iqbal: Narrated from Ja’far ibn Muhammad
from his father (as), who said in a hadith: When the Holy Prophet (S)
had completed his morning prayer, he would (continue to) face the Qiblah
until sunrise, invoking Allah the Almighty (SwT). At this time, ‘Ali ibn
Abi Talib (as) would come forward and sit behind the Holy Prophet (S)
and the people would come to seek permission to ask for their needs, and
this is what the Prophet (S) had instructed them to do.[^43]

His Du’a after the Dhuhr Prayer
-------------------------------

39. From Sayyid Ibn Tawus in al-Iqbal: Narrated from al-Hadi from his
fathers from Abi ‘Abdillah from Amir al-Mu’minin (as) from the Holy
Prophet (S): From among his supplications after the Dhuhr Prayer was:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ اللٌّهُ الْعَظِيمُ الْحَلِيمُ، لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ
اللٌّهُ رَبُّ الْعَرْشِ الْعَظِيمِ، وَالْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ رَبِّ
الْعَالَمِينَ. أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسْأَلُكَ مُوْجِـبَاتِ رَحْمَتِكَ
وَعَزَائِمَ مَغْفِرَتِكَ وَالْغَنِيمَةَ مِنْ كُلِّ خَيْرٍ
وَالسَّلاَمَةَ مِنْ كُلِّ إِثْمٍ. أَللٌّهُمَّ لاَ تَدَعْ لِي ذَنْباً
إِلاَّ غَفَرْتَهُ، وَلاَ هَمّاً إِلاَّ فَرَّجْتَهُ، وَلاَ كَرْباً
إِلاَّ كَشَفْتَهُ، وَلاَ سُقْماً إِلاَّ شَفَيْتَهُ، وَلاَ عَيْباً
إِلاَّ سَتَرْتَهُ، وَلاَ رِزْقاً إِلاَّ بَسَطْتَهُ، وَلاَ خَوْفاً
إِلاَّ آمَنْتَهُ، (وَلا دَيْـناً إِلاَّ قَضَيْـتَهُ) وَلاَ سُوءً
إِلاَّ صَرَفْتَهُ، وَلاَ حَاجَةً هِيَ لَكَ رِضاً وَلِي فِيهَا صَلاَحٌ
إِلاَّ قَضَيْتَهَا، يَا أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ، آمِينَ رَبَّ
الْعَالَمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There is no god But Allah, the Great, the Clement. There is no god but
Allah, the Lord of the throne of Grace. All praise is for Allah, the
Lord of the worlds. O Allah! I beseech You for all that which is the
cause of Your Mercy, and that which ascertains Your Forgiveness; and
benefit from every virtue, and safety from every sin. O Allah! Leave not
any sin for me but that You forgive it, any affliction but that You
remove it, any illness but that You heal it, any defect but* *that You
conceal it, any sustenance but that You increase it, any fear but that
You protect (me) from it, any evil but that You repel it, and any of my
needs in which is Your pleasure and which is beneficial for me, but that
You grant it; O Most Merciful! Grant me my supplication, Lord of the
Universe.”*[^44]

His Du’a in his Sujud (Prostration)
-----------------------------------

40. In al-Bihar: Narrated from ‘Abdillah ibn Sinan from Abi ‘Abdillah
(as) that when the Noble Prophet (S) put his face (on the earth) for
*sujud*, he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ مَغْفِرَتُكَ أَوْسَعُ مِنْ ذُنُوبِي وَرَحْمَـتُكَ أَرْجى
عِنْدِي مِنْ عَمَلِي، فَاغْفِرْ لِي ذُنُوبِي يَا حَيّاً لاَ يَمُوتُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Your forgiveness is greater than my sins and I am more
hopeful of Your mercy than of my actions, so forgive my sins O Living
who never dies!”*[^45]

His Du’a when he wanted to leave (after completing) his Prayer
--------------------------------------------------------------

41. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his
fathers from ‘Ali (as), that when the Holy Prophet (S) wanted to leave
(after completing) the prayer, he passed his right hand over his
forehead then said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ لَكَ الْحَمْدُ لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ أَنْتَ عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ
وَالشَّهَادَةِ. أَللٌّهُمَّ اذْهِبْ عَنَّا الْهَمَّ وَالْحُزْنَ
وَالْفِتَنَ مَا ظَهَرَ مِنْهَا وَمَا بَطَنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! For You is all praise, there is no god but You, Knower of the
unseen and the seen. O Allah! Take away from us all worry, sorrow and
trials, both the open and the concealed.”*

And he said: There is not one from my Ummah who does this but that Allah
(SwT) will give him what he has asked for.[^46]

Note: Sayyid Ibn Tawus mentions a similar narration in his book Falah
al-Sa’il.[^47]

His Du’a after the Prayer
-------------------------

42. In Kanz of al-Karajiki: Narrated from Anas who said: After the
prayer, the Holy Prophet (S) would supplicate, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ عِلْمٍ لاَ يَنْفَعُ وَقَلْبٍ لاَ
يَخْشَعُ وَنَفْسٍ لاَ تَشْبَعُ وَدُعَاءٍ لاَ يُسْمَعُ. أَللٌّهُمَّ
إِنَّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ هٌؤُلاَءِ الأَرْبَعِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! I seek refuge with You from the knowledge that does not
benefit, and the heart that does not fear (You), and the soul that does
not become satisfied, and the supplication that is not heard. O Allah! I
seek refuge with You from these four things.”*[^48]

His Salah and Du’a at the beginning of the New Year
---------------------------------------------------

43. From Sayyid Ibn Tawus in al-Iqbal: Narrated from Muhammad ibn
al-Fudhayl al-Sayrafi who said: It was narrated to us from ‘Ali ibn Musa
al-Rid’a from his father, from his grandfather, from his fathers (as),
who said: On the first day of Muharram, the Holy Prophet (S) would offer
two rak’ahs after which he would raise his hands and supplicate thrice
with the following supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ أَنْتَ الإِلٌهُ الْقَدِيـمُ، وَهٌذِهِ سَنَةٌ جَدِيدَةٌ،
فَأَسْأَلُكَ فِيهَا الْعِصْمَةَ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ، وَالْقُوَّةَ عَلـى
هٌذِهِ النَّفْسِ الأَمَّارَةِ بِالسُّوءِ، وَالإِشْتِغَالَ بِمَا
يُقَرِّبُنِي إِلَيْكَ، يَا كَرِيـمُ، يَا ذَاالْجَلاَلِ وَالإِكْرَامِ،
يَا عِمَادَ مَنْ لاَ عِمَادَ لَهُ، يَا ذَخِيرَةَ مَنْ لاَ ذَخِيرَةَ
لَهُ، يَا حِرْزَ مَنْ لاَ حِرْزَ لَهُ، يَا غِيَاثَ مَنْ لاَ غِيَاثَ
لَهُ، يَا سَنَدَ مَنْ لاَ سَنَدَ لَهُ، يَا كَنْزَ مَنْ لاَ كَنْزَ
لَهُ، يَا حَسَنَ الْبَلاَءِ يَا عَظِيمَ الرَّجَاءِ، يَا عِزَّ
الضُّعَـفَاءِ، يَا مُنْقِذَ الْغَرْقى، يَا مُنْجِيَ الْهَلْكى، يَا
مُنْعِمُ، يَا مُجْمِلُ، يَا مُفْضِلُ، يَا مُحْسِنُ، أَنْتَ الَّذِي
سَجَدَ لَكَ سَوَادُ اللَّيلِ، وَنُورُ النَّهَارِ، وَضَوْءُ الْقَمَرِ،
وَشُعَاعُ الشَّمْسِ، وَدَوِيُّ الْمَاءِ، وحَفِيفُ الشَّجَرِ، يَا
اللٌّهُ لاَ شَرِيكَ لَكَ. أَللٌّهُمَّ اجْعَلْنَا خَيْراً مِمَّا
يَظُنُّونَ، وَاغْفِرْ لَنَا مَا لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ، حَسْبِيَ اللٌّهُ لاَ
إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ عَلَيْهِ تَوَكَّلْتُ وَهُوَ رَبُّ الْعَرْشِ
الْعَظِيمِ، آمَنَّا بِهِ، كُلُّ مِنْ عِنْدِ رَبِّنَا، وَمَا يَذَّكَّرُ
إِلاَّ أُولُو الأَلْبَابِ، رَبَّنَا لاَ تُزِغْ قُلُوبَنَا وَهَبْ لَنَا
مِنْ لَدُنْكَ رَحْمَةً إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْوَهَّابُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! You are the Eternal Lord, and this is a new year, so I ask
that You grant me protection from Shaitan, and control over this
voluptuous self that incites towards evil, and being occupied in that
which would bring me closer to You, O Most Kind! O Lord of Might and
Majesty! O Supporter of the one who has no supporter, O Protector of the
one who has no protector, O Guardian of the one who has no guardian, O
Helper of the one who has no helper, O Assister of the one who has no
assister, O Reinforcement of the one who has no reinforcement, O Granter
of gracious gifts, O Source of great hope, O Esteem of the weak, O
Rescuer of the drowning, O Savior of the devastated, O Benefactor, O
Beautifier, O Granter of excellence, O Bestower; You are the One to whom
prostrate the darkness of night and the light of day, the brightness of
the moon and rays of the sun, the sound of (gushing) water and the
rustling of the trees; O Allah! You have no partner. O Allah! Make us
the best of what they conjecture (about us) and forgive us that which
they do not know (of our faults). Allah is enough for me – there is no
god but He; in Him do I trust and He is the Lord of the Exalted Throne.
We believe in it - everything is from our Lord, and none takes
admonition except those who possess intellect. Our* *Lord! Make not our
hearts deviate and bestow Your mercy on us, indeed You are
All-Munificent.”*[^49]

His Du’a on the night of Fifteenth of Sha’ban
---------------------------------------------

44. From Sayyid ibn Tawus in al-Iqbal: Among the actions to be performed
on the eve of the fifteenth of Sha’ban are ... and the Holy Prophet (S)
used to supplicate on this night and say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ اقْسِمْ لَنَا مِنْ خَشْيَتِكَ مَا يَحُولُ بَيْنَنَا
وَبَيْنَ مَعْصِيَتِكَ، وَمِنْ طَاعَتِكَ مَا تُبِلِّغُنَا بِهِ
رِضْوَانَكَ، وَمِنَ الْيَقِينِ مَا يَهُونُ عَلَيْنَا بِهِ مُصِيبَاتِ
الدُّنْـيَا. أَللٌّهُمَّ مَتِّعْنَا بِأَسْمَاعِنَا وَأَبْصَارِنَا
وَقُوَّتِنَا مَا أَحْـيَيْـتَنَا، وَاجْعَلْهُ الْوَارِثَ مِنَّا،
وَاجْعَلْ ثَارَنَا عَلـى مَنْ ظَلَمَنَا، وَانْصُرْنَا عَلـى مَنْ
عَادَانَا، وَلاَ تَجْعَلْ مُصِيبَتَنَا فِي دِيْنِنَا، وَلاَ تَجْعَلِ
الدُّنْيَا أَكْبَـرَ هَمِّـنَا، وَلاَ مَبْلَغَ عِلْمِنَا، وَلاَ
تُسَلِّطْ عَلَيْنَا مَنْ لاَ يَرْحَمُنَا، بِرَحْمَتِكَ يَا أَرْحَمَ
الرَّاحِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Grant us as much fear of You as would prevent us from Your
disobedience, and as much obedience as would make us attain Your
pleasure, and as much certainty as would make bearable for us the
tribulations of this world. O Allah! Grant us the use of our hearing,
sight and strength in the life You have given us, and let it remain with
us until we die, and avenge those who have oppressed us, and help us
against those who have become our enemies, and do not keep tribulations
for us in our religion, and do not make this world our greatest concern,
nor the* *limit of our knowledge, and do not make sovereign upon us one
who has no mercy on us, by Your Mercy O Most Merciful of
mercifuls.”*[^50]

45. In al-Iqbal: In the narration from his grandfather Abi Ja’far
al-Tusi, from one of the Noble Prophet’s wives who said: “On the night
when the Prophet (S) was with me, he gently withdrew from my bedcover
(so as not to wake me) but I noticed it. I began feeling the jealousy
that is felt by women and thought that he was in the room of another one
of his wives but when I came upon him, he was like a garment that had
fallen on the ground, prostrating, with the tip of his toes (placed on
the ground), and saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَصْـبَحْتُ إِلَيْكَ فَقِيراً خَائِفاً مُسْتَجِيراً فَلاَ تُبَدِّلْ
إِسْمِي وَلاَ تُغَيِّرْ جِسْمِي وَلاَ تَجْتَهِدْ بَلاَئِي وَاغْفِرْ
لِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I come to You as a beggar, fearful, seeking refuge, so do not change
my status, and do not alter my body, and do not make severe my
tribulations, and forgive me.”*

Then he raised his head and then prostrated again and I heard him say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَجَدَ لَكَ سَوَادِي وَخِـيَالِي وَآمِنَ بِذٌلِكَ فُؤَادِي. هٌذِهِ
يَدَايَ بِمَا جَنَيْتُ عَلـى نَفْسِي، يَا عَظِيمُ تُرجى لِكُلِّ
عَظِيمٍ إِغْفِرْ لِي ذَنْبِيَ الْعَظِيمَ فَإِنَّهُ لاَ يَغْفِرُ
الذَّنْبَ الْعَظِيمَ إِلاَّ الْعَظِيمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“My body and mind have prostrated to You, and by this has my heart
gained faith. These are my hands with which I have oppressed my soul, O
Greatest upon whom is the greatest hope, forgive my greatest sin, for
none forgives the greatest sin but the Greatest.”*

Then he raised his head and prostrated for the third time and I heard
him say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَعُوذُ بِعَفْوِكَ مِنْ عِقَابِكَ، وَأَعُوذُ بِرِضَاكَ مِنْ سَخَطِكَ،
وَأَعُوذُ بِمُعَافَاتِكَ مِنْ عُقُوبَتِكَ، وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْكَ،
أَنْتَ كَمَا أَثْـنَيْتَ عَلـى نَفْسِكَ وَفَوْقَ مَا يَقُولُ
الْقَائِلُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I seek refuge in Your forgiveness from Your chastisement, and I seek
refuge in Your grace from Your punishment, and I seek refuge in You from
You; You are as You have described Yourself and above what the speakers
speak.”*

Then he raised his head and prostrated once more for the fourth time and
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِنُورِ وَجْهِكَ الَّذِي أَشْرَقَتْ لَهُ
السَّمٌوَاتُ وَالأَرْضُ، وَقَشَعَتْ بِهِ الظُّلُمَاتُ، وَصَلُحَ بِهِ
أَمْرُ الأَوَّلِينَ وَالآخِرِينَ، أَنْ يَحِلَّ عَلَيَّ غَضَـبُكَ أَوْ
يَنْزِلَ عَلَيَّ سَخَطُكَ. أَعُوذُ مِنْ زَوَالِ نِعْمَتِكَ وَفَجْأَةِ
نِقْمَتِكَ وَتَحْوِيلِ عَافِيَتِكَ وَجَمِيعِ سَخَطِكَ. لَكَ الْعُتْبـى
فِيمَا اسْتَطَعْتُ وَلاَ حَوْلَ وَلاَ قُوَّةَ إِلاَّ بِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! I seek refuge with the light of Your presence by which the
heavens and the earth radiate, and by which the darkness dispels, and
through which the affairs of the first and last improve; and (I seek
refuge) from Your anger covering me and Your wrath coming upon me. I
seek refuge from the reduction of Your bounties, and the suddenness of
Your retribution, and the* *cessation of the well-being You have
granted, and all Your displeasure. You admonish me for what I have the
ability to perform and there is no power or might but by Your will.”*

She continued: “When I saw this from him, I left him and proceeded
towards home as a feeling of restlessness came upon me. Then the Holy
Prophet (S) followed me and said: “Why are you uneasy?” I said: “I was
with you O Prophet of Allah.” He said: “Do you know what night this is?
This is the night of the middle of Sha’ban. In it is the actions
determined, and the sustenance divided, and the life spans fixed; and
Allah forgives all but the polytheist or the open enemy, or one who has
severed ties with his close family, or the one who consumes intoxicants,
or the one who insists on sinning, or the (frolicsome) poet or
fortune-teller.”[^51]

Note: This has also been narrated in al-Iqbal from his grandfather Abi
Ja’far al-Tusi from Hammad from Aban from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) in a hadith
similar to this one but in which the supplication differs completely
from the supplication in this hadith.[^52] Al-Zamakhshari also narrates
this in al-Fa’iq without mentioning the supplications.[^53]

His Du’a upon seeing the New-Moon
---------------------------------

46. From Shaykh Tusi in al-Amali: Narrated from Muhammad ibn Hanafaiyya
from ‘Ali (as) who said: When the Holy Prophet (S) looked at the
new-moon, he would raise his hands and say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ، أَللٌّهُمَّ أَهِلَّهُ عَلَيْنَا بِالأَمْنِ وَ
الإِيـمَانِ وَ السَّلاَمَةِ وَ الإِسْلاَمِ رَبِّي وَرَبُّكَ اللٌّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In the name of Allah. O Allah! Make it come upon us with harmony and
faith, peace and submission (to You). My Lord and your Lord is
Allah.”*[^54]

Note: There are many similar narrations.[^55]

His Du’a upon seeing the New-Moon of the month of Ramadhan
----------------------------------------------------------

47. From Sayyid ibn Tawus in the section on the actions to be performed
in the month of Ramad’an: From Muhammad ibn Hanafiyya from Amir
al-Mu’minin (as) who said: When the Holy Prophet (S) saw the new-moon of
the month of Ramad’an, he turned his face towards the Qiblah and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ أَهِلَّهُ عَلَيْنَا بِالأَمْنِ وَالإِيـمَانِ
وَالسَّلاَمَةِ وَالإِسْلاَمِ، وَالْعَافِيةِ الْمُجَلَّلَةِ، وَدِفَاعِ
الأَسْقَامِ، وَالْعَوْنِ عَلـى الصَّلاَةِ وَالصِّيَامِ وَتِّلاَوَةِ
الْقُرَآنِ. أَللٌّهُمَّ سَلِّمْـنَا لِشَهْرِ رَمَضَانَ، وَتُسَلِّمْهُ
مِنَّا، وَسَلِّمْنَا فِيهِ، حَتّى يَنْقَضِيَ عَنَّا شَهْرُ رَمَضَانَ
وَقَدْ عَفَوْتَ عَنَّا وَغَفَرْتَ لَنَا وَرَحِمْتَنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Make it come upon us with harmony and faith, peace and
submission, well-being and protection from maladies, and help in prayer
and fastingو and reciting the Qur’an. O Allah! Make us turn to the month
of Ramad’an and make it receive us, and make us submissive in it, until
the month of Ramad’an ends while You have pardoned and forgiven us and
had mercy on us.”*[^56]

His Daily Dhikr
---------------

48. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Abi al-Hasan al-Anbari from Abi ‘Abdillah
(as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) used to praise Allah three hundred
and sixty times a day, the (same as the) number of canals in the body,
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ كَـثِيراً عَلـى كُلِّ حَالٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Many praises be to Allah – Lord of the Universe - in all
conditions.”*[^57]

49. Also: Narrated from Ya’qub ibn Shu’aib who said: I heard Aba
‘Abdillah (as) saying: The Noble Prophet (S) said: Verily there are
three hundred and sixty canals in the human body, out of which a hundred
and eighty are flowing and a hundred and eighty are stationary. If the
flowing canal becomes stationary, it does not grow and it the stationary
canal begins to flow, it does not grow. And the Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ كَثِيراً عَلـى كُلِّ حَالٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Many praises be to Allah in all conditions.”*

...three hundred and sixty times when he woke up in the morning and
(again) when night fell.[^58]

50. From Shaykh Tusi in al-Majalis and al-Akhbar: Narrated from Sariyya
ibn Ya’qub from his father, from al-Sadiq, from his fathers (as) in a
hadith: When the Holy Prophet (S) woke up in the morning, as the sun
rose, he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ كَـثِيراً طَيِّباً عَلـى كُلِّ
حَالٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Many good praises be to Allah - Lord of the Universe, in all
conditions.”*

And he would express his gratitude (to Him) three hundred and sixty
times.[^59]

His Dhikr in the Morning and Evening
------------------------------------

51. From al-Qutb al-Rawandi: It is narrated that when ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn
(as) was taken to Yazid, he wanted to kill him so he made the Imam stand
in front of him and spoke to him, trying to get a response that would
give him an excuse to kill him. And the Imam (as) would answer him, and
while he spoke he had small prayer-beads[^60] in his hand which he was
turning with his fingers as he was speaking. So Yazid said to him: “I am
speaking to you and you are replying me while turning the prayer-beads
in your hand with your fingers, so how is that permissible?” He (as)
said: “My father narrated to me from my grandfather that when he had
finished praying the morning prayer he would not talk until he had taken
his prayer-beads in his hand and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَصْبَحْتُ أُسَبِّحُكَ وَأُمَجِّدُكَ وَأُحَمِّدُكَ
وَأُهَلِّلُكَ بِعَدَدِ مَا أُدِيْرُ بِهِ سُبْحَتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! I start my day by praising and glorifying You as many times
as I have turned my prayer-beads.”*

...and he would take the prayer-beads and start to turn them as he spoke
whatever he wished to speak, other than reciting dhikr, and he said that
turning the prayer-beads would be counted (as recitation of dhikr) and
would act as a protection until he retired to his bed (at night) and
when he retired to his bed, he would say something similar to what he
had said (in the morning) and would place his prayer-beads under his
pillow and it would thus be counted (as dhikr) from one time to another
– so I did this to follow in the footsteps of my grandfather.” Yazid
said – repeating time and again: “None from among you do I address but
that he replies me with that by which his success is seen,” and he
withdrew from his intention to kill him and ordered that he be
unshackled.[^61]

Note: It is apparent from this narration that by ‘grandfather’ he meant
the Holy Prophet (S)

His remedy for Headache
-----------------------

52. In Tibb al-A’immah: From Ahmad ibn Ziyad from Fadhalah from Isma’il
ibn Ziyad from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: Whenever the Holy Prophet
(S) was afflicted with sluggishness or a headache, he would extend his
hands and recite Surah al-Fatihah and the *Mu’awwadhatayn*[^62] and he
would be relieved from that which afflicted him.[^63]

His seeking protection from fever and other ailments
----------------------------------------------------

53. In Da’awat al-Rawandi: The Noble Prophet (S) would seek protection
from fever and pains by saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ شَرِّ عِرْقٍ نَعَّارٍ وَمِنْ
شَرِّ حَرِّ النَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! I seek refuge with You from the harm of a gushing
blood-vessel and from the evil of the fire of hell.”*[^64]

His invocation for protection from fever
----------------------------------------

54. From Tibb al-A’immah: Narrated from ‘Amr Dhi Qurrah and Tha’labah
al-Jammal who said: We heard Amir al-Mu’minin (as) saying: A severe
fever came upon the Holy Prophet (S) so Jibra’il came to him and recited
the following invocation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ أُرْقِيكَ، بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ أَشْفِيكَ مِنْ كُلِّ دَاءٍ
يُؤْذِيكَ، وَاللٌّهُ شَافِيكَ، بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ خُذْهَا فَلْتُهَنِّيكَ.
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ الرَّحْمٌنِ الرَّحِيمِ. وَلاَ أُقْسِمُ بِمَوَاقِعِ
النُّجُومِ، وَإِنَّهُ لَقَسَمٌ لَوْ تَعْلَمُونَ عَظِيمٌ،
لَتَبَرَّأَنَّ بِإِذْنِ اللٌّهِ عَزَّوَجَلَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In the name of Allah - I invoke (for) you. In the name of Allah - I
cure you of every ailment that afflicts you and Allah is your Healer. In
the name of Allah - take it as it brings you well-being. In the name of
Allah the Compassionate the Merciful. I swear by the setting of the
stars. And that is indeed a mighty adjuration if you but knew. You will
surely recover by the will of Allah the Almighty.”*

Then the Prophet (S) stood up (cured) from that which had tied him down
and he said: “O Jibra’il! This is indeed a great invocation!” He
replied: “It is from a treasure in the seven heavens.”[^65]

His invocation for protection from magic
----------------------------------------

55. In al-Bihar: From Ibn ‘Abbas who said: Lubaid ibn A’sam cast a spell
on the Prophet (S) and then put it in the well belonging to Bani Zurayq.
So the Prophet (S) fell ill and while he was asleep two angels came to
him, one sat next to his head while the other next to his legs and they
informed him of this (magic) and said: “The spell is in the well of
Dharwan, inside a spadix of a palm tree under a rock at the bottom of
the well.” As the Prophet (S) woke up and send ‘Ali (as), Zubayr and
‘Ammar (to remove the spell). They removed the water from the well and
raised the rock and removed the spadix. In it were a few hairs of the
Holy Prophet (S) along with some broken teeth from his comb, which had
been tied in eleven knots with a needle. Then these two Surahs were
revealed. The Holy Prophet (S) started reciting the two Surahs and with
the recitation of each ayah, one of the knots opened up, and after all
the knots were undone, the Prophet (S) looked like someone who had just
had a huge burden lifted from him, and Jibra’il started saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ أُرْقِيكَ مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ يُؤْذِيكَ مِنْ حَاسِدٍ
وَعَيْنٍ وَاللٌّهُ يَشْفِيكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In the name of Allah I protect you from all things that harm you –
from the jealous one and the evil eye – and may Allah cure you.”*[^66]

Note: The two Surahs referred to are the *Mu’awwadhatan* (Surah al-Falaq
and al-Nas) as has been mentioned in other narrations.[^67]

Another one of his invocations
------------------------------

56. In al-Bihar from the Tafsir of the Imam: The Prophet (S) placed his
hand on the poisoned (meat of the) arm-bone and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ الشَّافِي، بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ الْكَافِي، بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ
الْمُعَافِي، بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ الَّذِي لاَ يَضُرُّ مَعَ إِسْمِهِ شَيْءٌ
فِي الأَرْضِ وَلاَ فِي السَّمَاءِ وَهُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In the name of Allah the Healer, in the name of Allah the Sufficient,
in the name of Allah the Nourisher, in the name of Allah with whose name
nothing in the earth or heaven can cause (us) harm and He is All-hearing
All-seeing.”*

Then he said: “Eat in the name of Allah,” and the Holy Prophet (S) ate
and they all ate until they were satisfied, and it (the poisoned meat)
did not harm them in the least.[^68]

His Du’a when Distressed or Troubled
------------------------------------

57. From Shaykh Tusi in al-Amali: Narrated from Zayd, from his fathers,
from ‘Ali (as), who said: Whenever the Noble Prophet (S) was distressed
or troubled he would recite the following du’a:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا حَيُّ يَا قَيُّومُ، يَا حَيّاً لاَ يَمُوتُ، يَا حَيُّ لاَ إِلٌهَ
إِلاَّ أَنْتَ، كَاشِفَ الْهَمِّ، مُجِيبَ دَعْوَةِ الْمُضْطَرِّينَ.
أَسْأَلُكَ بِأَنَّ لَكَ الْحَمْدَ لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ أَنْتَ
الْمَنَّانُ، بَدِيعُ السَّمٌوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ ذُو الْجَلاَلِ
وَالإِكْرَامِ، رَحْمٌنَ الدُّنْـيَا وَالآخِرَةِ وَرَحِيمَهُمَا، رَبِّ
ارْحَمْنِي رَحْمَةً تُغْنِيَنِي بِهَا عَنْ رَحْمَةِ مَنْ سِوَاكَ، يَا
أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Ever-living! O Ever-lasting! O Ever-living who never dies! O
Ever-living there is no god but You. Remover of the troubles! Answerer
of the calls of the desperate! I ask You, as all praise is due to You –
there is no god but You – O Bestower of Favors! Originator of the
heavens and the earth! Lord of Might and Glory! The Beneficent in this
world and the next and the Merciful in them both! O Lord! Bless me with
the mercy that would make me free from needing mercy from other than
You, O Most Merciful of the mercifuls”.*

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Whoever, from among the Muslims, recites
this du’a three times is guaranteed to get what he asks for except if it
(what he asks for) is a sin or if he has broken off ties with his close
relatives.”[^69]

His Du’a for memorizing the Holy Qur’an
---------------------------------------

58. In Qurb al-Isnad: From Mas’adah ibn Sadaqah: I was told by Ja’far
from his fathers (as) that the following was one of the supplications of
the Holy Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ ارْحَمْنِي بِتَرْكِ مَعَاصِيكَ مَا أَبْقَيْتَنِي،
وَارْزُقْنِي حُسْنَ النَّظَرِ فِيمَا يُرْضِيكَ عَنِّي وَأَلْزِمْ
قَلْبِي حِفْظَ كِتَابِكَ كَمَا عَلَّمْتَنِي، وَاجْعَلْنِي أَتْلُوهُ
عَلـى النَّحْوِ الَّذِي يُرْضِيكَ عَنِّي. أَللٌّهُمَّ نَوِّرْ
بِكِتَابِكَ بَصَرِي، وَاشْرَحْ بِهِ صَدْرِي، وَفَرِّحْ بِهِ قَلْبِي،
وَأَطْلِقْ بِهِ لِسَانِي، وَاسْتَعْمِلْ بِهِ بَدَنِي، وَقَوِّنِي عَلـى
ذٌلِكَ، فَإِنَّهُ لاَ حَوْلَ وَلاَ قُوَّةَ إِلاَّ بِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Bless me with the ability to keep away from Your disobedience
for the rest of my life; and grant me the ability to see the good in
what pleases You, and make my heart memorize Your book as You have
taught me; and enable me to recite it in the way that pleases You. O
Allah! Illuminate my sight by You book, and expand by it my chest, and
gratify by it my heart, and make eloquent my speech by it, and make my
body work by itو and strengthen me in this for surely there is no might
and no power but (by) You”.*[^70]

His Covering
------------

59. In al-Muhaj: The ‘Hijab’ (covering) of the Holy Prophet (S) (i.e.
the supplication for protection from enemies) was:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَجَعَلْنَا عَلـى قُلُوبِهِمْ أَكِنَّةً أَنْ يَفْقَهُوهُ وَفِي
آذَانِهِمْ وَقْراً. وَإِذَا ذَكَرْتَ رَبَّكَ فِي الْقُرَآنِ وَحْدَهُ
وَلَّوا عَلـى أَدْبَارِهِمْ نُفُوراً  أَللٌّهُمَّ بِمَا وَارَتِ
الْحُجُبُ مِنْ جَلاَلِكَ وَجَمَالِكَ، وَبِمَا أَطَافَ بِهِ الْعَرْشِ
مِنْ بَهَاءِ كَمَالِكَ، وَبِمَعَاقِدِ الْعِزِّ مِنْ عَرْشِكَ، وَبِمَا
تُحِيطُ بِهِ قُدْرَتُكَ مِنْ مَلَكُوتِ سُلْطَانِكَ، يَا مَنْ لاَ
رَادَّ لِأَمْرِهِ وَلاَ مُعَقِّبَ لِحُكْمِهِ، إِضْرِبْ بَيْنِي
وَبَيْنَ أَعْدَائِي بِسِتْرِكَ الَّذِي لاَ تُفَرِّقُهُ الْعَوَاصِفُ
مِنَ الرِّيَاحِ، وَلاَ تَقْطَعُهُ الْبَوَاتِرُ مِنَ الصِّفَاحِ، وَلاَ
تَنْفُذُهُ عَوَامِلُ الرِّمَاحِ، حُلَّ يَا شَدِيدَ الْبَطْشِ بَيْنِي
وَبَيْنَ مَنْ يَرْمِينِي بِخَوَافِقِهِ، وَمَنْ تَسَرَّى إِلـيَّ
طَوَارِقُهُ، وَفَرِّجْ عَنِّي كُلَّ هَمٍّ وَغَمٍّ، يَا فَارِجَ هَمِّ
يَعْقُوبَ فَرِّجْ عَنِّي، يَا كَاشِفَ ضُرِّ أَيُوبَ إِكْشِفْ ضُرِّي،
وَاغْلِبْ لِي مَنْ غَلَبَنِي، يَا غَالِباً غَيْرَ مَغْلُوبٍ.  وَرَدَّ
اللٌّهُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِغَيْظِهِمْ لَمْ يَـنَالُوا خَيْراً وَكَفى
اللٌّهُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ الْقِتَالَ وَكاَنَ اللٌّهُ قَوِيّاً عَزِيزاً 
 فَأَيَّدْنَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا عَلـى عَدُوِّهِمْ فَأَصْبَحُوا
ظَاهِرِينَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We have cast veils over their hearts lest they understand it and a
heaviness in their ears”*** (Surat al-An’am (6): 25)

***“And when you remember your Lord alone, in the Qur’an, they turn
their backs in aversion”*** (Surat al-Isra\` (17): 46)

*O Allah! By that which your Might and Majesty have covered, and by that
which have been engulfed by the perfection of your Sovereignty, and by
the honor that comes forth from your Infinite Knowledge, and by that
which is encompassed by your Dominion; O One whose* *command cannot be
overruled and whose ruling cannot be overturned! Place between myself
and my enemies a covering that cannot be removed even by strong winds,
nor can it be cut by sharp blades, nor can spears pierce it. O One whose
Might is great! Guard me from the one who has taken aim at me with his
arrows and the one who makes me the target of his strikes; and remove
from me every sorrow and hardship. O remover of the sorrows of Ya’qub!
Remove my sorrows; O Eliminator of the hardships of Ayyub! Eliminate my
hardships; and defeat for me the one who has defeated me, O Defeater who
cannot be defeated.*

***“And Allah turned back the unbelievers in their rage; they did not
obtain any advantage, and Allah sufficed the believers in their fight
and Allah is Strong and Mighty”*** (Surat al-Ahzab (33): 25)

***“Then We aided those who believed against their enemy and they became
the ones who prevailed.*** (Surat al-Saff (61): 14)[^71]

Addendum to this Chapter
------------------------

1. In al-Manaqib: He (S) would neither stand nor sit but by the
remembrance of Allah.[^72]

Note: This has also been narrated in Majma’ al-Bayan.[^73]

2. In al-Kafi: In his narration from Ibn Fad’dhal from one of our
companions from al-Rid’a (as), that he used to say to his companions:
“Take up the weapon of the Prophets.” It was asked: “And what is the
weapon of the prophets?” He replied: “(It is) du’a.”[^74]

3. In Da’awat al-Rawandi: He (S) would implore so much when supplicating
until it looked like his cloak was about to fall off.[^75]

4. In Kashf al-Ghummah: Ahmad ibn Hamdun said in his ‘Tadhkirah’:
Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (as) said: “We (the Ahl al-Bayt)
supplicate to Allah for that which we like, and if what we do not like
happens instead, we do not go against what Allah has preferred for
us.”[^76]

### His Du’a in the Morning

5. In al-Kafi: In his narration from al-Fadhl ibn Abi Qurrah from Abi
‘Abdillah (as) who said: Three sentences were recited by all the
prophets, one after the other, from Adam (as) until they came down to
the Noble Prophet (S). Every morning he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسْأَلُكَ إِيـمَاناً تُبَاشِرُ بِهِ قَلْبِي،
وَيَقِيناً حَتَّى أَعْلَمُ أَنَّهُ لاَ يُصِيبُنِي إِلاَّ مَا كَتَبْتَ
لِي، وَرَضِّنِي بِمَا قَسَمْتَ لِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! I ask You for faith which gives joy to my heart, and
certitude so that I may know that nothing befalls me except that which
You have destined for me, and make me pleased with that which you have
apportioned for me.”*[^77]

6. In al-Khisal: The Holy Prophet (S) taught ‘Ali (as) the du’a which
Jibra’il brought from Allah (SwT) and instructed the Prophet to recite
in times of hardships and troubles:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عِمَادَ مَنْ لاَ عِمَادَ لَهُ، وَيَا حِرْزَ مَنْ لاَ حِرْزَ لَهُ،
وَيَا ذُخْرَ مَنْ لاَ ذُخْرَ لَهُ، وَيَا سَنَدَ مَنْ لاَ سَنَدَ لَهُ،
وَيَا غِيَاثَ مَنْ لاَ غِيَاثَ لَهُ، وَيَا كَرِيـمَ الْعَفْوِ، وَيَا
حَسَنَ الْبَلاَءِ، وَيَا عَظِيمَ الرَّجَاءِ، وَيَا عَوْنَ
الضُّعَفَاءِ، وَيَا مُنْقِذَ الْغَرْقى، وَيَا مُنْجِيَ الْهَلْكى، يَا
مُحْسِنُ، يَا مُجْمِلُ، يَا مُنْعِمُ، يَا مُفْضِلُ، أَنْتَ الَّذِي
سَجَدَ لَكَ سَوَادُ اللَّيلِ، وَنُورُ النَّهَارِ وَضَوْءُ الْقَمَرِ،
وَشُعَاعُ الشَّمْسِ، وَدَوِيُّ الْمَاءِ، وَحَفِيفُ الشَّجَرِ، يَا
اللٌّهُ، يَا اللٌّهُ، يَا اللٌّهُ، أَنْتَ وَحْدَكَ لاَ شَرِيكَ لَكَ.
ثُمَّ تَقُولُ: أَللٌّهُمَّ افْعَلْ بِي كَذَا وَكَذََا...
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Supporter of the one with no supporter! O Protector of the one with
no protector! O Provider of the one with no provisions! O Helper of the
one with no helper! O Hearer of the unheard appeal! O Munificent in
forgiving! O One whose trials are good! O Giver of great hope! O Helper
of the weak! O Rescuer of the drowning! O Savior of the devastated! O
Beneficent! O Creator of beauty! O Granter of blessings! O Bestower of
good! You are the One to whom prostrate the darkness of night, the light
of day, the illumination of the moon, the rays of the sun, the sound of
(running) water and the rattling of trees. O Allah! O Allah! O Allah!
You are One and have no partner.”*

Then you say: “O Allah! Grant me such and such,” and you will not stand
up from where you are sitting but that your supplication will be
answered if Allah wills.[^78]

### His Invocation

7. In al-Muhaj: In his narration from Abi Basir and Muhammad ibn Muslim
who said: Ja’far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (as) narrated to us from his
father, from his fathers, from Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as),
who said: The Holy Prophet (S) would invoke (Allah (SwT)) for (the
safety of) al-Hasan and al-Husayn (as) with this, and he would order his
companions to recite it, and it is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ الرَّحْمٌنِ الرَّحِيمِ. أُعِيذُ نَفْسِي وَدِيـنِي
وَأَهْلِي وَمَالِي وَوُلْدِي وَخَوَاتِيمَ عَمَلِي وَمَا رَزَقَنِي
رَبِّي وَخَوَّلَنِي بِعِزَّةِ اللٌّهِ وَعَظَمَةِ اللٌّهِ وَجَبَرُوتِ
اللٌّهِ وَسُلْطَانِ اللٌّهِ وَرَحْمَةِ اللٌّهِ وَرَأْفَةِ اللٌّهِ
وَغُفْرَانِ اللٌّهِ وَقُوَّةِ اللٌّهِ وَقُدْرَةِ اللٌّهِ وَبِآلاَءِ
اللٌّهِ وَبِصُنْعِ اللٌّهِ وَبِأَرْكَانِ اللٌّهِ وَبِجَمْعِ اللٌّهِ
عَزَّوَجَلَّ وَبِرَسُولِ اللٌّهِ (صَلَّى اللٌّهُ عَلِيهِ وَآلِهِ)
وَقُدْرَةِ اللٌّهِ عَلـى مَايَشَاءُ، مِنْ شَرِّ السَّامَّةِ
وَالْهَامَّةِ، وَمِنْ شَرِّ الْجِنِّ وَالإِنْسِ، وَمِنْ شَرِّ مَا
دَبَّ فِي الأَرْضِ، وَمِنْ شَرِّ مَا يَخْرُجُ مِنْهَا، وَمِنْ شَرِّ
مَا يَنْزِلُ مِنَ السَّمَآءِ، وَمَا يَعْرُجُ فِيهَا، وَمِنْ شَرِّ
كُلِّ دَابَّةٍ رَبِّي آخِذٌ بِنَاصِيَتِهَا، إِنَّ رَبِّي عَلـى صِرَاطٍ
مُسْتَقِيمٍ، وَهُوَ عَلـى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ، وَلاَ حَوْلَ وَلاَ
قُوَّةَ إِلاَّ بِاللٌّهِ الْعَلِيِّ الْعَظِيمِ، وَصَلَّى اللٌّهُ عَلـى
سَيِّدِنَا مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In the name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful. I place myself, my
religion, my family, my wealth, my children, the results of my actions
and that which my Lord has bestowed on me, under the protection of the
Respect, Grandeur, Majesty, Munificence, Mercy, Kindness, Forgiveness,
Power, Might and Bounty of Allah; By the support of Allah* *, the
prophet of Allah (S) and the Power of Allah over whatever He wills, from
the evil of the poisonous and non-poisonous creatures, from the evil of
jinn and man, from the evil of that which moves on the earth, from the
evil of that which comes out from it, from the evil that descends from
the sky and ascends in it and from the evil of every creature that my
Lord holds by its forelock, surely my Lord is on the straight path and
He has power over all things; and there is no might and no* *power but
that of Allah the Sublime the Mighty – and blessings of Allah be on our
master Muhammad and his progeny.”*[^79]

### His invocation when in difficulty or great distress

8. In the book al-Mujtaba of Ibn Tawus: In his narration from Jabir who
said: When something distressed the Holy Prophet (S), or if the
disbelievers troubled him very much, he clasped his hand and said: “Get
restricted (then) get relieved.” Then he faced the Qibla and raised his
hands and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ الرَّحْمٌنِ الرَّحِيمِ. لاَ حَوْلَ وَلاَ قُوَّةَ إِلاَّ
بِاللٌّهِ الْعَلِيِّ الْعَظِيمِ. أَللٌّهُمَّ إِيَّاكَ نَعْـبُدُ
وَإِيَّاكَ نَسْتَعِينُ. أَللٌّهُمَّ كُفَّ بَأْسَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا
فَإِنَّكَ أَشَدُّ بَأْساً وَأَشَدُّ تَـنْكِيلاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In the name of Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful. There is no might
and no power but that of Allah the Sublime, the Mighty. O Allah! You
alone do we worship and from You alone do we seek help. O Allah!
Restrain the evil of the disbelievers for surely You are the strongest
in might and punishment”.*

... And by Allah, before he opened his hand his problem would be
solved.[^80]

### His Du’a when something made him sad

9. In al-Bihar: In a hadith from al-Sadiq (as) who said: Whenever
something troubled the Holy Prophet (S), he would recite the following
du’a – and they called it *du’a al-faraj* :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ احْرُسْنِي بِعَيْنِكَ الَّتِي لاَ تَنَامُ، وَاكْـنُفْنِي
بِرُكْنِكَ الَّذِي لاَ يُرَامُ، وَارْحَمْنِي بِقُدْرَتِكَ عَلَيَّ،
وَلاَ أَهْلَكُ وَأَنْتَ رَجَائِي، فَكَمْ مِنْ نِعْمَةٍ أَنْـعَمْتَ
بِهَا عَلَيَّ قَلَّ لَهَا شُكْرِي، وَكَمْ مِنْ بَلِيَّةٍ
ابْتَلَيْتَنِي قَلَّ لَكَ بِهَا صَـبْرِي، فَيَا مَنْ قَلَّ عِنْدَ
نِعْمَتِهِ شُكْرِي فَلَمْ يَحْرِمْنِي، وَيَا مَنْ قَلَّ عِنْدَ
بَلِيَّتِهِ صَبْرِي فَلَمْ يَخْذُلْنِي، وَيَا مَنْ رَآنِي عَلـى
الْخَطَايَا فَلَمْ يَفْضَحْـنِي، أَسْأَلُكَ أَنْ تُصَلِّيَ عَلـى
مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ. أَللٌّهُمَّ أَعِنِّي عَلـى دِيـنِي
بِالدُّنْـيَا، وَعَلـى الآخِرَةِ بِالتَّقْوى، وَاحْفَظْنِي فِيمَا
غِبْتُ عَنْهُ، وَلاَ تَكِلْنِي إِلـى نَفْسِي فِيمَا حَضَرْتُهُ، يَا
مَنْ لاَ تَضُرُّهُ الذُّنُوبُ، وَلاَ تَنْقُصُهُ الْمَغْفِرَةُ، هَبْ
لِي مَا لاَ يَنْقُصُكَ، وَاغْفِرْ لِي مَا لاَ يَضُرُّكَ، إِنَّكَ رَبٌّ
وَهَّابٌ. أَسْأَلُكَ فَرَجاً قَرِيـباً، وَصَبْراً جَمِيلاً، وَرِزْقاً
وَاسِعاً، وَالْعَافِيَةَ مِنْ جَمِيعِ الْبَلاَءِ، وَشُكْرَ
الْعَافِيَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Protect me by Your watchfulness that does not become weary,
guard me with Your support which cannot be defeated, have mercy on me by
Your power over me, and do not destroy (me) while I rely on You. How
many blessings have You bestowed upon me for which my gratitude has come
up short, and how many trials have you tested me with where my patience
for Your sake was inadequate? O One for whose blessings my gratitude has
come up short but He has not deprived me! O One in whose trials my
patience has been inadequate but He has not abandoned me! O One who has
seen my mistakes but has not dishonored me! I ask You to send Your
blessings on Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad. O Allah! Make this
world a means for my religion, and piety a means for the hereafter.
Protect me from that which is hidden from me and do not leave me on my
own in the face of what is in front of me. O One who is not harmed by
sins and does not lose anything by granting forgiveness! Grant me that
from which* *You lose nothing and forgive me that which does not harm
You! You are a Generous Lord. I ask You for a near deliverance, a
graceful patience, abundant sustenance, well-being in the face of all
trials and gratitude for all your blessings.”*[^81]

### His Du’a when he saw the New Moon

10. In al-’Uyun: From Darim ibn Qabisah from ‘Ali ibn Musa al-Rid’a,
from his fathers, from ‘Ali (as) who said: When the Prophet (S) saw the
new moon he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُّهَا الْخَلْقُ الْمُطِيعُ الدَّائِبُ السَّرِيعُ الْمُتَصَرِّفُ فِي
مَلَكُوتِ الْجَبَرُوتِ بِالتَّقْدِيرِ! رَبِّي وَرَبُّكَ اللٌّهُ.
أَللٌّهُمَّ أَهِلَّهُ عَلَيْنَا بِالأَمْنِ وَالإِيـمَانِ
وَالسَّلاَمَةِ وَالإِحْسَانِ، وَكَمَا بَلَغْتَنَا أَوَّلَهُ
فَبَلِّغْنَا آخِرَهُ، وَاجْعَلْهُ شَهْراً مُبَارَكاً تَمْحُو فِيهِ
السَّيِّئَاتِ وَتَرْفَعُ لَنَا فِيهِ الدَّرَجَاتِ، يَا عَظِيمَ
الْخَيْرَاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Obedient creature - the untiring, fast-moving heavenly body that
rotates by the Will of Allah! My Lord and your Lord is Allah. O Allah!
Make the new moon come upon us with tranquility and faith, and peace and
goodness. As You have made us pass the beginning of it, make us pass the
end of it. And make it a blessed month wherein You wipe off the evil
deeds and elevate our status, O Great Bestower of goodly things”.*[^82]

Note: A similar narration is in al-Mustadrak from al-Iqbal.[^83]

### His Du’a at the time of the New Moon of Rajab and other Months

11. In al-Iqbal: The du’a for the new moon of Rajab as found in
al-Da’awat: The Noble Prophet (S) used to say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ أَهِلَّهُ عَلَيْنَا بِالأَمْنِ وَالإِيـمَانِ
وَالسَّلاَمَةِ وَالإِسْلاَمِ، رَبِّي وَرَبُّكَ اللٌّهُ عَزَّوَجَلَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Make it (the new moon) come upon us with tranquility and
faith, and peace and submission (to Your will). My Lord and Your Lord is
Allah (SwT)”.*[^84]

12. Also: It is narrated that when he (S) saw the new moon of the month
of Rajab he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ بَارِكْ لَنَا فِي رَجَبٍ وَشَعْبَانَ، وَبَلِّغْنَا شَهْرَ
رَمَضَانَ، وأَعِنَّا عَلـى الصِّيَامِ وَالقِّيَامِ وَحِفْظِ اللِّسَانِ
وَغَضِّ الْبَصَرِ، وَلاَ تَجْعَلْ حَظَّنَا مِنْهُ الْجُوْعَ
وَالْعَطَشَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Bless us in Rajab and Sha’ban and make us reach the month of
Ramad’an; and help us to fast and establish prayers and control the
tongue and lower the gaze, and do not make our only share in it hunger
and thirst.”*[^85]

13. Also: It is narrated that when he (S) saw the new moon, he recited
the *takbir* (Allah is the Greatest) thrice and the *tahlil* (There is
no god but Allah) thrice, then he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ الَّذِي أَذْهَبَ شَهْرَ كَذَا وَجَاءَ بِشَهْرِ
كَذَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Praise be to Allah who make such-and-such month to pass and brought
such-and-such month.”*[^86]

### His Du’a after the Dhuhr Prayer

14. In Falah al-Sa’il: In his narration from Muhammad ibn Abi ‘Abdillah
ibn Muhammad al-Tamim, from Abi al-Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad, from his
father, from his fathers, from Abi ‘Abdillah, from Amir al-Mu’minin (as)
about the Holy Prophet (S), he said: His du’a after the Dhuhr prayer
was:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ اللٌّهُ الْعَظِيمُ الْحَلِيمُ، لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ
اللٌّهُ رَبُّ الْعَرْشِ الْكَرِيـمِ. أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ رَبِّ
الْعَالَمِينَ. أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسْأَلُكَ مُوجِبَاتِ رَحْمَتِكَ،
وَعَزَائِمَ مَغْفِرَتِكَ، وَالْغَنِيمَةَ مِنْ كُلِّ خَيْرٍ،
وَالسَّلاَمَةَ مِنْ كُلِّ إِثْمٍ. أَللٌّهُمَّ لاَ تَدَعْ لِي ذَنْباً
إِلاَّ غَفَرْتَهُ، وَلاَ هَمّاً إِلاَّ فَرَّجْتَهُ، وَلاَ سُقْماً
إِلاَّ شَفَيْتَهُ، وَلاَ عَـيْباً إِلاَّ سَتَرْتَهُ، وَلاَ رِزْقاً
إِلاَّ بَسَطْتَهُ، وَلاَ خَوْفاً إِلاَّ آمَنْتَهُ، وَلاَ سُوءً إِلاَّ
صَرَفْتَهُ، وَلاَ حَاجَةً هِيَ لَكَ رِضاً وَلِي صَلاَحٌ إِلاَّ
قَضَيْتَهَا، يَا أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ، آمِينَ رَبَّ الْعَالَمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There is no god but Allah, the Great, the Clement. There is no god but
Allah, the Lord of the throne of Grace. All praise is for Allah, the
Lord of the worlds. O Allah! I beseech You for all that which is the
cause of Your Mercy, and that which ascertains Your Forgiveness; and
benefit from every virtue, and safety from every sin. O Allah! Leave not
any sin for me but that You forgive it, any affliction but that You
remove it, any illness but that You heal it, any defect but that You
conceal it, any sustenance but that You increase it, any fear but that
You protect (me) from it, any evil but that You repel it, and any of my
needs in which is Your pleasure and which is beneficial for me, but that
You grant it; O Most Merciful! Grant me my supplication, Lord of the
Universe.”*[^87]

### His Du’a after every Two Rak’ahs of the Nafilah of Dhuhr

15. In Falah al-Sa’il: In his narration from Fatimah bint al-Hasan, from
her father al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) used to
recite this du’a between every two rak’ahs of the *nafilah* of Dhuhr:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ أَنْتَ أَكْرَمُ مَأْتِيٍّ، وَأَكْرَمُ مَزُورٍ، وَخَيْرُ
مَنْ طُلِبَتْ إِلَيْهِ الْحَاجَاتِ، وَأَجْوَدُ مَنْ أَعْطى، وَأَرْحَمُ
مَنِ اسْـتَرْحَمَ، وَأَرْأَفُ مَنْ عَفَا، وَأَعَزُّ مَنِ اعْتُمِدَ
عَلَيْهِ. أَللٌّهُمَّ بِي إِلَيْكَ فَاقَةٌ، ولِي إِلَيْكَ حَاجَاتٌ،
وَلَكَ عِنْدِي طَلِبَاتٌ، مِنْ ذُنُوبٍ أَنَا بِهَا مُرْتَهَنٌ قَدْ
أَوْقَرَتْ ظَهْرِي وَأَوْبَقَتْنِي، وَإِلاَّ تَرْحَمْنِي وَتَغْفِرْلِي
أَكُنْ مِّنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ. أَللٌّهُمَّ اعْتَمَدْتُكَ فِيهَا تَائِـباً
إِلَيْكَ، فَصَلِّ عَلـى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ، وَاغْفِرْلِي ذُنُوبِي
كُلَّهَا قَدِيـمَهَا وَحَدِيثَهَا سِرَّهَا وَعَلاَنِيَتَهَا، خَطَأَهَا
وَعَمْدَهَا، صَغِيرَهَا وَكَبِيرَهَا، وَكُلَّ ذَنْبٍ أَذْنَبْـتُهُ
وَأَنَا مُذْنِبُهُ، مَغْفِرَةً جَزْمًا، لاَ تُغَادِرُ ذَنْـباً
وَاحِداً، وَلاَ أَكْتَسِبُ بَعْدَهَا مُحَرَّماً أَبَداً، وَاقْبَلْ
مِنِّي الْيَسِيرَ مِنْ طَاعَتِكَ وَتَجَاوَزْلِي عَنِ الْكَبِيرِ مِنْ
مَعْصِيَتِكَ، يَا عَظِيمُ إِنَّهُ لاَ يَغْفِرُ الْعَظِيمَ إِلاَّ
الْعَظِيمُ، يَسْأَلُهُ مَنْ فِي السَّمٌوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ كُلَّ يَوْمٍ
هُوَ فِي شَأْنٍ، يَا مَنْ هُوَ كُلَّ يَوْمٍ فِي شَأْنٍ، صَلِّ عَلـى
مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ وَاجْعَلْ لِي فِي شَأْنِكَ شَأْنَ حَاجَتِي،
وَحَاجَتِي هِيَ فَكَاكُ رَقَبَتِي مِنَ النَّارِ، وَالأَمَانُ مِنْ
سَخَطِكَ، وَالْفَوْزُ بِرِضْوَانِكَ وَجَنَّتِكَ، وَصَلِّ عَلـى
مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ، وَامْـنُنْ بِذٌلِكَ عَلَيَّ وَبِكُلِّ مَا
فِيهِ صَلاَحِي. أَسْأَلُكَ بِنُورِكَ السَّاطِعِ فِي الظُّلُمَاتِ أَنْ
تُصَلِّي عَلـى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ، وَلاَ تُفَرِّقْ بَيْنِي
وَبَيْنَهُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ إِنَّكَ عَلـى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ
قَدِيرٌ. أَللٌّهُمَّ وَاكْتُبْ لِي عِتْقاً مِنَ النَّارِ مَبْـتُولاً،
وَاجْعَلْنِي مِنَ الْمُنِيبِينَ إِلَيْكَ التَّابِعِينَ لأَمْرِكَ،
الْمُخْبِتِينَ الَّذِينَ إِذَا ذُكِرْتَ وَجِلَتْ قُلُوبُهُمْ،
وَالْمُسْتَكْمِلِينَ مَنَاسِكَهُمْ، وَالصَّابِرِينَ فِي الْبَلاَءِ،
وَالشَّاكِرِينَ فِي الرَّخَاءِ، وَالْمُطِيعِينَ لأَمْرِكَ فِيمَا
أَمَرْتَهُمْ بِهِ، وَالْمُقِيمِينَ الصَّلاَةَ، وَالْمُؤْتِينَ
الزَّكَاةَ، وَالْمُتَوَكِّلِينَ عَلَيْكَ. أَللٌّهُمَّ أَضْعِفْنِي يَا
كَرِيـمُ كَرَامَتَكَ وَأَجْزِلْ لِي عَطِيَّتَكَ وَالْفَضِيلَةَ
لَدَيْكَ وَالرَّاحَةَ مِنْكَ، وَالوَّسِيلَةَ إِلَيْكَ وَالْمَنْزِلَةَ
عِنْدَكَ مَا تَكْفِينِي بِهِ كُلَّ هَوْلٍ دُونَ الْجَنَّةِ
وَتُظِلَّنِي فِي ظِلِّ عَرْشِكَ يَوْمَ لاَ ظِلَّ إِلاَّ ظِلُّكَ،
وَتُعَظِّمَ نُورِي، وَتُعْطِينِي كِتَابِي بِيَمِينِي، وَتُضْعِفَ
حَسَنَاتِي، وَتَحْشُرَنِي فِي أَفْضَلِ الْوَافِدِينَ إِلَـيْكَ مِنَ
الْمُتَّقِينَ، وَتُسْكِنَنِي فِي عِلِّيِينَ، وَاجْعَلْنِي مِمَّنْ
تَنْظُرُ إِلَيْهِ بِوَجْهِكَ الْكَرِيـمِ، وَتَتَوَفَّانِي وَأَنْتَ
عَنِّي رَاضٍ، وَالْحِقْنِي بِعِبَادِكَ الصَّالِحِينَ. أَللٌّهُمَّ
صَلِّ عَلـى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ، وَاقْلِـبْـنِي بِذٌلِكَ كُلِّهِ
مُفْلِحاً مُنْجِحاً قَدْ غَفَرْتَ لِي خَطَايَايَ وَذُنُوبِي كُلَّهَا،
وَكَفَّرْتَ عَنِّي سَيِّئَاتِي، وَحَطَطْتَ عَنِّي وِزْرِي،
شَفَّعْتَنِي فِي جَمِيعِ حَوَائِجِي فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ فِي
يُسْرٍ مِنْكَ وَعَافِيَةٍ. أَللٌّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلـى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ،
وَلاَ تَخْلُطْ بِشَيْءٍ مِنْ عَمَلِي وَلاَ بِمَا تَقَرَّبْتُ بِهِ
إِلَيْكَ رِيَاءً وَلاَ سُمْعَةً وَلاَ أَشِراً وَلاَ بَطِراً،
وَاجْعَلْنِي مِنَ الْخَاشِعِينَ لَكَ. أَللٌّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلـى
مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ، وَاعْطِنِي السَّعَةَ فِي رِزْقِي، وَالصِّحَةَ فِي
جِسْمِي، وَالْقُوَّةَ فِي بَدَنِي عَلـى طَاعَتِكَ وَعِبَادَتِكَ،
وَاعْطِنِي مِنْ رَحْمَتِكَ وَرِضْوَانِكَ وَعَافِيَتِكَ مَا
تُسَلِّمُنِي بِهِ مِنْ كُلِّ بَلاَءِ الآخِرَةِ وَالدُّنْـيَا،
وَارْزُقْنِي الرَّهْبَةَ مِنْكَ، وَالرَّغْبَةَ إِلَيْكَ، وَالْخُشُوعَ
لَكَ، وَالْوَقَارَ وَالْحَيَاءَ مِنْكَ، وَالتَّعْظِيمَ لِذِكْرِكَ،
وَالتَّقْدِيسَ لِمَجْدِكَ أَيَّامَ حَيَاتِي حَتَّى تَتَوَفَّانِي
وَأَنْتَ عَنِّي رَاضٍ. أَللٌّهُمَّ وَأَسْأَلُكَ السَّعَةَ وَالدَّعَةَ،
وَالأَمْنَ وَالْكِفَايَةَ، وَالسَّلاَمَةَ وَالصِّحَّةَ، وَالقُنُوعَ
وَالْعِصْمَةَ، وَالْهُدى وَالرَّحْمَةَ، وَالْعَفْوَ وَالْعَافِيَةَ،
وَالْيَقِينَ وَالْمَغْفِرَةَ، وَالشُّكْرَ وَالرِّضَا وَالصَّبْرَ،
وَالْعِلْمَ وَالصِّدْقَ، وَالْبِرَّ وَالتَّقْوى، وَالْحِلْمَ
وَالتَّوَاضُعَ وَالْيُسْرَ وَالتَّوْفِيقَ. أَللٌّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلـى
مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ، وَاعْصِمْ بِذٌلِكَ أَهْلَ بَيْتِي وَقُرُبَاتِي
وَإِخْوَانِي فِيكَ وَمَنْ أَحْبَبْتُ وأَحَبَّنِي فِيكَ أَوْ
وَلَّيْتُهُ وَوَلَدَنِي مِنْ جَمِيعِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ
وَالْمُسْلِمِينَ وَالْمُسْلِمَاتِ. وَأَسْأَلُكَ يَا رَبِّ حُسْنَ
الظَّنِّ بِكَ وَالصِّدْقَ فِي التَّوَكُّلِ عَلَيْكَ، وَأَعُوذُبِكَ يَا
رَبِّ أَنْ تَبْتَلِيَنِي بِِبَلِيَّةٍ تَحْمِلُنِي ضَـرُورَتُـهـَا
عَلـى التَّغَوُّثِ بِشَيْءٍ مِنْ مَعَاصِيكَ، وَأَعُوذُبِكَ يَا رَبِّ
أَنْ أَكُونَ فِي حَالِ عُسْرٍ أَوْ يُسْرٍ أَظُنُّ أَنَّ مَعَاصِيكَ
أَنْجَحُ فِي طَلِبَتِي مِنْ طَاعَتِكَ، وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ تَكَلُّفِ
مَا لَمْ تُقَدِّرْ لِي فِيهِ رِزْقاً، وَمَا قَدَّرْتَ لِي مِنْ رِزْقٍ،
فَصَلِّ عَلـى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ وَآتِنِي بِهِ فِي يُسْرٍ مِنْكَ
وَعَافِيَةٍ يَا أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! You are the most Noble One who is approached, the most
Magnanimous who is visited, the best One from whom fulfillment of
desires is sought, the most Generous in giving, the most Merciful of
those who show mercy, the most Compassionate of those who forgive and
the most Glorious of those who are relied upon. O Allah! I am needy of
You, I have desires that I wish You to fulfill and I have an obligation
to You because of the sins that have broken my back and debased me, and
if You don’t have mercy on me and forgive me I will surely be from the
losers. O Allah! I rely on You and turn to You, so send Your blessings
on Muhammad and his progeny, and forgive all my sins, of past and
present, (those done) in secret and in the open, by mistake or on
purpose, small and great, and all the sins that I have performed and I
am a perpetrator of – a forgiving that wipes off completely, not leaving
a single sin; and after which I will never perform that which is
prohibited. And accept my little good acts of worship while overlooking
my great disobedience of Your commands. O Great One! None can forgive
the great (sins) except the Great One. All those who are in the heavens
and earth ask from Him; every moment He is in a state of Glory. O One
who is in a state of Glory every day! Send blessings on* *Muhammad and
his progeny, and place my desire in Your Glory, and my desire is freedom
from the fire of hell, safety from Your wrath and prosperity with Your
pleasure and Your paradise; and bless Muhammad and the progeny of
Muhammad, and grant me by this whatever is good for me. I ask You by
Your light that radiates in the darkness, that you bless Muhammad and
the progeny of Muhammad and do not separate me from them in this world
and the hereafter, indeed You have power over all things. O Allah!
Destine for me freedom from the fire of hell once and for all, and make
me from among those who are repentant, those who follow your
commandments, the humble ones whose hearts tremble with fear when You
are mentioned, those who have completed their holy rites, the ones who
are patient in the face of trials, the ones who are thankful when in
comfort, the ones who obey Your commandments in whatever You command
them, the ones who establish the prayer, pay the poor-rate and those who
put their trust in You. O Allah! Double for me, O Munificent, Your
Munificence, and make abundant for me your blessings, virtues and
comforts, and intermediaries to You and a status before You and make
this enough for me in the face of all terrors; apart from paradise. And
shade me with the shade of Your Power on the day when there will be no
shade but Yours; and make my light bright, and give my book to me in my
right hand, and multiply my good deeds, and raise me among the best
groups of the pious ones, and make me stay among the lofty ones, and
make me* *from those whom You look at with Your Graciousness, and take
my soul while You are pleased with me and make me join Your good
servants. O Allah! Bless Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad, and
transform me with success and prosperity, having forgiven all my
mistakes and sins, and wiped off my evil deeds, and removed my burden,
and having granted all my needs in this world and the hereafter, in
comfort and health. O Allah! Bless Muhammad and his progeny and do not
mix any of my actions, with which I sought to become close to You, with
the intention of being seen or heard by people thereby becoming proud
and arrogant, and make me from among those who are submissive to You. O
Allah! Bless Muhammad and his progeny, and grant me abundance in my
sustenance, and good health in my body, and physical strength with which
I can worship and obey You; and bestow on me from Your Mercy, Pleasure
and Well-Being, that which will keep me safe from all the trials of the
hereafter and this world; and grant me fear of You, inclination towards
You, submission to You, dignity and bashfulness from You, respect for
Your remembrance, sanctity for Your Magnificence – all the days of my
life, until You take my soul while You are pleased with me. O Allah! I
ask you for abundance and equanimity, security and sufficiency,
soundness and health, contentment and modesty, guidance and mercy,
forgiveness and well-being, certitude and pardon, gratitude and pleasure
and patience, knowledge and truth, goodness and piety, clemency and
humility, ease and inspiration (to do good). O Allah! Bless Muhammad and
his progeny, and protect, by this, my family, close relatives, my
brothers in faith and the ones whom I love and who love me for Your
sake, from all the believing men and women. And I ask You, my Lord, to
make me think positively of You and for the ability to trust You
entirely; and I seek protection with You from any trial you test me with
which I am unable to bear and thus turn to sin; and I seek protection
with You, my Lord, from ever –whether in difficulty or ease – thinking
that sinning will be more beneficial for my cause than obeying You; and
I seek protection with You from exceeding the limits with regards to the
sustenance which You have not destined for me and the sustenance which
You have destined for me; so send Your blessings on Muhammad and his
progeny and give me of it in ease and well-being, O Most Merciful of
mercifuls.”*[^88]

### His Du’a after the Fajr Prayer

16. In al-Faqih: The Holy Prophet (S) used to say after the Fajr prayer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنَ الْهَمِّ وَالْحُزَنِ، وَالعَجْزِ
وَالْكَسْلِ، وَالْبُخْلِ وَالْجُبْنِ، وَضَلْعِ الدِّينِ وَغَلَبَةِ
الرِّجَالِ، وَبَوَارِ الأَيَّمِ وَالْغَفْلَةِ، وَالذِّلَّةِ
وَالْقَسْوَةِ، وَالْعَيْلَةِ وَالْمَسْكَنَةِ. وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ
نَفْسٍ لاَ تَشْـبَعُ وَمِنْ قَلْبٍ لاَ يَخْشَعُ، وَمِنْ عَيْنٍ لاَ
تَدْمَعُ، وَمِنْ دُعَاءٍ لاَ يُسْمَعُ، وَمِنْ صَلاَةٍ لاَ تَنْفَعُ
(تُرْفَعُ)، وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ مَنْ إِمْرَأةٍ تُشَيِّبُنِي قَبْلَ أَوَانَ
مَشِيبِي، وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ وَلَدٍ يَكُونُ عَلَيَّ رَباًّ، وَأَعُوذُ
بِكَ مِنْ مَالٍ يَكُونُ عَلَيَّ عَذَاباً، وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ صَاحِبِ
خَدِيعَةٍ، إِنْ رَأى حَسَنَةً دَفَنَهَا، وَإِنْ رَأى سَيِّئَةً
أَفْشَاهَا. أَللٌّهُمَّ لاَ تَجْعَلْ لِفَاجِرٍ عَلَيَّ (عِنْدِي)
يَدْاً وَلاَ مِنَّةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! I seek protection with You from grief and sorrow, weakness
and laziness, miserliness and cowardice, turning away from the truth and
idle talk of men, wasting time and negligence,* *vileness and cruelty,
destitution and poverty. And I seek protection with You from the self
that never gets satisfied, the heart that does not humble itself, the
eye that does not shed tears, the supplication that is not heard, the
prayer that does not benefit. And I seek protection with You from a
woman who makes me old before my time, and I seek protection with You
from a son who subjugates me, and I seek protection with You from wealth
that is a torment for me, and I seek protection from the deceiver who
conceals any good that he sees and propagates any evil that he sees. O
Allah! Do not let an insolent one ever do me a favor and do not make him
expect anything from me.”*[^89]

### His Du’a on the first Night of Ramadhan

17. In al-Mustadrak from al-Iqbal: The Noble Prophet (S) would
supplicate on the first night of the month of Ramad’an with the
following du’a:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ الَّذِي أَكْرَمَنِي بِكَ أَيُّهَا الشَّهْرُ
الْمُبَارَكُ، أَللٌّهُمَّ فَقَوِّنَا عَلـى صِيَامِنَا وَقِـيَامِنَا
وَثَـبِّتْ أَقْدَامَنَا وَانْصُرْنَا عَلـى الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ.
أَللٌّهُمَّ أَنْتَ الْوَاحِدُ فَلاَ وَلَدَ لَكَ، وَأَنْتَ الصَّمَدُ
فَلاَ شِبْهَ لَكَ، وَأَنْتَ الْعَزِيزُ فَلاَ يُعِزُّكَ شَيْءٌ،
وَأَنْتَ الْغَنِيُّ وَأَنَا الْفَقِيرُ، وَأَنْتَ الْمَوْلـى وَأَنَا
الْعَبْدُ، وَأَنْتَ الْغَفُورُ وَأَنَا الْمُذْنِبُ، وَأَنْتَ
الرَّحِيمُ وَأَنَا الْمُخْطِئُ، وَأَنْتَ الْخَالِقُ وَأَنَا
الْمَخْلُوقُ، وَأَنْتَ الْحَيُّ وَأَنَا الْمَيِّتُ. أََسْأَلُكَ
بِرَحْمَتِكَ أَنْ تَغْفِرْلِي وَتَرْحَمْنِي وَتَجَاوَزْ عَنِّي،
إِنَّكَ عَلـى كُلِّ شَيءٍ قَدِيرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“All praise is for Allah, the One who honored me by you O Blessed
Month. O Allah! Make us successful in our fasts and prayers, and keep us
steadfast and help us against the disbelievers. O Allah! You are the One
and has no son; and You are the Unique whom none is similar to; and You
are the Mighty and nothing makes You mighty. You are the Wealthy and I
am the poor; You are the Master and I am the slave; You are the
Forgiving and I am the sinner; You are the Merciful and I am at fault;
You are the Creator and I am the creation; You are Living and I am dead;
I beseech You, out of Your Mercy, to forgive me and have mercy on me and
overlook my sins, surely You have power over all things.”*[^90]

### His Du’a in the Morning and Evening

18. In the Tafsir of ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim: In his narration from Hashim ibn
Salim from Abi ‘Abdillah (as), in the hadith of Me’raj: The Holy Prophet
(S) said: “O Allah! You have granted excellence to Your Prophets so
grant it to me.” So Allah (SwT) said: “I give you two sentences from
under My Throne:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ حَوْلَ وَلاَ قُوَّةَ إِلاَّ بِاللٌّهِ وَلاَ مَنْجَأَ مِنْكَ إِلاَّ
إِلَيْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There is no power and no might but Allah” and “There is no security
from You but with You”.*

He (S) said: “The angels taught me what to say in the morning and
evening:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنَّ ظُلْمِي أَصْبَحَ مُسْتَجِيراً بِعَفْوِكَ، وَذَنْبِي
أَصْبَحَ مُسْتَجِيراً بِمَغْفِرَتِكَ، وَذُلِّي أَصْبَحَ مُسْتَجِيراً
بِعِزَّتِكَ، وَفَقْرِي أَصْبَحَ مُسْتَجِيراً بِغِنَاكَ، وَوَجْهِي
الْبَالِي الْفَانِي أَصْـبَحَ مُسْتَجِيراً بِوَجْهِكَ الدَّائِمِ
الْبَّاقِي الَّذِي لاَ يَفْنـى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! My oppression has sought refuge in Your Forgiveness, and my
sin has sought refuge in Your Pardon, my lowliness has sought refuge
with Your Greatness, my poverty has sought refuge in Your Wealth, my
transient existence has sought refuge in Your Everlasting Existence that
never perishes”.*

... and I say this in the evening also.”[^91]

### His Du’a at Sunrise

19. In Ibn Tawus’s Muhasabat al-Nafs, from the book of al-Rabi’ from
Muhammad al-Mustakin: In his narration from ‘Abi Ja’far (as) who said:
When the redness of the sun reached the peak of the mountain, tears
would flow from the Holy Prophet’s (S) eyes and he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ أَمسى ظُلْمِي مُسْتَجِيراً بِعَفْوِكَ، وَأَمْسَتْ ذُنُوبِي
مُسْتَجِيراً بِمَغْفِرَتِكَ، وَأَمْسى خَوْفِي مُسْتَجِيراً بِأَمْنِكَ،
وَأَمْسى ضَعْفِي مُسْتَجِيراً بِقُوَّتِكَ، وَأَمْسى وَجْهِيَ
الْبَالِيَ الْفَانِي مُسْتَجِيراً بِوَجْهِكَ الْدَائِمِ الْبَاقِي،
أَلْبِسْنِي عَافِيَتَكَ، وَغَشِّنِي بِرَحْمَتِكَ، وَجَلِّلْنِي
كَرَامَتَكَ، وَقِنِي شَرَّ خَلْقِكَ مِنَ الْجِنِّ وَالإِنْسِ يَـا
اللٌّهُ ياَ رَحْمٌنُ ياَ رَحِيمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! The day has come while my oppression has sought refuge in
Your Forgiveness, and my sins have sought refuge in Your Pardon, my fear
has sought refuge in Your Security, my weakness has sought refuge in
Your Strength and my transient existence has sought refuge in Your
Everlasting Existence. Grant me well-being, and cover me with Your
Mercy, and honor me with Your Nobleness, and keep me safe from the evil
of Your creation, from the jinn and man. O Allah! O Compassionate! O
Merciful!”*[^92]

### From his common supplications

20. In al-Bihar, from Da’awat al-Rawandi: From the supplications of the
Noble Prophet (S) was:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا مَنْ أَظْهَرَ الْجَمِيلَ وَسَتَرَ الْقَبِيحَ، يَا مَنْ لَمْ
يَهْتِكِ السِّتْرَ وَلَمْ يُؤَاخِذْ بِالْجَرِيرَةِ، يَا عَظِيمَ
الْعَفْوِ، يَا حَسَنَ التَّجَاوُزِ، يَا وَاسِعَ الْمَغْفِرَةِ، يَا
بَاسِطَ الْيَدَيْنِ بِالرَّحْمَةِ، يَا صَاحِبَ كُلِّ نَجْوى،
وَمُنْتَهى كُلِّ شَكْوى، يَا مُقِيلَ الْعَثَرَاتِ، يَا كَرِيـمَ
الصَّفْحِ، يَا عَظِيمَ الْمَنِّ، يَا مُبْـتَدِئاً بِالنِّعَمِ قَبْلَ
اسْتِحْقَاقِهَا، يَا رَبَّاهُ، يَا سَيِّدَاهُ، يَا أَمْلاَهُ، يَا
غَايَةَ رَغْبَتَاهُ. أَسْأَلُكَ بِكَ يَا اللٌّهُ أَنْ لاَ تُشَوِّهَ
خَلْقِي بِالنَّارِ، وَأَنْ تَقْضِيَ لِي حَوَائِجَ آخِرَتِي
وَدُنْـيَايَ، وَتَفْعَلْ بِي كَذَا وَكَذَا، وَتُصَلِّيَ عَلـى
مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O One who reveals the beautiful (deeds) and conceals the ugly
(actions)! O One who did not expose the secret and did not punish the
offence! O Most Forgiving! O Best Excuser! O Great Pardoner! O One whose
hands are open with mercy! O Hearer of all whisperings! O One to whom
all complaints are made! O Most Excellent in forgiving! O Great Bestower
of bounties! O Giver of blessings before they are deserved! O Lord! O
Master! O Guardian! O Goal of (my) desires! I Beseech You, O Allah! Not
to disfigure me with the fire of hell, and to fulfill my desires of the
hereafter and this world, and do such-and-such for me ... and send Your
Blessings on Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad.”*[^93]

21. Shaykh al-Mufid in al-Amali: From Jabir al-Ju’fi, from Abi Ja’far
Muhammad ibn ‘Ali (as), from Jabir ibn ‘Abdillah Ansari, from the
Prophet (S) who said in a hadith: Jibra’il said: “O Muhammad! Say at all
times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Praise be to Allah, Lord of the universe.”*[^94]

22. In al-Muhaj: From the supplications of the Holy Prophet (S) is the
*du’a al-faraj* :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ الرَّحْمٌنِ الرَّحِيمِ. أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسْأَلُكَ
يَا اللٌّهُ يَا اللٌّهُ يَا اللٌّهُ، يَا مَنْ عَلاَ فَقَهَرَ، وَيَا
مَنَ بَطَنَ فَخَبَرَ، وَيَا مَنْ مَلَكَ فَقَدَرَ، وَيَا مَنْ عُبِدَ
فَشَكَرَ، وَيَا مَنْ عُصِيَ فَغَفَرَ، يَا مَنْ لاَ يُحِيطُ بِهِ
الْفِكَرُ، يَا مَنْ لاَ يُدْرِكُهُ بَصَرُ، وَيَا مَنْ لاَ يَخْفى
عَلَيْهِ أَثَر ٌ ، يَا عَالِيَ الْمَكَانِ، يَا شَدِيدَ الأَرْكَانِ،
يَا مُنْزِلَ الْقُرَآنِ، يَا مُبَدِّلَ الزَّمَانِ، يَا قَابِلَ
الْقُرْبَانِ، يَا نَيِّرَ الْبُرْهَانِ يَا عَظِيمَ الشَّأْنِ، يَا ذَا
الْمَنِّ وَالإِحْسَانِ، وَيَا ذَا الْعِزِّ وَالسُّلْطَانِ، يَا رَحِيمُ
يَا رَحْمٌنُ، يَا رَبَّ الأَرْبَابِ، يَا تَوَّابُ يَا وَهَّابُ، يَا
مُعْتِقَ الرِّقَابِ، يَا مُنْشِئَ السَّحَابِ، يَا مَنْ حَيْثُ مَا
دُعِيَ أَجَابَ، يَا مُرَخِّصَ الأَسْعَارِ، يَا مُنَـزِّلَ الأَمْطَارِ،
يَا مُنْبِتَ الأَشْجَارِ فِي الأَرْضِ القِفَارِ، يَا مُخْرِجَ
النَّبَاتِ، يَا مُحْيِيَ الأَمْوَاتِ، يَا مُقِيلَ الْعَثَرَاتِ، يَا
كَاشِفَ الْكُرُبَاتِ، يَا مَنْ لاَ تَضْجُرُهُ الأَصْوَاتُ، وَلاَ
تُشَبِّهُ عَلَيْهِ اللُّغَاتُ، وَلاَ تَغْشَاهُ الظُّلُمَاتُ، يَا
مُعْطِيَ السُّؤْلاَتِ، يَا وَلِيَّ الْحَسَنَاتِ، يَا دَافِعَ
الْبَلِيَّاتِ، يَا قَابِلَ الصَّدَقَاتِ، يَا قَابِلَ التَّوْبَاتِ، يَا
عَالِمَ الْخَفِيَّاتِ، يَا مُجِيبَ الدَّعْوَاتِ، يَا رَافِعَ
الدَّرَجَاتِ، يَا قَاضِيَ الْحَاجَاتِ، يَا رَاحِمَ الْعَبَرَاتِ، يَا
مُنْجِحَ الطَّلِبَاتِ، يَا مُنْزِلَ الْبَرَكَاتِ، يَا جَامِعَ
الشَّتَاتِ، يَا رَادَّ مَا كَانَ فَاتَ، يَا جَمَالَ الأَرْضِينَ
وَالسَمٌوَاتِ، يَا سَابِغَ النِّعَمِ، يَا كَاشِفَ الأَلَمِ، يَا
شَافِيَ السَّقَمِ، يَا مَعْدِنَ الْجُودِ وَالْكَرَمِ، يَا أَجْوَدَ
الأَجْوَدِينَ، يَا أَكْرَمَ الأَكْرَمِينَ، يَا أَسْمَعَ السَّامِعِينَ،
يَا أَبْصَرَ النَّاظِرِينَ، يَا أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ، يَا أَقْرَبَ
الأَقْرَبِينَ، يَا إِلٌهَ الْعَالَمِينَ، يَا غِيَاثَ
الْمُسْتَغِيثِينَ، يَا جَارَ الْمُسْتَجِيرِينَ، يَا مُتَجَاوِزاً عَنِ
الْمُسِيئِينَ، يَا مَنْ لاَ يَعْجَلُ عَلـى الْخَاطِئِينَ، يَا فَكَّاكَ
الْمَأْسُورِينَ، يَا مُفَرِّجَ غَمِّ الَمْغَمُومِينَ، يَا جَامِعَ
الْمُتَفَرِّقِينَ، يَا مُدْرِكَ الْهَارِبِينَ، يَا غَايَةَ
الطَّالِبِينَ، يَا صَاحِبَ كُلِّ غَرِيبٍ، يَا مُونِسَ كُلِّ وَحِيدٍ،
يَا رَاحِمَ الشَّيْخِ الْكَبِيرِ، يَا رَازِقَ الطِّفْلِ الصَّغِيرِ،
يَا جَابِرَ الْعَظْمِ الْكَسِيرِ، يَا عِصْمَةَ الْخَائِفِ
الْمُسْتَجِيرِ، يَا مَنْ لَهُ التَّدْبِيرُ وَإِلَيهِ الْتَقْدِيرُ، يَا
مَنِ الْعَسِيرُ عَلَيهِ سَهْلٌ يَسِيرٌ، يَا مَنْ هُوَ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ
خَبِيرٌ، يَا مَنْ هُوَ عَلـى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ، يَا خَالِقَ
السَّمَاءِ وَالْقَمَرِ الْمُنِيرِ، يَا فَالِقَ الإِصْبَاحِ، يَا
مُرْسِلَ الرِّيَاحِ، يَا بَاعِثَ الأَرْوَاحِ، يَا ذَا الْجُوْدِ
وَالسَّمَاحِ، يَا مَنْ بِيَدِهِ كُلُّ مِفْتَاحٍ، يَا عِمَادَ مَنْ لاَ
عِمَادَ لَهُ، يَا سَنَدَ مَنْ لاَ سَنَدَ لَهُ، يَا ذُخْرَ مَنْ لاَ
ذُخْرَ لَهُ، يَا عِزَّ مَنْ لاَ عِزَّ لَهُ، يَا كَنْزَ مَنْ لاَ كَنْزَ
لَهُ، يَا حِرْزَ مَنْ لاَ حِرْزَ لَهُ، يَا عَوْنَ مَنْ لاَ عَوْنَ
لَهُ، يَا رُكْنَ مَنْ لاَ رُكْنَ لَهُ، يَا غِيَاثَ مَنْ لاَ غِيَاثَ
لَهُ، يَا عَظِيمَ الْمَنِّ، يَا كَرِيـمَ الْعَفْوِ، يَا حَسَنَ
التَّجَاوُزِ، يَا وَاسِعَ الْمَغْفِرَةِ، يَا بَاسِطَ الْيَدَينِ
بِالرَّحْمَةِ، يَا مُبْـتَدِئاً بِالنِّعَمِ قَبْلَ اسْتِحْقَاقِهَا،
يَا ذَا الْحُجَّةِ الْبَالِغَةِ، يَا ذَا الْمُلْكِ والْمَلَكُوتِ، يَا
ذَا الْعِزِّ وَالْجَبَرُوتِ، يَا مَنْ هُوَ حَيٌّ لاَ يَمُوتُ.
أَسْأَلُكَ بِعِلْمِكَ الْغُيُوبَ، وَبِمَعْرِفَتِكَ مَا فِي ضَمَائِرِ
الْقُلُوبِ، وَبِكُلِّ اسْمٍ هُوَ لَكَ اصْطَفَيْتَهُ لِنَفْسِكَ، أَوْ
أَنْزَلْتَهُ فِي كِتَابٍ مِنْ كُتُبِكَ، أَوِ اسْتَأْثَرْتَ بِهِ فِي
عِلْمِ الْغَيْبِ عِنْدَكَ، وَبِأَسْمَائِكَ الْحُسْنـى كُلِّهَا حَتَّى
انْتَهى إِلـى اسْمِكَ الْعَظِيمِ الأَعْظَمِ الَّذِي فَضَّلْتَهُ عَلـى
جَمِيعِ أَسْمَائِكَ. أَسْأَلُكَ بِهِ، أَسْأَلُكَ بِهِ، أَسْأَلُكَ بِهِ
أَنْ تُصَلِّي عَلـى مُحَمَّدٍ وآلِهِ، وَأَنْ تُيَسِّرَ لِي مِنْ
أَمْرِي مَا أَخَافُ عُسْرَهُ، وَتُفَرِّجْ عَنِّي الْهَمَّ وَالْغَمَّ
وَالْكَرْبَ، وَمَا ضَاقَ بِهِ صَدْرِي، وَعِيلَ بِهِ صَبْرِي، فَإِنَّهُ
لاَ يَقْدِرُ عَلـى فَرَجِي سِوَاكَ وَافْعَلْ بِي مَا أَنْتَ أَهْلُُهُ،
يَا أَهْلَ التَّقْوى وَأَهْلَ الْمَغْفِرَةِ، يَا مَنْ لاَ يَكْشِفُ
الْكَرْبَ غَيْرُهُ، وَلاَ يُجَلِّي الْحُزْنَ سِوَاهُ، وَلاَ يُفَرِّجْ
عَنِّي إِلاَّ هُوَ، إِكْفِنِي شَرَّ نَفْسِي خَاصَّةً، وَشَرَّ النَّاسِ
عَامَّةً، وَأصْلِحْ لِي شَأْنِي كُلَّهُ، وَأصْلِحْ أُُُمُورِي، وَاقْضِ
لِي حَوَائِجِي، وَاجْعَلْ لِي مِنْ أَمْرِي فَرَجاً وَمَخْرَجاً،
فَإِنَّكَ تَعْلَمُ وَلاَ أَعْلَمُ، وَتُقَدِّرُ وَلاَ أُقَدِّرُ،
وَأَنْتَ عَلـى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قدَيِرٌ، بِرَحْمَتِكَ يَا أَرْحَمَ
الرَّاحِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful.* *O Allah! I
beseech You. O Allah! O Allah! O Allah!* *O He who is exalted and
dominates! O He who is hidden and aware! O He who is the master and
exercises power! O He who is worshipped and rewards! O He who is
disobeyed and forgives! O He who is not comprehended by thought! O He
who is not perceived by vision! O He from whom no trace remains hidden!
O Lofty placed! O Firm in support! O Revealer of the Qur’an! O Shifter
of time! O Accepter of sacrifices! O Clear in proof! O Excellent in
glory! O Possessor of graciousness and benevolence! O Possessor of might
and force!* *O Merciful! O Compassionate! O Lord of lords! O Forgiver!*
*O Bestower! O Remover of shackles! O Raiser of clouds! O He who replies
whenever He is called! O Reducer of costs! O Sender of rain! O Grower of
trees in barren land! O Bringer out of plants (from the ground)! O Giver
of life to the dead! O He who annuls slips! O Remover of troubles! O He
who does not get annoyed by the sounds (of those who call upon Him), nor
are words ever indistinct for Him, nor does darkness cover Him. O
Bestower of requests! O Sponsorer of good! O Repeller of adversities! O
Accepter of charity! O Accepter of repentance! O Knower of the hidden! O
Answerer of supplications! O Exalter in rank! O Provider of all needs! O
Merciful on those who shed tears! O Fulfiller of entreaties! O Sender of
blessings! O Gatherer of all scattered things!* *O He who brings back
what has passed away! O Beautifier of the earth and the heavens! O Ample
in blessings! O Remover of pain! O Healer of sickness! O Source of
generosity and munificence! O Most Munificent of the munificent! O Most
Generous of the generous! O Most Hearing of the hearers! O Most Seeing
of the seers! O Most Merciful of the merciful! O Closest of the close! O
Lord of the universe! O Helper of those who seek help! O Protector of
those who seek protection! O Excuser of those who are at fault! O He who
does not hurry in punishing the wrongdoers! O Freer of captives! O
Reliever of sorrows of the sorrowful! O Gatherer of those who have
separated! O One who watches over runaways! O Goal of the seekers! O
Companion of every stranger! O Confidant of every lonely person! O
Merciful to the old man! O Provider for the small child! O Setter of
broken bones! O Safeguard of the fearful seeker of protection! O He who
governs and determines! O He for whom the difficult is simple and easy!
O He who is aware of all things! O He who has power over all things! O
Creator of the heavens and the shining moon! O Cleaver of the dawn! O
Sender of winds! O Dispatcher of the spirits! O He who possesses
munificence and forbearance! O He in whose hands are all the keys! O
Support for the one who has no support! O Protector of the one with no
protector! O Provider of the one with no provisions! O Mighty for the
one who has no might! O Treasure for the one who has no treasure! O
Sanctuary for the one who has no sanctuary! O Helper of the one with no
helper! O* *Foundation for the one with no foundation! O Provider of aid
for the one with no aid! O Giver of great hope! O Munificent in
forgiving! O Best accepter of excuses! O Great pardoner! O One whose
hands are open with mercy! O Giver of blessings before they are
deserved! O Possessor of the indisputable proof! O Owner of the kingdom
and sovereignty! O Possessor of might and power! O He who is living and
will never die! I beseech You by Your knowledge of the unseen, and by
Your understanding of what is in the depths of the hearts, and by every
name that You have chosen for Yourself or have sent down in a book from
among Your books or have hidden in Your unseen knowledge; and by all
Your beautiful names until arriving at Your Most High and Lofty Name
which You have exalted over all Your other names. I beseech You by it! I
beseech You by it! I beseech You by it! That You send blessings on
Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad, and that You make easy for me that
which I fear to be difficult, and that You relieve me of grief, sorrow
and troubles, and whatever makes me distressed or weakens my patience,
for surely there is none who has the power to relieve me other than You;
and deal with me in a manner that befits You, O worthy of Fear and
worthy of (granting) Pardon! O One other than whom none can resolve
difficulties and none can remove sorrow, and none can deliver me but He!
Save me from the evil of my self in particular and from the evil of
people in general; and set right all my issues and set right all my
matters, and fulfill my desires, and grant me an escape and a
deliverance from my situation; for surely You know and I do not know,
and You have power and I have no power, and You have power over all
things – by Your Mercy O Most Merciful of mercifuls.”*[^95]

23. Also in Muhaj al-Da’awat: From Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar: In
his narration from al-Sadiq (as) who said: The Prophet (S) used to
supplicate in his du’a:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ اجْعَلْنِي صَـبُوراً، وَاجْعَلْنِي شَكُوراً، وَاجْعَلْنِي
فِي أَمَانِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Make me patient, and make me thankful, and keep me in Your
protection.”*[^96]

24. In al-Irshad of al-Daylami: He (S) would supplicate and say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ اقْسِمْ لَنَا مِنْ خَشْيَتِكَ مَا يَحُولُ بَيْنَنَا
وَبَيْنَ مَعْصِيَـتِكَ، وَمِنْ طَاعَتِكَ مَا تُبَلِّغْـنَا بِهِ
جَنَّتَكَ وَمِنَ الْيَقِينِ مَا يُهَوِّنُ عَلَيْـنَا مِنْ مَصَائِبِ
الدُّنْـيَا، وَمَتِّعْـنَا بَأَسْمَاعِنَا وَأَبْصَارِنَا وَانْصُرْنَا
عَلـى مَنْ عَادَانَا، وَلاَ تَجْعَلِ الدُّنْـيَا أَكْبَرَ هَمِّنَا،
وَلاَ تُسَلِّطْ عَلَيْـنَا مَنْ لاَ يَرْحَمُنَا. أَللٌّهُمَّ لَكَ
الْحَمْدُ وَإِلَيْكَ الْمُشْـتَكى وَأَنْتَ الْمُسْتَعَانُ، وَفِيمَا
عِنْدَكَ مِنَ الرَّغْبَةِ وَلَدَيْكَ غَايَةُ الْطَّلِبَةِ. أَللٌّهُمَّ
آمِنْ رَوْعَتِي وَاسْـتُرْ عَوْرَتِي. أَللٌّهُمَّ أَصْلِحْ دِينَـنَا
الَّذِي هُوَ عِصْمَةُ أَمْرِنَا، وَأَصْلِحْ لَنَا دُنْـيَانَا الَّتِي
فِيهَا مَعَاشُنَا، وَأَصْلِحْ آخِرَتَـنَا الَّتِي إِلَيْهَا
مُنْقَـلَـبُنَا وَاجْعَلِ الْحَيَاةَ زِيَادَةً لَنَا فِي كُلِّ خَيْرٍ،
وَالْوَفَاةَ رَاحَةً لَنَا مِنْ كُلِّ سُوءٍ. أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنَّا
نَسْأَلُكَ مُوْجِـبَاتِ رَحْمَتِكَ وَعَزَائِمَ مَغْفِرَتِكَ
وَالْغَنِيمَةَ مِنْ كُلِّ بِرٍّ وَالسَّلاَمَةَ مِنْ كُلِّ إِثْمٍ، يَا
مَوْضِعَ كُلِّ شَكْوى، وَشَاهِدَ كُلِّ نَجْوى، وَكَاشِفَ كُلِّ بَلْوى،
فَإِنَّكَ تَرى وَلاَ تُرى، وَأَنْتَ بِالْمَـنْظَرِ الأَعَلـى.
أَسْأَلُكَ الْجَنَّةَ وَمَا يُقَرِّبُ إِلَيْهَا مِنْ قَوْلٍ أَوْ
فِعْلٍ، وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنَ النَّارِ وَمَا يُقَرِّبُ إِلَيْهَا مِنْ
قَوْلٍ أَوْ فِعْلٍ. أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسْأَلُكَ خَيْرَ الْخَيْرِ
رِضْوَانَكَ وَالْجَنَّةَ، وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ شِرِّ الشَّرِّ سَخَطُكَ
وَالنَّارُ. أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسْأَلُكَ خَيْرَ مَا تَعْلَمُ
وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ شَرِّ مَا تَعْلَمُ، فَإِنَّكَ أَنْتَ عَلاَّمُ
الْغُيُوبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah apportion for us from Your fear that which would remove us
from Your disobedience, and (apportion for us) from Your obedience that
which would get us to paradise, and from certitude that which would ease
the troubles of this world; and grant us the continued use of our
hearing and sight, and help us against our enemies, and do not make this
world our greatest concern, and do not give mastery over us to those who
have no mercy on us. O Allah! All praise be to You. To You does the
complainer refer and You are the Helper; You have what is desired and
with You lies the end of all wishes. O Allah! Calm my fear and hide my
faults. O Allah! Make right our religion which is the protection for our
affairs, and make right our world for it is the place wherein we live,
and make right our hereafter for it is our eventual destination; and
make the life (in this world) more for us in every good, and make death
a relief for us from every evil. O Allah! I beseech You for all that
which is the cause of Your Mercy, and that which ascertains Your
Forgiveness; and benefit from every virtue, and safety from every sin. O
One to whom all complain! O Witness of all secret communications! O
Reliever of all troubles! Verily You see but cannot be seen, and You are
in the highest viewpoint; I beg You for paradise and whatever brings me
closer to it from words and actions, and I seek Your protection from the
hellfire and whatever brings me closer to it from words and actions. O
Allah! I beseech You for the best of Your good pleasure and paradise,
and I seek Your protection from the worst of Your wrath and the
hellfire. O Allah! I ask for the good that You know and seek protection
from the evil that You know, for verily You are the knower of the
unseen.”*[^97]

25. In Jami’ al-Akhbar: A supplication narrated from the Holy Prophet
(S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُبِكَ مِنْ سُوءِ الْقَضَاءِ وَسُوءِ
الْقَدَرِ، وَسُوءِ الْمَنْظَرِ فِي الأَهْلِ وَالْمَالِ وَالْوَلَدِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! I seek Your protection from a bad fate and a bad destiny and
a look that is harmful to my family, property and children.”*[^98]

26. Also: From his (S) supplications:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ غِنیً يُطْغِينِي، وَفَقْرٍ
يُنْسِينِي، وَهَویً يُرْدِينِي، وَعَمَلٍ يُخْزِينِي، وَجَارٍ
يُؤْذِينِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! I seek Your protection from wealth that causes me to
transgress, and from poverty that makes me forget (Your bounties), and
from the desire that ruins me, and from the action that disgraces me and
from the neighbor who disturbs me.”*[^99]

27. Also: From his (S) supplications:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ اجْعَلْنَا مَشْغُولِينَ بِأَمْرِكَ، آمِنِينَ بِوَعْدِكَ،
آيِسِينَ مِنْ خَلْقِكَ، آنِسِينَ بِكَ، مُسْـتَوْحِشِينَ مِنْ غَيْرِكَ،
رَاضِينَ بِقَضَائِكَ، صَابِرِينَ عَلـى بَلاَئِكَ، شَاكِرِينَ عَلـى
نِعْمَائِكَ، مُتَلَذِّذِينَ بِذِكْرِكَ، فَرِحِينَ بِكِتَابِكَ،
مُنَاجِينَ إِيَّاكَ آنَاءَ اللَّيْلِ وَأَطْرَافَ النَّهَارِ،
مُسْـتَعِدِّينَ لِلْمَوْتِ، مُشْتَاقِينَ إِلـى لِقَائِكَ، مُبْغِضِينَ
لِلدُّنْيَا، مُحِبِّينَ لِلآخِرَةِ، وَآتِنَا مَا وَعَدْتَنَا عَلـى
رُسُلِكَ، وَلاَ تُخْزِنَا يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ إِنَّكَ لاَ تُخْلِفُ
الْمِيعَادِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Make us occupied in following Your commandments, trust in
Your promise, lose hope in Your creation, become close with You, feel
repelled by other than You, are pleased with Your decree, patient with
Your trials, thankful for Your blessings, enjoy Your remembrance, are
happy with Your book, whisper to You in the darkness of the night and
the light of day, are ready for death, crave for meeting with You, hate
this world and love the hereafter; and grant us what You have promised
us by Your prophets and do not disgrace us on the Day of Resurrection,
surely You do not break Your promises.”*[^100]

28. In al-Kafi: In his narration from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
which he attributed to one of the infallibles who said: Jibra’il (as)
came to the Noble Prophet (S) and said to him: “Your Lord says to you:
If you wish to worship me in the day and night as I am worthy of being
worshipped, then raise your hands to me and say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ لَكَ الْحَمْدُ حَمْداً خَالِداً مَعَ خُلُودِكَ، وَلَكَ
الْحَمْدُ حَمْداً لاَ مُنْـتَهى لَهُ دُونَ عِلْمِكَ، وَلَكَ الْحَمْدُ
حَمْداً لاَ أَمَدَ لَهُ دُونَ مَشِيَّتِكَ، وَلَكَ الْحَمْدُ حَمْداً
لاَ جَزَاءَ لِقَائِلِهِ إِلاَّ رِضَاكَ. أَللٌّهُمَّ لَكَ الْحَمْدُ
كُلُّهُ وَلَكَ الْمَنُّ كُلُّهُ، وَلَكَ الْفَخْرُ كُلُّهُ، وَلَكَ
الْبَهَاءُ كُلُّهُ، وَلَكَ النُّوْرُ كُلُّهُ، وَلَكَ الْعِزَّةُ
كُلُّهَا، وَلَكَ الْجَبَرُوتُ كُلُّهَا، وَلَكَ الْعَظَمَةُ كُلُّهَا،
وَلَكَ الدُّنْـيَا كُلُّهَا، وَلَكَ الآخِرَةُ كُلُّهَا، وَلَكَ
اللَّيْلُ وَالنَّهَارُ كُلُّهُ، وَلَكَ الْخَلْقُ كُلُّهُ، وَبِيَدِكَ
الْخَيْرُ كُلُّهُ، وَإِلَيْكَ يَرْجِعُ الأَمْرُ كُلُّهُ،
عَلاَنِيَّتُهُ وَسِرُّهُ. أَللٌّهُمَّ لَكَ الْحَمْدُ حَمْداً أَبَداً،
أَنْتَ حَسَنُ الْبَلاَءِ، جَلِيلُ الثَّنَاءِ، سَابِغُ النِّعْمَاءِ،
عَدْلُ الْقَضَاءِ، جَزِيلُ الْعَطَاءِ، حَسَنُ الآلاَءِ، إِلٌهُ مَنْ
فِي الأَرْضِ وِإِلٌهُ مَنْ فِي السَّمَاءِ. أَللٌّهُمَّ لَكَ الْحَمْدُ
فِي السَّبْعِ الشِّدَادِ، وَلَكَ الْحَمْدُ فِي الأَرْضِ الْمِهَادِ،
وَلَكَ الْحَمْدُ طَاقَةَ الْعِبَادِ، وَلَكَ الْحَمْدُ سَعَةَ
الْبِلاَدِ، وَلَكَ الْحَمْدُ فِي الْجِبَالِ الأَوْتَادِ، وَلَكَ
الْحَمْدُ فِي اللَّيْلِ إِذَا يَغْشى، وَلَكَ الْحَمْدُ فِي النَّهَارِ
إِذَا تَجَلَّى، وَلَكَ الْحَمْدُ فِي الآخِرَةِ وَالأُوْلـى، وَلَكَ
الْحَمْدُ فِي الْمَثَانِي وَالْقُرآنِ الْعَظِيمِ. وَسُبْحَانَ اللٌّهِ
وَبِحَمْدِهِ وَالأَرْضُ جَمِيعاً قَبْضَـتُهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ
وَالسَّمٌوَاتُ مَطْوِيَّاتٌ بِيَمِينِهِ، سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالـى عَمَّا
يُشْرِكُونَ، سُبْحَانَ اللٌّهِ وَبِحَمْدِهِ، كُلُّ شَيْءٍ هَالِكٌ
إِلاَّ وَجْهَهُ. سُبْحَانَكَ رَبَّنَا وَتَعَالَيْتَ وَتَبَارَكْتَ
وَتَقَدَّسْتَ، خَلَقْتَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ بِقُدْرَتِكَ، وَقَهَرْتَ كُلَّ
شَيْءٍ بِعِزَّتِكَ، وَعَلْوَتَ فَوْقَ كُلِّ شِيْءٍ بِإرْتِفَاعِكَ،
وَغَلَبْتَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ بِقُوَّتِكَ، وَابْـتَدَعْتَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ
بِحِكْمَتِكَ وَعِلْمِكَ، وَبَـعَـثْتَ الرُّسُلَ بِكُـتُبِكَ،
وَهَدَيْتَ الصَّالِحِينَ بِإِذْنِكَ، وَأَيَّدْتَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
بِنَصْرِكَ، وَقَهَرْتَ الْخَلْقَ بِسُلْطَانِكَ، لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ
أَنْتَ، وَحْدَكَ لاَ شَرِيكَ لَكَ، لاَ نَعْـبُدُ غَيْرَكَ، وَلاَ
نَسْأَلُ إِلاَّ إِيَّاكَ، وَلاَ نَرْغَبُ إِلاَّ إِلَيْكَ، أَنْتَ
مَوْضِعُ شَكْوَانَا، وَمُنْتَهى رَغْبَـتِنَا، وَإِلٌهُنَا
وَمَلِيكُنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! All praise be to You – praise which is eternal with Your
Everlastingness. All praise be to You – praise that is unending but by
Your knowledge. All praise be to You – praise that has no limit in
duration but by Your will. All praise be to You – praise that gives no
reward to its utterer* *apart from Your pleasure. O Allah! All praise is
for You, and all graciousness is from You, and all pride is Yours, and
all magnificence is Yours, and all light is Yours, and all respect is
Yours, and all power is Yours, and all might is Yours, and the whole
world is Yours, and the whole hereafter is Yours, and all the nights and
days are Yours, and all creation is Yours, and in Your hand is all good,
and to You return all affairs, open or secret. O Allah! All praise is
for You – an everlasting praise. You are the Best Tester, the Most
Praiseworthy, Ample in blessings, Just in passing decrees, Most Generous
in giving, the Best Bestower of bounties, Lord of all who are in the
earth, and Lord of all in the heavens. O Allah! All praise is for You in
the seven years of hardship, and for You is all praise in the wide
expanse of the earth, and all praise is for You as much as the ability
of the servants, and all praise is for You up to the limits of the land,
and all praise is for You in the mountains that act as pegs, and all
praise is for You in the night when it draws a veil, and all praise is
for You in the day when it shines in brightness, and all praise is for
You in the hereafter and the former, and all praise is for You in the
Seven Oft-repeated Verses and the Glorious Qur’an. Glory and praise be
to Allah; and the whole earth will be in* *His grip on the Day of
Resurrection and the heavens will be rolled up in His right hand. Glory
be to Him, and far is He above the partners they ascribe to Him; Glory
and praise be to Allah, all things will perish except He. Glory be to
You our Lord, the Sublime, the Divine, the Holy; You created everything
with Your power, and You overpower everything by Your might, and You
have risen above everything with Your exaltedness, and You have
conquered everything with Your strength, and You originated everything
with Your wisdom and knowledge, and You sent the prophets with Your
books, and You guided the righteous with Your permission, and You helped
the believers with Your divine succor, and You ruled over the creation
with Your sovereignty. There is no god but You - alone without any
partner; we do not worship anyone other than You, and we do not ask
anyone but You, and we do not desire anything but closeness to You. You
are the One to whom we complain, and You are the goal of our desires,
and our Lord and our Master.”*[^101]

29. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his
fathers from ‘Ali (as) who said: When the tablecloth was laid in front
of the Holy Prophet (S) he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ اجْعَلْهَا نِعْمَةً مَحْصُورَةً مَشْكُورَةً مَوْصُولَةً
بِالْجَنَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Make it a blessing that is limited, appreciated and linked to
paradise.”*[^102]

30. In ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: From al-’Irbas ibn Sariyah who said: The Holy
Prophet (S) used to supplicate:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ اجْعَلْ حُبَّكَ أَحَبُّ إِلَـيَّ مِنْ نَفْسِي وَسَمْعِي
وَبَصَرِي وَأَهْلِي وَمَالِي وَمِنَ الْمَاءِ الْبَارِدِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Make Your love more beloved to me than my self, my hearing,
my sight, my family, my wealth and cool water.”*[^103]

31. In al-Faqih: The Holy Prophet (S) used to say in his du’a:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ وَلَدٍ يَكُونُ عَلَيَّ رِباًّ،
وَمِنْ مَالٍ يَكُونُ عَلَيَّ ضِيَاعاً، وَمِنْ زَوْجَةٍ تُشَيِّبَنِي
قَبْلَ أَوَانِ مَشِيبَتِي، وَمِنْ خَلِيلٍ مَاكِرٍ عَيْنَاهُ تَرَانِي
وَقَلْـبُهُ يَرْعَانِي، إِنْ رَأى خَيْراً دَفَنَهُ، وَإِنْ رَأى شَرّاً
أَذَاعَهُ، وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ وَجْعِ الْبَطْنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! I seek Your protection from a son who subjugates me, and from
wealth that is the cause of my ruin, and from the wife who makes me old
before my time, and from the conspiring friend whose eyes see me but his
heart envies me - if he sees any good (action from me) he conceals it
and if he sees any bad he spreads it; and I seek Your protection from
the pain of the stomach.”*[^104]

Note: al-Tabarsi has also narrated this in al-Makarim.[^105]

32. In al-Muhaj: From the supplications of the Noble Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ أَنْ أَفْتَقِرُ فِي غِنَاكَ، أَوْ
أَضِلَّ فِي هُدَاكَ، أَوْ أَذِّلَ فِي عِزِّكَ، أَوْ أُضَامَ فِي
سُلْطَانِكَ، أَوْ أَضْطَهِدَ وَالأَمْرُ إِلَيْكَ. أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي
أَعُوذُ بِكَ أَنْ أَقُولَ زُوراً، أَوْ أَغْشى فُجُوراً، أَوْ أَكُونَ
بِكَ مَغْرُوراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! I seek Your protection from becoming poor in Your Wealth, or
going astray in Your Guidance, or becoming abased in Your Exaltedness,
or getting treated unjustly in Your Dominion, or being persecuted while
all affairs return to You. O Allah! I seek Your protection from speaking
lies, or being immoral, or being arrogant in front of You”.*[^106]

### His Veil

33. In al-Bihar from al-Khara’ij: It is narrated that the Holy Prophet
(S) used to pray in front of the *Hajr al-Aswad*, facing the Ka’bah and
facing Bayt al-Maqdis; and he would not be seen until he had completed
his prayer, and would be veiled by the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَإِذَا قَرَأْتَ الْقُرَآنَ جَعَلْنَا بَيْـنَكَ وَبَيْنَ الَّذِينَ
لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالآخِرَةِ حِجَاباً مَسْـتُوراً 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when you recite the Qur’an we place between you and those who do
not believe a hidden barrier”*** (Surat al-Isra\` (17): 45)

And the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 أُُوْلٌئِكَ الَّذِينَ طَبَعَ اللٌّهُ عَلـى قُلُوبِهِمْ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“These are they on whose hearts Allah has set a seal”.***  
 ( Surat al-Nahl (16): 108, Surat Muhammad (47):16)

And the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَجَعَلْنَا عَلـى قُلُوبِهِمْ أَكِنَّةً أَنْ يَفْقَهُوهُ وَفِي
آذَانَهِمْ وَقْراً 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We have put coverings on their hearts and deafness in their ears
lest they understand”.***  
 (Surat al-Isra\` (17): 46)

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 أَفَرَأَيْتَ مَنِ اتَّخَذَ إِلٌهَهُ هَوَاهُ وَأَضَلَّهُ اللٌّهُ
عَلـى عِلْمٍ وَخَتَمَ عَلـى سَمْعِهِ وَقَلْبِهِ وَجَعَلَ عَلـى
بَصَرِهِ غِشَاوَةً 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have you then considered him who takes his lowly desire for his god,
Allah has left him astray having knowledge and has set a seal on his
hearing and his heart and has put a cover on his sight”.*** (Surat
al-Jathiyah (45): 23) [^107]

Note: It is apparent that the supplications that have been narrated from
the Holy Prophet (S) are numerous and quoting them all would not fit in
with the goals of this book, so whoever wishes can refer to the sources.
He (S) has a long du’a which he used to recite between the compulsory
and *nafilah* prayers of Fajr, so whoever wants can refer to the book
‘Awarif al-Ma’arif.[^108]

He (S) also has supplications that he used to recite in the nights of
the month of Ramad’an which al-Kaf’ami has mentioned in his book
al-Balad al-Amin[^109] as has ‘Allamah Majlisi in al-Bihar.[^110]

34. In al-Khisal: In his narration from ‘Abdillah ibn Sinan from Abi
‘Abdillah (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) would seek protection from
six things every day: From doubt, polytheism, disdain, anger, trespass
and jealousy.[^111]

35. In al-Iqbal: From Ja’far ibn Babawayh, may Allah be pleased with
him, in the book Thawab al-A’mal, in his narration from the Holy Prophet
(S), he says: When the Noble Prophet (S) was mentioning the merits of
the month of Sha’ban to his companions, he said: “It is a blessed month
and it is my month.”[^112]

36. Also: From al-Sadiq (as) who said: My father narrated to me from his
father, from his grandfather (as) who said: The Prophet (S) said:
“Sha’ban is my month and Ramad’an is the month of Allah (SwT).”[^113]

37. Also: In his narration from ‘Abbas ibn Mujahid from his father who
said: ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn  
 (as) used to recite the following at noon every day in the month of
Sha’ban and on the eve of the fifteenth of the month; and he would send
salutations on the Holy Prophet (S) thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلـى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ، شَجَرَةِ
النُّــبُوَّةِ وَمَوْضِعِ الرِّسَالَةِ ... وَهٌذَا شَهْرُ نَبِيِّكَ
سَيِّدِ رُسُلِكَ صَلَوَاتُكَ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، شَعْبَانُ الَّذِي
حَفَفْتَهُ مِنْكَ بِالرَّحْمَةِ وَالرِّضْوَانِ، الَّذِي كَانَ
رَسُولُكَ صَلَوَاتُكَ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ يَدْأَبُ فِي صِيَامِهِ
وَقِيَامِهِ فِي لَيَالِيهِ وَأَيَّامِهِ بُخُوعاً لَكَ فِي إِكْرَامِهِ
وَإِعْظَامِهِ إِلـى مَحَلِّ حِمَامِهِ. أَللٌّهُمَّ فَأَعِنَّا عَلـى
الإِسْـتِنَانِ بِسُنَّتِهِ فِيهِ وَنَيْلِ الشَّفَاعَةِ لَدَيهِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Bless Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad, the evergreen
tree of prophethood, the destination of the Divine Message ... and this
is the month of Your prophet, master of Your messengers, salutations be
upon him and his progeny - Sha’ban, (the month) that You have surrounded
with mercy and pleasure; the month in which Your messenger would be
untiring in his fasting and prayers, in its nights and days, subjugating
himself in front of You in his glorification and extolment until he
passed away. O Allah! Help us to act upon his sunnah in this month and
to receive his intercession...”*[^114]

38. In the Kashkul of Shaykh Bahai: In the writing of my father, may he
be blessed: ‘Ata’ was questioned about the meaning of the saying of the
Holy Prophet (S): “The best du’a is my du’a and the du’a of the prophets
before me, and it is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ اللٌّهُ وَحْدَهُ وَحْدَهُ وَحْدَهُ، لاَ شَرِيكَ
لَهُ، لَهُ الْمُلْكُ، وَلَهُ الْحَمْدُ، يُحْيِي وَيُمِيتُ وَهُوَ حَيٌّ
لاَ يَمُوتُ بِيَدِهِ الْخَيْرُ وَهُوَ عَلـى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There is no god but Allah, alone, alone, alone, having no partners,
His is the kingdom and for Him is all praise, He gives life and death;
He is living and will not die, by His hand is all good and He has power
over all things.”*

Then he said: This is not a du’a (as such), rather it is glorification
and praise.[^115]

### His Du’a when Burning Insence

39. In al-Bihar, from Aman al-Akhtar: It is narrated that when the Holy
Prophet (S) would burn incense he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ الَّذِي بِنِعْمَتِهِ تَتِمُّ الصَّالِحَاتُ.
أَللٌّهُمَّ طَيِّبْ عُرْفَنَا، وَزَكِّ رَوَائِحَنَا، وَأَحْسِنْ
مُنْقَلَبَنَا، وَاجْعَلِ التَّقْوى زَادَنَا، وَالْجَنَّةَ مَعَادَنَا،
وَلاَ تُفَرِّقْ بَيْـنَنَا وَبَيْنَ عَافِـيَـتِنَا إِيَّانَا
وَكَرَامَتِكَ لَنَا إِنَّكَ عَلـى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“All praise is due to Allah, the One by whose blessing all virtues are
complete. O Allah! Make our scent pleasant, and increase our fragrance,
and make good the place of our return, and* *make piety our provision,
and paradise our final destination, and do not separate from us our
well-being and Your bounties, surely You have power over all
things.”*[^116]

### His Daily Dhikr

The previous section has details about what he (S) used to recite
everyday.

40. In ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: From Anas ibn Malik who said: A man came to
the Holy Prophet (S) and said: “O Prophet of Allah! I am a person who is
sharp-tongued and more so with my family.” The Noble Prophet (S) said:
“Where are you on the issue of seeking forgiveness? For surely, I seek
forgiveness from Allah a hundred times a day.”[^117]

Note: He has narrated it in al-Mizan from al-Majma’.[^118]

41. Also: With another chain of narrators: The Holy Prophet (S) said:
“Surely it comes over my heart so I seek forgiveness from Allah a
hundred times a day.”[^119]

Note: He has narrated it in al-Mizan.[^120]

42. In al-Ikhtisas: In a lengthy hadith from the Holy Prophet (S):
“There has been no prophet but that he has supplicated (to Allah)
against his people, and I have chosen to keep my supplication for the
intercession of my Ummah on the Day of Resurrection ...”[^121]

43. In the book Munyat al-Murid: It has been narrated that the Holy
Prophet (S) used to end his gatherings with du’a.[^122]

44. Also: When he (S) had completed his talk and wanted to stand up from
where he was sitting, he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ اغْفِرْلَنَا مَا أَخْطَأْنَا وَمَا تَعَمَّدْنَا وَمَا
أَسْرَرْنَا وَمَا أَنْتَ أَعْلَمُ بِهِ مِنَّا، أَنْتَ الْمُقَدِّمُ
وَأَنْتَ الْمُؤَخِّرُ لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ أَنْتَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Forgive us for what we did by mistake and what we did on
purpose, and what we concealed and what You know more of than us, You
are the Foremost and You are the Last, there is no god but You.”*[^123]

45. In al-Durr al-Manthur: From Umm Salamah that the Holy Prophet (S)
would frequently say in his du’a:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ مُقَلِّبَ الْقُلُوبِ ثَـبِّتْ قَلْبِي عَلـى دِينِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah - the Transformer of hearts! Make my heart steadfast on Your
religion”.*

I said: “O Prophet of Allah! And are hearts transformed?” He said: “Yes.
Allah did not create any human being but that his heart was between two
fingers from the fingers of Allah, so if He willed he would make it
upright and if He willed he would make it deviate.”[^124]

46. In Majma’ al-Bayan: And when he (S) heard the sound of thunder he
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَهُ مِنْهُ يُسَبِّحُ الرَّعْدَ بِحَمْدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Praise be to Him – the thunder declares His glory.”*[^125]

47. Also: Salim ibn ‘Abdillah narrates from his father who said:
Whenever the Noble Prophet (S) heard thunder and thunderbolts he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ لاَ تَقْـتُلْنَا بِغَضَبِكَ، وَلاَ تُهْلِكْنَا
بِعَذَابِكَ، وَعَافِنَا قَبْلَ ذٌلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Do not kill us with Your wrath, and do not destroy us with
Your punishment, and grant us amnesty before that.”*[^126]

48. Also: When the *Ashab al-Ukhdud* (makers of the pit) was mentioned
in his presence, he would seek protection with Allah from the severity
of chastisement.[^127]

49. In the Amali of Shaykh Tusi: When the Holy Prophet (S) saw a dark
cloud, he would leave everything and say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ شَرِّ مَا فِيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! I seek Your protection from any evil that is in it.”*

And if it passed he would praise Allah, and if it rained he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ نَاشِئاً نَافِعاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Make it a beneficial cloud.”*[^128]

50. In al-Faqih: ‘Ali (as) said: There are five types of winds, one of
which is *al-’Aqeem* (the destructive wind) and we seek protection with
Allah from its evil.[^129]

51. In al-Bihar: When the Holy Prophet (S) saw that the wind had become
strong he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ اجْعَلْهَا رِيَاحاً وَلاَ تَجْعَلْهَا رِيْحاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Make it (from the other) winds and do not make it (the
destructive) wind.”*[^130]

52. In Muhaj al-Da’awat: From Jabir, from Abi Ja’far (as) who said:
Jibra’il said: “O Prophet of Allah! Know that I have not loved any
prophet as much as I love you, so say frequently:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنَّكَ تَرى وَلاَ تُرى، وَأَنْتَ بِالْمَنْظَرِ الأَعَلـى،
وَأَنَّ إِلَيْكَ الْمُنْـتَهى وَالرُّجْعى، وَأَنَّ لَكَ الآخِرَةَ
وَالأُولـى، وَأَنَّ لَكَ الْمَمَاتَ وَالْمَحْـيَا، رَبِّ أَعُوذُ بِكَ
أَنْ أَذِلَّ وَأَخْزى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! You see but cannot be seen, and You are at the highest
viewpoint, and to You is the final destination and return, and Yours are
the end and the beginning, and Yours are the place of death and life. O
Lord! I seek Your protection from being disrespected and
disgraced.”*[^131]

[^1]: al-Da’awat: 47, al-Mustadrak 4:427

[^2]: ‘Uddat al-Da’i: 196

[^3]: Amali al-Tusi 2:198 (It has not been narrated here from al-Husain
), Makarim al-Akhlaq: 267, Majmu’at Warram: 320

[^4]: al-Ja’fariyat: 186

[^5]: Tafsir Ruh al-Jinan 1:26, and al-Nuri has mentioned it in
al-Mustadrak 5:307

[^6]: ‘Awali al-La\`ali 1:145, al-Mustadrak 8:137, Majma’ al-Bayan 9:41
– Surat al-Zukhruf, Bihar al-Anwar 76:293

[^7]: ‘Awali al-La\`ali 1:156

[^8]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 36, Da\`aim al-Islam 2:157, Kashf al-Ghummah
1:164

[^9]: Amali al-Tusi 1:398, Bihar al-Anwar 16:251

[^10]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 36

[^11]: Ibid.

[^12]: Ihya\` ‘Ulum al-Din 2:367

[^13]: Amali al-Tusi 2:209

[^14]: Dala\`il al-Imamah: 7, Bihar al-Anwar 83:23, al-Mustadrak 3:394

[^15]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 38, al-Mustadrak 5:36

[^16]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 38

[^17]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 38, al-Kafi 2:536

[^18]: al-Kafi 6:293

[^19]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 27

[^20]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 27 and 143

[^21]: al-Kafi 6:294, al-Mahasin: 436

[^22]: al-Kafi 6:336, ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rid’a 2:38

[^23]: al-Mahasin: 437

[^24]: Iqbal al-A’mal: 116

[^25]: Amali al-Saduq: 219

[^26]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 170

[^27]: al-Faqih 1:23 and 25

[^28]: Kamil al-Ziyarat: 322, al-Faqih 1:179

[^29]: Kamil al-Ziyarat: 320, Bihar al-Anwar 102:296

[^30]: al-Kafi 2:97, something similar to it is mentioned in al-Amali
al-Tusi 1:49

[^31]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 19

[^32]: Amali al-Tusi 1:49

[^33]: Da\`aim al-Islam 1:145, Fayd’ al-Qadir 5:143

[^34]: al-Faqih 1:489, Tafsir al-’Ayyashi 1:165 – Surat Ale ‘Imran (3)

[^35]: al-Faqih 1:487, Bihar al-Anwar 87:205

[^36]: al-Kafi 4:95, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 4:200, al-Faqih 2:106, Makarim
al-Akhlaq: 27, al-Ja’fariyat: 60, Fayd’ al-Qadir 5:107

[^37]: Refer to Wasa\`il al-Shi’ah 7:106

[^38]: al-Nuri quotes it in al-Mustadrak 5:52

[^39]: al-Kafi 2:548, Bihar al-Anwar 86:2

[^40]: al-Ja’fariyat: 34, al-Mustadrak 5:106

[^41]: Amali al-Tusi 1:158, Bihar al-Anwar 86: 134

[^42]: al-Majlisi quotes it from Bihar al-Anwar 86: 130

[^43]: Iqbal al-A’mal: 320, Bihar al-Anwar 35:289

[^44]: We did not find it in al-Iqbal but it has been narrated in Falah
al-Sa\`il: 171, al-Mustadrak 5:94

[^45]: Bihar al-Anwar 86: 217

[^46]: al-Ja’fariyat: 40

[^47]: Falah al-Sa\`il: 187

[^48]: Kanz al-Fawa\`id 1:385, Bihar al-Anwar 86:18

[^49]: Iqbal al-A’mal: 553

[^50]: Ibid., 699-700

[^51]: Ibid., 702

[^52]: Ibid.

[^53]: We did not find it in al-Fa\`iq

[^54]: Amali al-Tusi 2:109

[^55]: See Wasa\`il al-Shi’ah 7:233-235

[^56]: Iqbal al-A’mal: 17, al-Kafi 4:70, al-Faqih 2:100, Tahdhib
al-Ahkam 4:196

[^57]: al-Kafi 2:503

[^58]: Ibid.

[^59]: Amali al-Tusi 2:210, Majmu’at Warram: 322, Bihar al-Anwar 86:266
and 93:216

[^60]: What is commonly referred to as Tasbih in Persian , Urdu etc.
(Tr.)

[^61]: al-Da’awat:61, al-Mustadrak 5:124

[^62]: Surat al-Nas (114) and Surat al-Falaq (113). (Tr.)

[^63]: Tibb al-A\`immah : 39, Bihar al-Anwar 7:95 and al-Ja\`fariyyat:
216

[^64]: al-Da’awat: 208 and Bihar al-Anwar 95:31

[^65]: Tibb al-A\`immah : 37, Bihar al-Anwar 95:20, Qurb al-Isnad: 46,
al-Kafi 8:109

[^66]: Bihar al-Anwar 95:129, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 413

[^67]: Bihar al-Anwar 95:126, Tibb al-A\`immah: 114, Majma’ al-Bayan
10:568, Da\`aim al-Islam 2:138

[^68]: Bihar al-Anwar 95:144, The Tafsir attributed to Imam al-’Askari
: 178

[^69]: Amali al-Tusi 2:125

[^70]: Qurb al-Isnad:4, Bihar al-Anwar 95:341

[^71]: Muhaj al-Da’awat: 296

[^72]: Manaqib Ale Abi Talib 1:147

[^73]: Majma’ al-Bayan 2:554

[^74]: al-Kafi 2:468

[^75]: al-Da\`awat: 22, Bihar al-Anwar 93:339

[^76]: Kashf al-Ghummah 2:150,151

[^77]: al-Kafi 2:524, Bihar al-Anwar 86:289

[^78]: al-Khisal 2:510

[^79]: Muhaj al-Da’awat: 10

[^80]: al-Mujtaba: 2

[^81]: Bihar al-Anwar 95:197

[^82]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rid’a 2:70

[^83]: al-Mustadrak 7:440, Iqbal al-A’mal: 17

[^84]: Iqbal al-A’mal: 627-628, Bihar al-Anwar 98:376

[^85]: Iqbal al-A’mal: 628, Bihar al-Anwar 98:376

[^86]: Ibid.

[^87]: Falah al-Sa\`il: 171-172

[^88]: Ibid., 138-1401

[^89]: al-Faqih 1:335, Bihar al-Anwar 86:186

[^90]: al-Mustadrak 7:446, Bihar al-Anwar 98:74, Iqbal al-A’mal: 63

[^91]: Tafsir al-Qummi 2:11, Bihar al-Anwar 86:238 and 18:329

[^92]: Muhasabat al-Nafs: 30

[^93]: Bihar al-Anwar 95:164

[^94]: Amali al-Shaykh al-Mufid: 347

[^95]: Muhaj al-Da’awat: 90

[^96]: Ibid., 70

[^97]: al-Irshad al-Daylami: 82

[^98]: Jami’ al-Akhbar: 132

[^99]: Ibid.

[^100]: Ibid.

[^101]: al-Kafi 2:571

[^102]: al-Ja’fariyat: 216

[^103]: ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: 454

[^104]: al-Faqih 3:558

[^105]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 203

[^106]: Muhaj al-Da’awat: 102

[^107]: Bihar al-Anwar 95:218

[^108]: ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: 344

[^109]: al-Balad al-Amin: 195

[^110]: Bihar al-Anwar 98:74

[^111]: al-Khisal: 329, Bihar al-Anwar 72:191

[^112]: Iqbal al-A’mal: 684

[^113]: Ibid., 684-685

[^114]: Ibid., 687

[^115]: al-Kashkul 2:209

[^116]: Bihar al-Anwar 76:143

[^117]: ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: 428

[^118]: al-Mizan 18:245 – Surat Muhammad (47)

[^119]: ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: 428

[^120]: al-Mizan 18:245 – Surat Muhammad (47)

[^121]: al-Ikhtisas: 30

[^122]: Munyat al-Murid: 107

[^123]: Ibid.

[^124]: al-Durr al-Manthur 2:8 – Surat Ale ‘Imran (3)

[^125]: Majma’ al-Bayan 6:283, Bihar al-Anwar 59:356

[^126]: Majma’ al-Bayan 6:283, Bihar al-Anwar 59:357

[^127]: Majma’ al-Bayan 10:465 – Surat al-Buruj (85)

[^128]: Amali al-Tusi 1:128

[^129]: al-Faqih 1:547

[^130]: Bihar al-Anwar 60:17

[^131]: Muhaj al-Da’awat: 172, Bihar al-Anwar 94:268


