Chapter 22: The Hajj
====================

Addendum to this Chapter
------------------------

1. In al-Kafi: In his narration from Abi al-Faraj who said: Aban asked
Aba ‘Abdillah (as): “Did the Noble Prophet (S) have any special Tawaf
(circumambulation)?” He replied: “The Prophet (S) would perform Tawaf
ten times (each time circling the Ka’bah seven times) at night and in
the day; three times in the first part of the night, three times in the
last part of the night, twice in the morning and twice after Dhuhr, and
between these he would rest.”[^1]

Note: Shaykh Saduq has narrated this in al-Faqih and al-Khisal.[^2]

2. Also: From ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn al-Hajjaj from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who
said: The Holy Prophet (S) would touch the Hajr (black stone) every time
he performed Tawaf, (whether it was) obligatory or supererogatory.[^3]

3. Also: From Ghiyath ibn Ibrahim, from Ja’far from his father (as) who
said: The Holy Prophet (S) would touch the *Hajr al-Aswad* and the *Rukn
al-Yamani* and then he would kiss them and place his cheek over them,
and I saw my father doing the same.[^4]

Note: Shaykh Tusi narrates this in al-Tahdhib and al-Istibsar.[^5]

4. In al-Da’aim: From Abi Ja’far (as) who said: The Noble Prophet (S)
used to touch the two corners, the corner in which was the *Hajr
al-Aswad* and the corner of al-Yamani, whenever he passed by them during
the Tawaf.[^6]

5. In al-Mahasin: In his narration from Ja’far, from Ibn al-Qaddah, from
Abi ‘Abdillah from his father (as): The Prophet (S) used to like getting
the water of Zamzam brought for him (as a gift) when he was in
Madinah.[^7]

Note: al-Saduq has narrated this in al-Faqih as has al-Tusi in
al-Tahdhib.[^8]

6. In al-Kafi: In his narration from ‘Abdillah ibn Sinan in a hadith
from Abi ‘Abdillah (as): The Holy Prophet (S) used to recite the
*Dhil-Ma’arij* frequently, and he would recite the *talbiya*[^9]
whenever he saw a rider, or whenever he climbed a hill or came down a
valley, and in the last part of the night and after the prayers.[^10]

7. In al-Ja’fariyat: Ja’far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (as) said: My father
informed me from Jabir ibn ‘Abdillah that the *talbiya* of the Holy
Prophet was:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَبَّيْكَ أَللٌّهُمَّ لَبَّيْكَ لاَ شَرِيكَ لَكَ لَبَّيْكَ إِنَّ
الْحَمْدَ وَ النِّعْمَةَ لَكَ وَ الْمُلْكَ لاَ شَرِيكَ لَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I am here, O Allah!, I am here. I am here, no partners do You have, I
am here. Verily the praise and bounties are Yours as is the kingdom, no
partners do You have”.*[^11]

8. In al-Tahdhib: From Muhammad ibn Muslim in a hadith from one of them
(i.e. al-Baqir or al-Sadiq (as)): The Noble Prophet (S) would sacrifice
a large, healthy, horned ram that had a black mouth and black eyes.[^12]

Note: A similar narration is found in al-Da’aim.[^13]

9. In al-Kafi: In his narration from ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi ‘Abdillah
(as) who said: On the day of the sacrifice, the Holy Prophet (S) would
shave his head, clip his nails, and trim off some hair from his
moustache and the edges of his beard.[^14]

10. In al-Muqni’: The *sunnah* in the Ihram is: Clipping the nails,
trimming the moustache and shaving the pubic hair.[^15]

11. Also: It is from the *sunnah* that people should gather from
different towns on the day of ‘Arafah, without a leader, and supplicate
to Allah.[^16]

[^1]: al-Kafi 4:428

[^2]: al-Faqih 2:411, al-Khisal: 449

[^3]: al-Kafi 4:404

[^4]: Ibid., 4:408

[^5]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 5:105, al-Istibsar 2:216

[^6]: Da\`aim al-Islam 1:312

[^7]: al-Mahasin: 574

[^8]: al-Faqih 2:218, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 5:372

[^9]: A special call pronounced when performing the Hajj. (Tr.)

[^10]: al-Kafi 4:250

[^11]: al-Ja’fariyat: 64

[^12]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 5:205, Faydh al-Qadeer 5:227

[^13]: Da\`aim al-Islam 1:326

[^14]: al-Kafi 4:502, al-Faqih 2:507

[^15]: al-Muqni\`: 70

[^16]: Ibid., 46


