Addendum on the Uncommon Narrations
===================================

1. In al-Kafi: In his narration from Abi Maryam from Abi ‘Abdillah (as)
who said: It was the practice of the Holy Prophet (S) that if he owed
someone a two year old camel, he would give back a seven year old camel
and if he owed two dirhams, he would pay four.[^1]

Note: This has also been narrated in Qurb al-Isnad.[^2]

2. In al-Ihtijaj: In a long hadith from Musa ibn Ja’far from ‘Ali (as):
Whenever the Noble Prophet (S) mentioned any of his virtues, he would
say: “And there is no pride (in me because of this).”[^3]

Note: al-Majlisi has mentioned a similar narration in al-Bihar from
Irshad al-Qulub.[^4]

3. In al-Bihar: From the writings of Shahid Muhammad ibn Makki who said:
It is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that it is from the *sunnah*
for a believer to say one hundred times on the day of Ghadeer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ الَّذِي جَعَلَ كَمَالَ دِيْنِهِ وَ تَـمَامَ
نِعْمَتِهِ بِوِلاَيَةِ أَمِيرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَلِيِّ بْنِ أَبِي
طَالِبٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“All praise is due to Allah, the One who put the perfection of His
religion and the completion of His favor in the Wilayah of Amir
al-Mu’minin ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as).”*[^5]

4. Also: From Musa ibn Isma’il ibn Musa ibn Ja’far, from his father,
from his fathers (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) said: Calling on
the sick who are from the Bani Hashim is obligatory, and paying them a
(courtesy) visit is a *sunnah*.[^6]

5. In al-Da’aim: From Ja’far ibn Muhammad (as): When he was asked
whether a sheep is to be slaughtered while standing, he said: “It is not
appropriate to do this. The *sunnah* is that it should be slaughtered
while laying facing towards the Qibla.”[^7]

6. In Tuhf al-’Uqul: From al-Rid’a (as) who said: “We consider our
promises to be like debts that we owe, just as the Noble Prophet (S)
did.”[^8]

Note: This has also been narrated by al-Nuri in al-Mustadrak and by
al-Tabarsi in al-Mishkat.[^9]

7. In Majma’ al-Bayan: Whenever the Holy Prophet (S) heard thunder he
would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَ مَنْ يُسَبِّحُ الرَّعْدُ بِحَمْدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Praise be to the One whose Glory is declared by thunder.”*[^10]

8. Also: Salim ibn ‘Abdillah narrates from his father who said: Whenever
the Holy Prophet (S) saw thunderbolts he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ لاَ تَقْـتُلْنَا بِغَضَبِكَ وَ لاَ تُهْلِكْنَا بِعَذَابِكَ
وَ عَافِنَا قَبْلَ ذٌلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! Do not kill us with Your wrath; and do not destroy us with
Your punishment; and grant us amnesty before that.”*[^11]

9. Also: Whenever the *Ashab al-Ukhdud* (Makers of the Pit) were
mentioned in the presence of the Noble Prophet (S), he would seek refuge
with Allah from the severity of the chastisement [^12]

10. In al-Faqih: Whenever the yellow, red or black winds started
blowing, the face of the Holy Prophet (S) would change and become
yellow, like that of a person who is terrified, until drops of rain fell
from the sky, then he would return to his former state and say: *“It has
come to you with mercy.”*[^13]

11. In the Amali of Shaykh Tusi: Whenever the Holy Prophet (S) saw a
dark cloud, he left everything and said*: “O Allah! I seek protection
with You from the evil that is in it.”* And if it passed he would praise
Allah, and if it rained he would say: *“O Allah! Make it a beneficial
rain.”*[^14]

12. In al-Da’aim: From Abi ‘Abdillah Ja’far ibn Muhammad (as): Whenever
there was a solar or lunar eclipse, the Noble Prophet (S) would say*:
“Run to your masjid.”*[^15]

13. Also: The *sunnah* is to pray in the masjid if they pray (the Salat
al-Ayat) in congregation.[^16]

14. In al-Bihar: In his narration from ‘Ali (as) who said: My best
friend, the Prophet (S), never used to put aside anything for the
morrow, and Abu Bakr used to do this, and Umar ibn al-Khattab used to
keep ledgers and would hold the wealth from year to year. As for myself,
I do as my best friend the Prophet (S) did.

He said: “And ‘Ali used to give them (their share) every Friday
...”[^17]

15. In al-Bihar: From the Holy Prophet (S): *“We are the Ahl al-Bayt -
Allah has removed from us all indecencies, apparent and hidden.”*[^18]

16. Also: From him (S): *“We are the Ahl al-Bayt - Allah has chosen the
hereafter for us over this (transient) world.”*[^19]

17. Tafsir al-Furat in his narration from Abi Ja’far (as) who said:
Allah did not send any prophet but that he said to his people: *“Say, I
do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives.”*[^20]

18. In al-Bihar: When the Prophet (S) would show someone special
kindness and pray for his forgiveness, that person would attain
martyrdom.[^21]

\*\*\*

**Note from the compiler:** This marks the end of the book, by the Grace
and Blessing of Allah. However, the great ‘Allamah – may Allah grant him
a high status – had included a section on the character and moral traits
of the Holy Prophet at the beginning of this book, because of its
auspiciousness, so we have put an addendum to this section at the end of
book in following with the ‘Allamah’s practice and because of its
benefit, while ensuring that brevity is maintained.

[^1]: al-Kafi 5:254

[^2]: Qurb al-Isnad: 44

[^3]: al-Ihtijaj 1:211

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar 16:341

[^5]: Ibid., 98:321

[^6]: Ibid., 96:234

[^7]: Da\`aim al-Islam 2:179

[^8]: Tuhf al-’Uqul: 446

[^9]: al-Mustadrak 8:458, Mishkat al-Anwar: 173

[^10]: Majma’ al-Bayan 6:283

[^11]: Ibid.

[^12]: Majma’ al-Bayan 10:465

[^13]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih 1:547

[^14]: Amali al-Tusi 1:128

[^15]: Da\`aim al-Islam 1:200

[^16]: Ibid., 1:202

[^17]: Bihar al-Anwar 100:60, al-Gharat 1:47

[^18]: Bihar al-Anwar 23:116

[^19]: Ibid.

[^20]: Tafsir Furat al-Kufi: 139, Bihar al-Anwar 23:248

[^21]: Bihar al-Anwar 82:148


