Author’s Preface
================

All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the universe, and blessings and
salutations upon our master Muhammad (S) and his pure progeny.

Said Muhammad Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn Muhammad Husayn al-Hasani
al-Husayni – may Allah forgive his transgressions: This is what Allah
(SWT) made possible for us to compile from some of the narrations of the
Muslim narrators, of the practices of our master, the Prophet (S), in
the limited time and restricted period available. We ask the Almighty
(SWT) to grant us the ability to follow these practices as much as
possible.

The Almighty (SWT) has said:

***“In the Apostle of Allah there is certainly for you a good
exemplar***” (Surat al-Ahzab (33), 21)

And the Noble Prophet (S) said in his advice to ‘Ali (as): “...And sixth
is to follow my *sunnah* in my prayers and my fasting and my giving of
charity.”[^1]

And Imam ‘Ali (as) said: “Whoever disciplines himself with the character
that Allah wants his servants to have, will be granted everlasting
prosperity.”[^2] In addition, Imam al-Sadiq (as) said: “I would hate for
a person to die before having adopted any one attribute from the
attributes of the Holy Prophet (S).”[^3]

Indeed, following in his footsteps and adopting his traits is the true
perfection and final goal and it is with this that one can achieve
success in this world and the next.

We have left out the mention of Makruhat (abominable actions), as it is
part of our beliefs that the Noble Prophet (S) never performed any
Makruh or Mubah action in a way deemed Makruh or Mubah, and this has
been proven by rational and scriptural proofs.

We decided to delete the chains of narrators of the narrations for the
sake of brevity, however we have mentioned the names of the books and
their authors, and we have differentiated between the narrations with
complete and incomplete chains so that anyone who wants to find the
source of the narration can easily do so.

We have also mentioned his (S) nature because of its auspiciousness and
because it relates to his moral character even though it does not fall
under the topic of this book. We have not mentioned specific details of
events but have instead concentrated on the general aspects and from
Allah do we seek help.

Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Taba’taba’i

[^1]: al-Mahasin: 17, al-Kafi 8:66, al-Faqih 4:188, Majmu’at Warram
2:91, Da\`aim al-Islam 2:347

[^2]: The Tafsir attributed to Imam al-’Askari (as): 17, Adabu Qira\`ati
al-Qur\`an: no. 3, Bihar al-Anwar 92:214

[^3]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 39


