Chapter 3: On Cleanliness and the Rules of Beautification
=========================================================

1. In al-Makarim: When the Holy Prophet (S) used to wash his head and
beard; he would wash them with *‘Sidr’* (Lotus jujube).[^1]

2. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad, from his
fathers, from ‘Ali (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) used to comb his
hair and would mostly comb it with water saying: “Water is enough of a
perfume for a believer.”[^2]

3. From al-Saduq in al-Khisal: Narrated from ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn
al-Hajjaj from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) in (his explanation about) the words
of Allah (SwT)

***“Put on your adornment on every occasion of prayer”*** (Surat
al-A’raf (7): 31)

he said: “(It is) the combing of hair, for combing hair brings
sustenance, improves the hair, fulfills the need, increases virility and
stops phlegm. The Noble Prophet (S) used to comb below his beard forty
times and from above it seven times and he would say: This increases the
intellect and stops phlegm.”[^3]

Note: This has been narrated by al-Fattal in al-Rawd’a with an
incomplete chain.[^4]

4. In al-Kafi: Narrated from al-Sakuni from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said:
The Holy Prophet (S) said: “It is the *sunnah* to trim the moustache
until a little above the edge of the upper lip.”[^5]

5. In al-Faqih: The Holy Prophet (S) said: “The Magicians cut off their
beards and let their moustaches grow long, whereas we cut off out
moustaches and let our beards grow.”[^6]

6. Also: It has been narrated: Burying hair, nails and blood is from the
*sunnah*.[^7]

7. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Ibn ‘Uqbah from his father from Abi
‘Abdillah (as) who said: “Clipping nails is from the *sunnah*.”[^8]

8. In al-Faqih: In his narration from Muhammad ibn Muslim who asked Aba
Ja’far (as) about the dying of hair, so he said: “The Prophet of Allah
(S) used to dye his hair and here is some of his (dyed) hair which we
have in our possession.”[^9]

9. Also: He said: The Holy Prophet (S) and Husayn ibn ‘Ali and Abu
Ja’far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali  used to dye their hair with ‘*Katm’* (a type
of dye made from a special plant) and ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (as) used to
dye his hair with henna and *Katm*.[^10]

10. In al-Makarim: The Holy Prophet (S) would depilate the hair from his
body. Someone would do this for him up to his waist-wrap and he would do
the rest himself.[^11]

11. In al-Kafi: From Hudhaifah ibn Mansur who said: I heard Aba
‘Abdillah (as) saying: The Noble Prophet (S) would depilate the pubic
hair and the hair under the private parts every Friday.[^12]

12. From al-Fattal in Rawd’at al-Wa’id’in: Abu ‘Abdillah (as) said: The
*sunnah* regarding the use of a depilatory is to use it once every
fifteen days. The one who has passed twenty days (because of not having
money) should take a loan, to which Allah (SwT) will be the Guarantor,
and depilate. The one who passes forty days without depilating (the
excess body hair) is neither a believer not a disbeliever, and there is
no dignity in this.[^13]

13. In al-Faqih: ‘Ali (as) said: Removal of hair from the armpits
eliminates bad odor and is hygienic. It is a *sunnah* which the virtuous
one (S) instructed (his followers to perform).[^14]

14. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Salim al-Fazari from someone from Abi
‘Abdillah (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) would apply kohl with
collyrium (to both his eyes) when he went to his bed, one after the
other.[^15]

15. Also: Narrated from Zurarah from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: The
Holy Prophet (S) used to apply kohl to his eyes before going to sleep,
four times in the right eye and three times in the left.[^16]

16. In al-Makarim: He said: The Holy Prophet (S) used to apply kohl in
his right eye three times and in the left twice ... and he had a
container of kohl which he used at night. The kohl that he used was made
from collyrium.[^17]

17. From al-Husayn ibn Bastam in Tibb al-A’immah: Narrated from
‘Abdillah ibn Maimun from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: The Holy Prophet
(S) had a kohl container from which he would take kohl every night and
apply it thrice to both eyes before going to sleep.[^18]

Note: The difference in the number of applications (of kohl) alludes to
the difference in his (S) action at different times. The *sunnah* is the
very action of applying kohl before going to sleep without doing it a
specific number of times.[^19]

18. In al-Faqih: al-Sadiq (as) said: Four (actions) are from the
*akhlaq* of the prophets: Applying perfume, shaving (the head) with a
razor, removal of body hair with depilatory and being intimate with
one’s wife frequently.[^20]

Note: There are numerous similar traditions. Some have already been
mentioned and others will be mentioned in the coming sections.

19. In al-Kafi: Narrated from ‘Abdillah ibn Sinan from Abi ‘Abdillah
(as) who said: The Noble Prophet (S) had a container of musk and when he
performed ablution he would take it with his wet hands. When he came out
everyone knew that it was the Prophet of Allah (S) because of his
scent.[^21]

20. In al-Makarim: He (S) would never be offered any perfume but that he
would take it and apply some on himself and would say: “It has a good
scent that is easy on the wearer.” If he did not wish to apply it, he
would just put (the tip of) his finger in the perfume and take a little
from it.[^22]

21. Also: He (S) would burn the incense of *‘Ud al-Qamari’* (a special
type of incense).[^23]

22. In Dhakhirat al-Ma’ad: Musk was the perfume that he (S) loved the
most.[^24]

23. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Ishaq al-Tawil al-’Attar from Abi
‘Abdillah (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) would spend more on
perfume than he would spend on food.[^25]

24. Also: Narrated from Abi Basir from Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said:
Putting perfume on the moustache is from the *akhlaq* of the prophets
and a (way of showing) respect to the two angels who record your
deeds.[^26]

25. Also: Narrated from al-Sakan al-Khazzaz who said: I heard Aba
‘Abdillah (as) saying: “It is a must for every believer to clip his
nails, trim his moustache and apply some perfume every Friday. When it
was Friday and the Holy Prophet (S) did not have any perfume, he would
ask for some of his wives’ perfume cream, which he mixed with water and
put on his face.”[^27]

26. In al-Faqih: When it was Friday, if the Holy Prophet (S) did not
have any perfume, he would ask for a cloth that had been dyed with
saffron and he would sprinkle it with some water and then rub his hands
on it and wipe his face with it.[^28]

27. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Ishaq ibn ‘Ammar from Abi ‘Abdillah (as)
who said: When perfume was brought for the Holy Prophet (S) on the day
of Fitr, he would start by giving some to his wives (before using it
himself).[^29]

28. Also: Narrated from ‘Isa ibn ‘Abdillah, from his father, from his
grandfather, from ‘Ali (as) who said: The Noble Prophet (S) would never
turn down perfume and sweets.[^30]

29. From al-Ghazali in al-Ihya, in his recounting the *akhlaq* of the
Holy Prophet (S): He loved perfume and disliked foul odors.[^31]

Note: From the numerous different narrations it can be seen that he (S)
used to use a variety of different types of perfumes.

30. In al-Makarim: He said: The Holy Prophet (S) used to like applying
oil on his hair and disliked dusty disheveled hair. He would say:
“Applying oil removes distress.”[^32]

31. Also: He would apply different types of oil, and he would start by
putting oil on his head before his beard, saying: “The head before the
beard.”[^33]

32. Also: He would oil his hair with oil of the violet and would say:
“It is the best of oils.”[^34]

33. Also: When he applied oil, he would start with his eyebrows, then
his moustache, then he would put some in his nose and smell it, then he
would apply the oil on his head.[^35]

34. Also: He would apply oil on his eyebrows to get relief from a
headache. He applied different oil on his moustache from the one he used
for his beard.[^36]

Addendum to this Chapter
------------------------

1. In Tuhf al-’Uqul: From al-Rid’a (as): Good hygiene is from the
*akhlaq* of the prophets.[^37]

2. In al-Faqih: al-Sadiq (as) said: Four (actions) are from the *sunnah*
of the messengers: Applying perfume, brushing teeth, (being close to)
women and (using) henna.[^38]

3. In al-Da’aim: The Holy Prophet (S) would use perfume so much that it
would change the color of his beard and hair to yellowish color.[^39]

Note: There is a similar narration in Qurb al-Isnad.[^40]

4. In al-Makarim: The Holy Prophet (S) used to comb his hair with the
*‘Midra’* (a type of comb) ... and he would sometimes comb his beard
twice in one day. He would put the comb under his pillow after combing
his hair with it.[^41]

5. In al-Kafi: In his narration from Amr ibn Thabit from Abi ‘Abdillah
(as): I said (to him): “They narrate that parting the hair is from the
*sunnah*.” [He (as) said: “From the *sunnah*?”] I said: “They claim that
the Noble Prophet (S) parted his hair.” He said: “The Holy Prophet (S)
did not part his hair and the prophets (as) never kept their hair in
this way.”[^42]

Note: This hadith has also been narrated in al-Makarim.[^43]

6. Also: From Ayyub ibn Harun: I asked Aba ‘Abdillah (as): “Did the Holy
Prophet (S) part his hair?” He said: “No, because if the Holy Prophet’s
(S) hair became long, it would reach his earlobes (and he would never
let it grow more than that).”[^44]

Note: al-Tabarsi has narrated this in al-Makarim.[^45]

7. In the book al-Ta’rif of al-Safwani: When cutting his hair, he (S)
would start from the front part of his head, as this is from the
*sunnah* of the prophets (as).[^46]

Note: Zayd al-Narsi has narrated it in his Asl, from Abi al-Hasan
(as).[^47]

8. In al-Kafi: In his narration from Abi Basir who said: I asked Aba
‘Abdillah (as): “Is the parting of hair from the *sunnah*?” He said:
“No.” I said: “Did the Holy Prophet (S) ever part his hair?” He said:
“Yes.” I said: “How is it that the Noble Prophet (S) parted his hair yet
it is not from the *sunnah*?” He said: “If one goes through what the
Holy Prophet (S) went through then let him part his hair as the Holy
Prophet (S) parted his hair. It is only then that he has practiced the
*sunnah* of the Holy Prophet (S) otherwise he has not.” I said: “How is
this?” He said: “When the Holy Prophet (S) was turned away from the
Ka’ba despite having already brought a sacrifice and worn the Ihram,
Allah (SwT) showed him the vision that He informed him about in His
book, when He said:

***“Certainly God has fulfilled His Apostle’s vision in all truth: You
will surely enter the Sacred Masjid, God willing, in safety, with your
heads shaven or hair cropped, without any fear. So He knew what you did
not know, and He assigned [you] besides that a victory near at hand.”***
(Surat al-Fath (48): 27)

Thus the Noble Prophet (S) knew that Allah would fulfill for him what He
had shown him. It was after this that he let the hair on his head grow
long when he wore the Ihram, waiting to shave it off in the Haram (in
Makkah) as Allah (SwT) promised him. After he had shaved it, he did not
let his hair grow again and he had not done so before this either.”[^48]

9. Also: In his narration from Hafs al-A’war who said: I asked Aba
‘Abdillah (as) about dying the beard and the head – is it from the
*sunnah*? He said: “Yes”.[^49]

Note: al-Tabarsi has narrated this in al-Makarim.[^50]

10. In al-Khisal: From ‘Aishah: The Holy Prophet (S) would order the
burying of seven things from the human being: the hair, nails, blood,
menstrual blood, placenta (after pregnancy), teeth and the clots (of
miscarriage).[^51]

11. In al-Kafi: In his narration from ‘Abdillah ibn Abi Ya’fur who said:
We were in Madinah discussing with Zurarah about the plucking and
shaving of armpit hair. I said: “Shaving it off is better.” Zurarah
said: “Plucking it out is better.” So we sought permission to meet with
Abi ‘Abdillah (as) and he permitted us to see him. He was in the
bathhouse at the time, depilating his armpits. I said to Zurarah: “Does
this suffice (as evidence that I am right)?” He said: “No, maybe he did
this whereas it may not be permissible for me to do this.” He (as) said:
“What is going on with you (two)?” So I replied: “Zurarah was debating
with me regarding the plucking out and shaving of (hair from) the
armpits. I said that shaving it is better and he said that plucking it
out is better.” He (as) said: “You have arrived at the *sunnah* and
Zurarah has missed it. Shaving is better than plucking out (the hair)
and depilating it is better than shaving it.”[^52]

Note: al-Shaykh al-Saduq narrated this in al-’Ilal.[^53]

12. Also: In his narration from Yasir from Abi al-Hasan (as) who said:
The Holy Prophet (S) said: My beloved Jibra’il said to me: “Apply
perfume on alternative days and you must apply perfume every Friday
without fail.”[^54]

13. In al-Makarim: The Holy Prophet (S) said to ‘Ali (as): “O ‘Ali! You
must apply perfume every Friday as this is from my *sunnah*. Good deeds
will be written for you as long as the scent (of the perfume) is present
from you.”[^55]

14. Also: From Anas who said: When the Holy Prophet (S) was given an
aromatic plant, he would smell its scent and return it, except for the
Marjoram which he would not return.[^56]

15. In al-Bihar from Risalah al-Shahid al-Thanii: He (S) would clip his
nails and trim his moustache on Fridays before coming out for the Friday
prayer.[^57]

16. al-Shaykh Fakhr al-Din in al-Muntakhab, in a hadith from a Christian
man: I asked some of his (S) companions: “What is the gift he prefers
the most?” They said: “Perfume is what he likes more than anything else
and he has a special relish for it.”[^58]

17. In al-Khisal: In his narration form al-Hasan ibn al-Jahm who said:
Abu al-Hasan Musa ibn Ja’far (as) said: Five things are from the
*sunnah* concerning the head and five concerning the body. As for the
*sunnah* concerning the head, they are: brushing the teeth, trimming the
moustache, combing the hair, rinsing the mouth and clearing the
nostrils. The ones concerning the body are: circumcision, shaving off
the pubic hair, removing hair from the armpits, clipping the nails and
cleaning one self of all impurities after visiting the toilet.[^59]

18. Fiqh al-Rid’a (as): Be careful to practice the *sunnah* of Friday,
and these are seven: intimacy with the wife, washing the head and beard
with marsh mallow, trimming the moustache, clipping the nails, changing
clothes and applying perfume.[^60]

19. Al-Shahid al-Thani in Risalat A’mal Yawm al-Jumu’ah: He (S) used to
clip his nails and trim his moustache on Friday before coming to the
(Friday) prayer.[^61]

20. Ja’far ibn Ahmad in the book ‘al-’Arus’: From the Noble Prophet (S)
who said: My beloved Jibra’il said to me: “Apply perfume on alternative
days, and on Fridays it is a must (to do so).”[^62]

21. Also: From Abi ‘Abdillah (as) who said: It is from the *sunnah* to
send salutations (*salawat*) on the Holy Prophet and his progeny every
Friday one thousand times, and on other days a hundred times.[^63]

Note: al-Shaykh al-Tusi has narrated this in al-Tahdhib in his narration
from ‘Umar ibn Yazid from Abi ‘Abdillah (as).[^64]

[^1]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 32,

[^2]: al-Ja’fariyat: 156

[^3]: al-Khisal: 268, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 70

[^4]: Rawd’at al-Wa’id’in: 308

[^5]: al-Kafi 6:487, Tuhf al-’Uqul: 100, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 67,
al-Khisal: The Four Hundred Hadith

[^6]: al-Faqih 1:130, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 67

[^7]: al-Faqih 1:128

[^8]: al-Kafi 6:490

[^9]: al-Faqih 1:122, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 84

[^10]: al-Faqih 1:122, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 80

[^11]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 35

[^12]: al-Kafi 6:507

[^13]: Rawd’at al-Wa’id’in: 308, al-Kafi 6:506, al-Faqih 1:119

[^14]: al-Faqih 1:120, al-Khisal: The Four Hundred Hadith, Makarim
al-Akhlaq: 60

[^15]: al-Kafi 6:493, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 46-47

[^16]: al-Kafi 6:495

[^17]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 34, Collyrium is a certain stone that is used
as kohl.

[^18]: Tibb al-A\`immah: 83

[^19]: Bihar al-Anwar 76:95

[^20]: al-Faqih 1:131, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 63, Tuhf al-’Uqul: 442

[^21]: al-Kafi 6:515, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 42

[^22]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 34

[^23]: Ibid.

[^24]: We did not find this in Dhakhirat al-Ma’ad, however al-Kulayni
has narrated this in al-Kafi 6:515

[^25]: al-Kafi 6:512, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 43

[^26]: al-Kafi 6:510, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 42

[^27]: al-Kafi 6:511

[^28]: al-Faqih 1:465

[^29]: al-Kafi 4:170

[^30]: Ibid., 6:513

[^31]: Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din 2:358

[^32]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 34

[^33]: Ibid.

[^34]: Ibid.

[^35]: Ibid.

[^36]: Ibid.

[^37]: Tuhf al-’Uqul: 442

[^38]: al-Faqih 1:52, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 49, al-Ja’fariyat: 16, Da\`aim
al-Islam 1:119, Lubb al-Lubab 2:531

[^39]: Da\`aim al-Islam 2:166

[^40]: Qurb al-Isnad: 70

[^41]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 33

[^42]: al-Kafi 6:486

[^43]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 71

[^44]: al-Kafi 6:485

[^45]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 70

[^46]: al-Ta’rif: 4

[^47]: al-Usul al-Sittata ‘Ashar: 56

[^48]: al-Kafi 6:486

[^49]: Ibid., 6:481

[^50]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 83

[^51]: al-Khisal: 340

[^52]: al-Kafi 6:508

[^53]: ‘Ilal al-Shara’i

[^54]: al-Kafi 6:511, al-Mustadrak 6:48

[^55]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 43

[^56]: Ibid., 45

[^57]: Bihar al-Anwar 89:358, al-Mustadrak 6:46

[^58]: al-Muntakhab: 64

[^59]: al-Khisal: 271

[^60]: Fiqh al-Rid’a: 128

[^61]: al-Mustadrak 6:45

[^62]: Ibid., 6:48

[^63]: Ibid., 6:71

[^64]: al-Tahdhib 3:4


