Chapter 4: On Travelling and its Adab
=====================================

1. From al-Saduq in al-Faqih: In his narration from ‘Abdillah ibn
Sulayman from Abi Ja’far (as) who said: The Holy Prophet (S) used to
travel on Thursdays.[^1]

Note: There are many similar narrations.[^2]

2. From Ibn Tawus in Aman al-Akhtar and Misbah al-Za’ir: The author of
the book ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif has reported: When the Noble Prophet (S)
used to travel, he would carry with him five things: a mirror, a kohl
container, a comb and a *siwak* (tooth-brush). In another narration he
added: a pair of scissors.[^3]

Note: Similar narrations have been mentioned in Makarim al-Akhlaq and
al-Ja’fariyat.[^4]

3. In al-Makarim: From Ibn ‘Abbas who said: When the Holy Prophet (S)
walked, it would be known by his gait that he is neither feeble nor
lazy.[^5]

Note: It has been reported in numerous narrations that he (S) would walk
inclining forward (signifying strength) with a brisk pace as if he was
descending a slope.

4. In al-Makarim, quoting from Kitab al-Nubuwwah: The Holy Prophet (S)
used to like riding on an unsaddled donkey (using only the saddle
blanket).[^6]

5. In al-Kafi: Narrated from Isma’il ibn Hammam from Abi al-Hasan (as)
who said: The Holy Prophet (S) would take the route of ‘*Dhabb’* (the
mountain where Masjid al-Khif is located) on his way from Mina and he
would return from the path between *‘Ma’zamayn’* (between Mash’ar and
‘Arafah). And whenever he traveled to a place using one route, he would
not return using the same route.[^7]

Note: This has also been narrated by al-Saduq with an incomplete chain
of narrators[^8]. He has also narrated something similar from al-Rid’a
(as)

6. In al-Bihar: When he (S) intended to go for war, he would conceal his
intention from others.[^9]

7. In al-Faqih: In his narration from Mu’awiyah ibn ‘Ammar from Abi
‘Abdillah (as) who said: While on a journey, when the Holy Prophet (S)
descended (from an elevation) he would recite the tasbih *(“Subhan
Allah”)* and when he ascended, he would recite the takbir *(“Allahu
Akbar”)*.[^10]

8. From al-Qutb in Lubb al-Lubab: The Noble Prophet (S) would never
depart from any place until he had offered two rak’ahs of prayer, and
(when asked) he said: “So that it (the place) would bear witness about
my prayer.”[^11]

9. In al-Faqih: When the Holy Prophet (S) wanted to bid farewell to the
believers he said: “May Allah endow you with *taqwa*, turn you towards
all that is good, fulfill your every desire, safeguard for you your
religion and your material possessions, and return you to me
safely.”[^12]

10. From al-Barqi in al-Mahasin: Narrated from ‘Ali ibn Asbat from the
one who reported it to him: Abu ‘‘Abdillah D bid farewell to someone
saying: “I commend to the protection of Allah your religion and your
safety. May He endow you with *taqwa* and turn you towards good wherever
you turn”. Then Abu ‘Abdullah (as) turned towards us and said: “This is
the farewell of the Holy Prophet (S) to ‘Ali (as) when he would send him
somewhere.”[^13]

Note: The narrations about his (S) supplication for bidding farewell are
numerous and differ significantly. However despite the difference, they
all contain supplication for safety and success.

11. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from Ja’far ibn Muhammad from his
fathers from ‘Ali (as): The Holy Prophet (S) used to say to anyone
returning from Makkah: “May Allah (SwT) accept your pilgrimage, forgive
your sins and compensate your expense.”[^14]

Addendum to this Chapter
------------------------

12. In al-Mahasin: From Muhammad ibn Abi al-Kiram from Abi ‘Abdillah
(as) who said to him: “I would like for you to depart on Thursday. This
was the day when the Holy Prophet (S) would depart when he went on a
military expedition.”[^15]

13. In Majmu’at Warram: He (S) would cast lots between his wives when he
wanted to go on a journey.[^16]

Note: This has also been narrated by al-Tabarsi in al-Majma’ and
al-Mufid in al-Ikhtisas.[^17]

14. Also: He (S) disliked for a man to travel without a companion.[^18]

15. In al-Mahasin: From al-Sakuni in his narration: The Noble Prophet
(S) said: It is from the *sunnah* that when a group of people leave on a
journey, they should take money for their expenses. This is better for
their souls and for their morals.[^19]

Note: This has also been narrated by al-Saduq in al-Faqih.[^20]

16. In al-Makarim: In his travels, he (S) would always take with him a
bottle of oil, a container of kohl, a pair of scissors, a *miswak*
(tooth-brush) and a comb. In another narration: he would have with him
some thread, a needle, an awl and leather thongs, and he would stitch
his clothes (when they got torn) and mend his shoes.[^21]

17. Also: From Anas ibn Malik who said: When the Holy Prophet (S)
intended to travel, he would say when departing:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ بِكَ إِنْتَشَرْتُ وَ إِلَيْكَ تَوَجَّهْتُ وَ بِكَ
إِعْـتَصَمْتُ أَنْتَ ثِقَـتِي وَرَجَائِي. أَللٌّهُمَّ اكْفِنِي مَا
أَهَمَّنِي وَ مَا لاَ أَهْـتَمَّ لَهُ وَ مَا أَنْتَ أَعْلَمُ بِهِ
مِنِّي. أَللٌّهُمَّ زَوِّدْنِي التَّقْوى وَ اغْفِرْ لِي وَ وَجِّهْنِي
إِلـى الْخَيْرِ حَيْثُمَا تَوَجَّهْتُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah! by Your Will (and Mercy) have I embarked on this journey, and
to You have I turned, and with You do I seek refuge. You are my
Confidant and my Hope. O Allah! Suffice for me that which is important
for me and that which I do not give importance to but You know more of
than me. O Allah! Endow me with taqwa and forgive me, and turn me
towards good wherever I turn –* then he would leave.”[^22]

18. In Ma’ani al-Akhbar: The Holy Prophet (S) would travel swiftly and
when he came to an open space he would increase his speed.[^23]

Note: This has also been narrated by al-Mufid in al-Ikhtisas.[^24]

19. Al-Barqi has narrated in al-Mahasin, al-Saduq in al-Faqih and
al-Tabarsi in al-Makarim: In their narration from Abi Ja’far (as): When
he (S) bid farewell to a traveler, he would hold his hand and then
supplicate for him as he wished.[^25]

20. In al-Ja’fariyat: In his narration from ‘Ali (as) who said: The
Noble Prophet (S) had a short iron-tipped staff which he would lean on.
He would bring it out on the two ‘*eid* days and would pray next to it,
and when he was on a journey, he would place it in the direction of the
Qiblah and pray.[^26]

21. In al-Makarim: The Holy Prophet (S) said: Carrying a staff is a sign
of a believer and a *sunnah* of the prophets.[^27]

Note: This has also been narrated in ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif.[^28]

22. In ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: Leaning on a staff is from the *akhlaq* of
the prophets.[^29]

Note: This has also been narrated in al-Faqih and Mahajjat
al-Bayd’a.’[^30]

23. Also: Ka’b ibn Malik narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) would not
return from a journey except in the daytime, at forenoon.[^31]

24. In Mahajjat al-Bayd’a’: He (S) would not dismount until it became
too hot to travel during the day, and this is from the *sunnah.* Most of
his traveling was done by night.[^32]

25. Also: When he slept while on a journey in the beginning of the
night, he would sleep (resting his head) on his arm and if he slept late
at night, he would raise his arm and sleep placing his head on his
palm.[^33]

26. In ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: The *sunnah* is to depart for the journey
early in the morning and to start (the journey) on Thursday.[^34]

27. In ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: Taking the water-bag is also from the
*sunnah*.[^35]

28. Also: It has been narrated that when the Noble Prophet (S) would
return home from a battle or from the Hajj, (on his way) he would recite
the takbir *(Allahu Akbar)* thrice on every elevation on the land and
then say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ اللٌّهُ وَحْدَهُ لاَ شَرِيكَ لَهُ. لَهُ الْمُلْكُ وَ
لَهُ الْحَمْدُ وَ هُوَ عَلـى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ. آئِبُونَ عَابِدُونَ
سَاجِدُونَ رَبَّنَا حَامِدُونَ صَدَقَ اللٌّهُ وَعْدَهُ وَ نَصَرَ
عَبْدَهُ وَ هَزَمَ الأَحْزَابَ وَحْدَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*  
 “There is no god but Allah. He is one - without any partner. His is the
kingdom and for Him is all praise and He has power over all things. (We
come to Him) returning, worshipping, prostrating and praising our Lord.
Allah has made true His promise and helped His servant and vanquished
the (enemy) factions.”* [^36]

Note: al-Fayd’ has also narrated this in al-Mahajjah.[^37]

29. Also: When the Holy Prophet (S) returned (from his journey) he would
first enter the masjid and pray two rak’ahs, then he would enter his
house.[^38]

Note: al-Fayd’ has also narrated this.[^39]

30. In Durr al-Manthur: From Jabir ibn ‘Abdillah who said: The Holy
Prophet (S) would not fight a battle in the inviolable month unless he
was attacked, then he would fight; and when it (the month) came, he
would establish this until it had passed.[^40]

31. In al-Makarim: From Jabir ibn ‘Abdillah in a hadith where he
mentions some of his  
 (as) *adab* during battle: The Holy Prophet (S) would be among the last
people (to come on the battle field). He would urge forward and
encourage the weak, ride with them and supplicate for them.[^41]

32. In al-Iqbal: In his narration from Abi Ja’far (As) who said: The
Noble Prophet (S) would depart after sunrise.[^42]

33. In Durr al-Manthur: From Abi Musa that the Holy Prophet (S) used to
dislike shouting during battle. When the Holy Prophet (S) was at war, he
would not fight early in the morning but rather he would delay the
fighting until the sun had passed the meridian and the winds had started
to blow and (until) the descending of divine succor.[^43]

[^1]: al-Faqih 2:266, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 240, ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: 126

[^2]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rid’a 2:37

[^3]: al-Aman: 54, Misbah al-Za\`ir: 28, Da\`aim al-Islam 1:118 and
2:165

[^4]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 35, al-Ja’fariyat: 185

[^5]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 22

[^6]: Ibid., 24

[^7]: al-Kafi 4:248, 8:147

[^8]: al-Faqih 2:237

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar 13:135, quoting from Ma’ani al-Akhbar: 386

[^10]: al-Faqih 2:273, al-Kafi 4:287, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 261

[^11]: ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: 126

[^12]: al-Faqih 2:276, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 249, ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: 125,
al-Mahasin: 354

[^13]: al-Mahasin: 354, al-Mustadrak 8:208, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 249

[^14]: al-Ja’fariyat: 75, al-Faqih 2:299, al-Mustadrak 8:232

[^15]: al-Mahasin: 347, al-Faqih 2:266, al-Mahajjat al-Bayd’a\` 4:65

[^16]: Majmu’at Warram: 66

[^17]: Majma’ al-Bayan 7:130 – Surat al-Nur, al-Ikhtisas: 118

[^18]: Majmu’at Warram: 28

[^19]: al-Mahasin: 359, al-Ja’fariyat: 170, Da\`aim al-Islam 1:346

[^20]: al-Faqih 2:278

[^21]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 35, al-Ja’fariyat: 185, Da\`aim al-Islam
1:118, al-Mustadrak 8:217

[^22]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 246

[^23]: Ma’ani al-Akhbar: 378

[^24]: al-Ikhtisas: 120

[^25]: al-Mahasin: 354, al-Faqih 2:276, Makarim al-Akhlaq: 249

[^26]: al-Ja’fariyat: 184, al-Faqih 1:509

[^27]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 244

[^28]: ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: 127

[^29]: Ibid.

[^30]: al-Faqih 2:270, al-Mahajjat al-Bayd’a\` 4:74

[^31]: ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: 133

[^32]: al-Mahajjat al-Bayd’a\` 4:67

[^33]: al-Mahajjat al-Bayd’a\` 4:68

[^34]: ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: 126

[^35]: Ibid., 127

[^36]: ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: 129

[^37]: Mahajjat al-Bayd’a\` 4:75

[^38]: ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif: 130

[^39]: Mahajjat al-Bayd’a\` 4:76

[^40]: Al-Durr al-Manthur 1:207 – Surah al-Baqarah (2)

[^41]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 20

[^42]: Iqbal al-A\`mal: 281

[^43]: Al-Durr al-Manthur 3:189 – Surah al-Anfal (7)


