Preface
=======

**In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-Merciful**

The precious legacy left behind by the Holy Prophet's Household {*ahl
al-bayt*} (May peace be upon them all) and their followers' preservation
of this legacy from the menace of extinction is a perfect example of the
all-encompassing school {*maktab*} that embraces all the different
branches of Islamic knowledge. This school has been able to train many
talented personalities by quenching them with this gushing fountain.

This school has presented scholars to the Muslim *ummah* who, by
following the Holy Prophet's Household (*'a*), have occupied the station
of clarifying doubts and skepticism put forth by various creeds and
intellectual currents both inside and outside Muslim society. Throughout
the past centuries, they have presented the firmest answers and
solutions to these doubts.

Anchored in the responsibilities it is shouldering, the Ahl al-Bayt
(*'a*) World Assembly has embarked upon defending the sanctity of
*risalah* {message} and its authentic beliefs—truths which have always
been opposed by the chiefs and leaders of anti-Islamic sects, religions
and trends. In this sacred path, the Assembly regards itself as a
follower of the upright pupils of the school of the Ahl al-Bayt
(*'a*)—those who have always been ready to refute those accusations and
calumnies and have tried to be always in the front line of this struggle
on the basis of the expediencies of time and space.

The experiences in this field, which contained the books of scholars
belonging to the school of the Ahl al-Bayt (*'a*), are unique in their
own right. It is because these experiences have been based upon
knowledge {*'ilm*} and the preeminence of the intellect and reasoning,
and at the same time, they are completely devoid of blind prejudice,
whim and caprice. These experiences address experts, scholars and
thinkers in a manner that appeals to healthy minds and the pure human
natural disposition {*fitrah*}.

In a bid to assist those who are in quest of truth, the Ahl al-Bayt
(*'a*) World Assembly has endeavored to enter a new phase of these
worthy experiences within the framework of research and translating the
works of contemporary Shi'ah writers or those who, through divine
guidance, have embraced this noble school.

The Assembly is also engaged in the study and publication of the
valuable works of pious predecessors and outstanding Shi\`ah
personalities so that those who search for the truth may quench their
thirst from this refreshing fountain by listening and embracing this
truth, which the the Holy Prophet's Household (*'a*) has offered as a
gift to the entire world.

It is hoped that our dear readers would not deprive the Ahl al-Bayt
(*'a*) World Assembly of their valuable opinions, suggestions and
constructive criticisms in this arena.  
 We also invite scholars, translators and other institutions to assist
us in propagating the pure Muhammadan (s) Islam.

We ask God, the Exalted, to accept this humble effort and enhance it
further under the auspices of His vicegerent on earth, give us success
to al-Mahdi (may Allah, the Exalted, expedite his glorious advent).

It is appropriate here to express our utmost gratitude to Hujjat
al-Islam wa'l-Muslimin Shaykh Muhammad Husayn Ibrahimi for writing the
book, and to Mr. Mansoor Limba for translating it, as well as all our
honorable colleagues in accomplishing this task especially our close
associates in the Translation Office for undertaking this
responsibility.

Cultural Affairs Department  
 The Ahl al-Bayt ('a) World Assembly


