Distortion {Tahrif} in the Qur’an, Traditions and History
=========================================================

For many years, the Wahhabis have been trying to assume the leadership
of Muslim society. From the day when imperialism created this movement,
they have been dreaming for the realization of that cherished day, and
along this line, they have been utilizing every possible means. They are
converting the abundant God-given wealth of oil into dollars and through
which they are attracting many Muslims toward themselves.

They are equally making use of the historical merits and virtues of the
land of Hijaz to acquire authority; for example, the Prophet of Islam
(s) had been appointed for the Prophetic mission in that land and Islam
began there as well. Since the spread of Islam from Mecca and Medina,
and Medina even after the Prophet (s) had been the capital of Islam and
the center of decision-making, from where caliphs were appointed and
dismissed, today Mecca and Medina must accordingly also be the center of
Islam.

In the same vein, the Qur'an was revealed in the land of Hijaz, and the
language of the people of that region has been the made of its
expression (i.e. Arabic) the *qiblah* of the Muslims is, the holy city
of Mecca and holy sites, and sacred stations are located there. The
present king of this country is called the “Servant of the Two Holy
Places” {*khadim al-haramayn*} and his regime has enormous propaganda
apparatuses at its disposal.

In conclusion, they believe that the Saudi king deserves to be the ruler
and leader of the Muslims; that their Islam is the authentic Islam, that
the Wahhabi creed is consistent with the Qur'an and the *Sunnah* of the
Prophet (s); that it is the sect of salvation, the reference and source
of understanding Islam as well as the propagator and disseminator of
religion; and that the other sects should also refer to this sect to
understand the religion.

Since the philosophy behind the emergence of the nascent Wahhabi sect is
the effacement of the Shi\`ah and the creation of discord and dissension
among Muslims, the Wahhabis are looking for weak points in Shi\`ism so
as to besmirch their prolific thought, which can guide both Arabs and
non-Arabs, and thus weaken their most serious rival.

One example which they consider as weakness in Shi\`ism is their belief
in the principle of *taqiyyah* {dissimulation}, which the Wahhabis
consider as a form of *nifaq* {hypocrisy}. Similarly, they regard the
Shi\`ah's refusal to believe in the rightfulness of the first three
caliphs as well as in the excellence of the Mother of the Faithful {*umm
al-muminin*} 'A'ishah as defect and shortcoming, and their alleged
belief in the distortion {*tahrif*} of the Qur'an, etc.

Stating the futility of the accusations and points of weakness
attributed to the Shi\`ah itself requires a bulky treatise. As an
example, we shall discuss here the accusation on the Shi\`ah's alleged
belief in the *tahrif* of the Qur'an.

Belief in tahrif (alteration of the Qur'an) according to Sunni and Shi\`ah ‘ulama’
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Just as the Shi\`ah are not the only ones who discuss the subject of
*tahrif* of the Qur'an, the Wahhabis are not the only ones to discuss
the preservation of the Qur'an. Among Shi\`ah *'ulama*', a number of
*muhaddithun* have believed in the *tahrif* of the Qur'an; of course,
they mean *tahrif* in a particular sense and not in the sense the
Wahhabis think.

A number of Sunni *'ulama*' also believe in *tahrif*. For more
information, one may refer to books written on this subject.[^1]

Just as it is not correct to accuse Sunnis of *tahrif* of the Qur'an on
account of the beliefs of a number of their past *muhaddithun* and
*'ulama*', applying this belief which is held by some Shi\`ah
*muhaddithun* to all their *'ulama*', *fuqaha* and *muhaddithun* is no
less incorrect.

A number of authoritative books of the Ahl as-Sunnah (for example,
*Sahih al-Bukha*r*i*, vol. 4, p. 11; vol. 8, p. 209; *Sahih Muslim*,
vol. 5, p. 116; *Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal*, vol. 1, p. 47; *Muntakhab
Kanz al-'Ummal*, vol. 3, p. 43), record traditions about *tahrif* of the
Qur'an. Just as it is irrational to reject all these books, rejection
the sayings and works of a number of those Shi\`ah personalities who
have believed in *tahrif* is also incorrect. For example, the book,
*Mustadrak*, of Muhaddith Nuri is not supposed to be overlooked just
because his book, *Fasl al-Khitab* attempts to prove the alleged
*tahrif* of the Qur'an. It must be noted that the meaning of *tahrif* of
the Qur'an according to Muhaddith Nuri is different from what the
Wahhabis mean.

Therefore, a number of the Sunni and Shi\`ah figures believe in the
*tahrif* of the Qur'an, and the most important step in this context is
the separation of the Wahhabi imperialist sect and their creation of the
seed of discord between Sunni and Shi\`ah Muslims.

The Shi\`ah vehemently deny *tahrif* of the Qur'an, believing that the
Qur'an is the book on the basis of which all our beliefs and traditions
(in order to know their authenticity or otherwise) must be presented,
and the standard of the Islamic system. Keeping this importance of the
Qur'an, if *tahrif* had really occurred in it, the infallible Imams
(*'a*), who are the true guardians and protectors of the religion after
the Prophet (s), would definitely have pointed it out. In view of the
proofs of the Shi\`ah indicating the absence of *tahrif*, that group of
the Sunni *'ulama*' which believes in *tahrif* of the Qur'an would have
to attribute the occurrence of *tahrif* to the first three caliphs
because the Qur'an was compiled during their reigns, and 'Ali (*'a*)
abided by the Qur'an they had compiled.

One of the proofs of the Shi\`ah on the absence of *tahrif* of the
Qur'an is the statement of Imam 'Ali (*'a*) who says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْلَمُوا إنَّ هَذَا القُرْآنَ هُوَ النَّاصِحُ الَّذِي لاَ يَغُشُّ،
وَالهَادِي الَّذِي لاَ يُضِلُّ، وَالْمُحَدِّثُ الَّذِي لاَ يَكْذِبُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And know that this Qur'an is indeed an adviser who does not deceive, a
leader who does not mislead, and a narrator who does not lie.[^2]

This *hadith* shows the completeness of the Qur'an because the Qur'an
could be a good guide, truthful adviser and similar descriptions only if
it had not experienced any form of distortion.

The viewpoint of a number of jurists {fuqaha}
---------------------------------------------

The Shi\`ah *'ulama'* and *maraji' al-taqlid* generally reject the
belief in *tahrif*. The works that have been written on this subject are
so many that mentioning them is not an easy task and would need a
separate section. Now, for the sake of information, it will suffice to
mention some of them below:

1. Ayatullah Riya' ad-Din Araki, *Al-Usul*, vol. 3, p. 93;

2. Ayatullah Musawi Bujnurdi, *Muntahi'l-Usul*, vol. 2, p. 81;

3. Firuzabadi, *'Inayah al-Usul*, vol. 3, p. 120; and

4. Akhund Khurasani, *Kifayah al-Usul*, vol. 2, p. 63.

Ayatullah al-'Uzma Sayyid Abu'l-Qasim al-Khu'i says in this regard:  
*Tahrif* of the Qur'an in the sense of the deletion of some of its
verses or words is a fictitious affair as there is no truth in it.[^3]

The outstanding Shi\`ah *'alim*, Imam Khomeini (*r*) thus said in one of
his class sessions many years ago:  
 What the Akhbaris[^4] say that there has been *tahrif* in the Qur'an is
not true because their proof is a few traditions some of which are
fabricated {*maj'ul*}, while others are 'weak' {*da'if*},[^5] and yet
some others are subject to interpretation.[^6]

Similarly, in his message addressed to the pilgrims during the 1365 AHS
(1986) *Hajj* season, Imam Khomeini had urged and encouraged the people
to reflect and ponder over the Qur'an. In one part of the message, he
has explicitly stated that no sort *tahrif* has ever been present in the
Qur'an and it is reliable and trustworthy for all Muslims:

God forbid that this divine-heavenly book—which is the apparent and
written form of the aggregate of names, attributes, signs, and
expressions, and whose …written form has been handed to us without any
defect and omission or commission in the tongue of revelation after
descending from various stages and phases—be forgotten.[^7]

The Shi\`ah belief in this regard is so clear that it no longer needs
scholastic {*kalami*} interpretation, and for more information the
reader may refer to books written on this subject.[^8]

The excuses and distortions of Wahhabism
----------------------------------------

There is a *hadith* recorded in *Usul al-Kafi* stating the fact that
Hadrat Fatimah (*'a*) and Imam 'Ali (*'a*) each had a manuscript of the
Qur'an from the time of the Prophet (*'a*) in which they also used to
record the daily events. And since *Usul al-Kafi* is one of the oldest
and most authentic Shi\`ah texts, the Wahhabis have taken advantage of
the existence of these traditions in *Usul al-Kafi*, saying: “Based on
traditions recorded in authentic Shi\`ah books, the Shi\`ah regard the
Qur'an of Fatimah and 'Ali as their main Qur'an and they regard the
existing Qur'an as defective.” They raise this issue so that the Shi\`ah
would renounce their belief and say, “Hadrat Fatimah and 'Ali (*'a*) had
no book at all.”

With the aim of discrediting the Shi\`ah and creating the seed of
Suuni-Shi\`ah discord, the Wahhabis magnify this issue so much that it
would seem that authoritative sources and their *'ulama*' do not hold
such belief. Earlier pages, in this book, pointed out the references of
these traditions in authoritative Sunni texts.

The 'authoritativeness' {*i'tibariyyah*} of Sunni and Shi\`ah sources
does not mean that everything recorded therein is absolutely authentic
and acceptable, and does not require criticism, study, interpretation,
or refutation. Of course, it is true that there are traditions about the
Qur'anic manuscripts of Hadrat Fatimah (*'a*) and Imam 'Ali (*'a*), and
according to the belief of the Shi\`ah these copies are in the
possession of the Imam of the Age (al-Mahdi) (*'a*).

These two manuscripts of the Qur'an are not inconsistent with the
present Qur'an because this Qur'an is also complete. In the manuscripts
of these two pure personages, the daily events as well as the commentary
of the verses and circumstances surrounding their revelation are
recorded, which can help us a lot in understanding the Qur'an.[^9]

Tahrif in the statements and works of the Prophet
-------------------------------------------------

Since the two schools, including the Wahhabis, reject *tahrif* of the
Qur'an, it is appropriate to ask: Is not *tahrif* with respect to
*hadith*s of the Prophet (s) blameworthy as well? If there is any
*tahrif* in the statement of the Prophet (s), what guarantee and proof
are left for us concerning the immunity of his sayings?

In the books and writings of the Wahhabis, there are many instances
where the Prophetic traditions are mutilated and subjected to *tahrif*,
they are incompletely quoted and their primary sources are not usually
presented. Most cases of distortion {*tahrif*}, alteration {*tabdil*},
and deletion {*isqat*} in *hadith*s pertain to the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*'a*),
descriptions of Imam 'Ali (*'a*) and conformity of some verses of the
Qur'an with the Imam (*'a*), or affirmation of the Shi\`ah creed. We
shall cite some of these instances below:

### First instance

One of the *hadith*s being manipulated by this group is the *hadith*
known as *thaqalayn* {two precious things} when the Prophet (s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنِّي تَارِكٌ فِيكُمُ الثَّقَلَيْنِ: كِتَابَ اللهِ وَعِتْرَتِي، أهْلَ
بَيْتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, I am leaving among you two precious things: the Book of Allah
and my progeny, the members of my Household.

Shaykh 'Abd al-'Aziz ibn 'Abd Allah ibn Baz,[^10] the head of the
Islamic Call, Guidance and *Ifta'* of Saudi Arabia, in one of his
booklets published in 1364 AH, regards intellectual demonstration as a
religious innovation {*bid'ah*} and national praise such as that of
Palestine and Lebanon and the vilification of others such America, the
Soviet Union and Israel as a sin. Then, in page 8 of his booklet, he
narrates the said *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّهُ خَطَبَ النَّاسَ يَوْمَ عَرَفَةَ، فَقَالَ: إنِّي تَارِكٌ فِيكُمْ
مَا لَنْ تَضِلُّوا إنِ إعْتَصَمْتُمْ بِهِ: كِتَابَ اللهِ وَسُنَّتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, he (s) addressed the people on the Day of 'Arafah, saying: “I am
leaving among you things which if firmly hold, you shall never go
astray: the Book of Allah and my tradition {*sunnati*}.”  
 In the book, *Fath al-Majid*, a tradition with a similar intention has
been narrated, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ : إنِّي تَارِكٌ فِيكُمْ مَا إنْ تَمَسَّكْتُمْ بِهِ لَنْ
تَضِلُّوا: كِتَابَ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He (s) said: 'Verily, I am leaving something among you which if you take
firm hold, you shall never go astray: the Book of Allah'.[^11]

The case of distortion {*tahrif*} is so vivid that there is a difference
between the narration of the author of *Fath al-Majid* and that of 'Abd
Allah ibn Baz, who are both of the same creed. In the first instance,
“the Book of Allah and my tradition” {*kitab Allah wa sunnati*} is
recorded while only “the Book of Allah” {*kitab Allah*} is mentioned in
the second instance. In spite of this, the Sunni references and sources,
both traditions, notwithstanding their differences, have been distorted
because all authoritative Sunni references mention “the Book of Allah
and the members of my Household” {*kitab Allah wa ahla bayti*}. Since
this indisputable tradition is in favor of the family of the Prophet (s)
and corroborated by the Shi\`ah, however, the Wahhabis have manipulated
it. The tradition has been narrated in the *Sahih Muslim*, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّهُ قَالَ: “ألاَ أيُّهَا النَّاسُ! يُوشَكُ أنْ يَأتِيَ رَسُولُ
رَبِّي فَأُجِيبُ؛ وَأنَا تَارِكٌ فِيكُمُ الثَّقَلَيْنِ: أوَّلُهُمَا
كِتَابُ اللهِ، فِيهِ الْهُدَى وَالنُّورُ، فَخُذُوا بِكِتَابِ اللهِ
وَاسْتَمْسِكُوا بِهِ.” فَحَثَّ عَلَى كِتَابِ اللهِ وَرَغَّبَ فِيهِ.
ثُمَّ قَالَ: “وَأهْلُ بَيْتِي؛ أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللهَ فِي أهْلِ بَيْتِي.”
  </p>
</blockquote>

He verily said: “Now to our purpose: O people, I am only a human being.
I am about to receive a messenger (the angel of death) from my Lord and
I, in response to Allah's call, (would bid goodbye to you), but I am
leaving among you two weighty things: the one being the Book of Allah in
which there is right guidance and light, so hold fast to the Book of
Allah and adhere to it.” He exhorted (us) (to hold fast) to the Book of
Allah and then said: “The second are the members of my Household; I
remind you (of your duties) to the members of my family.”[^12]

In the *Musnad* of *Ahmad ibn Hanbal* (pages 17 and 59), *Sahih
at-Tirmidhi* (volume 3, page 14), *al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah* of Ibn Hajar
al-'Asqalani (page 136), and other references of the Sunnis, a similar
tradition with the term “the members of my Household” {*ahla bayti*}
have been recorded. In the new books, however, such as *Fath al-Majid*,
the booklet of 'Abd Allah ibn Baz, and other booklets published by the
Library of Masjid an-Nabi as well as in Mecca, one can find alterations,
deletions and distortions. This is just one example of famous
{*mashhur*}[^13] and uninterrupted {*mutawatir*}[^14] *hadith*s in which
*tahrif* has been done. Is this practice not a distortion, deviation and
treachery to Islam and the history of Muslims?

### Second instance (the identity of the saved sect)

In the book, *al-As'ilah wal-Ajwibah*, there has been recorded a
tradition allegedly from the Prophet (s):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّهُ قَالَ: سَتَفْتَرِقُ هَذِهِ الأُمَّةُ عَلَى ثَلاَثٍ وَسَبْعِينَ
فِرْقَةً؛ كُلُّهَا فِي النَّارِ إلاَّ وَاحِدَةً، وَهُمْ أهْلُ
السُّنَّةِ وَالْجَمَاعَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, he (s) said: “This *ummah* will be divided into seventy-three
sects and all of which shall be in the hellfire except one, and that is
the *Ahl as-Sunnah wa'l-Jama'ah*.”[^15]  
 In this *hadith*, the expression, ”*Ahl as-Sunnah wa'l-Jama'ah*” has
been inserted in order for them to claim that the Holy Prophet (s) has
approved of the Ahl as-Sunnah from the very beginning.

It must be said that the phrase, ”*Ahl as-Sunnah wa'l-Jama'ah,*” is not
extant in any of the primary and authoritative references of the Ahl
as-Sunnah. Since the Wahhabis could not add the name of their sect in
the *hadith* as Wahhabism is a nascent group, and on the other hand,
since they associated themselves with the Ahl as-Sunnah and their
mission is to magnify the Sunni-Shi\`ah dichotomy, they have inserted
the phrase, ”*Ahl as-Sunnah wa'l-Jama'ah*” in the *hadith* so as to
fortify the notion that the Prophet (s) had approved of the Ahl
as-Sunnah from the very beginning, and none other than them have been
formally recognized.

Therefore, once the expression, ”*Ahl as-Sunnah wa'l-Jama'ah,*” is
added, this question springs to the mind:  
 Which group refers to the saved sect? Undoubtedly, the group, which is
closer to the Book of Allah, the *Sunnah* of the Prophet (s), and the
*Ahl al-Bayt* (*'a*) and takes more recourse to them, is the saved
group. It is because in the traditions narrated in the Sunni references
it is emphasized that only the group which holds fast to the Book of
Allah and the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*'a*) will not go astray.

### Third instance (tahrif of the phrase, “mut'ah an-nisa'”)

In *Sahih* *al-Tirmidhi*, another authoritative Sunni source, this
tradition has been recorded:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُئِلَ ابْنُ عُمَرَ عَنْ متْعَةِ النِّسَاءِ، فَقَالَ: “هِيَ حَلاَلٌ.”
وَكَانَ السَّائِلُ مِنْ أهْلِ الشَّامِ، فَقَالَ لَهُ: “إنَّ أبَاكَ
قَدْ نَهَى عَنْهَا.” فَقَالَ ابْنُ عُمَرَ: “أرَأيْتَ إنْ كَانَ أبِي
نَهَى عَنْهَا، وَصَنَعَهَا رَسُولُ اللهِ. أتَتْرُكُ السُّنَّةَ
وَتَتْبَعُ قَوْلَ أبِي؟”
  </p>
</blockquote>

A certain man from Sham[^16] asked {'Abd Allah} ibn 'Umar about *mut'ah*
{fixed-time marriage}. He said: “It is *halal* {lawful}.” The man from
Sham said: “Your father has prohibited it.” Ibn 'Umar said: “If ever my
father has prohibited it, and the Messenger of Allah has regarded it as
lawful. Shall you abandon the *Sunnah* (of the Prophet) and follow my
father's opinion?”

In the new edition of *Sahih al-Tirmidhi*, however, this *hadith* is
totally expunged.[^17] Of course, it must be said that 'Umar ibn
al-Khattab prohibited not only the *mut'ah* for women but also the
*mut'ah* for *H*ajj {*hajj at-tamattu'*}.[^18] The latter means that
whenever the person in the state of *ihram*[^19] {*muhrim*} finishes his
rituals of *'umrat at-tamattu'*[^20]—as per instruction of the Prophet
(s)—provided that he has not yet donned the *ihram* for the *hajj*, he
may enjoy performing lawful sexual acts.  
 Ibn Kathir has narrated a *hadith* similar to the one quoted above
concerning the prohibition of *mut'ah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…كَانَ ابْنُهُ عَبْدُ اللهِ يُخَالِفُهُ. فَقَالَ: “إنَّ أبَاكَ يَنْهَى
عَنْهَا.” فَيَقُولُ: “خَشِيتُ أنْ تَقَعَ عَلَيْكُمْ حِجَارَةٌ مِنَ
السَّمَاءِ! قَدْ فَعَلَهَا رَسُولُ اللهِ. أَفَسُنَّةَ رَسُولِ اللهِ
نَتْبَعُ أمْ سُنَّةَ عُمْرَ بْنِ الخَطَّابِ؟”
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Abd Allah was against the saying of his father. When it was said to him
that his father had indeed prohibited the people from practicing
*mut'ah*, he said: “I am afraid lest stones from heaven fall on your
heads (for saying so). The Messenger of Allah deemed it lawful. Shall I
follow the *Sunnah* of the Messenger of Allah or the *sunnah* of (my
father) 'Umar ibn al-Khattab?”[^21]

It was said that *mut'ah* for *Hajj* is a debatable subject and the
Companions of the Prophet (s) had no unanimity of view about it. The
Zahiriyyah[^22] believe that the practice of the Companions is the
proof, but in view of the diverse opinions of the Companions in this
regard, the saying of 'Umar must be accepted:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
متْعَتَانِ كَانَتَا عَلَى عَهْدِ رَسُولِ اللهِ وَأنَا أنْهَى عَنْهُمَا
وَأُعَاقبُ عَلَيْهِمَا: متْعَةُ الْحَجِّ وَمتْعَةُ النِّسَاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

{'Umar said:} There were two types of *mut'ah* during the time of the
Messenger of Allah which I prohibited and I shall punish whoever shall
perform them: the *mut'ah* for *Hajj* and the *mut'ah* for women.[^23]

Now, this question is hereby posed: If the difference of opinion among
Companions was the reason behind their acceptance of the saying of 'Umar
ibn al-Khattab, why did they not prefer the saying of 'Abd Allah ibn
al-'Abbas—a learned man, *muhaddith* and well-informed of the sayings of
the Prophet (s)—who was of the opinion that the *mut'ah* for *Hajj* had
not been abrogated {*mansu*kh}.

It can be deduced from the opposition of 'Abd Allah ibn al-'Abbas and
'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar that 'Umar used his independent reasoning and
prohibited the people—who had consensus of opinion that these were
practiced during the time of the Prophet (s)—from doing so. Does this
view and opinion not go against the text {*nass*} (of the Qur'an and
*hadith*)?

'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar, 'Abd Allah ibn al-'Abbas, and a number of the
Companions were the first persons who differed with the opinion of the
Caliph.

In view of the fact that the Wahhabis have regarded the Companions as
worthy to be emulated, if certain people (such as the Shi\`ah) while
relying on indisputable proof would not accept the opinion and view of
'Umar but instead accept the view of 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar, 'Abd Allah
ibn al-'Abbas, and other Companions, have they traversed the path of
misguidance and disbelief {*kufr*}? If it is so, were Ibn 'Umar, Ibn
al-'Abbas and other Companions also misguided and infidels?

### Fourth instance

In *Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal* we can come across eight traditions all of
which indicate the brotherhood and fraternity between the Prophet (s)
and 'Ali (*'a*). In all of these traditions, the Prophet (s) pointed at
Imam 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (*'a*) and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هٰذَا أخِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

This ('Ali) is my brother.  
 In the new editions of this book, however, all these traditions are
expunged and no trace of them is left.

### Fifth instance

In *Tarikh Ya'qubi* until the 1358 AH edition, it is stated that this
noble verse was revealed on the day of Ghadir Khumm:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿الْيَوْمَ أَكْمَلْتُ لَكُمْ دِينَكُمْ وَأَتْمَمْتُ عَلَيْكُمْ
نِعْمَتِي وَرَضِيتُ لَكُمْ الإِسْلاَمَ دِينًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Today I have perfected your religion for you, and I have completed My
blessing upon you, and I have approved Islam as your religion**.*[^24]

From its 1379 AH edition onward, however, that sentence which had been
recorded for many centuries in that history book has been distorted and
twisted as it is now claimed that the same verse was revealed on the Day
of 'Arafah. On account of the politics of *tahrif*, many graves, mosques
and relics of the past have either been effaced or their names have been
changed.

The birth site of the Prophet (s) {*mawlid an-nabi*}; the birth site of
'Ali (*'a*) {*mawlid 'ali*}; the tombs of Prophet Isma'il (Ishmael)
(*'a*) and his mother Hajar on the two sides of Hijr Isma'il (which
until recently had been identified through a specific stone-mark); the
location of *Ghadir* Khumm; the tomb and other relics of Hadrat Khadijah
al-Kubra; the Shi'b Abu Talib; the tomb of Abu Talib; and many other
relics have been destroyed by the Wahhabis, because each of them
bespeaks of the historical events and happenings most of which, to some
extent or other are to the detriment of the inverted school of
Wahhabism.

The site of the *mubahalah* {imprecation}[^25] has been changed into
Masjid al-Ijabah by them. Today, if the residents of the city of Medina
are asked about the location of the grave of Fatimah (*'a*), they do not
know, and if those people who know the location of the *mubahalah* would
travel to that area, they would not be able to locate it easily.

Therefore, the Shi\`ah do not believe whatsoever in *tahrif*, and only a
limited number Sunni and Shi\`ah *'ulama*' of the past held this belief.
*Tahrif* in whatever form is rejected, whether it is *tahrif* of the
Qur'an or *tahrif* of the *hadiths*, history and historical places.

It is appropriate for the Muslim world to form a committee with the task
of preserving the sayings of the Prophet (s) as well as the ancient
authoritative religious references and texts, and to make efforts in
protecting the foundations of Islam. Perhaps, the secret behind the
*hadith*,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ حَفِظَ مِنْ أُمَّتِي أرْبَعِينَ حَدِيثاً…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whoever in my *ummah* preserves or memorizes four *hadith*s…”  
 is a campaign against these distortions.

[^1]: See, for example, Sayyid Mahdi Ruhani, Buhuth ma‘a Ahl as-Sunnah
wa’l-Salafiyyah, pp. 63-74, 206-324.

[^2]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 176.

[^3]: Sayyid Abu’l-Qasim al-Khu’i, Misbah al-Usul, vol. 1, p. 124.

[^4]: Akhbari: follower of Akhbarism [akhbariyyah], a movement, which
started within the Shi‘ah world about four hundred years ago. Its
originator was Mulla Muhammad Amin ibn Muhammad Sharif al-Astarabadi (d.
1033 AH/1623-24). He openly attacked the Shi‘ah mujtahids in his work
al-Fawa‘id al-Madaniyyah, vehemently contesting the Usulis’ claim that
reason is one of the sources of fiqh. The Usulis’ hold the Qur’an, the
Sunnah, reason, and ijma‘ [consensus] as valid sources for deduction of
the rules of the shari‘ah. The Akhbaris accepted the validity only of
the Sunnah and rejected the rest. Understanding the Qur’an, they
claimed, is beyond the capacity of a commoner, being restricted
exclusively to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). [Trans.]

[^5]: Weak [da‘if]: in the parlance of the science of hadith [‘ilm
al-hadith], it refers to a tradition that does not fit into the
categories of authentic [sahih], good [hasan] or dependable
[muwaththaq]. [Trans.]

[^6]: Imam Khomeini, Tahdhib al-Usul, vol. 2, p. 156.

[^7]: “Message on Dhu’l-Hijjah 1, 1406 AH (August 7, 1986), Sahifeh-ye
Imam, vol. 20, p. 92. [Trans.]

[^8]: See Rasul Ja‘fariyan, Ukdhubat Tahrif al-Qur’an.

[^9]: See Ma‘alim al-Madrasatayn, vol. 3, p. 306.

[^10]: The said sheikh passed away in the summer of 1420 AH just before
the trip of Hujjat al-Islam wa’l-Muslimin Sayyid Muhammad Khatami,
President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, to Saudi Arabia.

[^11]: Fath al-Majid, p. 35.

[^12]: Muslim, Sahih, vol. 4, p. 1803, hadith no. 2408 (‘Abd al-Baqi
Edition). Abdul-Hamid Siddiqui (trans.), Sahih Muslim (English
Translation), vol. 4, hadith no. 5920. [Trans.]

[^13]: Famous [mashhur]: a hadith with general fame and prevalence,
though not necessarily attained on all the levels. [Trans.]

[^14]: A mutawatir hadith is one which has been reported by so many
different chains of transmission and such a number of narrators in every
generation as normally could not agree to fabricate a tradition without
the fact of its fabrication becoming known. [Trans.]

[^15]: Al-As’ilah wa’l-Ajwibah, p. 23.

[^16]: Sham or Shamat: Up until five centuries ago, included Syria of
today, Lebanon and parts of Jordan and Palestine. [Trans.]

[^17]: See Sayyid Ja‘far Murtadha, Dirasat wa Buhuth fi’t-Tarikh, p. 14.

[^18]: Hajj at-tamattu‘: A type of pilgrimage which is applicable to
those living outside Mecca, i.e. out of limits of the haram (the
precinct of the Grand Mosque, Ka‘bah and/or the surrounding holy places
in Mecca). [Trans.]

[^19]: Ihram: The special two-piece seamless attire worn by pilgrims.
Also, the state of ritual consecration during which the pilgrim should
abstain from certain acts, such as not combing, not shaving, and
observing sexual continence. [Trans.]

[^20]: ‘Umrat at-tamattu‘: A visitation ritual that is obligatory before
performing Hajj. [Trans.]

[^21]: Tarikh Ibn Kathir, vol. 5, p. 141.

[^22]: Zahiriyyah: A sect within the Ahl as-Sunnah that contents itself
with the apparent [zahir] meaning of the hadiths.

[^23]: Bidayah al-Mujtahid wa Nihayah al-Muqtasid, vol. 1, p. 346; Ibn
Qudamah, Al-Mughni, vol. 7, p. 527; Ibn Qayyim, Zad al-Ma‘ad, vol. 2, p.
205.

[^24]: Surat al-Ma’idah 5:3.

[^25]: See the exegesis of Surat Al ‘Imran 3:61: “Should anyone argue
with you concerning him, after the knowledge that has come to you, say,
‘Come! Let us call our sons and your sons, our women and your women, our
souls and your souls, then let us pray earnestly and call down Allah’s
curse upon the liars’.” [Trans.]


