Islam as the School of Unity
============================

The Holy Qur'an invites all human beings to unity—Muslims, Christians,
Jews, etc.—and this invitation is not exclusive for the time of the
Prophet (s) or a certain group of the People of the Book {*ahl
al-kitab*}:[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُلْ يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ تَعَالَوْا إِلَى كَلِمَةٍ سَوَاءٍ
بَيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَكُمْ أَلاَّ نَعْبُدَ إِلاَّ اللَّهَ وَلاَ نُشْرِكَ
بِهِ شَيْئًا وَلاَ يَتَّخِذَ بَعْضُنَا بَعْضًا أَرْبَابًا مِنْ دُونِ
اللَّهِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say, 'O People of the Book! Come to a word common between us and you:
that we will worship no one but Allah, and that we will not ascribe any
partner to Him, and that we will not take each other as lords besides
Allah'**.*[^2]

The Glorious Qur'an speaks about the synagogue, temple, church and
mosque in the same line because the Name of God is mentioned in all of
them. As such, they must be held in high esteem and respect.

Although the blessed verse quoted invites all to unity, the greater
emphasis is on the solidarity of Muslims. This is because, in addition
to their unity and commonality in *tawhid* {unity of God}, prophethood
{*nubuwwah*} *qiblah* {the direction where one faces for prayer and
other acts of worship}, etc., Muslims also have a commonality with some
branches of religion. Thus, among the followers of the various
religions, Muslims are more deserving of having unity, and thus the
possibility of scientific, cultural, political and other interactions
among them is stronger. {the direction where one faces for prayer and
other acts of worship}, etc., Muslims also have a commonality with some
branches of religion. Thus, among the followers of the various
religions, Muslims are more deserving of having unity, and thus the
possibility of scientific, cultural, political and other interactions
among them is stronger. {the direction where one faces for prayer and
other acts of worship}, etc., Muslims also have a commonality with some
branches of religion. Thus, among the followers of the various
religions, Muslims are more deserving of having unity, and thus the
possibility of scientific, cultural, political and other interactions
among them is stronger.

Keeping aloof from spitefulness
-------------------------------

The life conduct {*sirah*} of the Holy Prophet (s)[^3] serves as a
proof, guideline and model for all of us. Through compassion,
magnanimity and endeavor, he (s) was able to unify the people of
Hijaz,[^4] most of whom had been idol-worshipers, under the banner of
Islam.

After their acceptance of Islam, some of them, known as the *munafiqun*
{hypocrites}, engaged in open confrontation with the Prophet (s) who had
to deal with them. They were those who ostensibly embraced Islam but in
intention and practice they were not assisting him (s). In spite of
this, the Prophet (s) peacefully associated with them and his objectives
were the accomplishment of the mission as well as imparting the
understanding and implementation of the Holy Qur'an. The very same
conduct was adopted by the infallible Imams (*'a*) and they never
kindled the flame of discord among Muslims.

We can see that although 'Ali (*'a*) had reproached the earlier caliphs
as recorded in *Nahj al-Balaghah*,[^5] in other instances he would laud
them. All this was primarily to foster the freedom of thought and the
spread of Islamic beliefs. The conclusion is that in the present age,
indulging in magnifying Sunni-Shi\`ah differences, apart from not being
useful, will result in an irreparable loss.

Proximity between Sunnis and Shi\`ah advances the interests of both. The
Shi\`ah in particular have not confined their thought, culture,
jurisprudence {*fiqh*}, exegesis of the Qur'an {*tafsir*}, and beliefs
to themselves and their seminaries. A survey of Muslim-populated
countries substantiates this statement as the books of great Shi\`ah
figures such as Shaykh al-Mufid, Shaykh at-Tusi, 'Allamah Hilli,
'Allamah Tabataba'i, and Professor Mutahhari can be easily found in
these countries.

The proximity of Sunnis and Shi\`ah opens the ways for the spread of
Shi\`ah thought and culture in the Muslim world, and as a result, makes
the further proximity of these two sects even more possible.

More than anyone else, the Wahhabis are apprehensive and endangered by
this proximity. It is for this reason that during the *Hajj* season,
they prohibit the entry into the country all religious books including
the Qur'an (in Persian translation), *tafsir*, history and *hadith*
books, and even Iranian magazines and newspapers. This is because they
are afraid that these printed materials would present facts against
their particular policy and doctrines. This is in spite of the fact that
those matters are never repugnant to the truth of Islam.

In terms of outlook, they oppose not only the Shi\`ah but also the four
Sunni schools of thought. They write books against the proximity of
Sunnis and Shi\`ah, campaigning against it, regarding it as an
impossible venture, and claiming thus: “We shall never have an
understanding with those who are engaged in speculative interpretation
of the verses of the Qur'an and who disrespect the two sheikhs
{*shaykhayn*}.”

Why Wahhabism should be identified
----------------------------------

The anti-unity campaign of Wahhabis reaches its peak during the Unity
Week.[^6] One of the best means of replying to such a plot is that the
*'ulama*' of the *Hajj* caravans and pilgrims should be the promoters of
unity more than anyone else. They should be familiar with the methods of
dealing with them and understand their views and opinions so that during
confrontations and argumentation's, they could reply to them consciously
and intellectually.

It is necessary for some Muslims who are following the Sunni school to
be properly informed about the opinions of the Sunni imams so as to
realize that the Wahhabis also have views difference to them and even
regard many of the beliefs of the Ahl as-Sunnah as polytheistic and,
worse still, prone to infidelity {*kufr*}. In reality, Wahhabism is a
political movement under the religious cover of identifying with the
Sunnis and it wants to prevent the unity of the Islamic schools of
thought {*madhahib*}. It is trying to kindle the flame of discord among
Muslims especially between the two main sects—Sunni and Shi\`ah—so as to
make the imperialist hegemony permanent over the Muslim nation.

Unfortunately, with the acquisition of the oil-rich land of Arabia and
reliance on the enormous God-given wealth, Wahhabism has succeeded in
becoming a potent force and has established innumerable offices and
organizations throughout the world for the propagation of its dogma. In
the Sunni-populated regions of Iran and Pakistan where most of the
people are suffering from poverty and deprivation, the Wahhabis are
making huge investments, constructing religious schools {*madaris*},
spending large amounts of money upon their students and others, and
attracting people to Wahhabi doctrines. Since most of our Sunni brothers
are living on the border regions of Iran, they are more subjected to the
influence of the propaganda of the imperialist Wahhabis.

As the 'Alawi Shi\`ah and Muhammadi Sunnis have risen up now hand in
hand against their enemies and can clearly see the hand of imperialism
behind the curtain of Wahhabism, it is necessary for Sunni and Shi\`ah
*'ulama*' to conduct research about Wahhabism and identify it well so as
to make it clear that this group has differences of opinion not only
with the Shi\`ah but also with the Ahl as-Sunnah. Although the Wahhabis
are always playing the Sunni card and try to portray themselves as the
well-wishers and sympathizers of the Sunnis, Sunnis in turn have to know
that the issues regarded by Wahhabis as their points of departure with
the Shi\`ah are the same issues that are common between the Sunnis and
the Shi\`ah. They also have to know that the Shi\`ah school is closer to
the Ahl as-Sunnah than Wahhabism is.

Leaders and Unity
-----------------

During the past decades, there were figures who regarded the unity of
Muslims as their ideal and aspiration, but they did not realize this
precious aspiration, or if they ever took steps for its realization,
they were very insignificant and rudimentary. In the recent period, the
late Ayatullah Burujerdi (*r*)[^7] gave an affirmative reply to this
aspiration by approving the *Jami'ah at-Taqrib bayn al-Madhahib
al-Islamiyyah* {University or Forum for the proximity of the Islamic
schools of thought}.

There have been other *'ulama'* and *fuqaha* who upheld the approach of
the late Burujerdi. In this context, the viewpoint and outlook of the
late Hadrat[^8] Imam Khomeini (*r*) and his efforts are well known to
all. At the present time also, in a bid to extend the scope of this
unity further, Ayatullah Khamene'i (may his sublime presence endure) has
issued a decree for reviving the foundation of unity and the forum for
proximity, which is itself worthy of gratitude and a source of hope.

It is appropriate for us to note at this juncture that the Shi\`ah
*'ulama*' and *fuqaha* of the past, such as Shaykh al-Mufid (d. 413 AH),
Sayyid Murtadha 'Alam al-Huda (d. 436 AH), and Shaykh at-Tusi (d. 460
AH), among others, have also emphasized unity between Sunnis and
Shi\`ah, and have written valuable books on this subject such as
*al-Khilaf* which enumerates the common points of belief between the two
groups. 'Allamah Hilli has also written a book on the basis of the
jurisprudence {*fiqh*} of the Shi\`ah and the four Sunni schools.

All these are proofs for the proximity of jurisprudential views of the
two schools and of the interest of leading figures in jurisprudence in
establishing mutual understanding. Of course, at the present time there
are treatises on jurisprudence written by Sunnis in which the views of
the Sunnis and the Shi\`ah on the branches of religion and jurisprudence
have been compared. For example, the books *Mawsu'ah Jamal 'Abd
al-Nasir* and *Al-Fiqh 'ala'l-Madhahib al-Khamsah* can be cited.

[^1]: People of the Book [ahl al-Kitab]: the respectful title given to
the Jews and Christians in the Qur’an. [Trans.]

[^2]: Surat Al ‘Imran 3:64.

[^3]: The abbreviation, “s”, stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
sallallahu ‘alayhi wa alihi wa sallam [may God’s salutation and peace be
upon him and his progeny], which is used after the name of the Holy
Prophet Muhammad (s). [Trans.]

[^4]: Hijaz: the region in Western Arabia bordering the Red Sea that
includes Ta’if, Mecca and Medina. Here, it alludes to the entire Arabian
Peninsula. [Trans.]

[^5]: Nahj al-Balaghah (The Peak of Eloquence) is a collection of
speeches, sayings and letters of the Commander of the Faithful, Imam
‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (‘a) compiled by Sharif ar-Radi Muhammad ibn
al-Husayn (d. 406 AH/1016). The contents of the book concern the three
essential topics of God, man and the universe, and include comments on
scientific, literary, social, ethical, and political issues. With the
exception of the words of the Glorious Qur’an and of the Holy Prophet
(s), no words of man can equate it in eloquence. So far, more than 101
exegeses have been written on Nahj al-Balaghah, indicating the
importance of this treatise to scholars and learned men of research and
investigation. For more information, visit:
http://www.al-islam.org/nahjul. [Trans.]

[^6]: 12-17 Rabi‘ al-Awwal. [Trans.]

[^7]: The abbreviation, “r” stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
rahmatullah ‘alayhi, rahmatullah ‘alayha, or rahmatullah ‘alayhim [may
peace be upon him/her/them], which is used after the names of pious
people. [Trans.]

[^8]: Hadrat: The Arabic word Hadrat is used as a respectful form of
address. [Trans.]


