The Life Account of Shaykh Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab and Ibn Sa‘ud
===========================================================

A cursory glance at the life account of Shaykh Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab
-----------------------------------------------------------------

In this section, we deemed it fitting to take a survey of the life of
Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab, known as the Shaykh, and Muhammad Sa'ud.

The sons and grandsons of the Shaykh are still living in the Arabia,
some of whom are known by the family name, “Al ash-Shaykh”. The children
of Muhammad Al as-Sa'ud some of whom are holding the reins of government
in Arabia are known as “al Sa'ud”. The country had been known before as
“Hijaz”, but it was changed into the “Kingdom of Saudi Arabia”
{*al-Mamlakah al-'Arabiyyah Sa'udiyyah*} during the reign of King 'Abd
al-'Aziz.

Shaykh Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab came from the region of Najd who was
born in 1114 AH in one of the cities of Najd named as ”'Ayniyyah”. His
father, Shaykh 'Abd al-Wahhab, was a scholar {*'alim*} and the judge
{*qadi*} of that region. As such, the creed of Shaykh Muhammad had been
ascribed to his father. After learning the basics of religion from his
father, Shaykh Muhammad went to Medina and learned from the *'ulama*' of
that region.

Due to his personal interpretations of some issues regarding belief and
his opposition to the *'ulama*' of Medina, he was expelled from the
city. He then went to Iraq where he stayed in Basrah. In that city he
got acquainted with a person named Shaykh Muhammad Majmu'i and adopted
his ideas. Finally, the two believed in a certain creed.

The other *'ulama*' of Basrah and the believers of the region that were
mainly of Iranian origin, had opposed him and ousted him from Basrah.

When Shaykh Muhammad was driven out of Basrah, he proceeded to Damascus,
which had a pleasant climate, but because of his unusual belief and
difficulties in life he was unable to remain there. Since he could not
return to Medina or Mecca, he went back to the Najd of his father,
Shaykh 'Abd al-Wahhab, who was then still the *'a*lim of the region.

The Shaykh had a brother named Shaykh Sulayman ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab who
was at loggerheads with him in terms of belief. His brother was the
first person to write a book refuting his doctrines. His father also
opposed him and sided with Shaykh Sulayman. In addition to the
opposition of his father and brother, he also faced the opposition of
*'ulama*', and this dispute continued until the death of his father.

Shaykh Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab after the death of his father
-------------------------------------------------------

After the death of his father, Shaykh Muhammad enjoyed great freedom in
propagating his doctrines and views. As such, he went to other places
and become acquainted with 'Uthman ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad, who was then
the emir of 'Ayniyyah, and married his daughter Jawharah. Although it is
said that the people there accepted some of his beliefs, because he went
to extremes in opposing their customs, they expelled him from the
region. For instance, he had ordered the destruction of a dome belonging
to Zayd ibn al-Khattab, brother of 'Umar. He had also issued a decree
for an old tree, which was venerated by the people of the region, to be
uprooted.

In sum, on account of his peculiar doctrines, among which was his
disregard for the leaders of the Ahl as-Sunnah, the Shaykh lost his
esteem in the people's sight and earned their wrath. From there he went
to the region of Dar'iyyah.

Nowadays, pilgrims—Iranian and non-Iranian—can still see the relics
related to the rule of 'Uthman in Arabia such as the holy shrine of the
Holy Prophet (s) and the graves surrounding it, the lanterns of Masjid
an-Nabi, and the inscriptions on that sacred mosque.

The children and students of Shaykh Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab
------------------------------------------------------

Shaykh Muhammad had a number of sons and daughters and married one of
his daughters to Muhammad ibn Sa'ud, the tribal chief. His sons, Husayn,
'Abd Allah and Ibrahim, became judges after their father. Even now, his
sons, one after another, hold religious positions in Saudi Arabia.  
 During his lifetime, apart from training students, the Shaykh wrote
some books which nowadays have caught the attention of *'ulama*' and
students of the region. These books are as follows:

1. *Kitab at-Tawhid*; a collection of his doctrines;

2. *Kitab Kashf ash-Shubahat*, which is written in defense of his
doctrines vis-à-vis Sunni *'ulama*';

3. The merits and issues of some stories in the Qur'an;

4. *Kitab al-Kaba'ir*, which has been written about the major sins;

5. *Masa'il al-Jahiliyyah*, in which he compares the pre-Islamic period
of ignorance of Arabia with his own time;

6. *Fawa'id as-Sirah an-Nabawiyyah*, which is well-known as *Sirat
ar-Rasul*. This book examines the entire course of the lives of some
Companions of the Prophet (s), his battles and the prevalent beliefs
during that time;

7. *Ikhtisar ash-Sharh al-Kabir*; and

8. *Adab al-Mashyi ila's-Salah* (These two books have been written about
issues related to jurisprudence and the branches of religion).

These books are still available at the present.

The Death of Shaykh Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab
--------------------------------------

After engaging in religious and political debates, successive travels to
a number of cities in the Muslim world, and enduring the wrath and anger
of the *'ulama*', Shaykh Muhammad was able to find his own supporters
and votaries, who are nowadays known as the Wahhabis.

According to historical sources which have been written in his praise
and appreciation and negating the deviant nature of his doctrines, the
Shaykh passed away in 1206 AH at the age of 92 in Dar'iyyah after
traveling to Basrah, Najaf, Karbala', and probably, Isfahan and Shiraz.

In short, after the death of the Shaykh, his beliefs and views were
promoted and propagated with the support and blessing of external and
domestic political brokers in such a manner that at the present, most of
the current rulers of Arabia and a number of religious scholars and
judges there follow him and other Muslim countries such as Afghanistan,
Pakistan and boarder communities in Iran have come under the influence
of these doctrines. The Wahhabis are spreading this creed in the various
countries in Europe, America and Asia by building mosques and libraries,
printing copies of the Holy Qur'an, dispatching religious missionaries,
and the like.

This creed is called Wahhabism derived from the name of the Shaykh's
father. Although the Shaykh seemed to be a follower of the Hanbali
school of thought, the truth of the matter is that he was not so, and he
was distinctively different from the other *'ulama'*. In fact, he
regarded himself as free to think, choose and formulate his own beliefs
pertaining to religion. Since he considered himself an initiator of a
new set of beliefs, he expressed his beliefs in the following points:

1. He treated all Muslims as infidels or polytheists while thinking of
himself as the true Muslim;

2. He declared visiting the graves and constructing domes and courtyards
around the cemetery of the Companions of the Prophet (s) and his
descendants as unlawful {*haram*};

3. He regarded making vows, requests and offering sacrificial animals
beside the shrine of saints {*awliya*'} as unlawful;

4. He used to reckon as *haram* entreating {*istighathah*} and resorting
to the inter mediation {*tawassul*} of the saints of God;

5. He considered it obligatory to wage *jihad* against those who opposed
his creed, saying: “Wage war against the infidels and polytheists until
there is no more sedition {*fitnah*} and the religion is solely for God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَقَاتِلُوهُمْ حَتَّى لا تَكُونَ فِتْنَةٌ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Fight them until faithlessness is no more**.*[^1]

What is meant by the Shaykh in this verse is *jihad* against Muslims and
for him the pure religion is referred to his creed.

This is the summary of the life account and beliefs of Shaykh Muhammad
ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab as taken from *Kitab At-Tawhid bi'l-Lughati
al-Farisiyyah*.[^2] Of course, other points shall also be mentioned in
other discussions.

To whom was Shaykh Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab indebted
----------------------------------------------

During the period of his stay in Mecca and Medina, Shaykh Muhammad came
across books that had a role in the formation of his thought. Among them
are the books of Ahmad ibn Hanbal, his *Musnad* in particular; the books
of Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah; and the writings of Ibn Taymiyyah. Contrary
to other *'ulama'* of the Ahl as-Sunnah, they expressed new beliefs and
opinions which can be extracted from their books on jurisprudence and
history. Of course, the Shaykh was largely influenced by the views of
Ibn Taymiyyah.

Ibn Taymiyyah lived during the 8th century AH. In terms of belief, he
was follower of Ahmad ibn Hanbal who lived in the 3rd century AH. Ibn
Taymiyyah believed in a sort of anthropomorphism concerning God
maintaining that God has a hand, foot, eye, tongue and mouth, and
occupies a space! In order to prove his case, he resorted to the literal
text of Qur'anic verses, maintaining that God is sitting on a throne in
heaven.

Ibn Taymiyyah is the epithet and title of Abu'l-'Abbas Taqi ad-Din Ahmad
ibn 'Abd al-Halim. He was born in the territory of Harran in present-day
Turkey. He then migrated with his father to Damascus, Syria, and there
he acquired learning in religion and jurisprudence. In many ideological
and intellectual issues, he held extreme and radical views.

In addition to his anthropomorphic beliefs concerning God, he prohibited
visitation of the graves and seeking the intermediation {*tawassul*} of
the Prophet (s) while deeming it permissible to abuse Imam 'Ali ibn Abi
Talib (*'a*). On issues in jurisprudence, he opposed the predecessors of
the four Sunni schools. From the above points, it can be understood that
the Shaykh was not the first person to have expressed such beliefs, for
individuals such as Ibn Taymiyyah had advanced similar ideas prior to
him.

Like Shaykh Muhammad, Ibn Taymiyyah earned the wrath and stern criticism
of the *'ulama'* of his time and for a time he was exiled to Egypt. But
through the help of the government of the time, he returned to Damascus.
During the last period of his life, he was imprisoned for his opposition
to the *'ulama*' of Damascus and finally expired in the castle of
Damascus and was buried there.[^3]

Ibn Sa‘ud
---------

In the territory of Dar'iyyah in the region of Hijaz, which is a
mountainous territory with a pleasant climate, a person named Muhammad
ibn Sa'ud assumed the chieftainship of his tribe. The Shaykh became
acquainted with Ibn Sa'ud and relayed to him his new doctrines, and Ibn
Sa'ud in turn accepted them. They agreed together to set up a government
encompassing the entire region where religious and judicial affairs,
issues concerning propagation, and the leadership of the Friday prayers
would be assumed by the Shaykh while the political, social, military,
and security affairs would be under Ibn Sa'ud.

The government in Hijaz at that time was tribal and ethnic, and like
many Muslim countries, was under Ottoman rule whose capital was
present-day Turkey. With Al Sa'ud's ascension to power, Hijaz seceded
from Ottoman rule and in the course of time, it fell under the control
of Britain. On course, the British role in this change of the government
should not be overlooked.

[^1]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:193.

[^2]: Kitab at-Tawhid bi’l-Lughah al-Farisiyyah, no. 27, pp. 16-34.

[^3]: ‘Ali Dawani, Firqeh-ye Wahhabi, chap. 1.


