Tawhid from the Shi`ah and Wahhabi Points of View
=================================================

**The negation of reasoning {ta‘aqqul} in the Wahhabi school and its
consequence**

A kind of intellectual negation can be observed in the school of
Wahhabism. Although Shaykh Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab regarded himself
an enlightened person, criticizing the four Suuni schools of thought,
some Shi\`ah beliefs, and reproaching them for speculatively
interpreting the verses of the Qur'an, he used to resort to secondary
issues concerning the teachings about God, the Exalted. He believed in a
sort of anthropomorphism for God and in this regard he used to content
himself with the outward purport of the verses.

His supporters also reject reflection and reasoning about the verses of
the Qur'an and the Prophetic traditions, negating the rational sciences,
philosophy and mysticism {*'irfan*}. They are afflicted with a
close-mindedness and intellectual frigidity to the extent that they are
incapable of applying the precepts of the school {*madrasah*}, the
Qur'anic verses and the traditions to the demands of time. It was for
this reason that they initially declared the telephone, mass
communication devices and others as religiously unlawful, and strongly
resisted them, but later they finally relented.

Since they are incapable of applying the concepts such as intercession
{*shafa*'ah}, *tawassul* and infallibility {*'ismah*} of the Prophet (s)
in the light of contemporary thinking their viewpoint concerning the
prophets, the Holy Prophet (s) in particular, and the saints is narrow.
They treat the spiritual station of the prophets and the saints as
identical with the rest of people, thinking them as being annihilated
and nonexistent after death, while the Shi\`ah and other Islamic schools
of thought consider them to be present and watching over us. In a
result, the Wahhabis consider *tawassul* to the prophets and *awliya*',
entreating them and asking for their *shafa'ah* an innovation in
religion {*bid'ah*} and polytheism.

A few words from Martyr Professor Murtadha Mutahhari
----------------------------------------------------

Martyr Professor Murtadha Mutahhari says:

The Wahhabis believe that God has two realms. One is related to His
Essence and no one has the right to enter into this realm. Worship
{*'ibadah*} and *tawassul* pertain to God and are exclusive to this
axis. The other realm is related to the natural affairs of the world in
which the will and discretion of man have a role and it has nothing to
do with God.[^1]

He also says:  
 According to us, however, conceiving of two realms for the creation;
thinking of God as belonging to one realm and the creatures, man in
particular, to be in the other realm; and considering these two as
distinctly separated is unacceptable and itself as a kind of polytheism.
We should not separate God from His acts and His creatures; for, we
believe that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَنَّ الْقُوَّةَ لِلَّهِ جَمِيعًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***That power, altogether, belongs to Allah**,*[^2]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ حَوْلَ وَلاَ قُوَّةَ إلاَّ بِاللهِ العَلِيِّ العَظِيمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There is no might and power except from Allah, the Exalted and
Great.”[^3]

Then, he says:  
 Contrary to common notions, Wahhabism is not only an anti-Imamate
theory but rather, before being anti-Imamate, it is anti-*tawhid* and
anti-human. It is anti-*tawhid* because it advocates the division of
work between the Creator {*khaliq*} and the creature {*makhluq*}. In
addition, it upholds a sort of hidden polytheism in Essence {*shirk-e
dhati*}. It is anti-human because it fails to comprehend the talent of
man that makes him superior to the angels, and according to the text of
the Qur'an, elevates him to the status of vicegerency of Allah
{*khilafat Allah*} who ordered the angels to prostrate before him. It
reduces him into a mere natural animal.”[^4]18

Tawhid according to the Shi\`ah philosophers and scholastic theologians {mutakallimun}
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the light of the blessed *Surah at-Tawhid* (or *al-Ikhlas*), the
following headings about the cognition of the Essence and Attributes of
God can be deduced:), the following headings about the cognition of the
Essence and Attributes of God can be deduced:), the following headings
about the cognition of the Essence and Attributes of God can be deduced:

### Tawhid of Essence {Tawhid-e dhati}

God has a Perfect Essence and the Attributes of Perfection and Beauty.
Thus, this Essence must be regarded as One and Unique. That is, whatever
we say concerning His Oneness and Unity, we have to believe also with
respect to His Essence. Those who acknowledge such Essence also believe
in the *Tawhid* of Essence.

### Shirk {polytheism} in Essence

This means that we believe in two or more essences for God, the Exalted.
This type of polytheism is called “polytheism in Essence”. God is One in
Essence and has no partner. So, those who maintain that God has a son or
equal, or that He has been begotten profess polytheism in Essence. The
Holy Qur'an strongly condemns this type of belief.

### Tawhid in Attributes

The Essence of God has Attributes which we can understand through Their
effects, such as the Knowledgeable {*al-'Alim*}, the Living {*al-Hayy*},
the Wise {*al-Hakim*}, and the Ever-Living {*al-Qayyum*}. We relate
these Attributes to the Essence, saying that God, the Blessed and
Exalted, is One in Essence and Attributes. Since all these Attributes
relate back to the Essence, there is no multiplicity in the Attributes
and all Attributes are one. Every Attribute is identical with the other
Attribute. For example, His Knowledge {*'Ilm*} is His Power {*Qudrah*}.
Therefore, the plurality of Attributes according to our understanding is
related to the effects of the Single Essence. As such, His Attributes
and Essence are One and not that He has One Essence and many
Attributes.}. Therefore, the plurality of Attributes according to our
understanding is related to the effects of the Single Essence. As such,
His Attributes and Essence are One and not that He has One Essence and
many Attributes.}. Therefore, the plurality of Attributes according to
our understanding is related to the effects of the Single Essence. As
such, His Attributes and Essence are One and not that He has One Essence
and many Attributes.

### Tawhid in Actions

*Tawhid* in Actions is also like *Tawhid* in Essence in the sense that
the origin of every action in the world of being is the Divine Sacred
Essence, and will finally relate to Him. We should know that every
Action that we ascribe to Him will be the same as His other Action, and
there is no difference and distinction among the Actions of God, and the
apparent duplicity in the Actions of God is caused by our perception:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلاَ تَقُولَنَّ لِشَيْءٍ إِنِّي فَاعِلٌ ذَلِكَ غَدًا إِلاَّ أَنْ
يَشَاءَ اللَّهُ وَاذْكُرْ رَبَّكَ إِذَا نَسِيتَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Do not say about anything, 'I will indeed do it tomorrow,' without
{adding}, 'if Allah wishes.' And when you forget, remember your
Lord**.*[^5]

So, all our wishes are within the domain of His will and all the actions
of God are one:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ حَوْلَ وَلاَ قُوَّةَ إلاَّ بِاللهِ العَلِيِّ العَظِيمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There is no might and power except from Allah, the Exalted and Great.”

Those who have such belief, attributing all actions to God have the
belief in *Tawhid* in Action.

### Polytheism in Action {shirk-e af‘ali}

Polytheism in Action {*shirk-e af'ali*} means to believe that a creature
has a divine will independent of the will of God in the sense that
whatever the said creature does is outside the domain of God's will.
This is contrary to what God has attributed to Himself as stated in the
Holy Qur'an, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَا رَمَيْتَ إِذْ رَمَيْتَ وَلَكِنَّ اللَّهَ رَمَى.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And you did not throw when you threw, rather it was Allah who
threw**.*[^6]

While we all know that the Prophet (s) threw earth and stones toward the
enemy during the Battle of Badr.

### Tawhid in worship

Having attributed the *Tawhid* of Essence, Attributes and actions to
God, *Tawhid* in worship is confirmed for Him in the sense that only His
Essence is worthy of worship, and if we consider anyone as His partner
in worship, as the idol-worshipers and others do, it means that we are
afflicted with polytheism in worship. The following verses of the Qur'an
express this *Tawhid* in worship:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِيَّاكَ نَعْبُدُ وَإِيَّاكَ نَسْتَعِينُ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You {alone} do we worship, and to You {alone} do we turn for
help**.*[^7]

And along this line, another verse states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُلْ إِنَّ صَلاَتِي وَنُسُكِي وَمَحْيَاي وَمَمَاتِي لِلَّهِ رَبِّ
الْعَالَمِينَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say, 'Indeed my prayer and my worship, my life and my death are all
for the sake of Allah, the*** ***Lord of all the worlds'**.*[^8]

*Tawhid* in worship is understood from the phrase, *“indeed my prayer
and my worship”* while *Tawhid* in Lordship {*rububiyyahi*} is discerned
from the phrase, *“my life and my death”*.

The foundations of Tawhid according to the Wahhabis
---------------------------------------------------

The Wahhabis regard *Tawhid* as having three parts: (1) *Tawhid* in
Lordship {*rububi*}, (2) *Tawhid* in Divinity {*uluhi*}, and (3)
*Tawhid* in the Names and Attributes {*asma' wa sifat*}.

### Tawhid in Lordship {rububi}

It means that only the Essence of God has all the absolute and perfect
Attributes. In other words, *Tawhid* in Lordship is the *Tawhid* in
recognizing and proving God whose proofs are the verses of *Surah
al-Kafirun*,[^9] the verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُلْ يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ تَعَالَوْا إِلَى كَلِمَةٍ…﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say, 'O People of the Book! Come to a word common**…*[^10]

and other verses.

### Tawhid in Divinity {uluhi or uluhiyyah}

It is the belief in the fact that only God is worthy of worship and
praise, and there is not other that god worshipped being beside Him.It
is the belief in the fact that only God is worthy of worship and praise,
and there is not other that god worshipped being beside Him.It is the
belief in the fact that only God is worthy of worship and praise, and
there is not other that god worshipped being beside Him.

### Tawhid in the Names and Attributes

The Attributes and Names of God are pre-eternal {*qadim*}.[^11] The
Wahhabis consider this aspect of *Tawhid* in the place of the *Tawhid*
in Attributes, worship and actions. This belief is traceable from the
belief of the Ash'arites {*asha'irah*}, a group of scholastic
theologians {*mutakallimun*} during the 2nd century AH. The Ash'arites
also believed in the “pre-eternality” {*qidmah*} of the Divine Names and
Attributes. Anchored on this belief, the Wahhabis reckon the Qur'an as
pre-eternal and the attribute of an act of God. They also consider the
dotted Arabic letters {*huruf al-mu'jam*} as pre-eternal.

They regard as Attributes of the Essence those attributes such the Eye
{*'ayn*}; Soul {*nafs*}; Knowledge {*'ilm*}; Life {*hayah*}; Hearer
{*sami*'}; Seer {*basir*}; Face {*wajh*}; Speech or Word {*kalam*};
Pre-existence {*qidam*}; Hand {*yad*}; Foot {*rijl*} (The Wahhabis
believe that God—God forbid—has hands and feet!), Dominion {*mulk*};
Grandeur {*'azamah*}; Greatness {*kibriya'*}; Eminence {*'uluww*};
Richness {*ghina*}; Mercy {*rahmah*}; Power {*qudrah*}; Wisdom
{*hikmah*}; etc.

They consider as Attributes of Act the attributes such as surprise
{*ta'ajjub*}; laughing {*dahik*}; satisfaction {*rida*}; anger
{*ghadab*}; aversion {*karahah*}; equality {*istiwa'*}; coming {*maji'*}
(the alleged appearance of God on the Day of Resurrection); coming down
{*nuzul*} (it refers to the belief of the Wahhabis that God is sitting
on the Throne and He descends from heaven at the dawn!); disagreement;
and gladness.[^12]

After stating the parts and examples of *Tawhid* from the point of view
of Wahhabism, it is now proper to examine polytheism {*shirk*} according
to this sect. Thereafter, we shall compare it with Shi\`ah monotheistic
thought.} according to this sect. Thereafter, we shall compare it with
Shi\`ah monotheistic thought.} according to this sect. Thereafter, we
shall compare it with Shi\`ah monotheistic thought.

Shirk {polytheism} and its limits according to the Wahhabis
-----------------------------------------------------------

*Shirk* {polytheism} from the viewpoint of Wahhabism means associating
partner with God and considering other beings as independent from Him.
Wahhabism also regards turning for help to the prophets and seeking the
intermediation {*tawassul*} of the saints as acts of polytheism.

According to this viewpoint, kissing and visiting the graves of the
infallible Imams (*'a*) and the Prophet (s) are all acts of polytheism,
unlawful and religious innovation {*bid'ah*}. According to the Wahhabis,
the Shi\`ah are polytheists or at least their beliefs have elements of
polytheism.

The socio-political consequences of Tawhid and shirk {polytheism} according to the Wahhabis
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The late Muhammad Jawad Mughniyyah thus writes:  
 Based on the Wahhabi creed, mere utterance of ”*La ilaha illallah wa
ashhadu anna Muhammadan rasul Allah*” {There is no god but Allah and
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah} is not enough for the acceptance of
Islam. After uttering it, one should rather not seek the inter mediation
of other than God; not have the intention of paying homage to the
Prophet (s); not touch and kiss his grave; not swear by the Prophet (s);
and not call on him and addressing him, thus: “O the Messenger of
Allah!” and “O my master!”

During his control of Mecca, Muhammad ibn Sa'ud (one of the rulers of
Saudi Arabia) had said in his speech that with the exception of the
Wahhabis, all Muslims are polytheists and must be reformed at the point
of the sword so as to embrace Wahhabism. Contrary to his statement,
however, King Faisal, the king of the Wahhabis, in his message issued in
1342 AH, says while addressing the Wahhabis: “And all Muslims, from
Egypt, India, etc. are your brothers.”

This means that, “You should not be pessimistic with respect to the
Muslims and you are not supposed to act according to this creed of
Shaykh Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab.”

Maintaining this belief by the Wahhabis would have such socio-political
consequences as considering all Muslims as polytheists and spreading
sedition {*fitnah*} and chaos, for such a belief is an imperialist and
anti-Islamic one.

The Wahhabi-Shi\`ah difference of perspective on Tawhid
-------------------------------------------------------

As stated earlier, there are qualitative and quantitative differences
between the Wahhabis and the Shi\`ah about *Tawhid*.

We shall find out later on that this classification from the perspective
of Wahhabism has significant political implications.

It can probably be argued that there is no problem with the
classification of the Wahhabis. In addition, this issue is only an
intellectual limitation, and difference of opinion between Muslim
philosophers and mystics {*'urafa'*} concerning this issue can also be
observed. But that which cannot be ignored is the difference in
understanding.

Shi\`ah *'ulama*' have divided *Tawhid* into (*Tawhid* in) Essence,
Attributes, acts and worship while the Wahhabi *'ulama*' have divided it
into (*Tawhid* in) Lordship, Divinity and the Names and Attributes.[^13]
If we compare them, and pair *Tawhid* in Essence with that of Lordship
and *Tawhid* in Divinity with that of *Tawhid* in acts and worship,
nothing remains to compare with *Tawhid* in the Names and Attributes.
Meanwhile, to believe in the pre-eternity {*qidmah*} of the Names and
Attributes demands the acceptance of “the multiplicity of pre-eternals”,
and this is an Ash'arite belief which is false.

Shi\`ah *'ulama*' believe that the Names of God can be divided into two:
particular and general. The particular aspect pertains specifically to
the Essence of God, the Exalted, such as “Allah”. The general aspect
relates to the Attributes of God which can also be applied to His
servants such as *rahman* {All-beneficent}, *rahim* {All-merciful} and
*karim* {*All-kind*}. The intellect of man has separated this aspect of
Attributes and ascribed it to God.

If this difference merely had an ideological dimension, it would not
then be so acute and sensitive, but since they are utilizing it for a
political end, it ought to be analyzed.

The Wahhabis have taken this way of dividing the levels of *Tawhid* from
Ibn Taymiyyah who, in turn, had adopted it from Ahmad ibn Hanbal.

Similarly, by dividing the Attributes into Acts and Essence, the
Wahhabis have ended up believing that God has an actual hand and foot
and that He can physically come and have an appearance. They have
contented with the literal meaning of the verses in this regard while
rejecting rational understanding and analysis. They reject as
”*mu'awwilun*” {allegorical interpreters} those who oppose this creed,
particularly the Shi\`ah who, by taking inspiration from the lofty
teachings of the Prophet (s) and the infallible Imams (*'a*), interpret
the verses related to God's seeing, hearing, His having a hand, foot and
His coming on the Day of Resurrection as allegorical. For instance, the
Shi\`ah regard the verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿الرَّحْمَانُ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ اسْتَوَى.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The All-beneficent settled on the Throne**,*[^14]28

to mean the sovereignty and authority of God on the Throne and not in
the sense of God's actual sitting on the Throne.

[^1]: Murtadha Mutahhari, Jahan Bini-ye Tawhidi [Monotheistic
Worldview], vol. 2, p. 116.

[^2]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:165.

[^3]: Jahan Bini-ye Tawhidi, ibid.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Surat al-Kahf 18:23-24.

[^6]: Surat al-Anfal 8:17.

[^7]: Surat al-Fatihah 1:5.

[^8]: Surat al-An‘am 6:162.

[^9]: Surat al-Kafirun 109:1-6: “O faithless ones! I do not worship what
you worship, not do you worship what I worship; nor will I worship what
you have worshipped nor will you worship what I worship. To you your
religion, and to me my religion.”

[^10]: Surat Al ‘Imran 3:64: “Say, ‘O People of the Book! Come to a word
common between us and you: that we will worship no one but Allah, and
that we will not ascribe any partner to Him, and that we will not take
each other as lords besides Allah’.”

[^11]: Here, the word “pre-eternal” [qadim] is not in contrast to the
notion of “new” [jadid]. It is rather the opposite of “created”
[hadith]; that is, to have existed from the very beginning and not to
have come into being sometime in the past.

[^12]: Fath al-Majid, pp. 33, 41, 57.

[^13]: Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab, At-Tawhid wa’l-Qawl as-Sadid fi
Maqasid at-Tawhid, p. 13.

[^14]: Surat Ta Ha 20:5.


