Ziyarah {Visitation} and the Laws Pertaining to the Graves and Mosques According to the Shi`ah and Wahhabis
===========================================================================================================

Ziyarah according to Sunnis and Shi\`ah
---------------------------------------

As stated earlier, Wahhabis think that *ziyarah*, like *shafa'ah*, is a
polytheistic act of seeking intermediation, and renders a person outside
the pale of religion. This is while *ziyarah*, according to the Ahl
as-Sunnah, has been considered permissible. In this context, as in many
other beliefs as well, Wahhabism is at odds with the Ahl as-Sunnah.

By resorting to uncommon and strange statements, against which the Ahl
as-Sunnah have also complained, the Wahhabis have endeavored to portray
Wahhabism as a school of thought {*madhhab*}. But Muslims, the Ahl
as-Sunnah in particular, cannot permit the inclusion of this group in
the list of Muslim schools of thought {*madhahib*}.

The views of Ibn al-Qudamah
---------------------------

Ibn al-Qudamah, a leading figure and *faqih* of the Ahl as-Sunnah, while
regarding *ziyarah*, like mourning, as consistent with the laws of
Islam, elaborates that *ziyarah* is permissible for men while
undesiderable {*makru*h} for women. In confirming this view, he has
cited the following tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَعَنَ اللهُ زُوّارَاتِ القُبُورِ، الْمُتَّخِذَاتِ عَلَيْهِنَّ
الْمَسَاجِدَ وَالسُّرَجَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah curses the visitors of the graves, especially women who light
candles on the graves and take them as their place of prostration or
mosque.

And he adds,  
 In this tradition, the phrase, “Allah curses…” implies aversion, and
this aversion is more intense for women according to their welfare; for,
it is possible that by going outside the house and to be present in the
public, the rights of the husband might be violated. The reason behind
the curse on female visitors {*za'irin*} is because of the fact that the
people during the pre-Islamic period of ignorance {*jahiliyyah*} used to
visit the graves. After sometime, they would construct statues and
images on the grave. Then, these would be treated as idols and they
would pay reverence in front of these. So, they were cursed and the
visitation of the women was prohibited.[^1]61

In continuation, he writes:  
 Visiting graves is *mustahabb* for men. Regarding its being *makruh* or
impermissible for women, there are two pertinent traditions. According
to a tradition, it is *mustahabb* provided that, like men, they read
beside the grave *surahs* of *at-Tawhid* (*al-Ikhlas*) and *Ya Sin*, and
*ayat al-Kursi*, but according to another tradition, it is not
permissible. In case of its permissibility, man and woman should recite
this salutation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكُمْ أهْلَ الدِّيَارِ مِنَ الْمُؤمِنِينَ
وَالْمُسْلِمِينَ، إنَّا إنْ شَاءَ اللهُ بِكُمْ لاَحِقُونَ، نَسْألُ
اللهَ لَنَا وَلَكُمُ العَافِيَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Peace be upon you, O believers and Muslims who inhabit these graves.
We will join you, God willing. We pray Allah for wellbeing for you and
us.”*[^2]

Ibn al-Qudamah does not regard the *ziyarah* as permissible for women,
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتُكْرَهُ لِلنِّسَاءِ، لأنَّ النَّبِيَّ  قَالَ: لَعَنَ اللهُ
زُوَّارَاتِ القُبُورِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ziyarah for women is *makruh* (dis commended) because the Prophet said,
'Allah curses the women who visit the graves'.

He believed that the Prophet (s) initially prohibited *ziyarah* for
women and the phrase, “Allah curses…” bespeaks of this fact. But
afterward, he considered the *ziyarah* for women as permissible, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُنْتُ نَهَيْتُكُمْ عَنْ زِيَارَةِ القُبُورِ، فَزُورُوهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I was prohibiting you from visiting to grave in the past, but now you
may do so.  
 Ibn al-Qudamah also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَوَى التِّرْمِذِيُّ أنَّ عَائِشَةَ زَارَتْ قَبْرَ أخِيهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Tirmidhi narrated that 'a'ishah visited the grave of her brother ('Abd
ar-Rahman).  
 In the end, Ibn al-Qutadah concludes from the set of the decrees on the
permissibility and honor (of *ziyarah*) in the quoted *hadith*s that it
is loathsome for the women to perform *ziyarah*.[^3]

The view of ‘Allamah Majlisi
----------------------------

In this regard, 'Allamah Majlisi expresses thus:  
*Ziyarah* is good and recommended for men… But concerning the *ziyarah*
for women, there are two pertinent opinions. One opinion is that
*ziyarah* for women is loathsome… and the other opinion is that it is
permissible provided that they cover themselves from the sight of
strangers {*ghayr mahram*}.[^4]

According to the belief of the Shi\`ah, visiting the grave of the
faithful is part of the *Sunnah* of the Holy Prophet (s) and all Muslims
have consensus of opinion that at the time of death of a believer, he
would go to his grave and express condolences to the bereaved ones. It
is also stated in the Holy Qur'an, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلاَ تُصَلِّ عَلَى أَحَدٍ مِنْهُمْ مَاتَ أَبَدًا وَلاَ تَقُمْ عَلَى
قَبْرِهِ إِنَّهُمْ كَفَرُوا بِاللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ وَمَاتُوا وَهُمْ
فَاسِقُونَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And never pray over any of them when he dies, nor stand on his
graveside. They indeed defied Allah and His Apostle and died as
transgressors**.*[^5]

This verse is about the hypocrites {*munafiqun*} and expresses this
point: O Prophet! Do not go to the graveside of the hypocrites as you
are doing with respect to the graves of the faithful, and do not pray
for their souls nor pray over their graves because they defied Allah and
His Apostle and they are transgressors. That *ziyarah* is an
indisputable principle and the presence of believers at the graveside of
one another is unquestionable although there may possibly be differences
of opinion among some Muslim schools of thought concerning the secondary
features of *ziyarah*.

Visiting the grave as an excellent sunnah
-----------------------------------------

It is thus recorded in history books attributed to the Ahl as-Sunnah:
Every year the Prophet (s) would visit the graves of the martyrs
{*shuhada*'} of the Battle of Uhud and recite this prayer {*ziyarah*}:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَلاَمُ عَلَيْكُمْ بِمَا صَبَرْتُمْ فَنِعْمَ عُقْبَى الدَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be on you because you were constant, how excellent, is then, the
issue of the abode.  
 It is also recorded that Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman, like the Prophet
(s), also used to perform *ziyarah*. The daughter of the Prophet of
Islam (s), Hadrat Fatimah az-Zahra (*'a*) would also visit the martyrs
of Uhud two days a week. During his visit to the martyrs, especially in
the *ziyarah* to Hamzah and Mus'ab ibn 'Umayr, the Holy Prophet (s)
would recite this verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رِجَالٌ صَدَقُوا مَا عَاهَدُوا اللَّهَ عَلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Men who fulfill what they have pledged to Allah**.*[^6]

In addition to this, it is thus recorded in the book, *As-Sahih* that
Abu Sa'id al-Khudri would extend salutations to the grave of Hamzah… Umm
Salamah, one of the honorable wives of the Prophet (s), and individuals
such as Abu Hurayrah, Fatimah Khuza'iyyah, and 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar
al-Khattab also used to perform *ziyarah* to this group of martyrs.[^7]

It is thus recorded in the valuable book, *al-Ghadir* under the section,
“Virtues and Merits of Abu Hanifah” {*Bab Fada'il wa Manaqib Abu
Hanifah*}:

Whenever he would go to Baghdad, Imam ash-Shafi'i would pay a visit to
the grave of Abu Hanifah. He would stand beside his grave, offer
salutation to him and seek his intermediation for the fulfillment of his
needs. Ahmad ibn Hanbal did the same practice with respect to his master
(Imam ash-Shafi'i) to such an extent that his son would get astonished.
Ahmad ibn Hanbal explained to his son that there is nothing wrong in
seeking the intermediation of Imam ash-Shafi'i for the removal of
difficulties because he, like the sun, was beneficial to the people.[^8]

Were the Prophet (s) and his *Ahl al-Bayt* (*'a*) not like ash-Shafi'i
for the people? This is while ash-Shafi'i and Abu Hanifah held the Imams
(*'a*) in high esteem, and Imam ash-Shafi'i acknowledges the sublime
station of 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (*'a*).

Is the practice of these Imams of the Ahl as-Sunnah not a proof for
their followers? Do the Wahhabis who regard *ziyarah* as an act of
polytheism also consider the Imams of the Ahl as-Sunnah as polytheists?

Notwithstanding the Sunni and Shi\`ah traditions regarding the
*mustahabb* status of *ziyarah*, there is also another tradition
narrated from the Prophet of Islam (s) that if anyone who goes to the
cemetery and read *Surat Ya Sin*, the agony of the dead ones shall be
mitigated. The Wahhabis, however, inscribed on a tabloid the *hadith*,
“Allah curses those who visit the graves” and placed it at the Baqi'
cemetery and on the grave of Abu Talib.

**Critique**: Although the imams of the Ahl as-Sunnah have approved of
the practice of visiting the graves and reckoned it as *mustahabb*, is
not the opposition of the Wahhabis nothing but advancing the imperialist
objectives and disrupting the unity of Muslims? Does it indicate the
fact that they are determined to interpret and explain the religion in
the way they like even if it is contrary to the opinions and views of
the other Muslim schools of thought? If they really regard it
permissible for men to perform *ziyarah*, why cannot male pilgrims visit
the Baqi' cemetery at all times, but they are only allowed to do so at a
specific time?

Why are Wahhabis determined to destroy all the holy shrines? For
example, why in 1216 AH Sa'ud ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz, on the order of his
father, assaulted Karbala' and after killing and plunder, destroyed the
holy shrine there? Or, why in 1217 and 1218 AH did they attack the holy
city of Mecca and engage in demolishing the religious relics there? Or,
why in 1220 AH under the slogan of “Kill the polytheists” did they
invade an-Najaf al-Ashraf? Or, why in later years did they assault the
holy city of Medina and raze the holy shrines to the ground in that
blessed place—the shrines of great personages such as the father of the
Prophet (s), the Imams (*'a*) buried in Baqi', and the descendants and
wives of the Prophet (s)?[^9]

Must not the answer to these questions be sought in Wahhabis' enmity to
the oppressed Imams of Baqi' and to the truth of Islam, or are we not
compelled to say that they also do not regard as permissible the
*ziyarah* for men which is proved by what they are doing in practice?
for men which is proved by what they are doing in practice? for men
which is proved by what they are doing in practice?

The laws pertaining to the graves and mosques
---------------------------------------------

The Wahhabis are not much inclined to beautify and visit shrines. Based
on some traditions some of which we shall quote later, they uphold the
unlawfulness of visiting graves, considering their demolition as
permissible. The basis of this mindset is traceable to Ibn Taymiyyah and
Shaykh Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab.

The Wahhabis claim that in practicing the religion and in explaining and
interpreting its laws, one must take inspiration from the conduct and
practice of the caliphs, the Companions {*sahabah*} and Followers
{*tabi'un*} because they are closer to the time of revelation and the
Prophet (s). We know that this is nothing but an empty claim and their
beliefs regarding *ziyarah* is contrary to the sayings and practice of
the Companions because the latter did not only visit Uhud and the
martyrs of Baqi' but if they ever happened to conquer a territory they
would also pay respect to the graves there. For instance, when Syria was
conquered during the reign of the second caliph, the Muslims preserved
the graves of Hadrat Zakariyya (Zechariah) and Yahya (John the Baptist)
(*'a*), considering them as holy. Or, when Bayt al-Maqdis (Jerusalem)
was annexed to the Islamic territories, they preserved the graves beside
Masjid al-Aqsa and no one demolished them.

The Wahhabis' opposition to the burial of the dead in a private house or
mosque, or near it is another proof of the fact that contrary to their
claim, they have adopted a different way which is discordant with the
way of the Companions because these very Companions, 'Ali (*'a*) in
particular, buried the Prophet (s) in his own house, or according to a
certain narration, Fatimah az-Zahra (*'a*), who was regarded by the
Wahhabis as one of the great Companions, was buried in her own house.
The incorrectness of this belief of the Wahhabis will be made clearer to
us when we find out that based on historical evidence, many of the
prophets (*'a*) were buried in *Hijr Isma*'*il* and *Bayt al-Maqdis*
without considering the fact that at the time of their burial, the
nature of these sacred sites as places of worship were known.

Why did the Wahhabis not destroy the graves of the Prophet (s) and the Two Sheikhs {shaykhayn} (Abu Bakr and ‘Umar)?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Wahhabis who play the companion card have never found an opportunity
to demolish the graves of the Prophet (s) and the Two Sheikhs
{*shaykhayn*} (Abu Bakr and 'Umar) because such practice is against the
conduct of the Companions of the Prophet (s), not to mention the fact
that the Muslim world will be united in opposing them.

But on account its distance from Masjid an-Nabi, opposition to the
Shi\`ah and the gathering of the pilgrims, they destroyed the Baqi'
cemetery. In 1344 AH corresponding to 1912-1913 CE, the Wahhabis razed
to the ground all the domes around Medina such as the domes of the four
Imams (*'a*) (buried in Medina such as al-Hasan, as-Sajjad, al-Baqir,
and as-*S*adiq (*'a*)); 'Abbas the uncle of the Prophet (s); the wives
of the Prophet (s); 'Abd Allah the father of the Prophet (s); 'Uthman
ibn 'Affan; Isma'il ibn Ja'far as-Sadiq; and Malik.[^10]

Therefore, since the Wahhabis do not believe in the visitation
{*ziyarah*} to the graves of the prophets and the saints, considering it
as a manifestation of polytheism and man's drifting away from God, they
are of the opinion that people must be kept away from this practice and
shrines and mausoleums must be destroyed.

**Honoring the mosques and praying** **beside graves**

The Wahhabis regard standing in prayer beside graves as an act of
polytheism because it will be deemed worshipping those who are buried.
Similarly, by citing the tradition below on the authority of Abu
Hurayrah, they think that constructing a mosque beside graves is
improper and against the religion.

The Prophet (s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تَجْعَلُوا بُيُوتَكُمْ قُبُوراً، وَلاَ تَجْعَلُوا قَبْرِي عِيداً،
وَصَلُّوا عَلَيَّ؛ فَإنَّ صَلاتَكُمْ تَبْلُغُنِي حَيْثُ كُنْتُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Do not convert your houses into a graveyard and do not make my grave as
a site for festivity {'id}. Send salutations to me as your salutations,
wherever you are, reach me*.

This *hadith*, on account of its narrator whose practice of fabricating
*habits* is known to all and sundry, is not very reliable, and it cannot
be accepted except through explanation and analysis. In explaining this
tradition it must be said that perhaps the phrase, “Do not convert your
houses into graveyards,” is indicative of the fact that if the
remembrance of God is forgotten in a house and spirituality in it dies
out, it actually turns into a graveyard, from which no voice comes out.

In the same manner, the phrase, “Do not make my grave a site for
festivity {*id*},” maybe a reminder of the reality that since the people
usually engage in merrymaking and rejoicing on the eve of feasts and
this merrymaking may possibly go against the religion or might result in
neglecting God for some moments, festivity and celebration must not be
held near the shrine of the Chief of the Prophets (s) because among the
requisites of visiting that holy shrine is presence of heart and
remembrance of God.

In the same vein, perhaps what is meant by the phrase, “Send salutations
upon me,” is when the Holy Prophet (s) wants his followers to send
salutations upon him which is perhaps a sort of need, his Companions and
followers are more in need of this spiritual gift. Meanwhile, the
phrase, “Do not convert your houses into graveyards,” has a health
dimension and that is, if a dead body is not buried, after sometime it
will emit an offensive odor and cause ailments and harm. And if it were
also buried near the site of a residence, by emitting a nauseating
smell, it would make life difficult for the residents, or bring about
disease and unpleasantness. Of course, this expression does not include
the Prophet (s) and the infallible Imams (*'a*) because their bodies and
souls, based on this Verse of Purification {*ayat* *at-tathir*},

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمْ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed Allah desires to repel all impurity from you, O People of the
Household, and purify you with a thorough purification**,*[^11]71

are pure and will not cause sickness and plague. Now, if by citing this
tradition, there is someone who would protest against the burial of the
Prophet (s) and Fatimah az-Zahra (*'a*) in the house, this criticism can
be traced back to Abu Bakr and 'Umar who were not members of the *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*'a*), and based on the Verse of Purification, they were not
purified. In conclusion, if the Wahhabis find fault with the burial of
the dead and regard standing in prayer beside the grave as an act of
polytheism, they would have to consider the Companions as polytheists
though they were not so.[^12]72

Argument based on verse 21 of Surah al-Kahf
-------------------------------------------

According to verse 21 of *Surat al-Kahf*, when the Companions of the
Cave went to sleep again, the people differed with one another on how to
mark the place where they had gone to sleep, and they finally agreed to
build a place of worship so that visitors, apart from visiting, could
also engage in worshipping God. With the aim of making their belief in
the religious impermissibility of constructing mosque over the graves
acceptable, the Wahhabis utilized the verse below although no part of it
can actually be taken to substantiate their belief. The verse in
question thus states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَكَذَلِكَ أَعْثَرْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ لِيَعْلَمُوا أَنَّ وَعْدَ اللَّهِ
حَقٌّ وَأَنَّ السَّاعَةَ لاَ رَيْبَ فِيهَا إِذْ يَتَنَازَعُونَ
بَيْنَهُمْ أَمْرَهُمْ فَقَالُوا ابْنُوا عَلَيْهِمْ بُنْيَانًا
رَبُّهُمْ أَعْلَمُ بِهِمْ قَالَ الَّذِينَ غَلَبُوا عَلَى أَمْرِهِمْ
لَنَتَّخِذَنَّ عَلَيْهِمْ مَسْجِدًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So it was that We let them come upon them, that they might know that
Allah's promise is true, and that there is no doubt in the Hour. As they
were disputing among themselves about their matter, they said, 'Build a
building over them. Their Lord knows best.' Those who had the say in
their matter said, 'We will set up a place of worship over
them'**.*[^13]

Another argument
----------------

At the outset, it must be noted that the Wahhabis oppose building
mosques over the graves, regarding it as unlawful and religiously
illegitimate. And in order to prove their belief, they resort to any
tradition, no matter how weak {*da'if*} it is. For example, they have
resorted to the following tradition, whose authenticity has no basis,
for whatever purpose it may serve them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَعَنَ اللهُ اليَهُودَ وَالنَّصَارَى؛ إتَّخَذُوا قُبُورَ
أنْبِيَائِهِمْ وَصَالِحِيهِمْ مَسَاجِدَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Allah curses the Jews and the Christians for making the graves of their
prophets and righteous ones as places of worship*.[^14]

Although both in terms of thought and practice, the Jews and the
Christians have committed many errors, they have never worshipped
graves. Secondly, this *hadith*—assuming that it is authentic
{*sahih*}—does not include Muslims because contrary to the Jews and the
Christians, they have never built a mosque over a grave, and if they are
ever standing in prayer near a grave, their aim is the pleasure of God
and to offer as gift its reward as a gift to the buried person, and if
the latter is among the *awliya*', they are praying to God to let them
attain his station and rank.

It seems that through this sort of opposition, Ibn Taymiyyah and
Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab, in particular, wanted to show their
open-mindedness and enlightenment, when they could have shown the
greatness of their minds by learning the truth of Islam, Islamic
management, means of social welfare and doing things like promoting the
setting up learning and research centers and struggling against
imperialism.

At the present time also, in order to display their knowledge and
intelligence, some neophytes and novices have made holy shrines,
mausoleums and supplications as the targets of their speeches.
Consciously or unconsciously, they are using their pens for the
advancement of imperialist objectives, and thus, pouring oil onto the
fires of the enemy.

They have to know, however, that enlightenment does not mean regarding
the prayers for *ziyarah* as superstitious and making a mockery of
supplications. It rather means to remind the Muslims of their past glory
and grandeur; to show to them way of deliverance from the yoke of
despotism and to present to them the truth of religion. This method was
made manifest when Imam Khomeini (*r*), throughout the course of the
Islamic Revolution, exerted his utmost efforts and dedication along
these lines.

Construction of mosques near the graves
---------------------------------------

With the conditions that we shall mention, Shi\`ah *'ulama'* have
consensus of opinion regarding the permissibility of mosques near graves
and shrines of the prophets (*'a*) and righteous people. Some scholars
of the Ahl as-Sunnah also believe in its permissibility and others are
of the opinion that it is loathsome. The Wahhabis, however, in following
Ibn Taymiyyah and Shaykh Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab, acknowledge its
unlawfulness, and in order to prove their belief, they have resorted to
any *hadith*, no matter how weak {*da'if*} it is. For example, they have
cited as proof verse 21 of Surah al-Kahf and as we have stated earlier,
from this verse the correctness of the Wahhabi belief cannot be deduced
whatsoever.

It is said that some distinguished Shi\`ah *'ulama*' such as 'Allamah
Majlisi, 'Allamah Hilli and Shaykh at-Tusi have decreed that it is
loathsome to build a mosque beside a grave if the mosque is built on the
grave and the prayer is performed in such a manner that one has to face
the grave, otherwise according to them, there is nothing wrong as it is
permissible to build a mosque such as these in the vicinity of the holy
shrines of Imam ar-Rida (*'a*) and Hadrat Fatimah al-Ma'sumah.[^15] Some
leading Shi\`ah figures even opine that it is *mustahabb* to construct a
mosque near shrines.

While expressing his opinion on the permissibility of building mosques
near shrines under the conditions we have mentioned, 'Allamah Majlisi
points to some traditions that confirm the permissibility of praying
near the shrines of the Imams (*'a*). For instance, he narrates that the
Prophet (s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…وَاللهِ لَتُقْتَلُنَّ بِأرْضِ العِرَاقِ وَتُدْفَنُ بِهَا.” قُلْتُ:
“يَا رَسُولَ اللهِ! مَا لِمَنْ زَارَ قُبُورَنَا وَعَمَّرَهَا
وَتَعَاهَدَهَا؟” فَقَالَ لِي: “يَا أبَا الْحَسَنِ! إنَّ اللهَ تَعَالَى
جَعَلَ قَبْرَكَ وَقَبْرَ وُلْدِكَ بِقَاعاً مِنْ بِقَاعِ الْجَنَّةِ
وَعَرَصَةً مِنْ عَرَصَاتِهَا.”
  </p>
</blockquote>

{The Prophet (s) said:} “You shall be killed in Iraq and you shall also
be buried there!” I (Imam 'Ali (*'a*)) said: O Messenger of Allah! What
shall be the reward of the one will visit our graves, beautify them and
maintain them?” He (s) said to me: “Your grave and that of your sons are
among the edifices of paradise and among its fields.”[^16]

It can be deduced from this noble *hadith* that renovating the graves of
the Imams (*'a*) is *mustahabb*. Visiting them shall have otherworldly
rewards, and there is nothing wrong to pray in those sacred places.

Elevation of the graves
-----------------------

The Wahhabis, basing their opinions on a tradition, believe that graves
must not be elevated beyond the ground level, or that a mausoleum should
not be constructed upon graves. Abu'l-Hayyaj narrates that 'Ali (*'a*)
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألاَ أبْعَثُكَ عَلَى مَا بَعَثَنِي عَلَيْهِ رَسُولُ اللهِ ؟ أنْ لاَ
تَدَعَ قَبْراً مُشْرِفاً إلاَّ سَوَّيْتَهُ، وَلاَ تِمْثالاً إلاَّ
طَمَسْتَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

{O Abu'l-Hayyaj!} Be aware that I shall send you for a mission for which
I was dispatched by the Messenger of Allah (s). Your mission is to level
to the ground the elevated and ornamented graves and to demolish
statues.[^17]

Thereafter, the author of *Fath al-Majid* infers from this *hadith* that
construction of monuments-like domes and statutes, and elevation of
outstanding and looming graves are not permissible and they must be
destroyed.

In reply, it must be said that first of all, as indicated by the book,
*Tahdhib at-Tahdhib*, the *hadith* is not substantiated. Secondly, this
tradition has ruled on the demolition of statues and razing graves to
the ground, and this rule cannot be applied to edifices and domes.

Therefore, the Sunnis and the Shi\`ah have consensus of opinion that
graves must not be stupendous, but it is permissible to build mausoleums
over the graves of the righteous and the *'ulama*'. It is recorded in
the book, *Al-Ghadir*, that “Malik ibn Anas passed away in 179 AH and
his grave is in Medina, in the Baqi' cemetery in particular, and has a
small dome and a small building:[^18]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْهِ قُبَّةٌ صَغِيرَةٌ مُخْتَصَرُ البِنَاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Therefore, it is permissible to construct domes and shrine according to
the Maliki *'ulama*'. In the book, *Al-Fiqh 'ala al-Madhahib
al-Arba'ah*, it is thus stated about the manner of making grave:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيُنْدَبُ ارْتِفَاعُ التُّرَابِ فَوْقَ الْقَبْرِ بِقَدَرِ شِبْرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is *mustahabb* for the grave to be an inch above the ground.[^19]

The Wahhabi viewpoint concerning the ornamentation of mosques and holy shrines
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is the underpinning of the Wahhabi creed—if they do not find a
supporting document and tradition about a certain case, they will
prohibit it. It is for this reason that they do not consider the
ornamentation of mosques, such as the Masjid al-Haram (in Mecca) and
Masjid an-Nabi (in Medina), with lanterns, chandeliers, etc. as
permissible, because they have not found a pertinent *hadith*. In reply,
it must be said that if the Wahhabis really give importance to this
criterion, then they are not supposed to make use of any manifestation
of the modernity because there has not been any traditions about the
permissibility of using vehicles, telephones, etc.

Secondly, the fact that we have no *hadith* about the unlawfulness of
this kind of issues is perhaps proof that it is permissible and
acceptable to use them. In conclusion, it may be said that if
ornamentation of mosques does not distract the attention of people but
rather encourages them to be present in it, it is therefore permissible
and there is nothing wrong with it.

Traveling to for visit mosques
------------------------------

By relying on a certain tradition, the followers of Muhammad ibn 'Abd
al-Wahhab believe that traveling with the intention of surveying mosques
is unlawful. Their main basis is a tradition on the authority of Abu
Sa'id who narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تُشَدُّ الرِّحَالُ إلاَّ إلَى ثَلاَثَةِ مَسَاجِدَ: الْمَسْجِدُ
الْحَرَامُ، وَمَسْجِدِي هَذَا، وَالْمَسْجِدُ الأقْصَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

You are not supposed to travel except for the visitation {*ziyarah*} of
three mosques: Masjid al-Haram (in Mecca), this mosque of mine (Masjid
an-Nabi in Medina), and Masjid al-Aqsa (in Jerusalem).

The Wahhabis have concluded from this *hadith* that travel to see other
mosques are not lawful. Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ سَافَرَ لِمُجَرَّدِ زِيَارَةِ قُبُورِ الأنْبِيَاءِ
وَالصَّالِحِينَ فَهُوَ مُشْرِكٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He who travels only to visit the graves of the prophets and the pious is
a polytheist.[^20]

Of course, this *hadith* expresses the importance of these three mosques
and one cannot infer from it the unlawfulness of visiting other mosques.
Visiting mosques located in Muslim lands is not only not blameworthy but
it also acquaints us with the past glory and grandeur of Muslims and
thus encourages us to strive hard to regain that honor and dignity.

[^1]: Ibn al-Qudamah, Al-Mughni, vol. 2, p. 430.

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: Ibn al-Qudamah, Al-Mughni, vol. 4, pp. 426, 431.

[^4]: ‘Allamah Majlisi, Mir’at al-‘Uqul, vol. 14, p. 191.

[^5]: Surat at-Tawbah (or, Bara‘ah) 9:84.

[^6]: Surat al-Ahzab 33:23. Waqidi, Al-Maghazi, vol. 1, p. 312.

[^7]: Sayyid Ja‘far Murtadha, As-Sahih fi Sirat an-Nabi, vol. 4, p. 318.

[^8]: ‘Allamah Amini, Al-Ghadir, vol. 5, p. 194.

[^9]: ‘Ali Dawani, Firqeh-ye Wahhabi, pp. 32-40.

[^10]: ‘Ali Asghar Faqihi, Wahhabiyyan, p. 407.

[^11]: Surat al-Ahzab 33:33.

[^12]: Fath al-Majid, p. 261.

[^13]: Surat al-Kahf 18:21.

[^14]: Fath al-Majid, p. 267.

[^15]: Fatimah al-Ma‘sumah: the sister of Imam ar-Rida (‘a) who was
buried in Qum. [Trans.]

[^16]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 100, p. 120.

[^17]: Fath al-Majid, p. 493.

[^18]: Al-Ghadir, vol. 5, p. 195.

[^19]: Al-Fiqh ‘ala al-Madhahib al-Arba‘ah, vol. 1, p. 420.

[^20]: Fath al-Majid, p. 261.


