The Miracles {Karamah} of the Saints of God {Awliya’ Allah}
===========================================================

Another point upon which the Wahhabis differ with the Sunnis and the
Shi\`ah is the issue of miracles {*karamat*}. All Muslim sects regard
the prophets (*'a*) as people who performed miracles {*karamat*} and
wondrous feats {*mu'jizah*} because the Qur'an bears witness to the
authenticity of this point. Concerning the infallible Imams (*'a*),
however, the only group that does not recognize them to have performed
miracles and treat them as equal to others in the possession or
otherwise of this merit is the Wahhabis. The Shi\`ah characterize the
infallible Imams (*'a*) with having miraculous and marvelous powers,
substantiating this fact with religious traditions and historical
accounts.

Now, if anyone believes that there is a difference between a *mu'jizah*
and a *karamah*, emphasizing that *mu'jizah* refers to that which is
performed by the prophets as narrated in the Qur'an while *karamah*
refers to that which is performed by the infallible Imams (*'a*) as
narrated in the traditions, it must be said that in any case, the pure
Imams (*'a*) possess powers and forces which the common people
undoubtedly do not possess, and it makes no difference whether you call
it as *mu'jizah* or *karamah*. It is said that some of the real Gnostics
and mystics {*'urafa*'} possess this power and to a lower degree. It is
thus stated in the book, *Fath al-Majid*:

The miracles {*karamah*} of the saints of God {*awliya' Allah*} are the
products of divine attraction and grace, and this affair does not depend
upon the person or his knowledge and intention—like the *karamah* of
'Ali (may Allah be pleased with him) on numerous occasions and the
*karamah* of 'Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) when he came to Iran
and talked to Prophet Daniel in the town of Shush. Similarly, at the
time when Medina was afflicted with famine, 'Umar participated in the
prayer for rain and it came.

It must not remain unstated that we do not have reliable historical
evidence concerning 'Umar's coming to Iran and the town of Shush in
particular. It was rather 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (*'a*) who had come to
Shush and talked with Prophet Daniel (*'a*).

With regard to the famine, it must also be said that what has been
recorded in reliable sources is that at the request of 'Umar, 'Abbas the
uncle of the Prophet (s) performed this prayer.

Then, the said author adds that these miracles have no benefit and if
there were any benefit, it only pertains to that time. In short, after
the death of those possessing *karamah*, those miracles have no value
and one should not expect them.[^1]

Therefore, the Wahhabis believe in a sort of *karamah* for the Imams
(*'a*), the Companions and leading figures of the religion, but they
consider these miracles valuable only at the time when those possessing
them are alive because once a person departs from this world, the mark
of his existence, like that of other living creatures and even the
non-living ones, ceases to exist. They substantiate this statement of
theirs with the verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّكَ مَيِّتٌ وَإِنَّهُمْ مَيِّتُونَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You will indeed die, and they {too} will die indeed**,*[^2]

in which the death of the Prophet (s) has been treated equal with that
of the *awliya'*. They have also inferred from this verse that seeking
help from the souls of the prophets (*'a*) and the *awliya'* is a futile
and vain practice, and that *ziyarat al-qubur* {prayer recited on
visiting a grave} must be shunned. Of course, the prohibition of
*ziyarah* for women is even more emphasized and the philosophy behind it
is clear.

The miracles of the saints of God as the effect of satisfaction of the soul and God-wariness {taqwa}
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

According to the verses,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَنْ يَتَّقِ اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَهُ مَخْرَجًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoever is wary of Allah, He shall make a way out for him**,*[^3]

And

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ اللَّهَ لاَ يُضِيعُ أَجْرَ الْمُحْسِنِينَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed Allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous**,*[^4]

anyone who is wary of God, does righteous deeds and strives to offer
sacrifices and charities for the pleasure of Allah, God will show him
the way of deliverance from worldly and otherworldly adversities and
give him rewards in both worlds. And whenever the people of the world
benefit from his good deeds, meritorious rewards shall be granted to
him. So, anyone who is of the opinion that the ornament of *karamah*
befits a particular number of people and that these miracles are
valuable and effective as long as their possessors are alive, is
thinking and believing incorrectly because the quoted verses do not
point to a particular person or group.

Meanwhile, the ruling on the truly faithful persons is like the ruling
on water. When they are alive, everybody can benefit from their presence
and when they die and are buried, people can establish spiritual
communion with them, turning to them for help and seeking their
intermediation. In the same manner, underground water can be obtained by
the spade, wheelbarrow and bucket.

In spite of this, the Wahhabis believe that anyone who departs from this
world, even if he is the Prophet (s), his existence has no more effect
and anyone whose existence has no effect is not worthy of *tawassul* and
*ziyarah* to him would be of no avail, thus to seek someone who has no
benefit and gain for one is a futile and vain action.

Charities {khayrat}, alms {sadaqat} and vows {nudhurat}
-------------------------------------------------------

The other case which the Wahhabis regard as sources of polytheism are
charities {*khayrat*}, alms {*sadaqat*} and vows {*nudhurat*} given on
behalf of the dead. Thus, it is stated in the book, *Fath al-Majid*:

The holy shrines, sacred places and graves of the *awliya'* which have
become sites of *ziyarah*, charities, vows, etc. are places of Satan and
it is unlawful to sojourn in these places such as the Zaynabiyyah, the
Ra's al-Husayn in Syria, and Karbala' and Najaf in Iraq.

The commentator of this book thus writes:  
 There were such places in the Hijaz before, but thanks to God, they
were demolished through the able hand of King 'Abd al-'Aziz al Sa'ud,
and it is hoped that God would destroy the rest.[^5]

It must be said that if the Shi\`ah fulfill their vows and give alms in
sacred places, it is for the pleasure of God and such acts are not
tainted with any sort of polytheism. The issue that comes to mind is
this: Why do the Wahhabis overlook the corruptions and perversions that
plague the youth; the wealth that is plundered from Muslim countries;
and the culture and civilization that are being destroyed in Muslim
lands? Yet, they persistently find fault with charities, alms and
*ziyarah* to the graves of leading figures of the religion, and consider
that all the problems of Muslims emanate from these issues. At the time
when Europeans are mummifying their great ones and preserving the
putrefied bones of inventors in affection for their scientists, why are
the Wahhabis trying to destroy the relics and shrines of religious
personalities especially the pure Imams (*'a*) and consider *ziyarah* to
these great personalities as hindrance to development, where in fact
these personalities are the fountainheads of guidance {*hidayah*} and
enlightenment {*irshad*}?

Seeking blessings {tabarruk} from the sacred stones
---------------------------------------------------

Another case highlighted by the Wahhabis and with which they have found
fault is the consideration of some stones as sacred and making
*tawassul* to them because they equate this recourse with a sort of
idol-worship. As such, they believe that anyone, who takes recourse to
these stones, makes a vow upon them, and takes them as intercessors, is
a polytheist {*mushrik*}:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَيَقُولُونَ هَؤُلاَءِ شُفَعَاؤُنَا عِنْدَ اللَّهِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they say, 'These are our intercessors with Allah'**.*[^6]

And with this belief, they have thus written:  
 It is not permissible for the stones from which people seek *tabarruk*
and make vows upon to remain on the surface of the earth. And it is
incumbent upon Muslims to obliterate them whenever they have the
opportunity to do so.[^7]

The fact must be acknowledged that there is no Muslim country in which
Muslims express reverence to a stone, regarding it as an intercessor,
and if out of ignorance and heedlessness, some Muslims revere an old
stone or tree, asking it for mercy, this practice must not be ascribed
to Muslims in general.  
 Of course, there are two stones and two hills whose Qur'anic sanctity
made Muslims honor them. They are the following:

1. The Black Stone {*al-hajar al-aswad*}: This stone is situated in a
corner of the *Ka'bah*, and the beginning and end of every *tawaf*
{circumambulation of the *Ka'bah*} is determined by it.

2. The Station of Abraham {*maqam ibrahim*}: The Qur'an enjoins the
Muslims to perform prayer at this site:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَاتَّخِذُوا مِنْ مَقَامِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ مُصَلًّى.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Take the venue of prayer from Abraham's Station**.*[^8]

3. The hills of Safa and Marwah: Regarding these two hills, the Qur'an
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ الصَّفَا وَالْمَرْوَةَ مِنْ شَعَائِرِ اللَّهِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed Safa and Marwah are among Allah's sacraments**.*[^9]

Of course, it must be noted that if people honor them, and hold in high
esteem the Prophet of Islam (s), the pure Imams (*'a*), the Qur'an, and
the religious personalities, it is because they are among the sacraments
of Allah and honoring them indicates the purity of hearts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَنْ يُعَظِّمْ شَعَائِرَ اللَّهِ فَإِنَّهَا مِنْ تَقْوَى
الْقُلُوبِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoever venerates the sacraments of Allah—indeed that arises from
God-wariness of hearts**.*[^10]

Seeking Tabarruk from the Prophet (s) and his relics
----------------------------------------------------

The Muslims—Sunnis and Shi\`ah—have consensus of opinion on this issue;
that the Prophet (s) and his relics must be honored and revered. In
confirming this subject one may refer to many historical accounts and
the sayings of leading Sunni personalities. For example, Hadrat Zahra
(*'a*) and other Companions used to invoke blessings from the soil of
the grave of the Holy Prophet (s); 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar who strove to
preserve the relics of the Holy Prophet (s) even tried to preserve a
tree under which the Prophet (s) once rested; Ahmad ibn Hanbal deems it
permissible to invoke blessings from the relics of the Messenger of
Allah (s); and Sunni *fuqaha* believe that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زِيَارَةُ القُبُورِ أفْضَلُ الْمَنْدُوبَاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Visitation of graves is the best of all recommended (*mustahabb*) acts.

It is important to note that for this reason, the Prophet (s) and his
successors (*'a*) and their relics as well as other religious objects
must be honored as they are the manifestations of the religion and
truthfulness of revelation.[^11]

[^1]: Fath al-Majid, pp. 93, 137, 169.

[^2]: Surat az-Zumar, 39:30.

[^3]: Surat at-Talaq 65:2.

[^4]: Surat at-Tawbah (or, al-Bara‘ah) 9:120.

[^5]: Fath al-Majid, p. 137.

[^6]: Surat Yunus, 10:18.

[^7]: Fath al-Majid, p. 274.

[^8]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:125.

[^9]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:158.

[^10]: Surat al-Hajj 22:32.

[^11]: See Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 1, pp. 59, 105; vol. 7, p. 199; Fath
al-Bari, vol. 1, pp. 256, 408; ‘Allamah Amini, Al-Ghadir, vol. 3, p. 170
as cited in Ahmad Ahmadi Miyanji, At-Tabarruk bi Athar ar-Rasul, p. 66.


