Part 1
======

Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as), as we are told by Shaykh Taqi al-Deen
Ibrabim ibn All ibn al-Hassan ibn Muhammad ibn Salih
al-’Amili-alKaf’ami, has made the following statement with regard to the
merits of reciting chapters and verses of the Holy Qur’an:

One who recites ten verses in one night will never be written down
among the indifferent. One who recites fifty verses will be written down
among those who remember Allah often (i.e., thakireen). If he recites a
hundred, he will be written down among those who constantly supplicate
(qaniteen). If he recites three hundred, he will be written down among
the winners (faaizeen). If lie recites five hundred verses, he will be
written down among those who reach the degree of jitihad (muitahideen).
And if one recites a thousand verses, he will be rewarded with one
kantar which is five thousand mithqals: each mithqal is twenty-four
karats the smallest of which [in as far as the weighing in the hereafter
is concerned] is as big as the mountain of Uhud, and the largest extends
from the earth to the sky (Misbah al-Kaf’ami, Vol. 2, p. 531).

The Imain (as) has also said, as quoted in the same reference, "If one
recites the Qur’an, Allah will let him enjoy his vision, and such
recitation decreases the penalty of his parents even if they may be
kajirs (apostates)." Imagine, dear reader, what it does to your parents
who raised you as a Muslim...

The reader is requested to refer to what is indicated early in this
book with reference to who Imam al-Sadiq (as) was, what his source of
information was, and what relation he had had with the Messenger of
Allah (pbuh). We, however, would like to add one more statement made by
this great Imam (as) that sheds light on his narration of Audit/i, since
we all know that had it/i is the second source of the Sunnah, the Holy
Qur’an being the first. Imam al-Sadiq (as) has said,

My hadith is the same as my father’s, while my father’s hadith is the
same as my grandfather’s, and the hadith of my grandather is similar to
that of al-Husain ((as) Husain’s hadith is the same as that of al-Hasan;
al-Hasan’s hadith is similar to that of the Commander of the Faithful
(as); the hadith of the Commander of the Faithful (as) is the same
hadith of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh), and the hadith of the Messenger
of Allah (pbuh) is the speech of Allah, the Lord of Dignity and
Greatness (This statement is recorded onp. 53, Vol. 1, of al-Kulayni’s
book AI-Kafi).

From the viewpoint of Muslims who believe in and follow the flqh of
Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as), whatever he said was the echo of what his
great grandfather the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) had said. He is one of
twelve Imams followed byJa’feri Shi’as and who the latter believe are
divinely inspired; they are the Imams of AhI al-Bayt (as) referred to in
verse 33 of Surat al-Ahzab (Chapter 33). The fad that their number is
twelve and that all of them descended from Quraysh is stated in the
Sahib books of our Sunni brethren. This is what all3ukhari and Muslims,
as well as many others, have confirmed. Some Sunni references indicate
that the Prophet (pbuh) named all of them, saying that the first was Ali
ibn Abu Talib (as) followed by his son alHasan (as) then al-Hasan’s
brother al-Husain (as), followed by nine from the offspring of al-Husain
(as) the last of whom is al-Mahdi (as).

The great Sunni Hanafi author of Yanabee’ al-Mawaddaa narrates an
incident in his book as follows:

A Jew named al-A’tal came to the Prophet (pbuh) and said, "Muhammad! I
wish to ask you about certain things which I have been keeping to
myself; so, if you answer them, I shall declare my acceptance of Islam
before you." The Prophet (pbuh) said, "Ask me, O father of Imarah!" So
he asked him about many things till he was satisfied and admitted that
the Prophet (pbuh) was right. Then he said, "Tell me about your wasi
(successor): who is he? No prophet can ever be without a wasi, and our
prophet Moses (as) had appointed Yusha’ IJoshna] son of Noon as his
successor." He (pbuh) said, "My wasi is Ali ibn Abu Talib followed by my
grandsons al-Hasan and al-Husain followed by nine men from the loins of
al-Husain." He said, "Then name them for me, O Muhammad!"

The Prophet (pbuh) said, "Once al-Husain departs, he will be followed
by his son Ali; when Ali departs, his son Muhammad will succeed him.
When Muhammad departs, his son Ja’fer will follow him. When Ja’fer
departs, he will be followed by his son Mousa. When Mousa departs, his
son All will succeed him. When Ali departs, his son Muhammad will
succeed him. When Muhammad departs, his son al-Hujjah Muhammad al-Mahdi
will succeed him. These are the twelve ones." So that Jew embraced Islam
and praised Allah for having guided him(‘This is recorded on p.440 of
al-Hafiz al-Qandoozi al-Hanafi’s book Yanabi’ al-Mawaddak and also by
al-Hamawayni in his book Faraid al-Simtain wherein he relies on the
authority of Mujahid who quotes Ibn Abbas).

If we wish to turn the pages of Shi’a books and discern the facts the
contain with regard to this subject, we will surely find many times a
many ahadith as this one, but this suffices to prove that Sum scholars
do admit that the number of the Imams (as) is twelve, an there are no
such Imams besides Ali (as) and his purified offspring.

What strengthens our conviction that the Twelve Imams fror AhI al-Bayt
(as) were never tutored by any of the Ummah’s scholai is the fact that
no historian, nor any traditionist, nor any biographei has ever
indicated that one of the Imams from Ahl al-.Bayt (as learned what he
knew from some suhaba or tubi’een as is the cas with all the Ummah’s
scholars and Imams.

Abu Haneefah, for example, was a student of Imam Ja’fer-a] Sadiq (as);
Malik was a student of Abu Haneefab; al-Shafi’i learne’ from Malik and
so did Afimed ibn Hanbal. As regarding the Imams from AhI al-Bayt (as),
their knowledge is gifted by Allah, Glory and Exaltation be to Him, and
they inherit such knowledge son from father for they are the ones to
whom the Almighty specifically refers where he says "Then We gave the
Book for an inheritance to those whor We chose from among Our servants"
(Holy Qur’an, 35:32). This much ought to convince the discreet reader
that th information stated in this section is taken from a very reliable
source

**The Basmala**

Whenever we recite a verse from the Holy Qur’an, we start with th
Basmala, that is: Bismillahir-Rahrnunir-Rahuin, In the Name of Allal the
Most Gracious, the most Merciful. In the Fatiha, the first chapte of the
Holy Qur’an, this Basmala is a verse all by itselt whereas in a, other
chapters, with the exception of Bara’ah or Tawbah where it not recited,
it serves as an introduction to other verses. On pp. 39-4t Vol. 1, of
his Taft ir, al-Qummi chronologically arranges the isnud o one
particular statement made by Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) an’ recounts the
longest list of narrators we have ever come across. Th list of narrators
ends with Abu Busayr, a well-known companion o this great Imam (as),
saying that he once asked Imam al-Sadiq (as about the tafsir of
Bismillu/iir-Rahmunir-Rahim, so he said, and xv would like to quote his
statement as well as its isnad in its origins text as follows:

After the long list of the said narrators, the Imam (as) indicates the
derivation of each letter of the Basmala as follows:

The "ba" is derived from "baha-Allah," the Splendor of Allah; the
‘seen" is derived from "sanna-Allah," the Majesty of Allah; the "meem"
is derived from "mulk-Allah," the Kingdom of Allah; "Allah’ is the God
of everything; "alRahman" is the One Who is Merciful to all His
creation; "al-Rahim" is the One Who singles out those who believe in Him
to receive the greatest share of His mercy.

On p. 506 of Misbah al-Kaf’umi, the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted
saying that when a teacher teaching a child to recite the Holy Qur’an
tells the child to recite "Bismillahir-Rahmanir-Rahim," and the child
recites it, Allah will decree a clearance for the child, for his
parents, and for the teacher, from hell, and that it is comprised of
nineteen letters, the same number corresponding to the number of the
keepers of the gates of hell; therefore, whoever pronounces it, Allah
will permit these letters to close the gates of hell against him.

Now let us research and find out how each of the 114 chapters of the
Holy Qur’an stands out among the rest, and what rewards the faithful
will Insaia-Allah receive from the most Generous One for reciting it.
Following is a translation from the Arabic of most of the original text
on pp. 506-542 of Vol. 2 of Misbah ul-Kaf’umi by Shaykh Taqi al-Deen
Ibrahim ibn Ali ibn al-Hassan ibn Muhammad ibn Salih al-’Axnili
al-Kaf’ami, in addition to selected texts included in Vol. 89 of
al-Majlisi’s Bihar ul-Anwar

**Chapter 1 (al-Fatiha)**

Al-Tibrisi, in his exegesis Mujma’rd-Bayun fee Tafsir al-Qur’un,
provides ten names for the first chapter of the Holy Qur’an, namely
Surat al-Fatiha:

al-Fatiha, the one that opens, for it is like a gate when opened, it
leads one to the Book of Allah;

al-Hamd, the praise, for its verses are clearly praising the
Almighty;

Ummul Kitab, the mother of the Book, for its status is superior to all
other chapters of the Holy Qur’an, or like the war standard: it is
always in the forefront;

al-Sab’, the seven verses, for it is comprised of seven verses and the
only one whose verses are seven, and there is no room here to elaborate
on the merits of the number 7 especially since most readers of this book
are already aware of such merits;

al-Mathani, the oft-repeated Chapter, for no other Chapter of the Holy
Qur’an is repeated as often as this one;

al-Kafiya, the chapter that suffices and that has no substitute; you
simply cannot replace its recitation with that of any other chapter of
the Holy Qur’an in the first two rek’ats of the prayers, whereas it can
substitute others;

al-Asas, the basis or foundation or bed-rock, a connotation of its
being the foundation upon which the Holy Qur’an stands just as the
Basmala ("Bismillahir-Rahmanir-Rahim") is the foundation of the
Fatiha;

alShifa, the healing, due to the fact that the Messenger of Allah
(pbuh) has said that the Fatiha heals from all ailments except death;
and al-Salat, the prayers, or the basic requirement of the daily
prayers, one without the recitation of which no prayer can be accepted,
especially since tue Prophet (pbuh) has quoted the Almighty saying, ‘The
prayers have been divided between Me and My servant: one half for Me,
and one for him;" so when one recites it and says, "Alhamdu lillahi
Rabbil-’Alameen," the Almighty says, "My servant has praised Me." And
when he says, "Arrahmanir-Raheem," the Almighty says, "My servant has
praised Me." And when he says, "Maliki YawmidDeen," Allah says, "My
servant has exalted Me." And when he says, "Iyyaka Na’budu wa iyyaka
nasta’een," Allah will say, "This is a covenant between Me and My
servant, and My servant shall be granted the fulfillment of his pleas."
Then if he finishes reciting the Fatiha to the end, Allah will again
confirm His promise by saying, "This is for [the benefit of] My servant,
and My servant will be granted the answer to his wishes."

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted by Abu Ali al-Fadl ibn
al-Hassan ibn al-Eadi al-Tibrisi, may Allah have mercy on his soul,
saying that one who recites al-Fatiha will be regarded by the Almighty
as though he recited two-thirds of the Holy Qur’an and as though he gave
by way of charity to each and every believing man and woman. "By the One
in Whose hand my soul is," the Prophet (pbuh) continues, "Allah Almighty
did not reveal in the Torah, the Gospel, or the Psalms any chapter like
it; it is the Mother of the Book and alSab’ al-Mathani (the oft-repeated
seven verses), and it is divided between Allah and His servant, and His
servant shall get whatever he asks; it is the best Sura in the Book of
the most Exalted One, and it is a healing from every ailment except
poison, which is death." He (pbuh) is also quoted by al-Kaf’ ami as
saying, "He (Allah) bestowed it upon me as His blessing, making it
equivalent to the Holy Qur’an, saying, ‘And We have granted you al-Sab’
al-Mathani and the Great Qur’an (Surat al-Hijr,

verse 87).’ It is the most precious among the treasures of the ‘Arsh."
Indeed, Allah, the most Sublime, has chosen Muhammad (pbuh) alone to be
honored by it without doing so to any other Prophet or Messenger of His
with the exception of Sulayman (Solomon), peace be upon him, who was
granted the Basmala (see verse 30 of Surat al-Naml, Chapter of the Ant).
One who recites it, being fully convinced of his following in the
footsteps of Muhammad (pbuh) and his Progeny (as), adhering to its
injunctions, believing in its outward and inward meanings, will be
granted by Allah for each of its letters a blessing better than what all
there is in the world of wealth and good things, and whoever listens to
someone reciting it will receive one third of the rewards due to its
reciter.


