Part 2
======

**Chapter 15 (al-Hijr)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that one who recites this
chapter will receive ten good deeds for the number of each Muhajir
(immigrant from Medina) and Ansar (Medenite supporter) and the number of
those who ridiculed the Prophet (pbuh).

**Chapter 16 (al-Nahl)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that one who recites this
chapter will not be tried by Allah with regard to what blessings He had
bestowed upon him during the life of this world, and if he dies on that
day or night, he will be granted rewards equivalent to those due to one
who dies after having left a good will. The Imam (as) has also said that
one who recites it once a month will be regarded as having paid his dues
in the life of this world.

**Chapter 17 (al-Isra’)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that whoever recites this
Chapter and is moved upon remembering his parents will be given the
weight of two kantars of rewards. Imam al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying
that one who recites this Chapter every Friday night will not die before
seeing al-Qa’im (al-Mahdi), peace be upon him, and will be among his
supporters.

**Chapter 18 (al-Kahaf)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that whoever recites
Surat al-Kahaf will be admitted into Paradise, and if he recites it on a
Friday, Allah will forgive the sins he has committed or will be
committing in ten days, and he will be granted light reaching the
heavens and will be protected against the dissension of the antiChrist.
Imam al-Sadiq (as) has also said that when this Chapter was revealed, it
was escorted by seventy thousand angels, and its greatness filled the
earth and the skies, and that whoever recites it on the eve of every
Friday will die as a martyr and will be resurrected in the company of
the martyrs and will stand with them.

**Chapter 19 (Maryam)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that anyone who recites this
Chapter will be granted rewards as many as the number of those who
believed in Zakariyya (as) and those who did not. Imam al-Sadiq has said
that if one recites it quite often, he will not die before he, his
wealth, and his offspring will be blessed by it, and on the Day of
Judgment, he will be among the supporters of Jesus, peace be upon him,
and be will be granted in the hereafter what Solomon (as) was granted in
the life of this world.

**Chapter 20 (Ta-Ha)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is cited saying that one who recites
Surat Taha will be granted rewards equivalent to what the Muhajirun and
Ansar will be granted, that the people of Paradise recite only two
chapters of the Holy Qur’an: Ya-Sin and Ta-Ha, and that Allah Almighty
created both of these Chapters two thousand years before creating Adam
(as). "Never cease reciting it," Imam al-Sadiq (as) used to say, "for
Allah, the most Exalted One, loves it and loves those who recite it.
Whoever recites it will be given his book (of reckoning) in his right
hand, and he will not be asked about his deeds and will be granted of
the rewards that with which he will be pleased."

**Chapter 21 (al-Anbiya’)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said, "Whoever recites
Surat-alAnbiya’ will be tried by Allah an easy trial, and each and every
prophet mentioned in the Holy Qur’an will shake hands with him." Imam
al-Sadiq (as) has said, "One who recites it out of his love for it will
be in the company of the prophets in Paradise, and he will be highly
respected in the life of this world."

**Chapter 22 (al-Hajj)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that anyone who recites
it will be granted as many rewards as the number of those who performed
the pilgrimage and the ‘runra. Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq is quoted saying
that whoever recites it every three days will perform the pilgrimage to
the House of Allah during that year, and if he dies on his way, he will
enter Paradise.

**Chapter 23 (aI-Muminun)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that one who recites this
Chapter will be given the glad tidings by the angels of the Spirit, of
fragrance, and of whatever cools his eyes when the angel of death (as)
descends upon him. Imam al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying that if someone
recites it every Friday, his deeds will be sealed with happiness, and
his residence will be in the highest pinnacle of Paradise among the
prophets and messengers.

**Chapter 24 (al-Nur)**

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, is quoted
saying that whoever recites it will be granted ten rewards for the
number of all those who believed in the past as well as those who will
in the future believe. Abu Abdullah Imam al-Sadiq (as) has also said,
"Fortify your wealth, your honor, and your women with it."

**Chapter 25 (al-Furqan)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that for one who recites
this Chapter each day or each night, nobody in his family will be guilty
of the sin of adultery, and when he dies, his soul will be escorted to
his grave by seventy thousand angels who will pray and seek Allah’s
forgiveness for him till he is placed in his grave, and he will enter
Paradise without a trial. Imam al-Kazim (as) has said, "Allah will never
torment anyone who recites Surat al-Furqan every night, nor will He try
him, and his residence will be in the highest level of Paradise."

**Chapter 26 (al-Shu’ara’)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said, "One who recites
Surat-alShu’ara will receive ten good deeds for the number of all those
who believed in Noah (as) and who disbelieved in Hud, Shu’ayb, Salih,
Abraham, and Jesus, peace be upon them, as well as those who disbelieved
in Muhammad (pbuh)." Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying that one
who recites all chapters which begin with "Taa-Seen" will be among the
true servants of Allah.

**Chapter 27 (al-NamI)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that one who recites this
Chapter will receive ten good deeds for the number of each and everyone
who believed in Sulayman (as) and who disbelieved in Hud, Salih,
Shu’ayb, and Ibrahim, peace be upon them, and that he will get out of
his grave shouting: "La Ilaha Illah-A fluli?

**Chapter 28 (al-Qasas)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that Allah will grant anyone who
recites this Chapter ten good deeds for each and every believer and
disbeliever in Moses (as).

**Chapter 29 (al-’Ankabut)**

Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said, "One who recites it will receive
ten good deeds for the number of each and every believer and
disbeliever." He (as) has also said, "One who recites both Surat alRum
and al-’Ankabut during the twenty-third night of the month of Ramadhan
will, by Allah, be among the people of Paradise."

**Chapter 30 (al-Rum)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that one who recites
Surat al-Rum will receive ten good deeds for each angel praising Allah
between the earth and the heavens, and he will have compensated for
whatever he missed during his day and night, adding, according to
al-Kaf’ami, "I do not make any execption for it, nor do I fear (for
having said so) that I am committing a sin (for making such a
statement), and these Suras enjoy a special favor with Allah; I mean
Surat al-’Ankabut and Surat al-Rum."

**Chapter 31 (Luqman)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that whoever recites
this Chapter will be in the companiony of Luqman (as) on the Day of
Judgment, and he will be rewarded with ten good deeds for everyone who
enjoins what is right and forbids what is wrong. He (as) has also said,
"Whoever recites it during the night, Allah Almighty will assign thirty
angels to protect him from Iblis and his hosts till the morning, and if
he recites it during the day, they will protect him from Iblis and his
hosts till the night."

**Chapter 32 (aI-Sajdah)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that whoever recites Surat
Luqman, Surat al-Sajdah, and Surat al-Mulk will be regarded as though he
spent the entire night of Laylatul-Qadr worshipping the Almighty. Imam
al-Sadiq (as) has also said, "If one reads it during Friday eve, Allah,
the most Exalted One, will grant him his book (of reckoning) in his
right hand, and He will not try him for what he had done, and he will be
in the company of Muhammad, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him and
his progeny."

**Chapter 33 (al-Ahzab)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said the following about this
Chapter: "Whoever reads it and teaches it to his family and those whom
his right hand possesses will be granted security against the torment of
the grave." Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said that one who reads it
quite often will be on the Day of Judgment in the neighborhood of the
Prophet (pbuh).

**Chapter 34 (Saba’)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said, "On the Day of Judgment, each
and every prophet will greet and be the companion of anyone who recites
Surat Saba’." Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said that whoever recites
both Hamd Chapters on the eve of a Friday will remain protected by
Allah, and so will his wealth, during his day, and he will not suffer
anything evil and will be granted of the best of the life of this world
and the life hereafter, so much so that no heart can ever desire more no
matter how hard to satisfy it may be.

**Chapter 35 (Fatir)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that one who recites Surat Fatir
seeking thereby to please Allah will be called upon by each of the eight
gates of Paradise to enter from whichever he desires.


