Chapter 36 (ya-sin)
===================

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said, "Anyone who enters a cemetery
and recites Surat Ya-Sin will have then decreased their [the dead’s]
suffering and will receive good deeds equalling the number of those
buried therein." He (p1mb) has also said that in the Torah it is
described as the Chapter that crowns the one who recites it with the
best of the life of this world and the life hereafter, and it wards off
from him the trials of this life and the torment of the life to come.
Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying that whoever recites this
Chapter seeking the Pleasure of Allah will be forgiven and will be
granted of the rewards as though he had recited the entire text of the
Holy Qur’an twelve times. He (as) has also said, "For everything there
is a heart, and the heart of the Qur’an is Chapter Ya-Sin; so, whoever
recites it during the day will be protected and sustained till the
night." Chapter 37 (al-Saffat)

Ahmed ibn Idris quotes al-Ash’ari who quotes Muhammad ibn Hassan
quoting Ibn Mahran quoting al-Bataini quoting Ibn al-’AAaa quoting Imam
Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) as saying that whoever recites it on a Friday will
be protected from all worldly evils, sustained in the life of this world
with the most generous portion of sustenance, and Allah will not let his
wealth, or offspring, or body be affected by the mischief of any
accursed Satan. Furthermore, if he dies that day or night, he will die
as a martyr and will be admitted into Paradise in the company of the
martyrs and in their level of Paradise. He (as), as stated on p. 419 of
al-Tibrisi’s Makarirn ut-A khlaq, is quoted saying that this Chapter is
recited by those who seek dignity in the life of this world and the life
to come. The same is stated on p. 296, Vol. 89, of al-Majlisi’s Bihar
al-Anwur. Truly lucky are those blessed with reciting this glorious
Chapter of the Holy Qur’an on a continuous basis for they will be
honored in this life and the life to come. May Allah Ta’ala make us
among them, Allahomma Aameen.

**Chapter 38 (Sad)**

Ibn al-Bataini traces the isnad of the following tradition to ‘Amr ibn
Jubayr who quotes his father citing Imam Abu Ja’fer al-Baqir (as)
saying, "One who recites Surat Sad during a Friday night will be granted
of the good of this life and that of the hereafter what nobody else is
granted except either a messenger-prophet or an angel near to Allah, and
Allah will admit him into Paradise as well as all the members of his
household whom he loves, including his servant, or anyone else."

**Chapter 39 (al-Zumar)**

Page 102 of Thuwub al-A‘mal details the rewards of the lucky ones who
are blessed with reciting this Sura. Ibn al-Bataini quotes Sandal
quoting Harun ibn Kharija quoting Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’fer alSadiq (as)
saying:

Whoever memorizes this Sura will be granted by Allah dignity in this
life and the life to come; He will be honored even if he has neither
wealth nor populous lineage, and everyone will be in awe of him; He will
prohibit hell from touching him and build him in Paradise a thousand
cities, in each one of which will be a thousand mansions, each
containing a hundred huris. In addition, he will have two flowing
fountains and two springs as well as two other ones in two gardens with
dark-green foliage and other hurts in pavilions confining their looks
only to him, and he will have two pairs of each of the fruit trees (of
Paradise).

**Chapter 40 (aI-Mu’min)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said, "The souls of each and every
prophet, siddeeq, and believer will bless and seek forgiveness for
anyone who recites this Sura." Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said that
Allah will forgive all the past and future sins of anyone who recites it
once every three nights, and that He will make him uphold righteous
speech and make the life hereafter better for him than this life.

**Chapter 41 (al-Sajda or Fussilat)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said, "Whoever recites it will be
granted ten good deeds for each letter in it." Imam .{a’fer al-Sadiq
(as) has said that it will be light for him on the Day of Judgment
extended as long as his eyes can see, and a source of joy, and he will
live in the life of this world praised, well-liked.

**Chapter 42 (al-Shura)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying, "Whoever recites Surat
al-Shura will be among those whom the angels bless and for whom they
will seek Allah’s forgiveness and mercy." Imam Ja’fer-alSadiq (as) has
said that one who recites it will be resurrected on the Day of Judgment
with a face like a full moon.

**Chapter 43 (aI-Zukhruf)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that whoever recites
this Chapter will be on the Day of Judgment among those addressed by
Allah thus: "O My servants! There is no fear on you this Day, nor shall
you grieve." Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying that one who
recites it quite often will receive security in his grave from Allah
against everything harmful and against the constriction of the grave
till he stands before Allah Ta’ala, and it will be this Chapter that
will permit him to enter into Paradise.

**Chapter 44 (aI-Dukhkhan)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that whoever recites
this Sura on a Friday night will be forgiven and will receive for each
of its verses the rewards of one who sets a hundred thousand slaves
free, and seventy thousand angels will seek forgiveness for him; and
Allah will build a mansion for whoever recites it on Fridays. Imam
Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said that one who recites it during his
obligatory and optional prayers will be resurrected among those who will
be secure and Allah will shade him with the shade of His ‘Arsh and will
try him an easy trial and give him his book (of reckoning) in his right
hand.

**Chapter 45 (aI-Jathiya)**

Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) has said the following about this Chapter:

"The faults of whoever reads it will be covered by Allah Who will
remove from him his fear when he is brought for judgement." Imam Ja’fer
al-Sadiq (as) has said that whoever recites it shall never see the fire,
and he will be in the company of Muhammad (pbuh).

**Chapter 46 (al-Ahqaf)**

Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said, "One who recites it will receive
ten good deeds for each particle of sand in the world." He has also
said, "One who recites it each night or each Friday night, Allah will
not expose him to any fear in the life of this world and will receive
security from the horrors of the Day of Judgement."

**Chapter 47 (Muhammad)**

He (as) is also quoted saying that if one recites this Sura, it will be
incumbent upon the Almighty, the Praised One, to let him drink of the
rivers of Paradise, and that doubt will never enter his mind with regard
to his creed.

**Chapter 48 (al-Fath)**

He (as) is also quoted saying that whoever recites this Chapter will be
as though he was present when the Prophet (pbuh) opened Mecca and was
with him when he (pbuh) received the oath of allegiance under the tree.
Imam al-Sadiq (as) has said the following with regard to this Chapter:
"Fortify with it your wealth, women, and whatever your right hands
possess against harm."

**Chapter 49 (al-Hujurat)**

Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said that whoever recites this Sura will
be granted good deeds for each and everyone who obeyed Allah Ta’ala and
who disobeyed Him. Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said, "One who recites
it every night or every day will be among those who will visit the
Prophet (pbuh)."

**Chapter 50 (Qaf)**

Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) has said the following about this Chapter:
"Whoever reads it, Allah will make the agony of death easy for him," and
also, "Whoever recites it quite often in his obligatory and optional
prayers will receive an increase from Allah Ta’ ala in his sustenance,
and He will give him his book in his right hand and will try him with an
easy trial."

**Chapter 51 (al-Tharlyat)**

Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said, "One who recites it will receive
ten good deeds for each and every wind that blew and swept in the life
of this world," and that whoever recites it during his day or night will
have an ease in his livelihood.

**Chapter 52 (al-Tur)**

He (as) is also quoted saying that one who recites this Sura, Allah
will grant him security from His torment and will let him enjoy His
Paradise. He (as) is also quoted saying that whoever recites it will
have the best of both worlds.

**Chapter 53 (aI-Najm)**

He (as) is also quoted saying that whoever recites this Chapter will
receive ten good deeds for each and every one who believed in the
Prophet (pbuh) and who disbelieved in him, and that whoever recites it
quite often every day or every night, he will live among the people
praised, loved.

**Chapter 54 (al-Qamar)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that whoever recites this Sura
every other day will be resurrected with his face looking like a full
moon. Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said, "Whoever recites it will be
resurrected by Allah from his grave conveyed on a she-camel of the
she-camels of Paradise." Here we have to stop for a moment and consider
the implication of the "she-camel" to which the Imam (as) refers in this
tradition. Surely on the Day of Judgment there will be a great deal of
movement and commotion: humans will be arranged in groups, as we are
told in Surat al-Saffat and elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an, each group
having common denominators, the good with the good and vice versa. The
Imam (as) is referring to the she-camels of Paradise, not the she-camels
in Paradise, for there are no she-camels in Paradise.

After all, what would she-camels be doing in Paradise, anyway?! Those
to whom the Imam (as) spoke did not know means of transportation other
than she-camels. His reference to she-camels can be seen as implying
means of transportation provided by the angels charged with Paradise and
with transporting to it the fortunate ones who will make it their home
from the area where they will be tried and once their destiny is
determined by the Supreme Judge, the Judge of all judges, the King of
all kings, Glory and Exaltation to Him. What confirms the view that
there are no camels in Paradise is one hadith cited on p. 394 of Ali ibn
Adham’s Tafsir in which Imam .la’fer al-Sadiq (as), through isnad, is
quoted saying that there will be no animals in Paradise except Bal’am
ibn Ba’ur’s donkey (provided to transport the newly born Christ and his
mother, peace be upon them), the she-camel of prophet Salih (as), the
wolf of prophet Yousuf (as), and the companion dog of the People of the
Cave.

This is stated on p. 195, Vol. 8, of Bihar al-Anwar. Space, distance,
movement, emotions and feelings, colors, perfumes and odors, etc. will
be as real in the life hereafter as they are in this one, only much more
intensely, and much more real, than we can ever imagine. To move from
one place to another will not be subject to one’s own desire or free
will. Desire and free will, among other things, are at our disposal only
in this short life, not in the life to come. This and many more details
of the hereafter will Insha-Allah be provided and documented in a book I
hope my Maker will enable me to write; your prayers, dear reader, are
sincerely solicited.


