Part 3
======

**Chapter 55 (al-Rahman)** Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) has said the
following about this Chapter: "Whoever reads it, Allah will have mercy
on his weakness and be regarded as having thanked Allah for it." Imam
Ja’fer alSadiq (as) Is quoted saying that there is a bride for
everything, and the Qur’an’s bride is Surat al-Rahman, and that Allah
will brighten the face of everyone who recites it quite often [on the
Day of Judgement].

**Chapter 56 (aI-Waqi’a)**

Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said, "Whoever recites it will not be
written down among the heedless, and whoever recites it every Friday
night will be loved by Allah."

**Chapter 57 (al-Hadeed)**

He (as) is also quoted saying that one who recites this Sura will be
written down among those who believed in Allah and His Messenger (pbuh).
The Imam (as) has also said, "Whoever recites all the Suras which start
by glorifying Allah before going to bed will not die before meeting
al-Qa’im (al-Mahdi), peace be upon him, and if he does die, he will be a
neighbour of the Prophet (pbuh)."

**Chapter 58 (al-Mujadila)**

He (as) is also quoted saying that whoever recites this Chapter will be
written down as being among Allah’s party, the ones who will achieve
victory on the Day of Judgement . The Imam (as) has also said, "Whoever
recites Surat al-Hadeed and al-Mujadila in his obligatory prayers, and
continues to do so, will not be exposed by Allah to any hardship as long
as he lives."

**Chapter 59 (aI-Hashr)**

Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said that whoever recites Surat alHashr
will be blessed by Allah Who will take his soul as though he had been a
martyr, and Paradise, hell, the ‘Arsh and the Kursi will all seek
Allah’s forgiveness for him, and that whoever recites whatever

**Chapter 60 (aI-Mumtahana)**

AI-Kaf’ami quotes the Prophet of Islam (pbuh) saying the following
about this Chapter: "Whoever reads it will receive intercession from all
believing men and women on the Day of Judgement ." Both alMajlisi and
al-Tibrisi tell us that Ibn al-Bataini traces the isnad of this
tradition to ‘Asim al-Khayyat who quotes Imam Ali ibn al-Husain alSajjad
Zaynul-’Abidin (as) saying, "Whoever recites this Sura in his obligatory
and optional prayers will have been ascertained by Allah as having full
conviction, and He will fill his heart with light, and neither poverty
nor insanity will ever afflict him nor any of his offspring."

**Chapter 61 (al-Saff)**

Prophet Muhammad (pbuh), as we are told on p. 520 of al-Kaf’ami’s
Misbah, has said, "Whoever recites it, Jesus (as) will pray and seek
forgiveness for him as long as he is in the life of this world, and he
will be his companion on the Day of Judgement ." Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq
(as) is quoted saying that if one recites it quite often in his
obligatory and optional prayers, Allah will place him in the ranks of
His angels, prophets and messengers.

**Chapter 62 (al-Jum’a)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said, "Whoever recites it will be
granted ten good deeds for each and everyone who attended and who did
not attend Friday congregational prayers in all Muslim lands." Imam
Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said, "Every believing man and woman, if he is
one of our followers, must recite during Friday night both Surat
al-Jum’a and Surat al-A’la, and in his noon prayers he has to recite
Surat al-Jum’a and Surat al-Munafiqun; so, if he/she does so, he/she
will be regarded as following in the footsteps of the Prophet (pbuh),
and his/her rewards from Allah will be Paradise."

**Chapter 63 (al-Munafiqun)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted as having said that anyone who
recites this Chapter will be cleared from doubt and hypocrisy with
regard to the creed.

**Chapter 64 (al-Taghabun)**

Al-Kaf’ami and al-Majlisi indicate that lbn al-Bataini cites
lbn-Abul‘Alaa quoting Abu Busayr quoting Abu Abdullah Irnam al-Sadiq
(as) saying that one who recites this Sura in his obligatory and
optional prayers, it will intercede for him on the Day of Judgement and
be a truthful witness for him testifying to the One Who will permit it
to testify, and it shall not part with him till it escorts him into
Paradise.

**Chapter 65 (al-Talaq)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted by al-Kaf’ ami and aL Majlisi,
as well as by the author of Al-Dun- al-Manihur who indicates the same on
p. 107, Vol. 6, of his book, saying that whoever recites this Chapter
will die as an adherent of the Sunnah of the Prophet (pbuh). Imam Ja’fer
al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying that it one recites it together with
Surat al-Tahreem in his obligatory prayers will be given refuge on the
Day of Judgement from fear and depression and from the fire.

**Chapter 66 (al-Tahreem)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that whoever recites this Sura
will be granted by Allah Subhanahu wa Ta’ala a true repentance. Both
al-Majlisi and al-Tibrisi indicate that the rewards of reciting this
Sura are the same like those due for whoever recites Surat al-Talaq. The
same view is endorsed by al-Kaf’ami

**Chapter 67 (al-Mulk or Tabarak)**

Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) has said the following about this Chapter:
"Whoever reads it will be regarded as though he had remained during
Laylatul-Qadr awake all night long worshipping his Lord. It is the one
that will protect and save whoever recites it from the construction of
the grave." Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said, ‘Whoever recites it
every day and night, his feet will say to [the angels] Nakir and Nakeer,
‘You have no right of passage at all-Al Tibrisi says it grants the one
who recites it security till he enters Paradise.

**Chapter 68 (al-Qalam or Noon)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said. ‘Whoever recites it will be
granted the rewards of those whose conduct is good." Imam Ja’fer-alSadiq
(as) has said, "Whoever recites it in his obligatory or optional prayers
will never suffer from poverty, and Allah will grant him security from
the constriction of the grave."

**Chapter 69 (al-Haqqah)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that one who recites
this Sura will receive an easy trial on the Day of Judgement . "Recite
this Sura quite often," Imam al-Sadiq (as) instructed his followers, "in
your obligatory as well as optional prayers, for doing so is a sign of
belief in Allah and His Messenger (pbuh), and whoever recites it will
never deviate from his right creed till he dies."

**Chapter 70 (al-Ma’arij)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that whoever recites
this Chapter will be granted the rewards of those who are true to their
trusts and promises and who always uphold their prayers. "Whoever
maintains its recitation," Imam al-Sadiq (as) has said, "will not be
asked on the Day of Judgement about any sin which he/she had done, and
Allah Ta’ala will admit him into His Paradise in the company of
Muhammad, peace and blessings of Allah upon him and his progeny."

**Chapter 71 (Nuh)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that whoever recites this Sura
will be regarded as being among the believers who are included in Noah’s
supplication, and that whoever believes in Allah and His Book should
never stop reciting it. Page 108 of Thawab al-A’mal traces a statement
made by Imam Abu Abdullah Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) as quoted by lbn
al-Bataini who quotes al-Husain ibn 1-lashim who quotes his father
quoting the Imam (as) saying, "Anyone who believes in Allah and recites
His Book should not stop reciting Surat Nuh, for any servant who reads
it in anticipation, being patient, in an obligatory or optional prayer,
Allah Ta’ala will let him reside among those who have truly obeyed Him
and will grant him three gardens in addition to honoring him and
marrying him to a hundred huris and four thousand others who were never
touched by anyone before, by the will of Allah." This is recorded also
in al-Majlisi’s Bihar al-Anwar.

**Chapter 72 (al-Jinn)**

Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) has said the following about this Chapter:
"Whoever reads it will be granted good deeds equal in number to. all the
Jinns and Satans who believed or disbelieved in Muhammad (pbuh)." Imam
Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said, "Whoever recites it quite often will not
receive any harm from the eyes of the Jinns, from their sorcery or
mischief, and he will join the company of Muhammad (pbuh)."

**Chapter 73 (al-Muzzammil)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted by al-Kaf’ami as having said
that one who recites this Sura will not suffer hardship in this life nor
in the life to come. What more can a believer hope for? Imam Ja’fer
al-Sadiq (as) has said, "Whoever recites it will have warded off
hardship from his life both in this life and in the life hereafter."
Whoever recites it during the ‘isha prayers or during the last part of
the night will have both that night and day, together with this Sura,
testify for him, and Allah Almighty will let him live a good life and
will take his soul away beautifully.

**Chapter 74 (al-Muddaththir)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that the person who
recites this Sura will be granted of the good deeds the equivalent of
the number of those who believed and who disbelieved in the Prophet
(pbuh) in Mecca. His great grandson Imam Al-Sadiq (as), whose knowledge
is derived from that of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) and who bears one
of his titles: al-Sadiq, is quoted as having said, "If one recites it in
his obligatory prayers, it will be incumbent upon the most Exalted One
to make him join the company of the Prophet (pbuh) in his status, and he
will never suffer misery in the life of this world at all."


