Chapter 75 (al-qiyama)
======================

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said with reference to one who
recites this Chapter, "Whoever recites it, I and Gabriel shall testify
for him on the Day of Judgement that he was a believer in the Day of
Judgement , and his face will be distinguished from all other faces [in
its radiance]." Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) is quoted as having said that
"Whoever recites it quite often and acts upon it, Allah will send it
[Sura] in the best way to convey to him glad tidings and to smile in his
face, and he will have no problem passing the Sirat (‘Throughout this
book, I have preferred to use this word as it exists in the Holy Qur’an
because I am convinced that there is no English equivalent for it, as is
the case with numerous other Our’anic diction words. Words like "path,
"way," or "highway" do not seem to me to convey the same meaning) and
the Scales."

**Chapter 76 (al-Dahr or Hal Ata)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that whoever recites this Sura
will be rewarded with Paradise and with silk clothes. Imam Ja’fer
al-Sadiq (as) has said, "Whoever recites it on a Thursday will be
granted by the Almighty in Paradise a hundred huis with large lovely
eyes, and he will be in the company of the Prophet (pbuh)."

**Chapter 77 (al-Mursalat)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that if someone recites
this Sura, it will be written down for him that he is not among the
polytheists. Imam al-Sadiq (as) has said about this Chapter, "Whoever
reads it, Allah will get him introduced to the Prophet, peace be upon
him and his progeny."

**Chapter 78 (al-Naba’)**

The Prophet (pbuh) has said that one who recites this Chapter will be
provided by Allah with a cool drink on the Day of Judgement . Imam
Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said, "Whoever recites it daily will visit the
Sacred House (the Ka’ba) before the year is over."

**Chapter 79 (aI-Nazi’at)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that whoever recites this
Chapter will not be tried on the Day of Judgement except for a short
period of time equalling the time it takes to perform an obligatory
prayer. Imam al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying, "Whoever recites it will
die fresh (not suffering from thirst), will be resurrected fresh, and
will enter Paradise fresh."

**Chapter 80 (Abasa)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted as having said that one who
recites this Sura will come on the Day of Judgement smiling, optimistic.
Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying that whoever recites this
Chapter as well as the Chapter of al-Takweer will be shaded in Allah’s
shade and Munificence in His Paradise.

**Chapter 81 (aI-Takweer)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that whoever recites this
Chapter will not be exposed by Allah when the books of deeds are spread
open, and ‘Whoever loves to see me on the Day of Judgement ," the
Prophet (pbuh) continued, "let him recite this Sura."

**Chapter 82 (al-Infitar)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that if one recites it, Allah
will record for him a good deed for each drop of rain and for each grave
and will improve his condition on the Day of Judgement . Imam al-Sadiq
(as) has said about this Chapter, "Whoever reads Surat-alInfifir and
Surat al-Inshiqaq, keeping them constantly in mind, during obligatory
prayers and optional prayers, no veil will shield him from Allah Ta’ala,
and Allah, the most Glorified One, will look after him till people are
through with their reckoning.

**Chapter 83 (al-Mutaffifeen)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that if someone recites it,
Allah will let him drink of a sealed nectar on the Day of Judgement .
Imam al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying, "Whoever becomes accustomed to
reciting it in his obligatory prayers, Allah will grant him security
from the fire and the reckoning, and he will not pass over the path of
hell."

**Chapter 84 (aI-Inshiqaq)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that whoever recites it will
never be given his book of reckoning from behind his back.

**Chapter 85 (al-Buruj)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that the person who recites it
will be granted ten good deeds for each and every Friday and Day of
Arafat in the life of this world, whereas Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has
said, "A person who recites this Sura in his obligatory prayers will be
gathered with the prophets of Allah (as), for it is their Sura."

**Chapter 86 (aI-Tariq)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that if one recites this Sura,
he will be given ten good deeds for each and every star in the skies,
and Imam al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying that one who recites it in his
obligatory prayers will acquire a special status with Allah, and he will
be in Paradise among the companions of the prophets.

**Chapter 87 (al-A’Ia)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that one who recites
this verse will receive ten good deeds for each and every character in
Allah’s revelations to Ibrahim (Abraham), Moses, Jesus, peace be upon
all of them, and Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him and his
progeny. Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq is quoted saying that if someone recites
it in his obligatory or optional prayers, it will be said to him on the
Day of Judgement , "Enter Paradise from whichever gate you wish."

**Chapter 88 (aI-Ghashiya)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that whoever recites it will
receive a very easy trial. Imam al-Sadiq (as) has said, "Whoever
constantly recites it in his obligatory and optional prayers will be
included in Allah’s mercy in the life of this world and the life to
come, and He will grant him security from His torment."

**Chapter 89 (al-Fajr)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that one who recites it in ten
successive nights will be forgiven by Allah, and if he recites it during
daytimes, it will be a light for him on the Day of Judgement . Imam
alSadiq (as) has said the following about this Chapter: "Whoever reads
it in his obligatory and optional prayers will be in Paradise on the
same level with Imam Husain (as) because it is al-Husain’s Sura."

**Chapter 90 (al-Balad)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that whoever recites this Sura
will be secure on the Day of Judgement from Allah’s Wrath. Imam Ja’fer
al-Sadiq (as) has said, "Whoever recites it in his obligatory and
optional prayers will be identified in the life of this world as being
among the righteous."

**Chapter 91 (al-Shams)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that one who recites it will be
regarded as having offered charity with everything under the sun and the
moon. Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying that in favor of
whoever recites this Sura quite often, and also recites Surat al-Layl,
Surat al-Duha, and Surat al-Inshirah, everything will testify on the Day
of Judgement , including his hair, complexion, flesh, blood, and veins
for him."

**Chapter 92 (al-Layl)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that whoever recites it will be
given so much till he is satisfied, and Allah will not let him be
exposed to hardship and will make life easy for him.

**Chapter 93 (al-Duha)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that one who recites this
Chapter will be among those accepted by Allah, the most Exalted One, as
being a member of the nation of Muhammad (pbuh) worthy of his
intercession, and he will receive ten good deeds for each orphan and
beggar.

**Chapter 94 (al-Inshirah)**

The Messenger of AJlah (pbuh) has said that whoever recites it will be
given of the rewards as though he had met the Prophet (pbuh) grieved and
had the cause of his grief removed.

**Chapter 95 (al-Teen)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that Allah will give two merits
to anyone who recites this Chapter: good health and conviction as long
as he lives, and when he dies, Allah Almighty will give him of the
rewards of the fast of all those who recited it. Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq
(as) has said, "Whoever recites it in his obligatory and optional
prayers will be given of Paradise whatever pleases him."

Chapter 96 (aI-’Alaq)

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that whoever recites this
Chapter will be regarded as though he has recited the entire Qur’an.
Imam al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying that one who recites this Sura then
dies that day or night will have died as a martyr and like one who
assisted the Prophet (pbuh) with his sword.

Chapter 97 (al-Qadr)

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that one who recites it is
regarded (by the Almighty) as though he fasted the month of Ramadhan and
spent Laylatl-Qadr adoring his Make:. Imam al-Sadiq (as) is quoted
saying that whoever recites this Chapter in one of the obligatory
prayers will be addressed: "O servant of Allah! Your past sins have been
forgiven, so resume your good deedi!" And he (as) has also said,
"Whoever recites it audibly will be like one raising his sword in
defense of Islam, and if he recites it silently will be regarded as
though he died a martyr for the cause of Islam, and if someone recites
it ten times, a thousand of his sins will be forgiven."

Chapter 98 (al-Bayyina)

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that one who recites it will be
gathered on the Day of Judgement with the best of Allah’s creation in
place and condition. He (pbuh) has also said, "Had people known what
merits it contains, they would have left their families and wealth aside
and learned it." Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said thatwhoever recites
this Sura will be free from shirk and will be admitted in the creed of
the Prophet (pbuh), and Allah will try him an easy trial.


