Part 4
======

Chapter 99 (al-ZilzaI)

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said, "Whoever recites this Chapter
will be regarded as though he read Surat al-Baqara and will be granted
of the rewards as though he had recited one quarter of the Qur’an." Imam
al-Sadiq (as) has said about this Chapter, "Whoever reads it in his
optional prayers will never be afflicted with an earthquake or lightning
or any other worldly calamity, and if he dies, his Lord will order to
have him admitted into Paradise."

Chapter 100 (aI-’Adiyat)

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that whoever recites it will be
granted of the rewards ten good deeds for everyone who spent the night
at Muzdalifa [during the pilgrimage] and attended the big gathering [at
Arafat]. Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said, "Whoever recites it quite
often will be resurrected in the company of Ali, peace be upon him, on
the Day of Judgement and will be among his companions.

Chapter 101 (al-Qari’a)

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that whoever recites
this Sura, Allah will let his scale of good deeds weigh heavily. Imam
Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying that one who recites this Sura
will receive security from Allah Ta’ala against the dissension of the
anti-Christ, against believing in the latter, and against hell’s stink.
The isnad of this tradition is traced to al-Bataini who quotes lsma’eel
ibn al-Zubayr quoting lbn Thabit.

Chapter 102 (al-Takathur)

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that one who recites
this Surah will not be tried by Allah, Glory and Exaltation are His,
regarding the blessings which lIe bestowed upon him and will be regarded
as though he recited a thousand verses of the Holy Qur’an. Ibn ‘Umer
narrated this tradition: "The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) asked us once,
‘Can anyone among you read one thousand verses from the Qur’an a day?’
We said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Who can?!’ He (pbuh) said, ‘Can anyone
among you recite Surat alTakathur?!"’ He (pbuh) is also quoted saying,
"Whoever recites this Sura when he goes to bed will be protected from
the grave’s trial." Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying that
whoever recites this Chapter in his obligatory prayers will have rewards
due to a thousand martyrs.

Chapter 103 (al-’Asr)

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that whoever recites
this Chapter will have his deeds sealed with patience and will be on the
Day of Judgement on the right track. Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has said
that whoever recites this Sura in his optional prayers will be
resurrected with a smiling face, his eyes being cooled, till he enters
paradise. This tradition is quoted by al-Kaf’ami and al-Majlisi, and it
is recorded on p. 386, Vol. 6, of Al-Dawral-Manthur

Chapter 104 (al-Humaza)

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that one who recites
this Chapter will be granted ten good deeds for each and everyone who
ridiculed the Prophet (pbuh) and his companions. Imam al-Sadiq (as) has
said about this Chapter, "Whoever reads it in his optional prayers, it
will ward off poverty from him, bringing him sustenance and protecting
him against a tragic death."

Chapter 105 (al-Feel)

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that Allah will protect
whoever recites this Sura against calumny and metamorphosis. Imam
al-Sadiq (as) said that one who recites it in his obligatory prayers
will receive good testimony on his behalf from every plain and n]ountain
and earth loam that he used to uphold the prayers, and he will enter
Paradise without reckoning. AI-Kaf’ami comments by saving that such
extra-ordinary rewards will not be granted to just zinybody bit are due
to the sincere pious ones, those who are endowed with knowledge and with
acting upon such knowledge. This view is shared by [bn Tawoos in his
book Al-k bat.

To all these three great men, and to all those who agree with them, we
would like to humbly say: "How do you know that? Has the Prophet (pbuh)
or any member of his AhI al-Bayt (as) said so? If what you claim is
true, then only very few will receive these mighty rewards, and they
will probably be the least among all humans to need them, especially
since Allah will have already been pleased with them due to their piety
and knowledge. Who will, then, come to the aid of sinners like
ourselves? Who will wipe out our sins, faults, and shortcomings, if
reciting these chapters do not do us any good? We think the Almighty is
much greater than that and much more Clement. We think He is more ready
to forgive sinning Muslims (like ourselves) who repent and regret than
to punish them..."

The great mentor of the nation al-Saduq, may Allah have mercy on his
soul, is quoted by al-Majlisi on p. 337, Vol. 89, of Biliar al-An war,
as saying, "Anyone who recites Surat al-Feel in one obligatory rek’a
ought to recite Surat Qura~sh in the other, for they both are like one
Sura, and one should not recite only one of them in his obligatory
prayers." This is also stated on p. 114 of Thawat A ‘ma!. "Anyone"
implies that the Almighty’s mercy is spaci enough to include everyone,
even sinners who deeply and sincej regret and repent their sins.

Our martyred Imani Abu Abdullah Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) written once in
his own hand-writing: "When you face your foe, ought to look at him and
recite Surat al-Eeel," as we are told by bi al-Tibrisi and al-Majlisi.

Chapter 106 (Quraysh)

AI-Majlisi has indicated that this Sura has the same merits as its SISI
above; therefore, he did not add anything while discussing the mer of
Qur’anic chapters in Vol. 89 of his book Bihar al-Anwar. The Messenger
of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that whoever recites will be granted
ten good deeds for each and everyone who circled the Ka’ba (made tawaf)
and took to seclusion (i’tilcaJ) therein. Ima Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) has
said, "One who recites it will be resurrected on the Day of Judgement
conveyed on one of the conveyances of Paradise till he is seated at the
light tables in Paradise. The reader is reminded that there are numerous
things awaiting us in the life come for which there are no words in our
limited human vocabulary. An analogy of such vocabulary, when it comes
to the life hereafter is like the sophisticated human vocabulary, in its
numerous language and countless dialects, compared to the vocabulary of
an animal whose share of sounds and motions is the most modest.

There is also so much reference to light when it comes to life after
death, including the waiting period known as the barzakh during which
the dead wait for the Resurrection, and during which their life in the
grave is world of its own. If Allah Almighty grants me life, health, and
Hi divine assistance, I will insha-Allah write a three-volume book oi
death, the Judgement Day, and life after death (i.e., on Paradise anc
hell), a volume for each. A chapter in Vol. 1 will Insha-Allahj dea with
the most fascinating subject of angels. If you wish to see such book
written and published, I need your prayers.

Chapter 107 (al-Ma’un or al-Been)

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that Allah will forgive
the sins of whoever recites it, and he will be regarded as having paid
his zalcat. Al-Bataini traces the isnad of this Sura to Isma’eel ibn
al-Zubayr who quotes ‘Arur ibn Thabit quoting Imam Abu Abdullah Ja’fer
al-Sadiq (as) as saying that if someone recites it in his obligatory and
optional prayers, Allah will accept his prayers and fast and will not
try him about what he did in the short life of this world.

Chapter 108 (al-Kawthar)

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that Allah will let
everyone who recites this Sura drink of the rivers of Paradise and will
give him of the rewards the equivalent to the number of all sacrifices
offered by the servants of Allah on the Day of Sacrifice (Ed al-Adha) or
any other sacrifice intended to seek His Pleasure. Imam Ja’fer alSadiq
(as) is quoted saying that one who recites this Sura in his obligatory
and optional prayers will be given to drink of the Pool of Kawthar; he
will converse with the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) and will be at the very
fountainhead of Tuba. The same is recorded in Thu wab al-A ‘mat.

Chapter 109 (al-Kafirun)

On pp. 339-340, Vol. 89, of Bihar al-Anwar, the author quotes alMufeed
quoting Abdullah ibn Abu Shaykh quoting Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Alimed
al-Hakeemi quoting Abdel-Rahman ibn Abdullah quoting Wahab ibn Jareer
quoting his father quoting Muhammad ibn Ishaq ibn Bashshar quoting
Sa’eed ibn Meena saying that a number of Qurayshi notables, including
‘Utbah ibn Rabee’a, Umayyah ibn Khalaf, al-Waleed ibn al-Mugheerah, and
al-’As saying once to the Messenger of Allah (pbuh), "O Muhammad! Let us
worship what you worship while you worship what we worship, so we wiJI
all share common grounds, and you will still be in charge; so, if what
we follow is right, you will have thus obtained your share of it, and if
you are right, we will have obtained our share of it," whereupon Allah,
the Praised One, the Glorified, brought down Surat al-Kafirun.

The author goes on to tell other incidents related to this Chapter,
filling more than four pages of his voluminous book and providing the
reader with page numbers of as many as eight references for those who
would like to research it further. The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is
quoted saying that one who recites this Sura will be regarded as though
he has read one quarter of the Holy Qur’an, and the most wicked of
Satans will be kept away from him, and he will be cleared from shirk and
will be exempted from having to go through the horrors of the Day of
Terror (Resurrection Day). He (pbuh) has also said that whoever recites
it before going to bed will sleep secure from shirk. Imam Ja’fer
al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying that whoever recites this Chapter and the
Chapter of Ikhlas in one of his obligatory prayers will be forgiven, and
so will his parents.


