Chapter 110 (al-nasr)
=====================

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said, "Whoever recites this Sura will
be regarded as though he were present with me when Mecca was opened (for
Muslim troops)." Imam al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying that whoever
recites this Sura in his obligatory or optional prayers will be granted
victory by Allah over his foes. In Figh al-Rida (as), it is stated that
if one recites this Chapter in an optional or obligatory prayer, Allah
will grant him victory over all his enemies and will enable him to
perform what is obligatory.

Chapter 111 (al-Lahab)

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying, "If someone recites
this Chapter, I will wish that Allah will never permit him to be in the
company of Abu Lahab." Imam al-Sadiq (as)lias said the following about
this Chapter, "if you recite this Sura, invoke Allah to curse Abu Lahab,
for he was among those who belied Muhammad, peace be upon him and his
progeny, and falsified his message." This quotation is recorded by Abu
Ali al-Tibrisi in his Muima’ul-Bayan fi Tafsir a!l Qur’an.

Chapter 112 (al-Iklas)

More than eighteen pages in Vol. 89 of Bihar al-Anwar, starting with p.
344, discuss the merits of this great Chapter and one of the greatest in
the Holy Qur’an. A voluminous book can be written only about the merits
of the Chapters of the Holy Qur’an. The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is
quoted saying, "Whoever recites al-Tkhlas will be as though he has
recited one third of the Holy Qur’an and will be granted ten good deeds
for each and everyone who believed in Allah, His angels, His books, His
messengers, and the Day of Judgement ." He (pbuh) has also said, "If
someone recites it once, he will be blessed; if he recites it twice, he
and his family will be blessed." Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) has said,
"‘Whoever recites it eleven times after fajr prayers will be safeguarded
against committing any sin that day despite Satan’s nose." AI-Bataini
quotes Sayf ibn ‘Ameerah quoting Abu Bakr al-iladrami quoting Abu
Abdullah Imam al-Sadiq (as) saying, "Whoever believes in Allah and the
Last Day ought to recite Surat al-lkhlas after each obligatory prayer,
for whoever recites it will gain the good of this life and the life to
come, and Allah will forgive him, his parents, and their offspring." One
particular incident related by al-Majlisi with reference to this great
Chapter is worth quoting here as narrated by Anas, a companion of the
Prophet (pbuh), thus:

We were once in the company of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) at Tabuk.
The sun rose one day with rays and light the like of which we had never
seen before. The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) kept wondering about its
light and rays. Suddenly Gabriel (as) came tp him, so he (pbuh) asked
him, "What is with the sun, O Gabriel, and what is with its light and
illumination and rays which I have never seen before?" Gabriel (as)
said, "This is due to Mu’awiyah ibn Mu ‘awiyah al-Laythi (al-Mazni) who
died today in Medina; so Allah sent seventy thousand angels to perform
the prayers on his soul." "What for?" asked the Prophet (pbuh). "He used
to recite Surat al-Ikhlas quite often," Gabriel (as) answered, ‘as he
stood, sat, or walked, during the night or the day." Then the Prophet
(pbuh) turned to us and said, "Recite it as much as you can, for it
denotes your Lord; if one recites it fifty times, Allah will raise him
fifty thousand degrees and remove from him fifty thousand sins and
record for him fifty thousand good deeds, and if one recites it more,
Allah will give him more."

Ibn al-Mutawakkil quotes Muhammad al-Attar who quotes al-Ash’ari
quoting Abmed ibn Hilal quoting Lisa ibn Abdullah quoting his
forefathers quoting Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) citing the Messenger of
Allah (pbuh) saying, "If someone recites Surat al-Ikhlas when he goes to
bed, Allah will forgive the sins he committed in fifty years." Imam Abu
Abdullah al-Sadiq (as) is quoted by Sulayman ibn Khalid, one of his
companions, saying, a recorded on pp. 349-350, Vol. 89, of Bihar
al-Anwar, and on p. 213 of Thawab al-A ‘mat, "If three days pass away
and one does not recite Surat al-Ikhlas in any of his prayers, he will
be forsaken and conviction will be stripped from his neck, and if he
dies during these three days, he will be regarded a sone who disbelieved
in Allah, the Great,"

Chapter 113 (aI-Falaq)

The messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted as saying that one who recites
both this Sura and the next (al-Nas) will be as though he recited all
the Books which Allah Almighty has revealed, and he, peace be upon him
and his progeny, ordered his companions to recite them upon waking up
and upon going to bed.

Chapter 114 (al-Nas)

Its merits are similar to those of its sister, Surat al-Falaq.


