The Templars and the Kabbalah
=============================

A book written by two Masons, Christopher Knight and Robert Lomas,
entitled The Hiram Key reveals some important facts about the roots of
Freemasonry. According to these authors, it is evident that Masonry is a
continuation of the Templars. Though, in addition to this, the authors
also examined the origins of the Templars

**A TEMPLAR-MASON TEMPLE: ROSSLYN CHAPEL**

The church known as "Rosslyn Chapel" near Edinburgh in Scotland is
recognized as a symbol of the heretical pagan beliefs of the Templars.
In the course of the construction of this edifice, Masons and
Rosicrucians, the successors of the Templars, were employed, and
decorated the whole chapel with symbols representative of their pagan
philosophy.

In a publication of Turkish Masonry, the magazine Mimar Sinan, the
Masonic origins and the pagan elements of the chapel are described in
these words: The most convincing proof of the unity of the Templars and
the Masons in Scotland is the castle and chapel in the village of
Roslin, 10 km. south of Edinburgh and 15 km. from the ancient Templar
center at Balantrodoch. The Templars lived in this region and in this
castle especially after 1312 under the protection of the Barons of St.
Clair.

...The chapel was built between 1446-48 by Sir William St. Clair who
was one of the most prominent nobles of the time in Scotland and even in
Europe. Masons and Rosicrucians worked on the construction. The chief
architect of the work was the Templar Grand Master, Sir William St.
Clair who brought itinerant mason architects and stone masons from every
part of Europe. New houses were built in the near-by village of Roslin
and a lodge was opened…

The plan and decoration of the chapel is unique. There is no other such
example in Scotland or even Europe. It captured the atmosphere of
Herod's temple very well and every part of it was decorated with Masonic
symbols. Among the symbols were reliefs on the walls and arches
depicting the heads of Hiram and his murderer,

a relief of an initiation ceremony, the keystones of the arches, and
compasses? Apart from the fact that the chapel was constructed in a
marked pagan style with Egyptian, Hebrew, Gothic, Norman, Celtic,
Scandinavian, Templar and Masonic architectural elements, and that it
contains very rich examples of stone work, one of the most interesting
aspects of it is that the tops of the columns are decorated with cactus
and corn motifs, besides various other plants figures. …

There are so many pagan decorative elements inside the chapel that a
priest, writing an account of the baptism he performed of the Baron of
Rosslyn in 1589 complained, "because the chapel is filled with pagan
idols, there is no place appropriate to administer the Sacrament. In
August 31, 1592, as a result of pressure exerted on Baron Oliver
St.Claire of Rosslyn, the chapel's pagan-style altar was destroyed.
(Tamer Ayan, "The Oldest Known Masonic Institution-the Scottish Royal
Order," Mimar Sinan, 1998, No.110, pp.18-19)

According to their thesis, the Templars underwent a great change while
they were in Jerusalem. In the place of Christianity, they adopted other
doctrines. At the root of this lies a secret that they discovered in the
temple of Solomon in Jerusalem, whose ruins they had set out to
investigate. The writers explain that the Templars used their purported
role as protectors of Christian pilgrims visiting Palestine as a
pretense, but that their real aim was quite different:

…There is no evidence that these founding Templars ever gave protection
to pilgrims, but on the other hand we were soon to find that there is
conclusive proof that they did conduct extensive excavations under the
ruins of Herod's Temple…12

The authors of The Hiram Key were not the only ones who found evidences
of this. French historian Gaetan Delaforge makes this similar
contention: The real task of the nine knights was to carry out research
in the area in order to obtain certain relics and manuscripts which
contain the essence of the secret traditions of Judaism and ancient
Egypt.13

At the end of the nineteenth century, Charles Wilson of the Royal
Engineers, began conducting archeological research in Jerusalem. He
arrived at the opinion that the Templars had gone to Jerusalem to study
the ruins of the temple. Wilson found traces of digging and excavation
under the foundations of the temple, and concluded that these were done
by tools that belonged to the Templars. These items are still in the
collection of Robert Brydon, who possesses an extensive archive of
information concerning the Templars.14

The writers of the Hiram Key argue that these excavations of the
Templars were not without result; that the order discovered in Jerusalem
certain relics that changed the way they saw the world. In addition,
many researchers are of the same opinion. There must have been something
that led the Templars, despite the fact that they had previously been
Christian and came from a Christian part of the world, to adopt a system
of beliefs and a philosophy so completely different from that of
Christianity, celebrate heretical masses, and perform rituals of black
magic.

According to the common views of many researchers, this "something" was
the Kabbalah.

The meaning of the word Kabbalah is "oral tradition." Encyclopedias and
dictionaries define it as an esoteric, mystical branch of Jewish
religion. According to this definition, the Kabbalah investigates the
hidden meaning of the Torah and other Jewish religious writings. But,
when we examine the matter more closely, we discover that the facts are
quite something else. These facts lead us to the conclusion that the
Kabbalah is a system rooted in pagan idolatry; that it existed before
the Torah, and became widespread within Judaism after the Torah was
revealed.

This interesting fact about the Kabbalah, is explained by just as
interesting a source. Murat Ozgen, a Turkish Freemason, maintains the
following in his book, Masonluk Nedir ve Nasildir? (What is Freemasonry
and What is it Like?):

We don't know clearly where the Kabbalah came from or how it developed.
It is the general name for a unique, metaphysically constituted,
esoteric and mystical philosophy particularly connected with Jewish
religion. It is accepted as Jewish mysticism, but some of the elements
it contains show that it was composed much earlier than the Torah.15

The French historian, Gougenot des Mousseaux, explains that the
Kabbalah is actually much older than Judaism.16 The Jewish historian,
Theodore Reinach, says that the Kabbalah is "a subtle poison which
enters into the veins of Judaism and wholly infests it."17 Salomon
Reinach defines the Kabbalah as "one of the worst aberrations of the
human mind."18

The reason for Reinach's contention that the Kabbalah is "one of the
worst aberrations of the human mind" is that its doctrine is connected
in large part with magic. For thousands of years, the Kabbalah has been
one of the foundation-stones of every kind of magic ritual. It is
believed that rabbis who study the Kabbalah possess great magical power.
Also, many non-Jews have been influenced by the Kabbalah, and have tried
to practice magic by employing its doctrines. The esoteric tendencies
that took hold in Europe during the late Middle Ages, especially as
practiced by alchemists, have their roots, to a great extent, in the
Kabbalah.

The strange thing is, that Judaism is a monotheistic religion, incepted
with the revelation of the Torah to Moses (peace be upon him). But,
within this religion is a system called the Kabbalah, that adopts the
basic practices of magic forbidden by the religion. This substantiates
what we have presented above, and demonstrates that the Kabbalah is
actually an element that has entered Judaism from the outside.

But, what is the source of this element?

The Jewish historian Fabre d'Olivet says that it came from Ancient
Egypt. According to this writer, the roots of the Kabbalah stretch back
to Ancient Egypt. The Kabbalah is a tradition learned by some of the
leaders of the Israelites in Ancient Egypt, and passed down as a
tradition by word of mouth from generation to generation.19

For this reason, we must look to Ancient Egypt in order to find the
basic origins of the Kabbalah-Templars-Freemasonry chain.


**The Magicians of Ancient Egypt**

The Ancient Egypt of the pharaohs was one of the most ancient
civilizations of the world. It was also one of the most oppressive. The
magnificent monuments that still remain from Ancient Egypt-the pyramids,
sphinxes and obelisks-were constructed by hundreds of thousands of
slaves, worked to the point of death, under the whip and threat of
starvation. The pharaohs, the absolute rulers of Egypt, wanted
themselves to be represented as gods and to be worshipped by the
people.

One of our sources of knowledge about Ancient Egypt is their own
inscriptions. These were discovered in the nineteenth century and, after
intense labor, the Egyptian alphabet was deciphered, bringing to light
much information about the country. But, because these inscriptions were
written by official state historians, they are filled with biased
accounts designed to praise the state.

For us, of course, the best source of knowledge about this matter is
the Qur'an.

In the Qur'an, in the story of Moses, we are given important
information about the Egyptian system. The verses reveal that there were
two important focal points of power in Egypt: pharaoh and his
inner-council. This council tended to exercise an important influence
over pharaoh; Pharaoh would often consult them and, from time to time,
follow their suggestions. The verses quoted below show the influence
that this council had on Pharaoh: Moses said, "Pharaoh! I am truly a
Messenger from the Lord of all the worlds, duty bound to say nothing
about God except the truth. I have come to you with a Clear Sign from
your Lord. So send the tribe of Israel away with me."

He said, "If you have come with a Clear Sign produce it if you are
telling the truth."

So he threw down his staff and there it was, unmistakably a snake.

And he drew out his hand and there it was, pure white to those who
looked. The ruling circle of Pharaoh's people said, "This is certainly a
skilled magician who desires to expel you from your land, so what do you
recommend?"

They said, "Detain him and his brother and send out marshals to the
cities, to bring you all the skilled magicians." (Qur'an, 7: 104-112) It
should be noticed that mention here is made of a council that advises
Pharaoh, that incites him against Moses, and recommends to him certain
methods. If we look at the records of Egyptian history, we see that the
two basic components of this council were the army and the priests.

There is no need to explain the importance of the army; it constituted
the basic military power of the regimes of the pharaohs. But, we should
look more closely at the role of the priests. The priests of Ancient
Egypt were a class referred to in the Qur'an as magicians. They
represented the cult which supported the regime. It was believed that
they had special powers and possessed secret knowledge. By this
authority they influenced the Egyptian people, and ensured their
position within the administration of the pharaohs. This class, known
from Egyptian records as the "Priests of Amon," focused their attention
on practicing magic and administering their pagan cult; in addition,
they also studied various sciences such as astronomy, mathematics and
geometry.

This class of priests was a closed order possessed (so they thought) of
a special knowledge. Such orders are commonly known as esoteric
organizations. In a magazine called Mason Dergisi (Masonic Journal), a
publication distributed among Turkish Masons, the roots of Freemasonry
are stated as going back to this kind of esoteric order, and special
mention is made of the Ancient Egyptian priests:

As thought develops in human beings, science advances and as science
advances, the number of secrets increases within the lore of an esoteric
system. In this development, this esoteric enterprise, which began first
in the East, in China and Tibet, and then spread to India, Mesopotamia
and Egypt, formed the basis of a priestly knowledge that had been
practiced for thousands of years and formed the basis of the power of
the priests in Egypt.20

How can there be a relationship between the esoteric philosophy of the
priests of Ancient Egypt and present-day Freemasons? Ancient Egypt-a
classic example in the Qur'an of a godless political system-disappeared
thousands of years ago. Can it have any influence today?

To find the answer to these questions, we must look at the Ancient
Egyptian priests' beliefs with regards to the origin of the Universe and
of life.

**THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BELIEF IN MATERIALIST EVOLUTION**

In their book The Hiram Key, the English Masonic authors Christopher
Knight and Robert Lomas argue that Ancient Egypt has a very important
place in regards to the origins of Masonry. According to these authors,
the most important idea that has transpired to modern Masonry, from
Ancient Egypt, is that of a universe existing by and of itself, and
evolving by chance. They explain this interesting notion in these
words:

The Egyptians believed that matter had always existed; to them it was
illogical to think of a god making something out of absolutely nothing.
Their view was that the world began when order came out of chaos, and
that ever since there has been a battle between the forces of
organization and disorder…This chaotic state was called Nun, and like
the Sumerian …description …, all was a dark, sunless watery abyss with a
power, a creative force within it that commanded order to begin. This
latent power which was within the substance of the chaos did not know it
existed; it was a probability, a potential that was intertwined within
the randomness of disorder.21

It will be noticed that the beliefs described here are in harmony with
the assertions of the present-day materialist establishment, which are
promoted by the agenda of the scientific community with such terms as
"the theory of evolution," "chaos theory," and the "essential
organization of matter." Knight and Lomas continue their foregoing
discussion by saying:

Amazingly, this description of creation perfectly describes the view
held by modern science, particularly "chaos theory" which has shown
intricate designs which evolve and mathematically repeat within
completely unstructured events.22

Knight and Lomas claim that there is a harmony between Ancient Egyptian
beliefs and modern science, but what they mean by modern science, as we
have stressed, is materialist concepts, such as the theory of evolution
or chaos theory. Despite the fact that these theories have no scientific
basis, they have been forcibly imposed on the field of science over the
past two centuries, and are presented as scientifically justified. (In
the following sections we will examine those who have imposed these
theories on the scientific world.)

Now, we have come to an important point in this stage of the book. Let
us summarize what we have discovered so far:

1. We began the discussion by discussing the Order of Templars which is
thought to be the origin of Masonry. We have seen that, although the
Templars were founded as a Christian order, they were affected by some
secret doctrines that they discovered in Jerusalem, totally abandoned
Christianity and became an anti-religious organization practicing
heretical rites.

2. When we asked what this doctrine was that influenced the Templars,
we found that it was basically the Kabbalah. 3. When we examined the
Kabbalah, we found proof that, however much it may resemble Jewish
mysticism, it is a pagan doctrine older than Judaism, that later entered
the religion, and that its true roots are found in Ancient Egypt.

4. Ancient Egypt was governed by the pagan system of Pharaoh, and there
we found an idea that forms the basis of the modern atheistic
philosophy: that of a universe existing of its own accord, and evolving
by chance.

All this surely paints an interesting picture. Is it by chance that the
philosophy of the priests of Ancient Egypt still thrives, and that there
exist traces of a chain (Kabbalah-Templars-Masonry) that has been
responsible for maintaining the supremacy of this philosophy to the
present day? Is it possible Masons, who have made their mark on the
world's history since the eighteenth century, fomenting revolutions,
promoting philosophies and political systems, can be the inheritors of
the magicians of Ancient Egypt?

In order to make the answer to this question clearer, we must first
examine more closely the historical events that we have now only briefly
outlined.


**The Inside Story on the Kabbalah**

Exodus" is the title of the second book of the Torah. This book
describes how the Israelites, under the leadership of Moses, left Egypt
and escaped the tyranny of Pharaoh. Pharaoh made the Israelites work as
slaves and would not consent to set them free. But, when confronted by
the miracles God performed through Moses, and the disasters He inflicted
on his people, Pharaoh relented. And so, one night the Israelites
gathered en masse, and began their emigration from Egypt. Later, Pharaoh
attacked the Israelites, but God saved them through a further miracle He
performed through Moses.

But, it is in the Qur'an that we find the most accurate account of the
exodus from Egypt, because the Torah underwent much textual corruption
after it was originally revealed to Moses. An important proof of this is
that in the five books of the Torah-Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers
and Deuteronomy-there are many contradictions. The fact that the book of
Deuteronomy ends with an account of the death and burial of Moses is
indisputable proof that this portion would have to have been added after
Moses' death.

In the Qur'an, in the account of the exodus of the Israelites from
Egypt, as in all other stories related in it, there is not the slightest
contradiction; the story is recounted soundly. Moreover, as with other
stories, God reveals much wisdom and many secrets in the course of what
is related. For this reason, when we examine these stories closely, we
can extract a number of lessons from them.


