The Golden Calf
===============

One of the important facts concerning the exodus of the Israelites from
Egypt, as related in the Qur'an, is that they rebelled against the
religion revealed to them by God in spite of the fact that God had
rescued them through Moses from the tyranny of Pharaoh. The Israelites
were not able to comprehend the monotheism that Moses communicated to
them, but tended continually toward idolatry.

The Qur'an describes this strange tendency here: We conveyed the tribe
of Israel across the sea and they came upon some people who were
devoting themselves to some idols which they had. They said, "Moses,
give us a god just as these people have gods." He said, "You are indeed
an ignorant people.

What these people are doing is destined for destruction. What they are
doing is purposeless." (Qur'an, 7: 138-139)

Despite Moses' warnings, the Israelites continued in such perversion,
and when Moses left them, to ascend alone to Mt. Sinai, it manifested
itself fully. Taking advantage of Moses' absence, a man by the name of
Samiri came forth. He fanned the sparks of the Israelites' inclination
towards idolatry, and persuaded them to fabricate the statue of a calf
and worship it.

Moses returned to his people in anger and great sorrow. He said, "My
people, did not your Lord make you a handsome promise? Did the
fulfillment of the contract seem too long to you or did you want to
unleash your Lord's anger upon yourselves, so you broke your promise to
me?" They said, "We did not break our promise to you of our own
volition. But we were weighed down with the heavy loads of the people's
jewelry and we threw them in, for that is what the Samaritan did."

Then he produced a calf for them, a physical form which made a lowing
sound. So they said, "This is your god-and Moses's god as well, but he
forgot." (Qur'an, 20: 86-88)

Why was there such a persistent tendency among the Israelites to erect
idols and worship them? What was the source of this inclination?
Clearly, a society that had never before believed in idols would not
suddenly adopt such inane behavior as to construct an idol and begin to
worship it. Only those for whom idolatry was natural inclination could
have believed in such nonsense.

However, the Israelites were a people that had believed in one God
since the days of their ancestor Abraham. The name "Israelites" or "the
Sons of Israel" was given first to the sons of Jacob, Abraham's
grandson, and afterwards to the whole Jewish people who derived from
him. The Israelites had safeguarded the monotheistic faith that they had
inherited from their ancestors Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, peace be upon
them.

Together with Joseph, peace be upon him, they went into Egypt and
preserved their monotheism for a long period of time, despite the fact
that they had lived amidst Egyptian idolatry. It is clear from the
stories related in the Qur'an that, when Moses came to them, the
Israelites were a people that believed in one God.

The only explanation for this is that the Israelites, however much they
adhered to a monotheistic belief, were influenced by the pagan peoples
among whom them lived, and began to imitate them, replacing the religion
chosen for them by God with the idolatry of foreign nations.

When we investigate this matter in light of historical records, we see
that the pagan cult that influenced the Israelites was that of Ancient
Egypt. An important evidence in support of this conclusion is that the
golden calf the Israelites worshipped, while Moses was on Mt. Sinai, was
actually a replica of the Egyptian idols Hathor and Aphis. In his book,
Too Long in the Sun, the Christian author Richard Rives writes:

Hathor and Aphis, the cow and bull gods of Egypt, were representatives
of sun worship. Their worship was just one stage in the long Egyptian
history of solar veneration. The golden calf at Mount Sinai is more than
sufficient evidence to prove that the feast proclaimed was related to
sun worshipâ€¦23

The influence of the Egyptian pagan religion on the Israelites occurred
in many different stages. As soon as they had encountered a pagan
people, this leaning towards heretical belief appeared and, as the verse
maintains, they said "Moses, give us a god just as these people have
gods." (Qur'an, 7: 138) What they said to their Prophet, "Moses, we will
not believe in you until we see God with our own eyes." (Qur'an, 2: 55)
reveals that they were inclined to worship a material being that they
could see, as their pagan religion provided the Egyptians with.

The tendency of the Israelites to the paganism of Ancient Egypt, that
we have here outlined, is important to understand and gives us some
insight into the corruption of the text of the Torah and the origins of
the Kabbalah. When we consider these two topics carefully, we will see
that, at their source, is found Ancient Egyptian paganism and the
materialist philosophy.


**From Ansient Egypt to the Kabbalah**

While Moses was still alive, the Israelites began to create likenesses
of the idols they had seen in Egypt and to worship them. After Moses
died, there was less to deter them from backsliding farther into
perversity. Of course, the same thing cannot be said of all Jews, but
some of them did adopt Egyptian paganism. Indeed, they carried on the
doctrines of the Egyptian priesthood (Pharaoh's magicians), that lay at
the foundation of that society's beliefs, and corrupted their own faith
by introducing these doctrines into it.

The doctrine that was introduced into Judaism from Ancient Egypt was
the Kabbalah. Like the system of the Egyptian priests, the Kabbalah was
an esoteric system, and its basis was the practice of magic.
Interestingly, the Kabbalah provides an account of creation quite
different from that found in the Torah. It is a materialist account,
based on the Ancient Egyptian idea of the eternal existence of matter.
Murat Ozgen, a Turkish Freemason, has this to say on this topic:

It is evident that the Kabbalah was composed many years before the
Torah came into existence. The most important section of the Kabbalah is
a theory about the formation of the universe. This theory is very
different from the story of creation accepted by theist religions.
According to the Kabbalah, at the beginning of creation, things called
Sefiroth, meaning "circles" or "orbits," with both material and
spiritual characteristics came into being. The total number of these
things was 32.

The first ten represented the solar system and the others represented
the masses of stars in space. This particularity of the Kabbalah shows
that it is closely connected to ancient astrological systems of
belief... So, the Kabbalah is far removed from Jewish religion and much
more closely related to the ancient mystery religions of the East.24

The Jews, by adopting these Ancient Egyptian materialist and esoteric
doctrines that were founded on magic, ignored the related prohibitions
in the Torah. They took on the magic rituals of other pagan peoples, and
thus, the Kabbalah became a mystical doctrine within Judaism, but
contrary to the Torah. In her book entitled Secret Societies and
Subversive Movements, the English writer Nesta H. Webster says:

Sorcery, as we know, had been practised by the Canaanites before the
occupation of Palestine by the Israelites; Egypt, India, and Greece also
had their soothsayers and diviners. In spite of the imprecations against
sorcery contained in the Law of Moses, the Jews, disregarding these
warnings, caught the contagion and mingled the sacred tradition they had
inherited with magical ideas partly borrowed from other races partly of
their own devising. At the same time the speculative side of the Jewish
Cabala borrowed from the philosophy of the Persian Magi, of the
Neo-Platonists, and of the Neo-Pythagoreans. There is, then, some
justification for the anti-Cabalists' contention that what we know
to-day as the Cabala is not of purely Jewish origin.25

There is a verse in the Qur'an that refers to this topic. God says that
the Israelites learned satanic sorcery rituals from sources outside
their own religion:

They follow what the satans recited in the reign of Solomon. Solomon
did not become unbeliever, but the satans did, teaching people sorcery
and what had been sent down to Harut and Marut, the two angels in
Babylon, who taught no one without first saying to him, "We are merely a
trial and temptation, so do not become unbeliever." People learned from
them how to separate a man and his wife but they cannot harm anyone by
it, except with God's permission. They have learned what will harm them
and will not benefit them. They know that any who deal in it will have
no share in the hereafter. What an evil thing they have sold themselves
for if they only knew! (Qur'an, 2: 102)

This verse maintains that certain Jews, although they knew that they
would lose out in the hereafter, learned and adopted the practices of
magic. Thus, they strayed away from the Law that God had sent them and,
having sold their own souls, fell into paganism (magic doctrines). "They
have sold themselves" for an evil thing, in other words, they abandoned
their faith.

The facts related in this verse demonstrate the main features of an
important conflict in Jewish history. This struggle was, on the one
hand, between the prophets that God sent to the Jews and those believing
Jews who obeyed them, and on the other hand, those perverse Jews who
rebelled against God's commandments, imitated the pagan culture of the
peoples around them, and followed their cultural practices rather than
the Law of God.

**PAGAN DOCTRINES ADDED TO THE TORAH**

It is important to note that the sins of the corrupt Jews are often
reported in the holy book of the Jews itself-the Old Testament. In the
book of Nehemiah, a kind of history book within the Old Testament, the
Jews confess their sins and repent:

Then those of Israelite lineage separated themselves from all
foreigners; and they stood and confessed their sins and the iniquities
of their fathers. And they stood up in their place and read from the
Book of the Law of the LORD their God [for one-fourth] of the day; and
[for another] fourth they confessed and worshiped the LORD their God.
Then Jeshua, Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, [and]
Chenani stood on the stairs of the Levites and cried out with a loud
voice to the LORD their God.

...[They said:] "...they [our fathers] were disobedient and rebelled
against You, cast Your law behind their backs and killed Your prophets,
who testified against them to turn them to Yourself; And they worked
great provocations. Therefore You delivered them into the hand of their
enemies, who oppressed them; And in the time of their trouble, when they
cried to You, You heard from heaven; And according to Your abundant
mercies You gave them deliverers who saved them from the hand of their
enemies.

But after they had rest, They again did evil before You. Therefore You
left them in the hand of their enemies, so that they had dominion over
them; Yet when they returned and cried out to You, You heard from
heaven; And many times You delivered them according to Your mercies, and
testified against them, that You might bring them back to Your law. Yet
they acted proudly, and did not heed Your commandments, but sinned
against Your judgments, which if a man does, he shall live by them. And
they shrugged their shoulders, stiffened their necks, and would not
hear.

...Nevertheless in Your great mercy You did not utterly consume them
nor forsake them; For You [are] God, gracious and merciful.

Now therefore, our God, The great, the mighty, and awesome God, ...You
[are] just in all that has befallen us; For You have dealt faithfully,
but we have done wickedly. Neither our kings nor our princes, our
priests nor our fathers, have kept Your law, nor heeded Your
commandments and Your testimonies, with which You testified against
them. For they have not served You in their kingdom, or in the many good
[things] that You gave them, or in the large and rich land which You set
before them; Nor did they turn from their wicked works." (Nehemiah 9:
2-4, 26-29, 31-35)

This passage expresses the desire that a number of Jews had in
returning to their faith in God, but in the course of Jewish history a
different segment gradually gained strength, and came to dominate the
Jews and later thoroughly altered the religion itself. For this reason,
in the Torah and the other books of the Old Testament, there are
elements that derive from heretical pagan doctrines, as well as those
mentioned above which urge a return to the true religion. For example:

o In the first book of the Torah, it is said that God created the
entire universe in six days from nothing. This is correct and derives
from the original revelation. But, then it maintains that God rested on
the seventh day, though it is a completely fabricated assertion. It is a
perverse idea derived from paganism which attributes human qualities to
God. In a verse of the Qur'an, God says:

We created the heavens and the earth and all between them in six days,
nor did any sense of weariness touch Us. (Qur'an, 50: 38) o In other
parts of the Torah, there is a style of writing that is not respectful
of the honor of God, especially in those places where human weakness is
falsely attributed to Him. (God is surely beyond that) These
anthropomorphisms are made to resemble the human weaknesses that pagans
applied to their own fictitious gods.

o One such blasphemous assertion is another that claims that Jacob,
ancestor of the Israelites, wrestled with God, and won. This is clearly
a story invented to confer the Israelites with racial superiority, in
emulation of the racial feelings widespread among pagan peoples. (or, in
the words of the Qur'an: "fanatical rage")

o There is a tendency in the Old Testament to present God as a national
deity-that He is God of the Isrealites only. However, God is the Lord
and God of the universe and of all human beings. This notion of national
religion, in the Old Testament, corresponds to tendencies of paganism,
in which every tribe worships its own god.

o In some books of the Old Testament (for example, Joshua) commandments
are given to commit horrible violence against non-Jewish peoples. Mass
murder is commanded, with no regard for women, children or the elderly.
This merciless savagery is totally against God's justice, and recalls
the barbarism of pagan cultures, who worshipped a mythical god of war.

These pagan ideas that were introduced into the Torah must have an
origin. There must have been Jews who adopted, honored and cherished a
tradition foreign to the Torah, and changed the latter by adding into it
ideas derived from the tradition they espoused. The origin of this
tradition stretches back to the priests of Ancient Egypt (the magicians
of Pharaoh's regime). It is, in fact, the Kabbalah which was passed on
from there by a number of Jews.

The Kabbalah assumed a form that enabled Ancient Egyptian and other
pagan doctrines to insinuate themselves into Judaism and develop within
it. Kabbalists, of course, assert that the Kabbalah simply explains in
more detail the hidden secrets of the Torah, but, in reality, as Jewish
historian of the Kabbalah, Theodore Reinach, says, the Kabbalah is "a
subtle poison which enters into the veins of Judaism and wholly infests
it."26

It is possible, then, to find in the Kabbalah clear traces of the
materialist ideology of the Ancient Egyptians.

**THE KABBALAH-A DOCTRINE OPPOSED TO CREATIONISM**

God reveals in the Qur'an that the Torah is a divine book that was sent
as a light to humanity:

We sent down the Torah containing guidance and light, and the Prophets
who had submitted themselves gave judgment by it for the Jews-as did
their scholars and their rabbis-by what they had been allowed to
preserve of God's Book to which they were witnessesâ€¦(Qur'an, 5: 44)
Therefore, the Torah, like the Qur'an, is a book that contains knowledge
and commands related to such topics as the existence of God, His unity,
His qualities, the creation of human beings and other creatures, the
purpose of human creation, and God's moral laws for humanity. (But, this
original Torah is not extant today. What we possess today is an
"altered" version of the Torah, corrupted by human hands.)

There is an important point that both the true Torah and the Qur'an
share in common: God is recognized as Creator. God is absolute, and has
existed since the beginning of time. Everything other than God is His
creation, created by Him from nothing. He has created and formed the
whole universe, the heavenly bodies, lifeless matter, human beings and
all living things. God is One; He exists alone.

While this is the truth, there is a quite different interpretation
found in the Kabbalah, that "subtle poison which enters into the veins
of Judaism and wholly infests it." Its doctrine of God is totally
opposed to the "fact of creation," found in the real Torah and the
Qur'an. In one of his works on the Kabbalah, the American researcher,
Lance S. Owens, presents his view on the possible origins of this
doctrine:

Kabbalistic experience engendered several perceptions about the Divine,
many of which departured from the orthodox view. The most central tenet
of Israel's faith had been the proclamation that "our God is One." But
Kabbalah asserted that while God exists in highest form as a totally
ineffable unity-called by Kabbalah Ein Sof, the infinite-this unknowable
singularity had necessarily emanated into a great number of Divine
forms: a plurality of Gods. These the Kabbalist called Sefiroth, the
vessels or faces of God.

The manner by which God descended from incomprehensible unity into
plurality was a mystery to which Kabbalists devoted a great deal of
meditation and speculation. Obviously, this multifaceted God image
admits to accusations of being polytheistic, a charge which was
vehemently, if never entirely successfully, rebutted by the
Kabbalists.

Not only was the Divine plural in Kabbalistic theosophy, but in its
first subtle emanation from unknowable unity God had taken on a dual
form as Male and Female; a supernal Father and Mother, Hokhmah and
Binah, were God's first emanated forms. Kabbalists used frankly sexual
metaphors to explain how the creative intercourse of Hokhmah and Binah
generated further creation...27

An interesting feature of this mystical theology is that, according to
it, human beings are not created, but are in some way divine. Owens
describes this myth: The complex Divine image â€¦was also visualized by
Kabbalah as having a unitary, anthropomorphic form. God was, by one
Kabbalistic recension, Adam Kadmon: the first primordial or archetypal
Man.

Man shared with God both an intrinsic, uncreated divine spark and a
complex, organic form. This strange equation of Adam as God was
supported by a Kabbalistic cipher: the numerical value in Hebrew of the
names Adam and Jehovah (the Tetragrammaton, Yod he vav he) was both 45.
Thus in Kabbalistic exegesis Jehovah equaled Adam: Adam was God. With
this affirmation went the assertion that all humankind in highest
realization was like God.28

This theology comprises of a mythology of paganism, and formed the
basis of the degeneration of Judaism. Jewish Kabbalists breached the
limits of common sense to such an extent that they even tried to make
human beings into gods. In addition, according to this theology, not
only was humanity divine, but it consisted only of Jews; other races
were not considered human. As a result, within Judaism, which was
originally founded on the basis of service and obedience to God, this
corrupt doctrine began to develop, whose intent was to satiate Jewish
arrogance. In spite of its contrary nature to the Torah, the Kabbalah
was introduced into Judaism. Eventually though, it began to corrupt the
Torah itself.

Another interesting point about the corrupt doctrines of the Kabbalah
is its similarity to the pagan ideas of Ancient Egypt. As we have
discussed in earlier pages, the Ancient Egyptians believed that matter
had always existed; in other words, they rejected the idea that matter
was created from nothing. The Kabbalah asserts the same thing in
relation to human beings; it claims that human beings were not created,
and that they are responsible for regulating their own existence.

To state it in modern terms: the Ancient Egyptians were materialists,
and, essentially, the doctrine of the Kabbalah can be called secular
humanism. It is interesting to note that these two concepts-materialism
and secular humanism-describe the ideology that has dominated the world
over the last two centuries.

It is tempting to ask if there are forces who have carried the
doctrines of Ancient Egypt and the Kabbalah from the midst of ancient
history to the present day.


