From the Templars To the Mansons
================================

When we mentioned the Templars earlier, we noted that this peculiar
order of crusaders was affected by a "secret" found in Jerusalem, as a
result of which they abandoned Christianity and began to practice magic
rites. We said that many researchers had reached the opinion that this
secret was related to the Kabbalah. For example, in his book Histoire de
la Magie (The History of Magic) the French writer, Eliphas Lévi,
presents detailed evidence that the Templars were initiated into the
mysterious doctrines of the Kabbalah, that is, they were secretly
trained in this doctrine.29 Therefore, a doctrine with its roots in
Ancient Egypt was transmitted to the Templars through the Kabbalah.

In Foucault's Pendulum, the famous Italian novelist, Umberto Eco,
relates these facts in the course of the plot. Throughout the novel, he
relates, through the mouths of its protagonists, that the Templars were
influenced by the Kabbalah and that the Kabbalists possessed a secret
that could be traced back to the Ancient Egyptian pharaohs. According to
Eco, some prominent Jews learned certain secrets taken from the Ancient
Egyptians, and later inserted these into the first five books of the Old
Testament (Pentateuch).

But, this secret, which was transmitted secretly, could be understood
only by the Kabbalists. (The Zohar, written later in Spain, and forming
the fundamental book of the Kabbalah, deals with the secrets of these
five books) After stating that the Kabbalists read this Ancient Egyptian
secret also in the geometric measurements of the temple of Solomon, Eco
writes that the Templars learned it from the Kabbalist rabbis in
Jerusalem:

The secret-what the Temple already said in full-is suspected only by a
small group of rabbis who remained in Palestine… And from them the
Templars learn it.30

When the Templars adopted this ancient Egyptian-Kabbalist doctrine,
naturally, they came into conflict with the Christian establishment that
dominated Europe. This was a conflict they shared with another important
force-the Jews. After the Templars were arrested, by joint order of the
king of France and the Pope in 1307, the order went underground, but its
influence continued, and in a more radical and determined way. As we
said earlier, a significant number of Templars escaped arrest and
appealed to the king of Scotland,

the only European kingdom at that time that had not accepted the
authority of the Pope. In Scotland, they infiltrated the wall-builders'
guild and, in time, took it over. The guilds adopted the traditions of
the Templars, and thus, the Masonic seed was planted in Scotland. Still,
to this day, the mainline of Masonry is the "Ancient and Accepted
Scottish Rite."

As we investigated in detail in The New Masonic Order, from the
beginnings of the fourteenth century it is possible to detect traces of
the Templars-and some Jews associated with them-at various stages of
European history. Without going into detail, here are some of the
headings under which we examined this topic:

o In Provence, in France, there was an important Templar refuge. During
the arrests, very many hid here. Another important feature of the area
is that it is the most well known center of Kabbalism in Europe.
Provence is the place where the oral tradition of the Kabbalah was made
into a book. o The Peasants Revolt in England, in 1381, was, according
to some historians, fanned to flame by a secret organization. Those
experts who study the history of Masonry agree that this secret
organization was the Templars. It was more than a mere civil uprising,
it was a planned assault on the Catholic Church. 31

o Half a century after this revolt, a clergyman in Bohemia by the name
of John Huss started an uprising in opposition to the Catholic Church.
Behind the scenes of this uprising were again the Templars. Moreover,
Huss was very interested in the Kabbalah. Avigdor Ben Isaac Kara was one
of the most important names that he was influenced by in the development
of his doctrines. Kara was a rabbi of the Jewish community in Prague and
a Kabbalist.

32

Examples such as these are signs that the alliance between the Templars
and the Kabbalists was directed at a change in the social order of
Europe. This change involved an alteration in the basic Christian
culture of Europe, and its replacement by a culture based on pagan
doctrines, like the Kabbalah. And, after this cultural change, political
changes would follow. The French and Italian revolutions, for example…

In the coming sections, we will look at some important turning-points
in the history of Europe. At every stage the fact that will confront us
is that there existed a force that wanted to alienate Europe from its
Christian heritage, replace it with a secular ideology and, with this
program in mind, to destroy its religious institutions. This force
attempted to cause Europe to accept a doctrine that had been handed down
from Ancient Egypt through the Kabbalah. As we pointed out earlier, at
the basis of this doctrine were two important concepts: humanism and
materialism.

First, let us look at humanism.

**Humanism Revisited**

"Humanism" is considered a positive idea by the majority of people. It
brings to mind notions such as love of humanity, peace and brotherhood.
But, the philosophical meaning of humanism is much more significant:
humanism is a way of thinking that posits the concept of humanity as its
focus and only goal. In other words, it calls human beings to turn away
from God their Creator, and concern themselves with their own existence
and identity. A common dictionary defines humanism as: "a system of
thought that is based on the values, characteristics, and behavior that
are believed to be best in human beings, rather than on any supernatural
authority."33

The clearest definition of humanism, however, has been put forward by
those who espoused it. One of the most prominent modern spokesmen for
humanism is Corliss Lamont. In his book The Philosophy of Humanism, the
author writes:

[In sum] humanism believes that nature ... constitutes the sum total of
reality, that matter-energy and not mind is the foundation stuff of the
universe and that supernatural entities simply do not exist. This
nonreality of the supernatural means, on the human level, that men do
not possess supernatural and immortal souls; and, on the level of the
universe as a whole, that our cosmos does not possess a supernatural and
eternal God.34 As we can see, humanism is almost identical to atheism,
and this fact is freely admitted by humanists. There were two important
manifestos published by humanists in the last century.

The first was published in 1933, and was signed by some important
individuals of that time. Forty years later, in 1973, a second humanist
manifesto was published which confirmed the first, but contained some
additions relative to some developments that had occurred in the
meantime. Thousands of thinkers, scientists, writers and members of the
media signed the second manifesto, which is supported by the still very
active American Humanist Association.

When we examine the manifestos, we find one basic foundation in each of
them: the atheist dogma that the universe and human beings were not
created but exist independently, that human beings are not responsible
to any other authority besides themselves, and that belief in God has
retarded the development of individuals and societies. For example, the
first six articles of the first Humanist Manifesto are as follows:

First: Religious humanists regard the universe as self-existing and not
created.

Second: Humanism believes that man is a part of nature and that he has
emerged as the result of a continuous process.

Third: Holding an organic view of life, humanists find that the
traditional dualism of mind and body must be rejected.

Fourth: Humanism recognizes that man's religious culture and
civilization, as clearly depicted by anthropology and history, are the
product of a gradual development due to his interaction with his natural
environment and with his social heritage. The individual born into a
particular culture is largely molded by that culture. Fifth: Humanism
asserts that the nature of the universe depicted by modern science makes
unacceptable any supernatural or cosmic guarantees of human values...

Sixth: We are convinced that the time has passed for theism, deism,
modernism, and the several varieties of "new thought."35 In the above
articles, we see the expression of a common philosophy that manifests
itself under such names as materialism, Darwinism, atheism and
agnosticism. In the first article, the materialist dogma of the eternal
existence of the universe is put forward. The second article states, as
the theory of evolution does, that human beings were not created.

The third article denies the existence of the human soul claiming that
human beings are composed of matter. The fourth article proposes a
"cultural evolution" and denies the existence of a divinely ordained
human nature (a special human nature given in creation). The fifth
article rejects God's sovereignty over the universe and humanity, and
the sixth states that it is time to reject "theism," that is belief in
God.

It will be noticed that these claims are stereotypical ideas, typical
of those circles that are hostile to true religion. The reason for this
is that humanism is the main foundation of anti-religious sentiment.
This is because humanism is an expression of "man's reckoning that he
will be left to go on unchecked," which has been the primary basis,
throughout history, for the denial of God. In one verse of the Qur'an,
God says: Does man reckon he will be left to go on unchecked?

Was he not a drop of ejaculated sperm,
then a blood-clot which He created and shaped,
making from it both sexes, male and female?

Is He who does this not able to bring the dead to life? (Qur'an, 75:
36-40) God says that people are not to be "left to go on unchecked," and
reminds them immediately afterwards that they are His creation. This is
because, when a person realizes that he is a creation of God, he
understands that he is not "unchecked" but responsible before God.
For this reason, the claim that human beings are not created has become
the basic doctrine of humanist philosophy. The first two articles of the
first Humanist Manifesto give an expression to this doctrine. Moreover,
humanists maintain that science supports these claims.

However, they are wrong. Since the first Humanist Manifesto was
published, the two premises that humanists have presented as scientific
facts-the idea that the universe is eternal and the theory of
evolution-have collapsed:

1. The idea that the universe is eternal was invalidated by a series of
astronomical discoveries made when the first Humanist Manifesto was
being written. Discoveries such as the fact that the universe is
expanding, of cosmic background radiation and the calculation of the
ratio of hydrogen to helium, have shown that the universe had a
beginning, and that it came to be from nothing some 15-17 billion years
ago in a giant explosion called the "Big Bang.

" Although those who espouse the humanist and materialist philosophy
were unwilling to accept the Big Bang theory, they were eventually won
over. As a result of the scientific evidence that has come to light, the
scientific community has finally accepted the Big Bang theory, that is,
that the universe had a beginning, and therefore humanists have no
argument. Thus the atheist thinker Anthony Flew was forced to confess:

…I will therefore begin by confessing that the Stratonician atheist has
to be embarrassed by the contemporary cosmological consensus. For it
seems that the cosmologists are providing a scientific proof of what St.
Thomas contended could not be proved philosophically; namely, that the
universe had a beginning…36

2. The theory of evolution, the most important scientific justification
behind the first Humanist Manifesto, started to lose ground in the
decades after it was written. It is known today that the scenario
proposed for the origin of life by atheist (and no doubt humanist)
evolutionists, such as A. I. Oparin and J. B. S. Haldane in the 1930's,
hasno scientific validity; living things cannot be generated
spontaneously from non-living matter as proposed by this scenario.

The fossil record demonstrates that living things did not develop
through a process of small cumulative changes, but appeared abruptly
with their distinct characteristics, and this fact has been accepted by
evolutionist paleontologists themselves since the 1970's. Modern biology
has demonstrated that living things are not the result of chance and
natural laws, but that there are in each organism complex systems
indicating an intelligent design that are evidence for creation. (For
details refer to Harun Yahya, Darwinism Refuted: How the Theory of
Evolution Breaks Down in the Light of Modern Science)

Moreover, the erroneous claim that religious belief was the factor that
prevented humanity from progressing and drew it into conflict has been
disproved by historical experience. Humanists have claimed that the
removal of religious belief would make people happy and at ease,
however, the opposite has proved to be the case. Six years after the
first Humanist Manifesto was published, the Second World War broke out,
a record of the calamity brought upon the world by the secular fascist
ideology.

The humanist ideology of communism wreaked, first on the people of the
Soviet Union, then on the citizens of China, Cambodia, Vietnam, North
Korea, Cuba and various African and Latin American countries,
unparalleled savagery. A total of 120 million people were killed by
communist regimes or organizations. It is also evident that the Western
brand of humanism (capitalist systems) has not succeeded in bringing
peace and happiness to their own societies or to other areas of the
world.

The collapse of humanism's argument on religion has also been
manifested in the field of psychology. The Freudian myth, a corner-stone
of the atheist dogma since early twentieth century, has been invalidated
by empirical data. Patrick Glynn, of the George Washington University,
explains this fact in his book titled God: The Evidence, The
Reconciliation of Faith and Reason in a Postsecular World:

The last quarter of the twentieth century has not been kind to the
psychoanalytic vision. Most significant has been the exposure of Freud's
views of religion (not to mention a host of other matters) as entirely
fallacious. Ironically enough, scientific research in psychology over
the past twenty-five years has demonstrated that, far from being a
neurosis or source of neuroses as Freud and his disciples claimed,
religious belief is one of the most consistent correlates of overall
mental health and happiness. Study after study has shown a powerful
relationship between religious belief and practice, on the one hand, and
healthy behaviors with regard to such problems as suicide, alcohol and
drug abuse, divorce, depression, even, perhaps surprisingly, levels of
sexual satisfaction in marriage, on the other hand. 37

In short, the supposed scientific justification behind humanism has
been proven invalid and its promises vain. Nevertheless, humanists have
not abandoned their philosophy, but rather, in fact, have tried to
spread it throughout the world through methods of mass propaganda.
Especially in the post-war period there has been intense humanist
propaganda in the fields of science, philosophy, music, literature, art
and cinema. The attractive but hollow messages created by humanist
ideologues have been insistently imposed upon the masses. The song
"Imagine," by John Lennon, soloist of the most popular music group of
all times, the Beatles, is an example of this:

This song was chosen as the "song of the century" in several polls that
were held in 1999. This is a good indication of the sentimentality with
which humanism, lacking any scientific or rational foundation, is
imposed on the masses. Humanism can produce no rational objection to
religion or the truths it teaches, but attempts to employ suggestive
methods such as these.

When the promises of the 1933 I. Humanist Manifesto proved vain, forty
years passed after which humanists presented a second draft. At the
beginning of the text was an attempt to explain why the first promises
had come to nothing. Despite the fact that this explanation was
extremely weak, it demonstrated the enduring attachment of humanists to
their atheist philosophy.

The most obvious characteristic of the manifesto was its preservation
of the anti-religious line of the 1933 manifesto:

As in 1933, humanists still believe that traditional theism, especially
faith in the prayer-hearing God, assumed to live and care for persons,
to hear and understand their prayers, and to be able to do something
about them, is an unproved and outmoded faith… We believe ...that
traditional dogmatic or authoritarian religions that place revelation,
God, ritual, or creed above human needs and experience do a disservice
to the human species... As nontheists, we begin with humans not God,
nature not deity.38

This is a very superficial explanation. In order to understand
religion, one first needs the intelligence and understanding to be able
to grasp profound ideas. The predisposition must be sincerity and the
avoidance of prejudice. Instead, humanism is nothing more than the
attempt of some individuals, who are passionately atheistic and
antireligious from the outset, to portray this prejudice as rational.

However, the efforts of humanists to describe faith in God and
monotheistic religions as groundless and outmoded creeds is actually not
a new undertaking; it is the emulation of a claim that has been made for
thousands of years by those who reject God. In the Qur'an, God explains
this age-old argument propounded by the unbelievers:

Your God is One God. As for those who do not believe in the hereafter,
their hearts are in denial and they are puffed up with pride.
There is no doubt that God knows what they keep secret and what they
make public. He does not love people puffed up with pride.
When they are asked, "What has your Lord sent down?" they say, "Myths
and legends of previous peoples." (Qur'an, 16: 22-24)

This verse reveals that the real reason of the unbelievers' rejection
of religion is the arrogance hidden in their hearts. The philosophy
called humanism is merely the outward manner by which this age rejects
God. In other words, humanism is not a new way of thinking, as those who
espouse it claim; it is an age-old, antiquated world-view common to
those who reject God out of arrogance.

When we look at the progress of humanism in European history, we will
discover many solid proofs for this assertion.


**The Roots of Humanism in The Kabbalah**

We have seen that the Kabbalah is a doctrine that dates back to Ancient
Egypt, and that it entered and contaminated the religion that God
revealed to the Israelites. We have also seen that its foundation rests
upon a perverse way of understanding that regards human beings as
uncreated though divine creatures that have existed for eternity.

Humanism entered Europe from this source. Christian belief was based on
the existence of God, and the belief that human beings were His
dependent servants created by Him. But, with the spread of the Templar
tradition throughout Europe, the Kabbalah began to attract a number of
philosophers. So, in the fifteenth century, a current of humanism began
that left an indelible mark on the European world of ideas.

This connection between humanism and the Kabbalah has been emphasized
in several sources. One of these sources is the book of the famous
author Malachi Martin entitled The Keys of This Blood. Martin is
professor of history at the Vatican's Pontifical Bible Institute. He
says that the influence of the Kabbalah can be clearly observed among
the humanists:

In this unaccustomed climate of uncertainty and challenge that came to
mark early-Renaissance Italy, there arose a network of Humanist
associations with aspirations to escape the overall control of that
established order. Given aspirations like that, these associations had
to exist in the protection of secrecy, at least at their beginnings. But
aside from secrecy, these humanist groups were marked by two other main
characteristics.

The first was that they were in revolt against the traditional
interpretation of the Bible as maintained by the ecclesiastical and
civil authorities, and against the philosophical and theological
underpinnings provided by the Church for civil and political life…

Not surprisingly given such an animus, these associations had their own
conception of the original message of the Bible and of God's revelation.
They latched onto what they considered to be an ultrasecret body of
knowledge, a gnosis, which they based in part on cultic and occultist
strains deriving from North Africa-notably, Egypt-and, in part, on the
classical Jewish Kabbala….

Italian humanists bowdlerized the idea of Kabbala almost beyond
recognition. They reconstructed the concept of gnosis, and transferred
it to a thoroughly this-wordly plane. The special gnosis they sought was
a secret knowledge of how to master the blind forces of nature for a
sociopolitical purpose.39

In short, the humanist societies formed in that period wanted to
replace the Catholic culture of Europe with a new culture that had its
roots in the Kabbalah. They aimed to create a sociopolitical change to
bring this about. It is interesting that, besides the Kabbalah, at the
source of this new culture were the doctrines of Ancient Egypt. Prof.
Martin writes:

Initiates of those early humanist associations were devotees of the
Great Force-the Great Architect of the Cosmos-which they represented
under the form of the Sacred Tetragrammaton, YHWH ….[humanists] borrowed
other symbols-the Pyramid and the All Seeing Eye-mainly from Egyptian
sources.40 It is quite interesting that humanists make use of the
concept of "the Great Architect of the Universe," a term still used by
Masons today. This indicates that there must be a relationship between
humanists and Masons. Prof. Martin writes:

In other northern climes, meanwhile, a far more important union took
place, with the humanists. A union that no one could have expected. In
the 1300s, during the time that the cabalist-humanist associations were
beginning to find their bearings, there already existed-particularly in
England, Scotland and France-medieval guilds of men …

No one alive in the 1300s could have predicted a merger of minds
between freemason guilds and the Italian humanists…. The new Masonry
shifted away from all allegiance to Roman ecclesiastical Christianity.
And again, as for the Italian occultist humanists, the secrecy
guaranteed by the tradition of the Lodge was essential in the
circumstances.

The two groups had more in common than secrecy, however. From the
writings and records of speculative Masonry, it is clear that the
central religious tenet became a belief in the Great Architect of the
Universe-a figure familiar by now from the influence of Italian
humanists…The Great Architect was immanent to and essentially a part of
the material cosmos, a product of the "enlightened" mind.

There was no conceptual basis by which such a belief could be
reconciled with Christianity. For precluded were all such ideas as sin,
Hell for punishment and Heaven for reward, and eternally perpetual
Sacrifice of the Mass, saints and angels, priest and pope.41

In short, in Europe, in the fourteenth century, a humanist and Masonic
organization was born that had its roots in the Kabbalah. And, this
organization did not regard God as the Jews, Christians and Muslims did:
the Creator and Ruler of the whole universe and the only Lord and God of
humanity. Instead, they used a different concept, such as the "Great
Architect of the Universe," which they perceived as being "part of the
material universe."

In other words, this secret organization, that appeared in Europe in
the fourteenth century, rejected God, but, under the concept of "the
Great Architect of the Universe," accepted the material universe as a
divinity.

For a clearer definition of this corrupt belief, we can jump forward to
the twentieth century and look at Masonic literature. For example, one
of Turkey's most senior Masons, Selami Isindag, has a book entitled
Masonluktan Esinlenmeler (Inspirations from Freemasonry). The purpose of
this book is to train young Masons. Concerning the Masons' belief in the
"Great Architect of the Universe," he has this to say:

Masonry is not godless. But the concept of God they have adopted is
different from that of religion. The god of Masonry is an exalted
principle. It is at the apex of the evolution. By criticizing our inner
being, knowing ourselves and deliberately walking in the path of
science, intelligence and virtue, we can lessen the angle between him
and us. Then, this god does not possess the good and bad characteristics
of human beings. It is not personified. It is not thought of as the
guide of nature or humanity. It is the architect of the great working of
the universe, of its unity and harmony. It is the totality of all the
creatures in the universe, a total power encompassing everything, an
energy. Despite all this, it cannot be accepted that it is a beginning…
this is a great mystery.42

In the same book, it is clear that when Freemasons speak of the "Great
Architect of the Universe," they mean nature, or, that they worship
nature: Apart from nature there can be no power responsible for our
thought or our activities…The principles and doctrines of Masonry are
scientific facts based on science and intelligence. God is the
evolution. An element of it is the power of nature. So the absolute
reality is the evolution itself and the energy that encompasses it.43

The magazine Mimar Sinan, a publishing organization especially for
Turkish Freemasons also gives expression to the same Masonic philosophy:
The Great Architect of the Universe is a leaning toward eternity. It is
an entering into eternity. For us, it is an approach. It entails the
on-going search for absolute perfection in eternity. It forms a distance
between the current moment and the Thinking Freemason, or,
consciousness.44 This is the belief the Masons mean when they say, "we
believe in God, we absolutely do not accept atheists among us." It is
not God that Masons worship, but naturalist and humanist concepts such
as nature, evolution and humanity divinized by their philosophy.

When we look briefly at Masonic literature, we may begin to see that
this organization is nothing more than organized humanism, as well as
recognize that its aim is to create throughout the whole world a
secular, humanist order. These ideas were born among the humanists of
fourteenth century Europe; present-day Masons still propose and defend
them.


