Masonic Humanism : the Worship of Humanity
==========================================

The internal publications of the Masons describe in detail the humanist
philosophy of the organization and their hostility to monotheism. There
are countless explanations, interpretations, quotations and allegories
offered on this subject in Masonic publications.

As we said at the beginning, humanism has turned its face from the
Creator of humanity and accepted humans as "the highest form of being in
the universe." In fact, this implies the worship of humanity. This
irrational belief, that began with the Kabbalist humanists in the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, continues today in modern Masonry.

One of the fourteenth century's most famous humanists was Pico Della
Mirandola. His work entitled Conclusiones philosophicae, cabalisticae,
et theologicae was condemned by Pope Innocent VIII in 1489 as containing
than the glory of mankind. The Church saw this as a heretical idea that
was nothing less than the worship of humanity. Indeed, this was a
heretical idea because there is no other being to be glorified except
God. Humanity is merely His creation.

Today, Masons proclaim Mirandola's heretical idea of the worship of
humanity much more openly. For example, in a local Masonic booklet, it
says: Primitive societies were weak and, because of this weakness, they
divinized the power and phenomena around them. But Masonry divinizes
only humanity.45

In The Lost Keys of Freemasonry, Manly P. Hall explains that this
Masonic humanist doctrine goes back to Ancient Egypt: Man is a god in
the making, and as in the mystic myths of Egypt, on the potter's wheel,
he is being molded. When his light shines out to lift and preserve all
things, he receives the triple crown of godhood, and joins that throng
of Master Masons, who in their robe of Blue and Gold, are seeking to
dispel the darkness of night with the triple light of the Masonic
Lodge.46

This is to say that according to the false belief of Masonry, human
beings are gods, but only a grand master reaches the fullness of this
divinity. The way to become a grand master is to fully reject the belief
in God and the fact that human beings are His servants. This fact is
briefly touched on by another writer, J.D. Buck, in his book Mystic
Masonry:

The only personal God Freemasonry accepts is humanity in toto . . .
Humanity therefore is the only personal god that there is.47 Evidently,
Masonry is a kind of religion. But, it is not a monotheistic religion;
it is a humanist religion and, therefore, a false religion. It enjoins
the worship of humanity, not of God. Masonic writings insist on this
point. In an article in the magazine Turk Mason (The Turkish Mason), it
says, "We always acknowledge that the high ideal of Masonry lies in
'Humanism' doctrine."48

Another Turkish publication explains that humanism is a religion: Far
from dry sermons on religious dogmas, but a genuine religion. And our
humanism in which the meaning of life takes root, will satisfy the
longings that youth are not aware of.49 How do the Masons serve this
false religion they believe in? To see this, we must look a little more
closely at the messages that they disseminate to society.


**HUMANIST MORAL THEORY**

Today, Masons in many countries are engaged in an effort to introduce
themselves to the rest of society. Using press conferences, Internet
sites, newspaper advertisements and statements, they describe themselves
as an organization solely dedicated to the good of society. In some
countries there are even charitable organizations supported by Masons.

The same thing is said by the Rotary and Lion's Club organizations,
which are "light" versions of Masonry. All of these organizations insist
that they are working for the good of society.

Certainly, to work for the good of society is not an undertaking to be
discouraged, and we have no objection to it. But, behind their claim
there is a deceptive message. Masons claim that there can be morality
without religion, and that a moral world can be established without
religion. And, the intention behind all their charitable work is to
spread this message in society.

We will see shortly why this claim is so deceitful. But, before that,
it will be useful to consider the views of Masons on this subject. On
the Masons' Internet site, the possibility of "morality without
religion" is described in this way:

What is human? Where does he come from and where is he going?... How
does a person live? How does he have to live? Religions try to answer
these questions with the help of moral principles that they have set.
However they relate their principles with metaphysical concepts like
God, heaven, hell, worship. And people have to find their principles of
life without being involved in metaphysical problems, which they need to
believe in without comprehending. Freemasonry has been declaring these
principles for centuries as freedom, equality, brotherhood, the love of
working and peace, democracy, etc. These release a person totally from
the religious creeds but still give a principle of life. They search
their bases not in metaphysical concepts but inside a mature person
living on this earth.50

Masons who think in this way are totally opposed to a person believing
in God and performing acts of charity to gain His approval. For them,
everything must be done only for the sake of humanity. We can clearly
discern this way of thinking in a book published by the Turkish lodges:
Masonic morality is based on love for humanity. It totally rejects being
good through hope for the future, a benefit, a reward, and paradise, out
of fear of another person, a religious or political institution, unknown
supernatural powersâ€¦ It only espouses and exalts being good in relation
to the love for family, country, human beings and humanity. This is one
of the most significant aims of Freemasonic evolution. To love people
and to be good without expecting something in return and to reach this
level are the great evolution.51

The claims in the above quotation are highly misleading. Without the
moral discipline of religion there can be no sense of self-sacrifice for
the rest of society. And, where this would appear to be accomplished,
relationships are merely superficial. Those who have no sense of
religious morality have no fear of God or respect for Him, and in those
places where there is no fear of God, human beings are concerned only
for their own gain.

When people think that their personal interests are at stake, they
cannot express true love, loyalty or affection. They show love and
respect only to those who may be of benefit to them. This is because,
according to this misconception of theirs, they are in this world only
once and, therefore, will take as much from it as they can. Moreover,
according to this false belief, there is no retribution for any
dishonesty or evil they commit in the world.

Masonic literature is full of moral sermons which try to obfuscate this
fact. But, actually, this morality without religion is nothing but sham
rhetoric. History is full of examples to show that, without the
self-discipline that religion confers upon the human spirit, and without
divine law, true morality cannot in any way be established.

A striking example of this was the great French Revolution of 1789. The
Masons, who fomented the revolution, came forth with slogans shouting
the moral ideals of "liberty, equality and fraternity." Yet, tens of
thousands of innocent people were sent to the guillotine, and the
country soaked in blood. Even the leaders of the revolution themselves
could not escape this savagery, but were sent to the guillotine, one
after the other.

In the nineteenth century, socialism was born from the notion of the
possibility of morality without religion, and with even more disastrous
results. Socialism supposedly demanded a just, equal society in which
there was no exploitation and, to this end, proposed the abolition of
religion. However, in the twentieth century, in places such as the
Soviet Union, the Eastern Block, China, Indo-China, several countries in
Africa and Central America, it subjected people to dreadful misery.

Communist regimes murdered an incredible number of people; the total
number nears about 120 million.52 Moreover, contrary to what has been
claimed, justice and equality have never been established in any
communist regime; the communist leaders in charge of the state comprised
a class of elites. (In his classic book entitled The New Class, the
Yugoslavian thinker Milovan Djilas, explains that the communist leaders,
known as "nomenklatura," formed a "privileged class" contrary to the
claims of socialism.)

Also today, when we look within Masonry itself, which is constantly
pronouncing its ideas of "service to society" and "sacrifice for
humanity," we do not find a very clean record. In many countries,
Masonry has been the focus of relationships for ill-gotten material
gain. In the P2 Masonic Lodge scandal of Italy in the 1980's, it came to
light that the Masons maintained a close relationship with the mafia,
and that the directors of the lodge were engaged in activities such as
arms-smuggling, the drug trade or money laundering.

It was also revealed that they arranged assaults on their rivals and on
those who had betrayed them. In the "Great Eastern Lodge Scandal" of
France in 1992, and in the "Clean Hands" operation in England, reported
in the English press in 1995, the activities of Masonic lodges in the
interests of illegal profit became clear. The Masons' idea of "humanist
morality" is only a sham.

That such a thing should happen is inevitable, because, as we said at
the beginning, morality is only established in society by the moral
discipline of religion. At the basis of morality lies the absence of
arrogance and selfishness, and the only ones who can achieve this state
are those who realize their responsibility to God. In the Qur'an, after
God tells of believers' self-sacrifice, He commands "â€¦It is the people
who are safe-guarded from the avarice of their own selves who are
successful." (Qur'an, 59: 9). This is the true basis of morality.

In the Sura Furqan of the Qur'an, the nature of the morality of true
believers is described in this way:

The servants of the All-Merciful are those who walk lightly on the
earth and, who, when the ignorant speak to them, say, "Peace";
those who pass the night prostrating and standing before their
Lord...
those who, when they spend, are neither extravagant nor mean, but take
a stance mid way between the two;
those who do not call on any other god together with God and do not
kill anyone God has made inviolate, except with the right to do so, and
do not fornicate...

those who do not bear false witness and who, when they pass by
worthless talk, pass by with dignity; those who, when they are reminded
of the Signs of their Lord, do not turn their backs, deaf and blind to
them. (Qur'an, 25: 63-73)

That is, the basic duty of believers is to submit to God in humility,
"not to turn their backs, as if they were deaf and blind when they are
reminded of His signs." Because of this duty, a person is saved from the
selfishness of the ego, worldly passions, ambitions, and the concern to
make himself liked by others. The kind of morality mentioned in the
verses above is attained by these means alone. For this reason, in a
society lacking in love and fear of God and faith in Him, there is no
morality. Since nothing can be determined absolutely, each determines
what is right and wrong according to his own desires.

Actually, the primary aim of Masonry's secular-humanist moral
philosophy is, not to establish a moral world, but to establish a
secular world. In other words, Masons do not espouse the philosophy of
humanism because they grant a high importance to morality, but only to
transmit to society the notion that religion is not necessary.

**THE MASONIC GOAL: TO ESTABLISH A HUMANIST WORLD**

The humanist philosophy, which Masons regard so highly is founded on
the rejection of faith in God, and the worship of human beings, or the
veneration of "humanity" in His place. But, this raises an important
question: do Masons reserve this belief for themselves only, or do they
wish it to be adopted by others as well?

When we look at Masonic writings, we can clearly see the answer to this
question: the goal of this organization is to spread the humanist
philosophy throughout the world, and to eradicate the monotheistic
religions (Islam, Christianity and Judaism).

For example, in an article published in the Masonic magazine Mimar
Sinan, it says, "Masons do not search for the origin of the ideas of
evil, justice and honesty beyond the physical world, they believe that
these things arise from a person's social conditions, social
relationships and what he strives for in his life." and adds, "Masonry
is trying to spread this idea throughout the whole world."53

Selami Isindag, a senior Turkish Mason, writes: According to Masonry,
in order to rescue humanity from a morality of the supernatural based on
religious sources, it is necessary to establish a morality that is based
on love for humanity which is not relative. In its traditional moral
principles, Masonry has taken into account the tendencies of the human
organism, its needs and their satisfaction, the rules of social life and
their organization, conscience, freedom of thought and speech and,
finally, all the things that go into the formation of natural life.
Because of this, its goal is to establish and foster human morality in
all societies.54

What Master Mason Isindag means by "rescuing human beings from a
morality based on religious sources" is the alienation of all people
from religion. In the same book, Isindag explains this goal and its
"principles for the establishment of an advanced civilization":

Masonry's positive principles are necessary and sufficient for the
establishment of an advanced civilization. They are:

-The acceptance that the impersonal God (the Great Architect of the
Universe) is evolution itself.
-The rejection of the belief in revelation, mysticism and empty
beliefs.

-The superiority of rational humanism and labor.
The first of the three articles above entails the rejection of the
existence of God. (Masons do not believe in God, but in the Great
Architect of the Universe, and the above quotation shows that with this
term, they mean evolution.) The second article rejects revelation from
God and religious knowledge based on it. (Isindag himself defines this
as "empty beliefs.") And the third article exalts humanism and the
humanist concept of "labor" (as in Communism).

If we consider how entrenched these ideas have become in the world
today, we can appreciate the influence of Masonry in it. There is
another important thing to take note of here: how has Masonry put into
motion its mission against religion? When we look at Masonic writings,
we see that they want to destroy religion, especially on the societal
level, by means of mass "propaganda." Master Mason Selami Isindag throws
a lot of light on this matter in this passage from his book:

â€¦Even overly repressive regimes have not been successful in their
attempts to destroy the institution of religion. Indeed, the harsh
excesses of political methods, in their attempt to enlighten society by
rescuing people from empty religious faith and dogmas produced an
adverse reaction: the places of worship they wanted close are today
fuller than ever, and the faith and dogmas that that they outlawed have
even more adherents. In another lecture we pointed out that in such a
matter that touches heart and emotion, prohibition and force have no
effect.

The only way to bring people from darkness to enlightenment is positive
science and the principles of logic and wisdom. If people are educated
according to this way, they will respect the humanist and positive sides
of religion but save themselves from its vain beliefs and dogmas.55

In order to understand what is meant here, we have to analyze it
carefully. Isindag says that repression of religion will make religious
people more highly motivated and will strengthen religion. Therefore, in
order to prevent religion from being strengthened, Isindag thinks Masons
should destroy religion on the intellectual level.

What he means by "positive science and principles of logic and wisdom"
is not really science, logic or wisdom. What he means is merely a
humanist, materialist philosophy that uses these catch-phrases as
camouflage, as in the case of Darwinism. Isindag asserts that, when
these ideas are disseminated in society, "only the humanist elements in
religion will gain respect," that is, what will be left of religion will
be only those elements approved by the humanist philosophy. In other
words, they want to reject the basic truths that lie at the foundation
of monotheistic religion (Isindag calls them vain beliefs and dogmas).
These truths are the ultimate realities such as that man is created by
God and is responsible to Him.

In short, Masons aim at destroying the elements of faith that
constitute the essence of religion. They want to reduce the role of
religion as merely a cultural element that expresses its ideas on a
number of general moral questions. The way to accomplish this, according
to the Masons, is to impose atheism on the society in the guise of
science and reason. Ultimately though, their goal is to remove religion
from its position as even a cultural element, and establish a totally
atheist world.

In an article by Isindag, in the magazine Mason, entitled "Positive
Science-The Obstacles of Mind and Masonry," he says:

As a result of all this, I want to say that the most important
humanistic and Masonic duty of us all is not to turn away from science
and reason, to acknowledge that this is the best and only way according
to evolution, to spread this faith of ours among people and to educate
the people in positive science. The words of Ernest Renan are very
important: "If the people are educated and enlightened by positive
science and reason, the vain beliefs of religion will collapse by
themselves." Lessing's words support this view: "If human beings are
educated and enlightened by positive science and reason, one day there
will be no need for religion."56

This is Masonry's ultimate goal. They want to destroy religion
completely, and establish a humanist world based on the "sacredness" of
humanity. That is, they want to establish a new order of ignorance, in
which people reject God Who created them, and consider themselves
divineâ€¦ This goal is the purpose for the existence of Masonry. In the
Masonic magazine called Ayna (Mirror), this is called a "Temple of
Ideas":

Modern Masons have changed the goal of the old Masons to build a
physical temple into the idea of building a "Temple of Ideas." The
construction of a Temple of Ideas will be possible when Masonic
principles and virtues are established and such wise people increase on
the earth.57 To further this goal, Masons work tirelessly in many
countries of the world. The Masonic organization is influential in
universities, other educational institutions, in the media, in the world
of art and ideas.

It never ceases in its efforts to disseminate its humanist philosophy
in society and to discredit the truths of the faith that is the basis of
religion. We will see later that the theory of evolution is one of
Masons' principal means of propaganda. Moreover, they aim to build a
society that does not mention even the name of God or religion, but
caters only to human pleasure, desires and worldly ambition. This will
be a society formed by people who have "made (God) into something to
cast disdainfully behind their backs" (Qur'an, 11: 92), similar to the
people of Madyan mentioned in the Qur'an.

In this culture of ignorance there is no room for the fear or love of
God, doing His will, performing acts of worship, nor is there any
thought for the hereafter. In fact, these ideas are thought to be
old-fashioned and characteristic of uneducated people. This message is
being constantly repeated in films, comic strips and novels.

In this great enterprise of deception, the Masons continually play a
leadership role. But, there are also many other groups and individuals
engaged in the same work. Masons accept them as "honorary Masons," and
count them as their allies because they are all one in their shared
humanist philosophy. Selami Isindag writes:

Masonry also accepts this fact: In the outside world there are wise
people who, although they are not Masons, espouse Masonic ideology. This
is because this ideology is wholly an ideology of human beings and of
humanity.58 This persistent battle against religion relies on two basic
arguments or justifications: the materialist philosophy and Darwin's
theory of evolution.

In the next two chapters we will examine these two justifications,
their origin and their relationship to Masonry. Then, we will be able to
understand more clearly the behind-the-scenes of these ideas that have
influenced the world since the nineteenth century.

**Materialism Revisited**

In the first chapter of this book, we looked at the regime of Pharaoh
in Ancient Egypt and came to some important conclusions about its
philosophical underpinnings. The most interesting feature of Ancient
Egyptian thought, as we said, is that it was materialist, that is,
posited the belief that matter is eternal and uncreated. In their book
The Hiram Key, Christopher Knight and Robert Lomas have some important
things to say on this matter that are worth repeating:

The Egyptians believed that matter had always existed; to them it was
illogical to think of a god making something out of absolutely nothing.
Their view was that the world began when order came out of chaos, and
that ever since there has been a battle between the forces of
organization and disorderâ€¦This chaotic state was called Nun, and like
the Sumerian â€¦descriptions â€¦, all was a dark, sunless watery abyss with
a power, a creative force within it that commanded order to begin. This
latent power which was within the substance of the chaos did not know it
existed; it was a probability, a potential that was intertwined within
the randomness of disorder.59

There is a striking similarity between the myths of Ancient Egypt and
modern materialist thinking. A hidden reason for this interesting fact
is that, there is a modern organization that has adopted these Ancient
Egyptian beliefs, and aims to establish them throughout the world. This
organization is Masonryâ€¦


