Haroun Questions  Bahlool About Hazrat Ali
==========================================

One day Bahlool went to Haroun, who was drunk. He said to Bahlool, “Was
Ali ibn Abi Talib greater than the Messenger of Allah's uncle Abbas' son
or was Abdullah ibn Abbas greater than Ali?”

“As long as you won't kill me, I will speak the truth.”

“You are safe.”

Bahlool said, “Hazrat Ali is greater than all Muslims after Hazrat
Mohammad Mustafa because he is a brave young man who is a real faithful.
All the good deeds are found in him. He didn't show the slightest
slowness in obeying Islam's and Allah's orders. Word by word, he has
obeyed Allah's commands. He had such perfect and unchanging faith, that,
not only did he think his, but his children's, lives nothing. In all the
wars and battles he was always ahead of the advanced guard of the army.
No one has ever seen him leave the enemy; so, he was once asked if he
ever thought about his life during battles--Allah forbid--'It is
possible that someone might attack you from behind and take your life.'

“Hazrat Ali said, 'My fight is for the sake of Allah's religion. In it I
have no thought for benefit or of greed and personal desire. My life is
in Allah's hands. If I die, then it is with Allah's will, and I will die
in Allah's way. What good is greater than this, and I will enjoy it that
I will be killed in Allah's way and be amongst the Godly Believers and
those who are on the Right and True Path.'

“Even when Hazrat Ali was the Amir and Khalifa of Muslims, he did not
love luxury. He spent his entire time working for the Muslims and
worshipping Allah. He never took one dinar unnecessarily from the Public
Treasury. Once his brother Aqeel, who had a family, requested Hazrat Ali
to give him more than his share and right from the Public Treasury.
Hazrat Ali denied Aqeel's request. He told all of his officials not to
oppress the people. All his affairs were decided with justice and
equity. The officer who committed the least bit of oppression or tyranny
was removed from office after being harshly questioned by Hazrat Ali. He
did not even forgive his close friends the punishment they deserved.

“Once when Ibn Abbas was the commander of Basra, he spent some money
from the Public Treasury for some personal work. Hazrat Ali asked for
that cost back and warned him about that deed. He gave Ibn Abbas a date
by which to return the amount, but he could not. Hazrat Ali ordered him
to come to Kufa. Ibn Abbas knew that Hazrat Ali was not such a Khalifa
who would overlook his mistake, so he fled to Makkah and went and sat in
Allah's house because he knew he would be safe there.”

Haroun Rashid became ashamed from listening to this, so he wanted to
hurt Bahlool and cause him heartache, so he asked, “Why was such a great
and respectful person killed?”

“Many of those on the Right Path have been killed and thousands of
Messengers and good, pious slaves of Allah continue to fight in His
way.”

“Tell me the details of Ali's death.”

“According to Hazrat Imam Zain-ul-Abedin, when Abdur Rahman ibn Muljim
decided to kill Hazrat Ali, he brought another person with him. That
accursed man fell into a deep sleep and so did Ibn Muljim. When Amirul
Momineen entered the Mosque, he awakened the sleepers for Salat
(prayer). When he stood for Salat (prayer), then went to Sajdah, the
accursed Ibn Muljim attacked his head with a sword. That stroke fell on
the place where Amr ibn Abd Wudd had previously wounded the Imam with a
stroke at the Battle of Khandaq. From this stroke his head was wounded
to the eyebrows, and since the accursed person had soaked the sword in
poison, Ali said farewell to the world after three days. He addressed
his sons, 'For Allah's friends, the companionship of Prophets and
Vicegerents is better than this terminating world. If I die from this
wound, then only give my murderer one stroke because he only gave me one
stroke of the sword. Don't cut his body into pieces.' After saying this,
he was unconscious for a while. When he awoke, he said, 'I saw the
Apostle of Allah who ordered me to leave. He said that tomorrow I will
be by him.' He said this and died. Then the sky's color changed and the
earth started shaking. The sound of Tasbih and righteousness came from
the sky to the people's ears, and everyone knew that this was the voice
of angels.

“About this, a poet has excellently said,

'Tonight the infidels raised the flag of oppression and tyranny.

From this defeat (martyrdom of Ali), they destroyed Islam's

principles.

From this one stroke that was given to the Father of Believers,

it is like the home of faith was ruined. All the dwellers

of Heaven took off the crown of respect and threw it on

the earth from sorrow of Ali.

To the people of the world, running water became bitter.

Perhaps the prison of oppression and tyranny has become

absorbed with safety.

By killing the son-in-law of Taha (the Apostle of Allah), the

oppressors have struck and arrow of sorrow into the

heart and body of Ya-Seen (the Apostle of Allah).

'From this grief and misery the dwellers of Paradise became

angry.

Because of Qatama the infidels struck the sword of enmity on

Imam Ali's forehead.

The oppressors didn't just cut Hazrat Ali's head into two pieces,

they also cut Allah's hand (Yadullah, meaning Ali).

When the enemy's sword fell upon the Imam's forehead, the

moon and the sun also received the wound of grief.

The attack wounded the forehead of the King of Faith, Ali.

It was as if the miracle of Shaq-ul-Qamar again came to the

world; Ali's forehead was cut into two pieces the way

that the Apostle of Allah's finger sliced the moon into

two pieces.'

“The voice of Zainab's and Umme Kulsum's crying was heard; and Hasan and
Husain threw their Imamahs (turbans) on the ground because of their
sorrow.”


