Bahlool's Conversation with Abu Hanifa
======================================

One day Abu Hanifa was teaching at the college. Bahlool was sitting in a
corner, listening to Abu Hanifa's lesson. In the middle of his lesson,
Abu Hanifa said that, “Imam Jafar Sadiq says three things that I don't
agree with. These are: Firstly, he says Shaitan will be punished in the
Hell-fire. Since Shaitan is made of fire, then how is it possible that
fire can hurt him? One kind of thing can't get hurt from the same kind
of thing. Secondly, he says that we can't see Allah; but something that
is present must also be able to be seen. Therefore, Allah can be seen by
our eyes. Thirdly, he says that whoever does something is himself
responsible for it; and will be questioned about it because he did it
himself; but evidence is against this. Meaning, whatever a person does
is done by Allah and the person has no control over what he does.”

As soon as Abu Hanifa said this, Bahlool picked up a clod of earth and
threw it at him. It hit his forehead and gave him severe pain. Then
Bahlool ran away. Abu Hanifa's students ran after Bahlool and caught
him. Since Bahlool was related to the Khalifa, they took him to the
Khalifa and narrated the whole incident.

Bahlool said, “Call Abu Hanifa so that I can give him my answer.”

Abu Hanifa was called and Bahlool said to him, “What wrong have I done
to you?”

“You hit my forehead with a clod of earth. My forehead and head are in
severe pain.”

“Can you show me your pain?”

“Can pain be seen?”

Bahlool replied, “You yourself say that every present thing can be seen
and you criticize Imam Jafar Sadiq by saying how is it possible that
Allah is present, but invisible. Secondly, you wrongly claim that the
clod of earth pains your head; because the clod of earth is made of mud
and you were also created from mud. Then how can one kind of thing hurt
the same type of substance? Thirdly, you yourself said that all acts are
done by Allah. Then how can you say that I am guilty, present me to the
Khalifa, complain about me, and demand punishment for me!”

Abu Hanifa listened to Bahlool's intelligent answers and shamefully left
Haroun's court.


