Bahlool Criticizes Abdullah Mubarak
===================================

One day Abdullah Mubarak went to the desert to see Bahlool the Wise. He
saw Bahlool bareheaded, barefoot, and reciting Allah's Name. He went up
to him and saluted him. Bahlool answered the greeting.

Abdullah Mubarak said, “O Shaykh! My request is that you advise me and
tell me how to pass a life in this world, so that I stay away from sins
because I am a sinful being and I can't overcome my evil self-will. Tell
me some way by which to acquire relief.”

“O Abdullah! I myself am worried and distressed. What do you expect from
me. If I had a brain, people wouldn't call me crazy. What effect can the
speeches of lunatics have that people would accept, so go and look for
some intelligent person.”

“O Shaykh! Those who say they are crazy are just fooling others. They
are intelligent, and it is the truth that is heard from the lunatic.”

Bahlool was silent. Abdullah again began flattering him and said, “O
Shaykh! Don't disappoint me; I came with expectations.”

“O Abdullah! First agree to my four conditions, so that you don't go
back on your words at the statement of a lunatic. Then I will criticize
you and will tell you such things that will be the means of your
salvation.”

“What are these four conditions; tell me so I can agree.”

“Firstly, whenever you commit a sin or go against Allah's command, then
don't eat of His sustenance.”

“Then whose sustenance shall I eat of?”

“Being an intelligent person, you claim that you worship Allah and eat
out of His sustenance, and then you disobey His command. You yourself
judge, is this the way to repay beneficence?”

Abdullah said, “You spoke true, what is the second condition?”

“Secondly, whenever you want to sin, do not intend to stay in His
Kingdom.”

“This is more difficult than the first, because every place is Allah's
land and kingdom so then where will I go?”

“It is a very evil thing that you eat out of His sustenance, live in His
Kingdom and then disobey His command. Yourself judge, is this the
condition of beneficence?”

“What is the third condition?”

“Thirdly, when you want to sin or disobey His command, then go hide in
such a place where He can't see or be aware of you. Then do whatever you
want.”

“This is the most difficult. Allah knows and sees all. He is present
everywhere. He sees and knows all that His creations do.”

“You are an intelligent being. You should know that He is present
everywhere, the All-Knowing and All-Seeing. In this sense, it would be
very evil of you to eat of His sustenance, stay in His Kingdom, and then
disobey Him in His All-Knowing, All-Seeing presence. Even then you claim
to worship Him; although He says in the Holy Qur'an, 'Do not think that
Allah is unaware of the act of the oppressor.'“

Abdullah said, “You spoke true. What is the fourth condition?”

“The fourth condition is that when the Angel of Death suddenly comes to
you to obey Allah's order and seize your soul, then at that time say,
'Wait a little while so I can say good-bye to my relatives, get their
farewell, and take provisions for my last journey; then seize my soul.'“

“This is the most difficult condition. At that time the Angel of Death
will not even give me time to breathe.”

“O intelligent human! You know that there is no cure for death. You
can't make it go away from you, and the Angel of Death doesn't give time
when on the verge of death. While committing sins, the Angel of Death
suddenly and surprisingly comes, sparing no time for even breathing. As
Allah says, 'When the time of their death comes, they can't hurry a bit
or delay.' So then Abdullah! Hear the truth from a lunatic and awaken
from the sleep of unawareness.

“Beware of arrogance and intoxication, and worry about the Hereafter
because a long journey waits and life is short. Don't postpone today's
work until tomorrow, maybe tomorrow will not come for you. Know that
this is the most valuable time. Don't be lazy in doing work for the
Hereafter. Make provision for the Hereafter today because regretting
there tomorrow has no benefit.”

When Abdullah heard these words he bowed his head and began to think.

Bahlool again said, “O Abdullah! You wanted advice from me that would
prove useful tomorrow and wanted me to present an example and proof. Why
have you bowed your head? What answer will you give on the Day of
Judgment when dangerous and strong angels inquire during your reckoning.
Today whomever's account is pure will have no fear tomorrow.”

Finally Abdullah raised his head and said, “O Shaykh! I whole-heartedly
listened to your advice. I also accept this fourth condition. Say
something else and make me your student.”

“O Abdullah! It is incumbent upon the servant that whatever he does is
by Allah's order and whatever he says or hears is according to His
order, then the servant is a servant.”

Intelligent and wise Bahlool that is called crazy and insane by people
was benefited by the companionship of Imam Jafar Sadiq.


