Bahlool and a Judge
===================

It is said that a certain man decided to do Hajj. Since he had little
children, he went to the judge and, in front of the court officials,
gave 1,000 Dinars to the judge for his children. He said, “If I die
during this journey, then you are my successor. What you yourself want,
give to my children, and if I safely return, then I will take back this
deposit.”

He departed from the judge's office for Hajj; Allah willed for him to
die on the way. When his sons became of age and understanding, they
asked for their deposit which was trusted with the judge.

The judge said, “Your father willed in front of the people that I give
to you whatever I wanted. In this respect, I can give you only 100
Dinars.”

They started yelling and screaming. The judge called the witnesses and
asked, “Do you people testify that that day these children's father gave
me 1,000 Dinars and said, 'If I die on the way, then give my sons
whatever you want.'“

All the people testified that yes, he said this.

Therefore the judge said, “Now I won't give you more than 100 dinars.”

Those poor sons were perturbed and asked everyone for help. The people
couldn't change this lawful trick. Gradually, Bahlool heard about it. He
took the children with him to the judge and said, “Why don't you give
these orphans their right?”

The judge said, “Their father willed that I give them whatever I wish,
and I won't give them more than 100 dinars.”

“O Judge! What you want is 900 dinars, and according to your words, that
deceased willed that whatever you yourself want, give to my sons;
therefore, give that late person's children the 900 dinars that you
yourself want. That is their right.”

The judge became helpless at Bahlool's answer and was compelled to give
the orphans the 900 dinars.


