Bahlool's Discussion with a Faqih
=================================

It is said that a famous Faqih of Khorasan came to Baghdad. When Haroun
heard of this, he invited the Faqih to his court. He was respectfully
welcomed and was seated next to Haroun and treated very importantly by
Haroun. During their conversation, Bahlool arrived. Haroun told him to
take a seat. The Faqih took one look at Bahlool and said to Haroun, “The
Khalifa's favors and likes are strange that he likes an ordinary man and
seats him close to himself.”

Bahlool understood that the Faqih was talking about him, so with all his
might he turned to that man and said, “Don't be arrogant about your
worthless knowledge, and don't judge my looks. I am ready to debate with
you and prove to the Khalifa that you don't know anything.”

The Faqih replied, “I have heard you are insane and I won't have
anything to do with crazy people.”

“I confess my insanity, but you don't acknowledge your
misunderstanding.”

Haroun Rashid looked at Bahlool angrily and told him to be quiet, but
Bahlool didn't listen to him and said, “If that person is so confident
about his knowledge, then he should debate.”

Haroun said to the Faqih, “What is the difficulty? Ask Bahlool some
question.”

He replied, “I am ready on one condition, which is that I will ask
Bahlool something. If he gives a correct answer, I will give him 1,000
dinars (gold coins). If he can't answer, he will give me 1,000 dinars.

Bahlool said, “I don't have anything of worldly wealth, not even gold
dinars, but I am ready; when I answer your question, I will take the
money and distribute it among paupers. If I can't answer, then I will
attend to you as a servant and slave.”

The man accepted these conditions and asked Bahlool, “In a house a wife
is sitting with her lawful husband. In that house one person is praying
Salat (prayer) and another is fasting. Someone from outside enters the
house. Because of his coming, the husband and wife become unlawful for
each other, the prayers and fasts also become unlawful. Can you tell me
who is the person that came?”

Bahlool immediately answered, “The man that entered the house was the
woman's first husband, who had gone on a journey. When a very long time
had passed since he left, and news was received that he had died;
according to the permission of Shariah, the woman married the man
sitting next to her. She hired two people; one to fulfill her dead
husband's overdue, unfulfilled prayers, and another to fulfill tardy
fasts. During this time the man who had gone on the journey returned,
although news of his death was widespread. Therefore, the other husband
becomes unlawful as do the prayers and fasts.”

Haroun and those present became confident and praised Bahlool for
solving the problem correctly. Then Bahlool said, “Now it's my turn to
ask a question.”

The Faqih said, “Ask.”

Bahlool asked, “I have one jar of honey and a second full of vinegar. I
want to prepare the refreshing drink Sikanjebeen. I fill one bowl with
honey and another with vinegar. To make Sikanjebeen, I mix them both
together. Afterwards I see that there is a mouse in it. Can you tell me
if the mouse was in the honey or the vinegar jar?”

The Faqih thought for a long time, but was unsuccessful in answering.

Haroun said to Bahlool, “Now, you give the answer.”

Bahlool replied, “If this person accepts his inferior knowledge I will
answer the question.”

Helpless, the Faqih confessed his inferiority.

Bahlool replied, “We should take the mouse out, wash it with water, and
after it is cleaned of honey and vinegar, cut its stomach open. If the
stomach contains vinegar, then believe that it fell in the vinegar jar.
If it contains honey, accept that it fell in the honey.”

The entire assembly was astonished at Bahlool's intelligence and
knowledge, and praised him a lot. The Faqih bowed his head, and
according to the deal, Bahlool distributed the 1,000 dinars amongst
Baghdad's poor.


