Part One: A Survey of the History of Nationalism
================================================

Rise of Nationalism as a Creed
------------------------------

While some of the characteristics of nationalism may be witnessed in the
tribal system of the Greek city-state many thousand years ago[^1]
nationalism as a political, social and ideological school of thought
took birth in the West following the French Revolution.

Jean-Jacques Rousseau was one of the greatest advocates of this creed.
He emphasized the unity, solidarity and the group spirit of the masses
and insisted that one should have the highest attachment to one's home
and country where one has been brought up. He believed the fatherland to
be the core and center of a person's and a group's love and loyalty. He
elevated this belief to a sacred religious duty, and severely condemned
the idea of mankind's collective attachment or a religious societal
order.

The main fabric of the school of nationalism was laid by the French
Revolution, where it was first put to practice. It was then that the
stimulation of emotions towards the flag and country, the glorification
and worship of national heroes, the composition of the national anthem,
the emphasis on the sanctity of the French language and race, the
creation of great national festivals and ceremonies in the style of
religious rites, a pride in the history of France and a belief in the
great mission of the French nation, emerged and displayed themselves one
after another in the course of the Revolution. But with the rise of the
Jacobins to power and the disasters which followed the Revolution, the
evils of nationalism evinced themselves from the very beginning. For the
Jacobins, nationalism became the means to toy with the masses feelings,
general mobilization, aggression upon neighboring countries,
expansionism, massacre, corruption, suppression and self-interest,
showing that nationalistic sentiments always result in aggression and
imperialism. To the Jacobins, French interests were their basis for
decisions.

With the progressive influence of the French Revolution in the West, the
concept of nationalism rapidly gained popularity[^2] leavening behind
the notions of freedom and democracy. The rise of Napoleon Bonaparte
quickened its pace in the West. Napoleon was a staunch believer in the
creed of nationalism and, as we shall see, he was the first to scatter
its seed in the Islamic world. His strong sense of nationalism laid the
grounds for its expansionistic and aggressive policies, his wars and
massacres had encouraged a spirit of domination in the French nation,
and soon, other nations were contaminated with nationalistic sentiments.
In Germany and Italy, this spirit rose rapidly, and in the name of
nationalism, horrible crimes were committed and a desperate fight for
power was started.

The 19th century is called 'the golden age’ of nationalism[^3]. It was
in that century that Thomas Jefferson and Thomas Paine set up the
foundations for American nationalism. In England, Jeremy Bentham gave
nationalism a new scope. With William Gladstone, British nationalism
reached its height. Nationalism spread as an intellectual movement and
school in the whole of central and Western Europe. Mazzini, who rose in
Italy is regarded as one of the greatest theoreticians of the school of
nationalism of the 19th century. Other great propounders and
banner-bearers of nationalism in that century were Giuseppe Garibaldi in
Italy, Victor Hugo in France and Otto Bismarck in Germany.

Nationalism made history in that century, bringing about some of the
greatest events. Belgium secured its independence, while in South and
Central America, the colonies of Portugal and Spain declared their
independence under the leadership of Simon Bolivar and Jose Martin. But
the strongest sentiments of nationalism were roused by Western
governments in the European colonies of the Ottoman Empire. Greece,
Bulgaria, Hungary, Finland, Czechoslovakia, Croatia were tempted into
claiming independence.

Of course, these events were trivial as compared to the unprecedented
expansion of imperialism in the Third World, and the political clashes
and conflicts of Western governments. History has shown that nationalism
has been far more destructive than constructive. British, French
colonialist policies and aggressions, and the expansionism of Napoleon
III and Bismarck, proved that the deceptive slogans of Western
nationalism and liberalism were empty covers and excuses for enslaving
oppressed nations.

Creed of Nationalism
--------------------

Nationalism is a creed, a school and a pseudo-religion which the West
created to fill an ideological vacuum.

Man cannot live without a faith, an ideology, to which he can show
affection and love. In the Middle Ages in the West, this faith,
ideology, were found in Christianity and the religion of the Church. But
Christianity was an unrealistic, imperfect and one dimensional religion,
and since it had an unscientific and anti-intellectual basis, it could
not last as a permanent and universal religion and ideology.

The Renaissance and subsequent changes dealt the church a heavy blow,
and Christianity could no longer make its presence felt as a living
faith in Europe, and soon became a dead creed. As we said, Christianity,
from the beginning, lacked the dynamism which provides the people with
zeal, frenzy, fanaticism and solidarity. After the Renaissance, it
retired completely from the political, social, intellectual and
emotional life of the people and western ideology was left with an
intense vacuum.

In the absence of an inspiring force that would revive them, the
westerners were left in the dark. Christianity was dead. Since man
cannot live in a vacuum (of belief) and needs an ideology to follow and
love, ‘Azar, the idol-maker’ of Western ideas hewed the idol of
nationalism, and offered it to the West as anew religion and anew god
that was welcomed by thirsty devotees. This vacuum was later on filled
by Marxism, and both these schools owed their creation to the weakness
and failure of Christianity in satisfying the religious longing of
Westerners.

But in Islamic East, there never existed such a vacuum. Here, Islam was
already present as a living, dynamic and universal ideology. It
contained such dynamism that in the first century after its advent, it
unified all the lands stretching from North Africa to the farthest parts
of Asia, and from Spain to Mongolia, and joined together peoples of
different races, languages and cultures as a single Ummah. Even now,
Islam still possesses in the Muslim world afar greater power of rousing
revolutionary zeal, devotion and solidarity than any other ideology. It
can inspire its followers to sacrifice their life and wealth in the way
of the school, and for that reason there is no need in the Islamic world
to import nationalism as a Western commodity which is produced in
accordance with the peculiar conditions of that region.

Nationalists and Western intellectuals of the Islamic world ignore the
facts of their own country and its cultures and fancy that any
experiment which has been successful in the West, may be repeated in the
East. But this is illusory thinking. A blind imitation of such so-called
intellectuals has left them no power of discernment to realize that the
West possessed special conditions which differed from those of the world
of Islam. The West was faced with a decadent Christianity and church,
whereas, here is a revolutionary and dynamic Islam. It is unable to
understand this reality that Islam and Christianity are two wholly
different phenomena.

While Christianity is a collection of dogmas and religious rites of
priests, Islam is a living, comprehensive ideology containing
intellectual and practical issues, concerning both the individual and
society.

Nationalism and Colonization
----------------------------

Colonialism and Capitalism were two other factors which encouraged the
spread of nationalism.

In the 19th century, the Westerners embarked on a fearful race for
colonization and plundering the Third World countries. They pounded upon
Asian and African nations like bloodthirsty wolves. With such actions,
they badly needed a strong ideology to justify their pillage and crimes,
while, at the same time, to provide a motive for further plunder and
colonization. Thus, in the heat of these attempts at colonization,
nationalism rose as an ideology and a living creed of the West.

The school of nationalism in connection with colonization played three
significant parts:

1- It was firstly the source of colonization. Intense patriotic
feelings, a belief in national and racial superiority, a tribal pride
and a glorification of one's own history and culture, emerged from
nationalism, providing the ground for political expansionism and
economic self-axism. Imperialism is the illegitimate offspring of these
same nationalistic inclinations.

2- Nationalism was a means to justify colonization and the savage acts
of Western colonizers under the guise of “national exigencies” and
«revival of the country's greatness.

3- Thirdly, it was the strong motive force which maintained the spirit
of colonization. By kindling intense nationalistic sentiments and a
spirit of self-sacrifice for the fatherland, the motive for colonization
was set, giving fresh impetus to English, French and Germans in their
close and stubborn race for domination over Asia and Africa.

Francis Cooker, the well-known Western thinker writes: “In the 19th
century, most nationalists out of their fanatical nationalism were
convinced and claimed that advanced nations had a lofty history and
culture, and a racial and national superiority; therefore they were not
justified in confining their talents to their own borders. Their
national and patriotic duty must not be summed up in their defense and
preservation of the independence and territorial integrity of their own
country. They have a universal mission to expand the radius of their
political and national cultural influence to all parts of the world in
the interest of mankind, and help to civilize retarded lands even by
force and violence if necessary.”

The above view which was the logical conclusion of nationalistic thought
was the root of colonization and a means of justifying savage plunder by
imperialism.

A survey of the words and writings of the founders of the nationalistic
school in the 19th century reveals how stubbornly they propagated this
idea that our national duty compels us not only to defend our frontiers,
but also to engage in military and political ventures even thousands of
kilometers away from those frontiers for the sake of the country’s
greatness.

Dr. Bridgehet a national thinker of the 19th century writes: “Being
pleased with our territorial Integrity is not enough, since dropping
behind in the international, political and military race would mean
neglecting our duty of guarding the historical greatness of our country.
If we abstain from expansionism, our national pride will be damaged. It
is only by being adventurous and warlike that our national pride may be
preserved[^4].”

Nationalism also extended Darwin's view about the survival of the
fittest to the social and political realms. Ernest Haeckel propagated it
strongly in Germany, stating: “Only strong and powerful nations have the
right to live and to swallow weak and retarded nations”. This may be
called “the collective cannibalism of modern civilization.” Karl
Pearson, another prominent nationalist too, considers the survival of
the fittest as «the natural law of the relationship of nations.”

As a result of such argumentation by the nationalists, at the end of the
19th century, a new wave of aggressive expansionism was witnessed.
British colonization led by Gladstone, the English nationalist, made
India and many other zones a part of the British Empire. Germany, under
Bismarck, another nationalist leader embarked on expansionism. France
seized various parts of Africa and made of them its own colonies.
England occupied the Suez zone and embarked on more imperialistic
adventures. Germany intended to create a wide Aryan Empire from Berlin
to Baghdad. Even the newly-risen America as a power, influenced by
nationalism, entered the race for colonization, occupying the
Philippines and other areas of the Far East. The thirst for colonization
led to disputes between France and Germany on the question of domination
over Morocco, and a similar rivalry emerged between Russia and Britain
to make Iran their mandate. All these were the amazing results of
nationalism.

Joseph Lighten, the social historian[^5] writes:  
 “The whole history of the 19th century is based on an
economic-political nationalism resulting in clashes and colonization.
Nationalism is the root of the expansionism and friction of various
governments.” Some of the greatest nationalists of the 19th century have
been active agents for the expansion of aggressive colonization and
great criminals of history.

Gladstone, the highest banner-bearer of British nationalism was the man
who began a series of aggressive attacks upon the Third World forcing
weak nations under his yoke. Robert Clive was the principal agent of the
expansion of colonization in India, the man who cruelly massacred the
Indians in the Battle of Pelassi. Cecil John Rhodes spread British
colonization elsewhere. All these people justified their savage and
disgraceful aggressions in the name of nationalism.

Thus, in the 19th century, the high pundits of colonization used
nationalism as a motive and a justification for their ventures.
Nationalism was the creed of the imperialists and not that of the
opponents of colonization. Naturally the establishment of capitalistic
order was not without its influence on the expansion of both nationalism
and colonization, and there has always existed a close bond of cause and
effect between these three factors. Capitalism aided by nationalism
directed the national policy of the countries towards expansionism to
exhibit its power in all parts of the world so that it could secure new
markets where demand was high.

The East India Company which enhanced British colonization in India in
the name of 'national greatness' and under the cover of nationalistic
slogans, is one of the clearest examples of the connection that exists
between nationalism, imperialism and capitalism, a subject which will be
discussed in the following chapter.

The Bond Between Nationalism and Capitalism
-------------------------------------------

Nationalism as a tool in the hands of the world-devouring capitalism.

Another factor which was influential in the advance of 19th century
nationalism was the capitalistic order which took root in the West[^6].
Nationalism had become a tool in the hands of big capitalists and
factory owners to preserve the home market for their industrial products
and rouse national feeling for the sole consumption of local products on
the one hand, and also to secure new markets by leading nations and
governments towards colonization in the name of national interests. For
this reason the school of nationalism flourished in the 19th century
after the growth of capitalism.

World-devouring capitalism ripened following the industrial revolution.
A series of discoveries and inventions begun in 1732 by John Key set the
wheel turning for the industrial revolution. The discoveries and
inventions of Thomas Savery, Thomas Newcomen, James Watt, Richard
Arkwright, Samuel Crompton, Abraham Derbys, Henry Cort and Henry
Bessemer resulted in the establishment of huge mechanized factories, the
rise of millionaire class and middle-class merchants and culminating in
the birth of a world-devouring capitalistic order.

This new class of capitalists and merchants used nationalism as a tool
for promoting and preserving their wicked and inhuman goals. To the
profiteering class whose factories' production was far higher than the
demand at home, securing markets was what mattered the most. Employers
and capitalists directed all efforts at selling their products in their
bid to win the race they were engaged in with the capitalists and
industrialists of other nations.

These two groups had two objectives:  
 A) To secure new markets in other parts of the world.  
 B) To monopolize the home market and prevent the entry of imported
goods.

World-devouring capitalism fulfilled both objectives through the
injection of nationalistic sentiments which encouraged the masses to
choose home made products, rather than imported goods of better
qualities. And also by encouraging nationalistic prejudices, capitalism
directed the countries' policy towards imperialism and colonization
which were considered necessary for securing new markets.

The capitalists made use of nationalism to counter foreign capitalism,
and the conflict extended from the economic to the political field. They
made use of limited freedom of travel, restricted import and the
language barrier to check the entry of foreign goods in the home
markets[^7].

With this goal in mind, the capitalists propagated the slogan of
“homeland”, calling their own profits “national interests”, and
mobilizing their compatriots to defend the “country's interests.” Thus,
with the rise of capitalism, nationalism became a weapon in a combat
between the capitalists of various countries, and in order to monopolies
world markets, it was placed wholly at the service of capitalism.
Moreover, plundering capitalists used the creed of nationalism for
another evil objective also which was to incite dispersion among
oppressed classes.

The 19th century witnessed the exploitation of the oppressed classes of
society in the most ruthless manner by capitalism. The industrial
revolution and the appearance machines turned commercial capitalism Into
Industrial capitalism and resulted in the concentration of capital and
labor. With these conditions, the exploitation of the labor force was
multiplied a hundredfold, resulting in a fearful social system where the
worker's blood was cruelly sucked.

The inhuman system of capitalism, in order to terrify the oppressed
masses and check their rebellion, compelling them to work day and night
in pitiful conditions like thoughtless mechanized beings, needed an
effectively strong motive, and this was found in nationalism. Thus
through the slogan and cry of 'homeland', capitalism attained its
objective.

With nationalistic sentiments, national zeal and frenzy reaching a
crescendo, the oppressed class of society forgot all about social
injustice and instead turned to national issues. Due to the national
unity banner, they failed to realize the lack of harmony between their
interests and those of the arrogant in their society.

Moreover, a natural development of savage exploitation was that the
workers' spirit of rebellion and dissatisfaction gained in intensity day
by day in other European countries while raising the question of
nationalism and kindling the flame of nationalistic sentiments, making
it impossible for the world oppressed to make common cause against the
arrogant. The oppressed of each nation, out of nationalistic sentiments,
allied themselves with the arrogant of that nation, against the
oppressed of another nation, thereby preventing an effective alliance of
world oppressed against the whole arrogant world. This was the old
policy of divide and rule’ which had long been adopted by oppressors as
far as history goes.

Nationalism in the 20th Century
-------------------------------

The history of nationalism in the 20th century can be divided into two
periods:

A- Nationalism in the first half of the 20th century.

B- Nationalism in its second half.

In the first half of the 20th century, up to the Second World War, the
clearest manifestation of nationalism was seen in Europe and Japan
resulting in a universal war. It revived in them the dream of colonizing
the whole world, and led them to start two calamitous wars. Most
scholars admit that the main cause for the First and Second World Wars
was nationalistic sentiments. In this period, the true off-springs of
nationalism who elevated this school to its highest position and gave it
its severest form were Mussolini in Italy, Hitler in Germany, Peron in
Argentina, Franco in Spain and Salazar in Portugal. This was the wicked
product that nationalism gave to mankind and this way is still
continued. Nationalism is still looked upon as a formal religion by
international aggressors such as the U.S.

In the second half of the century, nationalism made its appearance in
the Third World. At first it looked like a movement aimed at uprooting
colonization, but a close analysis points to the contrary. As the
western culture and domination were not compatible with eastern
religion, culture, mentality and local traditions, rebellion against
colonization was inevitable in these eastern regions, whether
nationalism appeared as a motivating force or not. For the people, the
motive of revolt was religion and religious fanaticism, not nationalism
and nationalistic sentiments. But when the small enlightened group
depending on the West realized that the direct domination of
colonization was no longer possible they directed the movements in the
name of nationalism, so that after the exit of colonization, they would
indirectly be able to preserve its values and methods of domination.

In the contemporary world, colonization having become a thing of the
past, and the colonies having secured their independence, nationalism
has come to be used by colonization and imperialism in another form, and
its role is somewhat changed.

Neo-colonization uses nationalism to prevent the union of former
colonies, so as to keep them weak and dependent on stronger powers.

The imperialists on realizing that they could no longer keep eastern
nations under their direct yoke, and that their union would be a serious
threat to their interests, started exporting nationalism to the East in
a bid to weaken them and encourage conflicts among the newly independent
nations of Asia and Africa. This way, they aimed at sowing the seed of
hostility and dispersion among them to check their unity and solidarity.
This is why we see that wherever colonization has made an exit, the rein
of affairs is held by a westernized educated minority, and nationalistic
forces are encouraged to stand against Islamic forces. The bond between
nationalism and colonization is preserved as before, and wherever
nationalism raises its head, its root is imperialism.

[^1]: Some researchers consider Reformation as the beginning of
nationalism and others suggest the Westphalia incident in 1648, but the
majority of the researchers regard the French Revolution to be a turning
point in the emergence of nationalism.

[^2]: Salow Baron: Modern Nationalism, New York, 1927, p. 43.

[^3]: Hans Kohn: The Idea of Nationalism: A study of it's origin and
background, New York, 1944, p. 116.

[^4]: Francis W. Cooker: Recent Political Thought, New York, 1934, p.
443-48.

[^5]: Joseph Lighten: Social Philosophers in Conflict, New York, 1937,
p. 439.

[^6]: Hans Kohn: The idea of Nationalism: A study in its origin and
Background. p 79.

[^7]: Carlton Hays: The Historical Evaluation of Modern Nationalism, p.
129.


