Part Two: The History of the Inroad of Nationalism in the Islamic World
=======================================================================

Nationalism as an imported school
---------------------------------

Nationalism is an imported school which has been exported by exploiting
powers to disturb the unity of the Islamic world. Some Western thinkers
and Orientalists who have always strived to introduce Western political
and cultural colonization in Asia and Africa, provided the ground for
its rise and the so-called enlightened groups depending on the West
acted as its banner-bearers, propounding this school of thought.

Western colonizing governments have always considered the unity of the
world of Islam, which they call “Pan-Islamism", a potential danger to
their political and economic interests. At the end of the 19th century,
inspired by the ideas of Sayyid Jamal-al-Din and Sultan Abdul Hamid,
there started talks about the unity of world Muslims, and the union and
solidarity of the Turks and Arabs in the Ottoman Empire prevented the
inroad of Western values and ideals in the critical and strategic Middle
East zone.

Colonizing powers felt the danger and adopted a policy which
unfortunately proved effective. This was the infusion of the idea of
nationalism and the awakening of national sentiments among the Arabs and
Turks in order to check “Pan-Islamism” and thereby divide the great
Ottoman Empire, and replace the declining influence of the Ottomans by
the power of Western colonization.

It is noteworthy that nationalism rose first, not in the Muslim lands
which were under British and French domination, but in regions which
formed part of the Ottoman Empire. In India which was a British colony,
such Westernized intellectuals as Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan found no need to
rely on nationalism, national and xenophobian sentiments and were still
occupied with the thought of economic and educational improvement of the
Muslims. They even took an opposing stand against the nationalism of the
Hindu Congress Party. In Algeria and Sudan too, it was Islam that stood
in the persons of the Mahdi Sudanese and Algerian Abdul-Qader against
colonization, but there was no sign of nationalism. In Indonesia and
Malaysia and Muslim lands of the Far East, too, which were directly
under British and French domination, Westernized intellectuals believed
there was no need to rouse nationalistic feelings.

On the other hand, these intellectuals who were dependent on
colonization, raised the cry of nationalism in the lands of the Ottoman
Empire, namely Turkey, Egypt and the Arab lands in order to overthrow
the Ottoman rule and pave the way for their own influence and expansion.

This historical fact clearly shows that those who sympathized with
nationalism in Islamic lands did not claim independence out of
xenophobia, but were motivated by something quite different. They were
in fact, the surrogates of Western colonizers who could be used to break
up Islamic unity and weaken or destroy the Ottoman Empire. We see now,
why in the Iran of that time, the westernized intellectuals did not so
strongly support the idea of nationalism as was done in Turkey, Egypt,
Syria and Lebanon by their allies, since Iran did not form part of the
Ottoman Empire. Moreover, at that time, Iran had little connection with
the world of Islam owing to the excessive reliance of the Qajar kings on
the prejudicial differences between the Shi'a and Sunni sects, and
colonial powers did not think it probable that Iran would join the great
union of world Muslims. Therefore, they felt secure and all their
efforts were directed at making the western culture and system bear root
in Iran, and prevent a religious government from assuming power so, in
Iran, the emphasis was laid on the question of the constitution, Western
democracy and liberal thoughts of the West. In the works of Taleboff and
Mirza Khan Kermani, we see much less of nationalism and national unity
than in those of their Arab and Turkish counterparts. The focal point of
discussion was the 'constitution', Western liberalism and the necessity
of casting aside religious thoughts and principles, and copying European
culture[^1].

Why were the Muslim lands of Istanbul, Cairo and 'Beirut preoccupied
with the idea of nationalism? Why was this longing for nationalism at
the end of the 19th century concurrent with the height of colonial
expansion? Why did the Arabs and Turks, the targets of nationalism,
confront each other? Why was there no talk of British or French
colonialism? Why did nationalistic sentiments become popular in the
realm of the Ottoman Empire, but not in those countries invaded by
Western colonialism? Why is it that following the dissolution of the
Ottoman Empire, as a result of intense nationalistic sentiments,
colonialism rapidly succeeded in swallowing the Middle East? Answers to
these questions may be found in the wide dimension of Western colonial
interference for the creation and expansion of nationalism in the world
of Islam.

Napoleon and Frenchmen as pioneers of Egyptian Nationalism
----------------------------------------------------------

In Islamic countries nationalism took birth in the 19th century. The
first countries which fell victim to it were Egypt and Turkey.
Napoleon's invasion of Egypt was a turning point in the history of the
Islamic world and the beginning of Westernization. During the brief stay
of the French in Egypt, Western ideas had found their way amidst
Egyptian intellectuals. The contact of such Egyptian scholars as Abdul
Rahman Jabarti, Sheikh Hassan Attar etc. with the men of learning that
Napoleon had brought with him to Egypt, and the encouragement given by
the French, roused the desire in some self-sold Egyptians to walk in
step with the West. This point can explain why the spirit of nationalism
rose first in Egypt to prepare the ground for its separation from the
Ottoman Empire sooner than other lands belonging to it. Most probably,
as the French were openly fighting the Empire of the Turkish Muslims and
inherited the anti-Islamic prejudices from the crusaders and men like
Charlemagne, they began sooner than others to break up Islamic unity and
destroy the Ottoman Empire, by rousing Egyptian nationalism, in the same
way as the British did with Arab lands.

In order to revive Egyptian nationalism and rouse the pride of the
Egyptians of their past, Napoleon established an institution called the
“Egyptian Foundation”, a sham scientific society supposedly for research
in ancient Egyptian history and culture, but which in reality aimed at
reviving Egyptianism against the idea of Islamic unity, and at
undermining Islamic inclinations forcing a gap between Egypt and the
Ottoman Empire. It was through this Foundation that some distinguished
French men of learning such as Clot, Cerisy, Linant and Rousset were
dispatched to Egypt[^2], whose objective, as we may guess, was to help
the Egyptians discover their ancient Pharaonic culture and to acquaint
them with French culture on which they were encouraged to frame their
lives and policies.

Sylvestre de Sacy and other French scholars wrote books on the
magnificence of Egyptian civilization, and Egyptian nationalists such as
Tahtavi discovered the splendor of their ancient civilization and
cultural independence through De Sacy's book, “Nationality[^3]”.

It was probably through French influence that Muhammad Ali declared his
independence from the Ottoman Empire and for the first time raised the
question of Arab unity. Western missionaries, too, were very active.
Between 1863 and 1879, no less than seventy seven French, American,
Italian and German schools were opened in Egypt.

Following all these efforts at colonization, a westernized intellectual
class rose as the banner-bearer of Egyptian nationality, insisting upon
the following of Western civilization. Defa'at-al-Tahtavi (1801-1873)
was the first of these men. He stayed in Paris for five years and having
been indoctrinated with French ideas, he returned to Egypt to propound
Montesquieu's thoughts on the nation and the country.

Tahtavi in his well-known book, “Manahej” and other works made recurrent
use of words like 'homeland' and 'patriotism', words which were not so
popular till then among the Egyptians, in the concept of Western
nationalism. He declared that the Egyptians were a nation apart from
other Muslims, and the core of their love and loyalty should be their
'homeland'. He tried to prove that nationalism is not compatible with
Islam, but this was a futile and hypocritical effort. This pioneer of
nationalism considered the reason for the decadence of Egypt to be the
rule of non-Egyptian Muslims such as the Mameluks. But at the same time,
he shamelessly spoke of the French and Westerners in general, not as a
symbol of greed for the world, but as representatives of science,
civilization and culture, and suggested that Egypt should follow the
West[^4].

Another pioneer of Egyptian nationalism was Yaghoub Zow'e, whose father
was a Jew and mother, an Italian. He lived in Paris for a long time and
was a French agent. In Paris, he published the journal,
'EI-Vatan-el-Mesri' (Egyptian homeland) to propagate nationalism. He was
a founder of Egyptian nationalism[^5] and had a close friendship with
Cromer, the English governor of Egypt.

Taha Hossain was another Westernized Egyptian nationalist. He attempted
in his book, 'EI-Mostaqbel-el-Thaqafe', to prove that Egypt has no
connection whatsoever with the world of Islam, but that it has instead,
a strong bond with Europe.

In the time of Taha Hossain, nationalist forces led by the Wafd Party
became a determining factor in Egyptian politics. Sa'ed Zaghlool, leader
of the Wafd party and other nationalist politicians were British pawns
who considered political independence only as a means of becoming
Europeanized progressives and found it in the acceptance of Western
values.

This was an account of the rise and spread of nationalism in Egypt,
showing how Westerners sowed the seed of nationalism and irrigated it.

Three Jews as inspirers of Turkish nationalism
----------------------------------------------

Turkey was another of the first Islamic countries where the school of
nationalism found its way. Bernard Lewis, the well-known orientalist,
confesses that three European Jews inspired the spirit of nationalism in
Turkey[^6].

The first person who tried hard to kindle the flame of Turkish
nationalism was Arthur Lumley David (1811-1832). He was an English Jew
who traveled to Turkey and wrote a book called, 'Preliminary Discourses'
in which he tried to show how the Turks were a distinguished and
independent race, superior to the Arabs and other oriental races.

Lewis writes: “The book of this English Jew made the Turks imagine
themselves as having a distinct nationality and independence.” Before
the spread and indoctrination of Western ideas, no sign is seen of
nationalism in the Ottoman, Empire. Even until the beginning of the
present century, the Turks did not consider the Arabs as aliens, and the
Arabs looked upon the Turks in the same way. The Arabs were content to
be included in the Ottoman Empire on account of being of the same
religion, and the Turks respected them because of 1heir culture, and
knowledge of Arabic was considered a sign of learning. Even a Sultan
like Abdul-Hamid was surrounded by Arab counselors in his court, the
likes of Abol-Hoda and Ezzat Pasha. In the revolution of 1908 against
Abdul-Hamid there were at least two Arab officers, named Aziz Ali Mesri
and Mahmood Showkat Pasha among the leaders. But the book of the said
Jew gradually convinced some self-sold and dependent intellectuals and
politicians like the leaders of the" Young Turks» movement of the
superiority of the Turkish race.

In 1851, Fu'ad and Jowdat Pasha translated most of David's writings into
Turkish. In 1869, another writer, Ali Savi, published a treatise in
Turkish which was an imitation of David's, speaking of the glorious past
of the Turkish race. This was one of the first writings in which
nationalism was propounded and it was something quite unprecedented in
the Ottoman Empire. As Lewis says: “Thus the Turks discovered their
nationality through the West and copied the writings of the
Westerners[^7].”  
 David Leon Cohen, a Jewish French writer was another man who greatly
contributed to the expansion of Turkish nationalism. In 1899, he
published a book called "Introduction Generale a l'Histoire de L'
Asie[^8]”. In this book, he writes of the racial superiority of the
Turks and of their epical records in history. This book was translated
into Turkish in the first decade of the l0th century in a large number.
Prof. Khadouri and Bernard Lewis believe that the said Jew inspired the
Pan- Turkism of 'Young Turks' who started a revolution in 1908.

In addition to the above book, Cohen published several epical stories on
the past glories of the Turks. Clearly, the main aim of this Jew in his
eulogy of the Turkish race was to rouse their racial prejudices and
weaken their bond with other Muslim nations. He was not content with
writing only, but also formed societies of exiled Turks and Egyptians in
Paris and tried to lay the foundation of nationalistic movements in
those countries[^9].

But the person who had the greatest role in the creation of Turkish and
Arab nationalism, was the famous orientalist, Arminius Vambery
(1832-1918), the son of a Jewish Hungarian priest. He published many
works on the necessity for the revival of Turkish nationality, language
and literature. His works intensely captivated the attention of
Westernized, so-called enlightened Turks and incited their patriotism.
He was closely acquainted with the Turkish statesmen and politicians of
the first rank[^10].

One of the main aims of the Jews in inciting nationalistic sentiments
was to pave the way for the occupation of Palestine. The Jews in their
unsuccessful contact with Sultan Abdul-Hamid to secure Palestinian
territories for Jewish emigrants, came to the conclusion that the only
way to fulfill their dream was to overthrow Abdul-Hamid and break up
Islam and Arab and Turkish unity. Under the cover of nationalism and
through encouraging the creation of the 'Young Turks' movement, Zionism
first succeeded in deposing Abdul-Hamid, imprisoning him and laying the
ground for inciting differences and enmity between the Turks and Arabs.

These plots of colonialism and Zionism gave birth to the 'Young Turks'
movement which resulted in the revolution of 1908 and deposal of
Abdul-Hamid. The “Young Turks” who executed the Zionist scheme, embarked
on a 'Pan- Turkish' policy based on a belief in the superiority of the
Turks. So they adopted an anti-Arab stand, closed down Arab cultural
societies and began acts of discrimination against the Arabs and non-
Turks, a conduct which was in line with the direct plots of British
colonialism in rousing Arab nationalism.

Thus Zionism and imperialism and their discrimination towards the Arabs
on the one hand, and inciting Arab nationalism and their opposition to
the Turks on the other. Until this time, the Arabs did not consider
themselves a separate race. But as the Turks were seeking the
superiority of Turkish culture over other cultures, the Arabs, too,
insisted upon their own independent identity. It was the racial and
nationalistic policies of Young Turks that kindled the flame of Arab
nationalism-a matter, which as we shall see, was directly supported by
the British[^11].

After the revolution of 1908, the “Young Turks” expanded Turkish
nationalism by force and by propagation through the mass media.
Moreover, the repeated blows inflicted upon Turkey by Arab countries,
together with the extension of western education and dispatch of
students to Europe, intensified Turkish nationalistic frenzy. Even some
Muslim thinkers as Namek Kamal (1840-1888), Zia Pasha (1825-1880) and
Jowdat Pasha (1823-1898), tried hard to blend Islam with nationalism-an
idea which was doomed from the very beginning since these two schools
are incompatible. The progressive advance of nationalism and
colonization at last led to the rise of Ata Turk accompanied by his
anti-Islamic policy.

With him, Turkey became totally dependent on the West, exactly what the
Satanic West wanted. The Western intellectual class continued to promote
this school which was now supported by the bayonets of Ata Turk and his
successors. Zia Gukalp (1876-1942), the greatest theoretician of the
Turkish nationalist school, was a well- known personality of the west
who busied himself copying Western ideas and culture, both of which he
made the core of his ideology. Turkish nationalism resulted at last in
the membership of Turkey in the NATO, thereby surrendering its political
and cultural independence.

This was then an account of the rise and advance of nationalism in
Turkey.

$$SUB[British Colonialism, the Banner-bearer of Arab Nationalism]  
*4- British Colonialism, the Banner-bearer of Arab Nationalism.*

Nationalism was nowhere to be seen in the Arab countries before the
inroad of Western ideas and colonial influence.

Arab lands gradually came under the domination of the Ottoman Empire
from the 16th century onward, and a unity was established between almost
all parts of the Muslim Middle East (excluding Iran). All through the
Ottoman rule, until the beginning of the 20th century, the Arabs had no
feeling of alienation towards the Turks, and were perfectly content with
the unity that existed between Turkish and Arab lands. They considered
the Ottoman Sultan, the rightful ruler of the Muslims, and the Ottomans,
too, showed no discrimination towards the Arabs. They chose the governor
of each Arab zone (with the title of Naghib) from among the people of
the same zone.

French colonization was the first to sow the seeds of nationalism and
the separation of Egypt, to be followed by the deceitful and mischievous
creation of Turkish nationalism by Imperialism and Zionism in the form
of the 'Young Turks' movement and leading for the first time to
discrimination of Arabs by them.

Concurrently, colonial powers especially Britain roused the racial and
nationalistic sentiments of the Arabs through Christian Arab
missionaries and Western intellectuals.

After Egypt, the pioneers of Arab nationalism were Syria, Lebanon and
Jordan. Missionaries were most active in these regions. Members of the
Jesuit Catholic sect from 1830 and Protestants from 1820 entered Syria.
The giant Christian society became the agent for executing the plot of
colonization. Christian Arabs regarded Western penetration to their own
interests, and looked at French and British colonization as a refuge
against the Muslims. They were very sensitive about the expansion of the
idea of the universal Islamic Ummah, since such a unity would place them
in a minority, whereas having nationalism as the basis of unity would
not only prevent their being considered a minority (since in such a
unity all are Arabs -not Muslims and Christians), but being ahead of the
Muslims as far as Western education was concerned and trusted by
colonial powers, they hoped to assume the rein of affairs. From the
beginning, Christian Arabs sought the aid of Western governments against
Muslim Arabs, as was the case in the Civil War of 1860 when they invited
the Europeans for a campaign in Lebanon. But this method did not solve
the Christians' problem in the long run since it roused the cynicism of
the Muslims. Therefore on the suggestion of their colonial masters they
resorted to the importation of the creed of nationalism.

One of the clearest examples was Najib Azouri, a founder of Arab
nationalism. He was an agent of both France and England. In 1904 in
Paris, he published a book named “Le Reveil de la Nation Arabe”. He
further formed a society by the name of “Ligue de la Patrie Arabe”, and
published a monthly journal named, “L 'independence Arabe”, as an organ
of the union. In its publication, an employee of the French Foreign
Ministry named Eugene Lung, collaborated closely with him. Lung as a
servant of French colonialism wrote a book named “La Revolte
Arabe”[^12], in which he praised the Arab race. One of the points
repeatedly stressed in this book was the racial, cultural and political
differences between the Arabs and Turks, and occasional reference to the
superiority of the Arabs over the Turks and the necessity of segregating
the Arabs from the Ottoman Empire. To both Azouri and Lung, three
revolutions would be necessary to destroy the Ottoman Empire: An Arab
revolution, a Kurdish revolution and an Armenian revolution[^13].

Azouri's views on international politics, too, show his dependence on
Britain and France. Against the Turks, he sought the friendship of
Britain, and supported the pro British party of Muhammad Wahidi and
pro-British dailies such as “El-Haghtatem” and “El-Watan”. He regarded
the power of Germany which supported the Ottoman Empire a danger to
human society, and considered the governments of France and Britain as
the banner-bearers of justice in the world, and encouraged these two
colonizing powers to interfere in the Ottoman's internal affairs in
favor of the Arabs. He volunteered to start a revolution within the
Ottoman Empire in cooperation with lung, with the aid of British and
French capital and weapons. Dr. Hamid Enayat writes:

“Azouri expressed his loyalty and obedience to Britain and France and
introduced himself as the supporter of their interests in the East, and
said: 'The French should assist and tell us what they want from
us[^14].”

Azouri as a founder of Arab nationalism was dependent on the French and
British governments and was in their service[^15].

Besides Azouri, there were such men as Petros Bostani, Nasif al-Yazeji,
Ibrahim al- Yazeji, Nofel, Salim Nofel, Mikhael Shamhada, Sem'een
Kalhoun, Gerges Fayyaz, Rastan Dameshghia and many other Christian
enlightened men depending on colonial powers, who tried to incite and
expand Arab nationalism. These men did their utmost to convince the
Arabs that they were a distinct race, superior to other Muslim nations.
They deliberately misinterpreted history to attain this objective and
presented Islam, Islamic culture and civilization as being originally
Arabic- a matter which was a great treason to the intellect. Their
arguments and ways to prove Arab nationality came from Western culture
and thought.

Arab nationalism was reflected in two ways: firstly by emphasis on
Egyptian, Syrian, Iraqi and other nationalities, and secondly by
emphasis on Arab unity, or the Arab race.

During the World War I, the British government decided to enter the
arena in person and to openly support and guard Arab nationalism,
turning the enmity between the Arabs and the Turks to its own interest.
The rise of Sharif Hossain, grandfather of king Hossain of Jordan
against the Turks in June 1916, which is regarded as an objective
desired by Arab nationalism, was the product of direct British meddling
and intervention. The expansion of Arab nationalism against the
Ottomans, brought the British and French governments into the Arab zone,
resulting in the creation of Israel as a cancerous tumor in the heart of
the Arab land.

Sharif Hossain, as a pioneer of Arab rebellion against the Turks was a
British agent, and the British were the greatest supporters of Arab
independence from the Turkish yoke. The story of Sharif Hossain's
collaboration with the British as a hero of Arab nationalism is very
amazing. In 1914, direct contact was made through Abdullah, son of
Sharif Hossain and father of King Hossain, between Kitchner, well-known
English general, and Sharif. Some time after, Kitchner sent one of his
high-ranking officers, named Ronald Stors to visit Abdullah. At this
time, the World War had begun and Kitchner who was now British War
Secretary, sent a message to Abdullah in October 1914 asking him to rise
in rebellion for independence against the Turks. Kitchner promised to
support the Arabs' efforts for independence, and even to transfer the
Muslim Caliphate from the Turks to the Arabs and choose Sharif as the
new caliph.

Sharif Hossain, this so-called reverend pro-British nationalist, carried
out the plan of colonialism in the name of Arab independence, and at a
time when Turkey was entangled with the British and French, he made an
assault upon the Turks rousing the Muslims against them and in favour of
the British. McMahon, an English general, sent a letter to Sharif, the
copy of which is in the archive of the British Foreign Office in which
Sharif Hossain's role is lauded as a determining factor in “the combat
for independence by the valiant Arab nation.”

On July 21, 1915, Sharif sent a message to McMahon, asking for British
support for the Arab demand for the caliphate. On June 10, 1916, the
Arab national uprising, with the aid of British arms and munitions and
military and political support was started, led by Sharif Hossain. T. E.
Lawrence, an English government official, was the principal adviser to
Feisal, son of Sharif, in this national Arab uprising. On one side, the
Arab forces rushed upon the Turks, while on the other, in a perfectly
coordinated operation, General Allen by, the British commander in
Palestine took the lead in fighting. Thus the combat of the Arabs for
independence incited by nationalism, was promoted under British military
protection.

But while British and French colonizing powers tempted the Arabs into a
war of independence, and while Sharif Hossain and Arab secret
organizations such as El-Fetat and El-Ahad were actively executing the
schemes of the colonial powers, Britain and France were secretly
dividing the Arab zones among themselves. With the Treaty of Sykes-Picot
and the Balfour Declaration, they laid the ground for the division of
Arab lands and creation of Israel as a country.

France occupied Algeria, Tunis and Morocco by inciting anti-Turkish
feelings. Italy made Libya its colony, while Russia occupied parts of
Armenia; Britain occupied Egypt, Cyprus, Aden, and the Sheikdoms of the
Persian Gulf, and then Syria, Lebanon and Iraq, culminating in the
creation of the cancerous tumor, “Israel”, in the heart of the Arab
world.

And that was the painful story of Arab nationalism, its creation and
expansion.

Conclusion
----------

It becomes clear then that nationalism in Islamic lands was incited by
the Westerners, with the British and French missionaries and
Orientalists having a great share in it. It was then expanded by
colonial plots and used by colonialism as a tool for breaking up Islamic
unity and destroying the Ottoman Empire. In this connection, Christian
and Jewish minorities and pro-Western intellectuals were the principal
executors of these imperialistic plans. Almost all the banner-bearers
and famous pioneers of nationalism in Islamic lands were those who
copied the Western values and ideals.

With the inroad of Western ideals, words like 'homeland' and
'patriotism' became very popular with the Arabs, Turks and Iranians.
Nationalism was the stealthy and motivated imitation of Western models,
dictated by colonial powers, eventually resulting in the dependence of
those countries upon the West or East. This fact that for many years the
main supporters of Egyptian nationalism and Arab nationality and other
Islamic nations were France and Britain is more eloquent than words.
With those brilliant records of colonization, at present, the biggest
supporter of nationalist forces of Turkey and Iran is the U.S., and the
supporter of the Ba’athists and some Arab countries is the Soviet Union.

The important question that arises is why the idea of nationalism which
penetrated Islamic lands through Western ideas and colonial plots, was
welcomed by some sections of the Muslim masses and how did it expand?

Firstly, the masses could not see the difference between 'patriotism'
and 'nationalism' and to their unconscious mind, both concepts seemed to
denote the same idea as that of Islamic 'Ummahism'. From the beginning,
Islam had created a strong feeling of the 'Ummah' and had divided the
world into the “House of Islam” and the “House of War”. The masses
believed nationalism to be the same as 'Ummahism' and therefore welcomed
it.

The reason was that even though the people sometimes spoke of
nationalism, yet in practice, they regarded a Christian Egyptian and
Coptic Egyptian beyond the sphere of nationality, and Turkish Armenians
as aliens. Actually, to the masses, nationalism and Islamic Ummahism
meant one and the same thing.

Secondly, contrary to the main pioneers of nationalism, who propagated
it as a result of their dependence on colonial powers and the West, the
masses manifested nationalistic sentiments in opposition to social
tyranny or to the colonial influence of Britain and France. To the
masses, nationalism was a sentiment, not a school, but to the Western,
so-called enlightened class and politicians, it was an ideology and a
political creed.

The third factor behind the growth of nationalism among the masses was
the injustice of the selfish, pseudo-Muslim governments which inflicted
oppression and torture upon the people. While the Ottoman Empire was on
the brink of collapse, Turkish rulers like other selfish rulers of
history treated their subordinates oppressively including not only the
Arabs but the Turkish peasants. After the Young Turks assumed power,
tyranny and discrimination became prevalent, an outcome of Turkish
nationalism, which led to a spread of nationalistic sentiments among the
Arabs, of which colonialism made the utmost use. The most recent example
of a country where nationalism is fully manifest, is Bangladesh,
resulting from the tyrannical conduct of Pakistan's military dictators.

[^1]: Refer to the books: “Andishehaye Mirza Aqa Khan Kermani”-
(Thoughts of Mirza Aqa Khan Kermani) and Andisheye Mirza Fath-e Ali
Akhundzadeh -(Thought of Mirza Fateh-e Ali Akhundzadeh) by Fereydoon
Adamiat.

[^2]: M. Sabry: L 'Empire Egyptian sour Mohammad Ali, p; 579, Paris,
1930.

[^3]: Refer to the book: «Andisheye Arab" -(Arab thought) by Hurani and
“Tarikhe Andisheye Siasie Arab] -(The history of the Arab political
thought) by Hamid Enayat, p. 28.

[^4]: For more information on Tahtavi's nationalistic thoughts, refer to
the book “Seiri dar Andisheye Siasie Arab” -(A survey of the Arab
political thought) by Hamid Enayat, p. 34-35.

[^5]: Ditto, p. 46.

[^6]: Bernard Lewis: Islam in History, London, 1973, p. 132.

[^7]: Bernard Lewis: Islam in History, p. 132.

[^8]: Refer to “Nationalism in Asia and Africa” by Khadouri, p.159.
Khadouri has offered reasons and proved that the westerners are the
founders of nationalism in. most third-world countries. Also refer to
«Islam in History», by Bernard Lewis, p. 132.

[^9]: Refer to Jewish Encyclopedia, an article by Zodic Kahn, p. 61, and
“Turkism and the Soviets” by Hutler, p.141.

[^10]: Concerning the role of David Cohen and Vambery in the emergence
and expansion of the Turkish nationalism refer to “History-Writing and
national revival in Turkey” by Bernard Lewis and “The Development of
secularism in Turkey" by Niazi Brex, Printed in Montreal, 1944, p.
314-315.

[^11]: Concerning the role of Zionism and the westerners in the creation
and expansion of the Turkish nationalism refer to: Mardin's “The Genesis
of young Ottoman thought” a study in the modernization of Turkish
political ideas (Princitton N.J. 1962, p. 250). Harold Boven's British
contribution to Turkish studies, London, 1945, p. 43-4. Also refer to
“The Emergence of Arab Nationalism" by Zein Nzein, p.71.

[^12]: Elic Kedourie: The Politics of Political Literature in Middle
East studies, vol. III No.2, May 1972, p.230.

[^13]: Refer to “Al-Belad-ul- Arabiat-e- dulat-et- Uthmania”, by Sate
aal- Hasari, Darul- Elmul-mulaeen, Beirut, 1960, p. 126.

[^14]: “Seiri dar Andisheye Eslamie Arab”-(A survey of Arab Islamic
Thought), pp. 234- 228.

[^15]: George Antonius: “Arab Awakening", p. 99.


