Part Three: Definition, Basis and Characteristics of Nationalism
================================================================

Definition of Nationalism
-------------------------

'Patriotism' is the equivalent of nationalism. In Latin, 'natio' and
'nitus' means 'the place of birth'. Political scientists have given
different definitions of nationalism.  
 Carlton Hayes says:

“A nation is an independent political group with a common world-view and
cultural heritage[^1].”

In this definition, a common political organization and cultural unity
are considered as the main factors in forming a nation.

Hans Kohn says:  
 “The co-existence of a special group in a single realm is the factor
for forming a nation. Being brought up in a natural and geographical
environment creates the greatest unit of tribal solidarity between
individuals. The group which on this basis feels a joint interest and
expediency, forms a nation[^2].”

Luigo says:

“A nation is a collection of individuals who are joined together by the
factor of territory, blood, language, culture or history[^3].”

Salo Baron describes a nation as follows[^4]:

“The word 'nation' is applied to a group of people who live in the same
land and are joined together by common political organizations.”

Kohn says of the characteristics of nationalism[^5]:

“A deep feeling of attachment to a homeland and absolute loyalty to it,
and a sense of sharing its destiny are the basis of nationalism, which
is genuine when no other factor checks the loyalty to the homeland.”

The American Encyclopedia defines nationalism as follows:

“Loyalty and attachment to a national unity are more significant than
any other attachment in the question of nationalism. Other
characteristics of nationalism are pride in the achievements of one's
nation, a deep belief in the distinction of one's nation and even its
superiority over other nations."[^6]

Hayes, too, repeats, the same point and writes:

“Loyalty and attachment to the interior of the group (namely the nation
and homeland) are the basis of nationalism[^7].”

An analysis of the above definitions clarifies two points:

A) Giving authenticity to territory, blood or language is the basis of
nationalism. Instead of basing unity on belief and ideology, nationalism
bases it on language, territory and race. Homeland and nationality
become the axis of patriotism. In answer to the question as to what is
the main factor behind the building of a separate identity, the school
of nationalism has this to say:

'What distinguishes a human being from another, is not his belief, but
his birth-place, homeland, language and race. Those who are within the
four walls of the homeland and nation, belong to it, and those who are
outside it, are aliens. National interests and expediency are the
criteria of the propriety or impropriety and goodness or badness of
everything and the measure for the evaluation of the individual and
social conduct'. To the school of nationalism, the factors behind the
formation of a nation are material in nature, like geographical
frontiers, language, race and political organizations. It is on the
basis of these factors that the people have a feeling of sharing a
single destiny and a common past.

B) The next basic characteristic of nationalism is that all the loyalty
is centered upon the homeland. All other loyalties such as loyalty to
God, religion, belief and ideology are subordinated to loyalty to the
country and nation. No loyalty should check patriotism, and when
religious sentiments come in opposition with patriotic sentiments, the
latter must prevail.

This is a principle which no nationalist can ignore. Man lives for his
country and offers his life for it, and not for anything else. It is
attachment to nationality that gives direction to one's individual and
social postures, not attachment to religion and ideology. A human being
takes pride in his national achievements and feels dependent on its
cultural heritage, not on the history of religion and his faith.

A nationalist believes deeply that nation and country are superior to
all others, attributing all the good things to them.

Nationalism and Secularism
--------------------------

According to the above view, nationalism is closely linked with
secularism, in view of the necessity of separation between government
and religion, and politics from creed. One of the basic principles of
nationalism is a rejection of religious bonds and an acceptance of a
secularistic order.

One of the main slogans of Egyptian nationalism was:

“Religion is related to God (meaning personal acts of devotion) and
homeland is connected with society (i.e. social-political life).
Secularism means that religion is something subjective that must be
confined to an individual's private and family life, and religious
feelings and ideas should not interfere in the socio-politico set-up, be
the concern of nationalism only. So the socio-politico roots of religion
should be severed from politics.

Nationalism leads directly to secularism. The belief that national unity
must be based on a common land, race or language, necessitates that
religion be kept apart from politics. Thus, secularism paves the way for
the domination of nationalism, since according to this school of
thought, religion and nationalism cannot rule at the same time in the
same realm.

Secularism is the twin brother of nationalism and it changes the meaning
of minorities. In a government founded on religion, the followers of
other creeds and schools are regarded as minorities, but with
nationalism and secularism, there are only racial, political and
regional minorities. Nationalism claims that religious beliefs prevent
national unity and religious minorities feel themselves alienated. The
only proper basis is geographical, racial or lingual nationality. The
main duty of everyone is the patriotic duty, and religious duty is
subordinate to it, and confined to personal belief. The patriotic duty
of everyone is to sacrifice everything, even religion, for the nation
and country and serve and fight for them.

Basis and other characteristics of Nationalism
----------------------------------------------

Nationalism considers sovereignty as a tool to protect the country and
its citizens, not one for enforcing a particular ideology and system.

Economy, too, is based on national interest and welfare, not on what is
legitimate or illegitimate. Culture, art, poetry and literature are the
means for depicting national pride and greatness and creation of
solidarity and inspiring racial sentiments.

To nationalism, the strongest factors directing individual and social
life, determining intellectual and political postures, are the country
and nation. As Ibn-Khaldoon says, the element behind patriotism is
nationality.

Some of the other characteristics of nationalism are:  
 1) Belief that one should defend a compatriot against a foreigner,
whether the former is in the right or not.

2) Eulogizing and almost worship of national personalities and
historical heroes of one's country.  
 3) Revival of past traditions such as ancient idolatry. Neo-nationalism
too, in this connection, relies on myths, ancient and dead customs, such
as the ceremonies of the last Tuesday night of the year.

Egyptian nationalism, the most eloquent spokesman of which was Taha
Hossein, did its utmost to revive the relics of the old pharaonic
civilization. Lofti-el-Sayed, the well-known Egyptian nationalist
suggested that his compatriots should have a knowledge of the old and
brilliant Egyptian civilization in order to ensure the continuity of
their history[^8]. Likewise, Iranian nationalism was tried to relate the
Iranian nation to Cyrus and Darius, not to Muhammad (S).

4) A tendency to distort historical facts to glorify one's country, and
to invent stories and create models to show one's nation at its best.

5) Like old Totemism, there are special emblems in nationalism which are
given sanctity. The flag, national emblem, and national anthem are
considered sacred, for each of which a human being has the duty of
self-sacrifice.

Nationalism as a pseudo-religion
--------------------------------

Thus, we see that nationalism is a pseudo-religion which is its own god
and its own prophet. (Ferdowsi, for example, is regarded as a prophet of
Iranian nationalism). This creed has its own totems, idols, models,
ceremonies and ethical rules. In fact, Westerners created a creed which
they called nationalism on the basis of patriotism, which is rooted in
human instincts, after which they exported it to the East.

Nationalism as an advanced tribal system
----------------------------------------

Westerners lay the foundation of nationalism on the in-group feeling,
patriotism and tribal attachment. A critical examination of the school
of nationalism would show it to be similar to the tribal system of
Totemism.

Unity in the tribal system was founded on a community of blood and land,
with a total disregard of right and wrong, and on chastity, honesty and
belief. Whoever belonged to the tribe was shown affection, and whoever
did not belong to it was considered an alien.

Nationalism too, is similar in this respect. In the tribal system, wars
and peace were made for the tribe's sake. A person was proud of his
membership in the tribe and very often looked with scorn upon others.
The tribe was an organization under whose umbrella, the members felt
secure. Nationalism also gives rise to similar sentiments.

Some elements of the tribal system of Totemism, too, have found their
way in nationalism. Every tribe had a totem in which the members felt
that a spiritual power protected the tribe. Moreover, while 'homeland'
is the great totem of the modern man, nationalism is as illegal and
unjustifiable as Totemism. Some groups fight for the lion (emblem of
Britain) and blue flag; and some fight for the eagle (German emblem) or
for the red flag. While Totemism was the factor behind tribal unity,
today the 'country' plays the same role.

[^1]: J. H. Carlton Hayes: Essays on Nationalism, New York, 1926, p. 9.

[^2]: Hans Kohn: The idea of Nationalism: its origin and background, New
York, 1944. p. 14,

[^3]: Luigo: Nationalism and Internationalism, New York, 1946, p. 25,.

[^4]: Salo. W. Baron: Modern Nationalism and Religion, p. 31.

[^5]: Hans Kohn: The Idea of Nationalism, New York, 1927, p. 15.

[^6]: Nationalism commotes a loyalty to the group entity, superior to
all other loyalties (Encyclopaedia Americana).

[^7]: Carlton Haves: Essays on Nationalism, p. 56.

[^8]: Refer to: “Muqaddamata -Leddera sat-ul-Fekr-ul-siasial-Arabi”,
p.101.


