Part Four: The Philosophy Refuting Nationalism
==============================================

The difference between Patriotism and Nationalism
-------------------------------------------------

Patriotism and nationalism are two perfectly different concepts, the
distinction between which is sometimes not understood.

Patriotism is a natural and instinctive human feeling, whereas
nationalism is not a sentiment, but an ideology. The former is
sentimental, whereas the latter is a pseudo-creed on which the instinct
and sentiment are based.

The school of nationalism is built upon two animal instincts of man
which he has in common with other creatures, namely the 'group instinct'
and the 'love of home'. Nationalism begins with these two instincts,
eventually ending in a pseudo-religion which causes these relatively
innocent sentiments to become dangerously fanatical.

Nationalism based on manâ€™s animal instinct
------------------------------------------

The group-feeling is a natural human instinct which has in common with
some animals. Protozoa, ants, bees live in groups. When wild bulls sense
danger, they push the cows and calves to the middle of the flock, and
remain on the outskirts, ready for defense. When horses sense danger,
they stand in a circle, face to face, pointing their heads to the
center, and placing their rear legs outside the circle, ready for
defense[^1].

An attachment to 'land' and 'home', too, is also an animal instinct,
innate in man. Cats and dogs love the house they live in. A pigeon is so
attached to its cot that wherever it goes, it finally returns back to
it.

Thus, the group feeling and attachment to the land are two of man's
animal instincts.

What is the basis of group unity in human society?
--------------------------------------------------

In the course of history, ever since man stepped beyond wilderness and
turned instinctively towards civilization and group-life, he has always
been preoccupied with the question regarding the basis on which he
should build his collective life: whether it should be on the basis of
territory, blood and language, or on the basis of idea, belief,
meditation and intellect. Animals which act by instincts solely, base
their collective life on blood or land.

Since the beginning of history, there have existed two parallel lines.
One line was that prophets and great religions which has based unity on
belief and faith, the height of which was attained by Islam in
establishing a nation of conviction called the Islamic Ummah. The other
line was that of paganism which based unity on geographical boundaries,
color, language, race and political organization. The primitive system
of totemism, tribal system, ancient civilizations of Greece, Rome, Iran,
Caldea and Assyria, all sought their unity in the above factors.

The Quranic verses call it the line of satan. Satan bases his
superiority on being created from fire which is the equivalent of race
and blood; but Adam uses intellect and awareness as a basis of
privilege, and it is for this reason, and not because of blood and race
that he is prostrated before by the angels.

Why should man base unity on faith?
-----------------------------------

So far it has become clear that a unity based on land and blood is
related to man's animal instinct which he shares with some animals, and
not because of his distinctive characteristics which make him of a
superior animal.

But should land and blood be man's only basis of unity, or is there some
other factors? To answer this question, it would first be necessary to
understand man's peculiar nature.

According to the Quran, man is an animal endowed with a divine (i.e.
beyond animal) spirit. Consequently, there are two inherent tendencies
or inclinations which characterize man's nature: an animal tendency
which makes him similar to other animals, and a human tendency which
distinguishes him from them.

The tendencies he has in common with other animals are his instincts.
According to Freud and McDougal, instinct is a mysterious force which
acts through bodily organs of all living creatures and makes them do
things without awareness and thinking.

In man, these instincts originate from his animal nature. They include
desire for food, the sexual urge, fighting, attachment to land, blood,
wealth etc. Of course, according to his superior nature, man's instincts
from a biological viewpoint are weaker and more flexible than those of
the animal and his acts and behaviors unlike those of animals, are not
solely instinctive, but are motivated by other higher sources too.

These superior inclinations are what distinguish man from the animal and
make him superior to it. They are his intellect, intelligence,
self-awareness and belief, faculties which are unique to him and also
the desire for perfection, knowledge and the ideal.

The motive force behind men's behavior in life are these higher
inclinations which make him superior to and distinct from the animal.
That is why we see that ideals, thought and reasonings which have risen
higher in human beings than in animals, are so effective that they
transform all instinctive needs. The similarities and differences
between individuals and human societies do not directly originate from
instincts, but from awareness, reasoning and reflection.

We see here where the school of nationalism deviates and errs. It
regards land and blood as the main controlling factors of man's
behavior, and how the school of communism mistakenly considers the belly
as the main factor and the Freudian school which regards the sexual
factor as being the motive force behind man's behavior. Considering
these, we can then understand the difference between these schools and
the school of the prophets. The former schools stress on instincts which
do not make man a superior animal and disregard man's higher qualities
or undermine them.

In the school of the prophets, the determining factor and criterion has
nothing to do with territory, blood, food or sex; but it is rather man's
belief, ideology and ideals which originate from his awareness,
intellect and knowledge, which give him an exalted position among
creatures and enable him to dominate the world. So long as he is bonded
to such things as land and blood, he remains at the animal level, but
once he steps higher towards belief and ideology, he attains the human
level. Instinctive factors on which nationalism and other Western 'isms'
rely are improper and futile since they degrade man to the animal level,
and from a scientific viewpoint they are wrong since man's unique
quality is his awareness, explaining his weak instincts. Human
sacrifices all the way through history on grounds of conviction, show
that a vision of life based on instinct is defective.

Man is a human being, not an ass or a crow. He must adopt belief as the
basis of unity and a determining factor of life and reject attachment to
territory, race, gold, and force.  
 That is why we reject nationalism, communism and all other futile
'isms' and turn to a divine school which is based on belief, a search
for perfection and man's unique quality.

Nationalism is based on the accident of nature
----------------------------------------------

In nationalism, nationality is only an accident of nature. Whereas in
Islam, it is the choice and conscious will of the individual that
determines his destiny. The bases of nationalism are the co-existence of
a special group in a particular land, or attachment to a particular race
or language; all of which are accidental factors without any connection
with the human will.

How can an individual belonging to a particular race, color or language
liberate himself from these instinctive attachments? Adopting the
'accident of nature' reasoning as the test and main criterion of man's
social and political life will mean degrading his rank and position,
whereas his superiority over other living creatures lies in his free
will and choice. Nationalism denigrates him to the extent of his
confinement to the four walls of his birth-place.

Nationalism also negates man's free will in other respects, which fact
is clearly illustrated by the Nazi rule in Germany. Hitler's nationalism
stressed that whoever is of the Aryan race and has German as his mother
tongue is German, whether he wants it or not. The consequences of this
nationalism were the forceful occupation of other territories on the
excuse of a common race.

[^1]: The Descent of Man, p. 14.


