Part Five: Shortcomings of Nationalism
======================================

Illogical basis of Nationalism
------------------------------

Herbert Luthy says: “Nationalism is a creed based on a handful of dogmas
that cannot be accounted for from a scientific and intellectual point of
view, and have authenticity only in the minds oft heir followers.”[^1]

Nationalists have been unable to explain explicitly how their principles
can be applied universally, and what are the factors which build up the
independent identity of a nation and what is the distinction of a nation
which naturally or psychologically sets it apart from other nations, so
that these qualities cannot be found in any other nation. The works of
the nationalist propounders give us ho indication in this connection,
but a show of such disharmonious ideas which are not logically
acceptable.

Nationalist theoreticians rely on geographical, lingual, racial,
political, economic, cultural and historical factors, and regard the
territory, country, blood and history as the factors that build up a
nation's separate identity.

Now we will analyze the validity and logic of each of the above factors
as a so-called unifying factor and as a yardstick for measuring the
independent identity of a society.

Territory and country: These words are rather conventional, than
natural. A human being feels at home to be in his town, village and
locality as a result of persistent suggestion from outside.

If one is to consider more than the above, why should he regard himself
an Egyptian and not an Arab? And if he is a member of the Arab world,
why not be an Asiatic? This is something conventional and personal, not
logical. Why should a man, born in Ireland, consider his country to be
Britain and not Ireland? The frontiers of many countries, especially in
Africa, are imaginary demarcations. Nationalists want the people to show
attachment to these crooked lines that colonial powers have drawn on the
maps of Asia and Africa, and turn this affection into an ideology. They
drew these lines, made them look real and forced people on this side of
the line to consider themselves as belonging to that country, and those
outside that line as foreigners, without giving a logical reason for it.
The attachment of a person to his land is natural, not logical. When it
is suggested constantly to a person that a country is his homeland, he
comes to believe it, and to consider others as aliens. From a
geographical viewpoint, 'homeland' is constantly changing. What
Afghanistan is today, was considered Iran yesterday. Why then should an
Afghan regard himself an Afghan and not an Iranian? This is only a
matter of suggestion.

What other factor other than a common religion, an Iraqi Kurd has in
common with an Iraqi Arab? Why should he not consider himself a citizen
of Kurdestan instead of Iraq? Nationalists cannot offer a reasonable
explanation.

B) Language: The German school of nationalism with Herbert Luthy
(1744-1803) and Johan Fichte (1762-1814), particularly, who had been its
greatest representatives in the 18th and 19th centuries considers
language and history to be the most important factors behind the
national identity of a people. They regard language as being especially
significant in the creation of a national spirit and identity. Following
them are some nationalists of the Islamic world like Namegh Kamal of
Turkey and Nadim of Egypt who attach the greatest importance to language
as a basis of nationality. But the fact is that the language and common
history of a people have not been sufficient in themselves to kindle a
national awareness.

The Americans of George Washington's time had the same language and
history as those of England, and vet they segregated from Britain and
became an independent nation. Switzerland has three different languages
in three regions, and yet the feeling of nationality is strong there.
India has over fourteen languages, and yet there is no language but
English that all Indians may understand. If language is a determining
factor of unity and independent national solidarity, why did hot England
and North America form a single nation in spite of their common
language? Why did not the Latin American countries (except Brazil) which
have a common language like Spain, Brazil or Portugal become united?

We do not want to deny the role of a common language in accelerating the
process of unity and solidarity, since it is evident that language is a
means of direct communication, offering a nation a common literature.
What we mean is that language is not the principal factor in shaping
nationality, even if it speeds the process. Many nations have become
nations in spite of differences in languages (like Switzerland), while
there are many nations which are remote from one another in spite of a
.common language. Thus language cannot be regarded as a firm basis for
nationality. Nasser and other Arab nationalists tried to set up a united
Arab nation on the basis of a common language but they failed. The
Maronite Christians and Muslims of Lebanon speak the same language but
they have been fighting each other for the last six years, and these
Christians feel closer to the Europeans than to the Muslims.

Moreover, in every country, we come across several languages, not one.
What is called a dialect is in fact a different language. Is it easier
for a Persian-speaking individual to understand the Afghani Dari or the
Azari of Tabriz? The people of Arabia do not understand even ten percent
of the Arabic of Libya. All these facts show that language is a weak
factor and basis of nationality and any reasoning opposing this
assertion will be illogical and defective.

C) History, culture and civilization: It is true that the history and
culture of a people create a feeling of unity and of communal interests,
but nationalists forget the fact that in the East, especially in the
world of Islam, the unity of history, culture and civilization is based
on belief, not on geographical factors. Culture and civilization-wise,
post-Islamic Iran is more close to Arab countries and Pakistan, than to
the ancient Zoroastrian culture. Similarly, Egypt in its culture and
civilization is closer to post-Islamic Iran than was the Pharaonic
civilization. Our history and culture are based on ideology and belief.
All the Muslims after the rise of Islam have the same history and
culture. The past civilization of Iranians, Arabs, Turks, Pakistanis and
Indian Muslims is nothing but an Islamic one. Nationalism tries in vain
to call this civilization an Iranian or Arab civilization in order to
rouse the national sentiments or unearth the decayed bones of
pre-Islamic history and culture which has nothing to do with our present
culture and civilization. That is why the relics of those civilizations
cannot warm the hearts of the people in comparison with Islamic history
and civilization, and lead them towards unity and victory.

Nationalists do not only try to revive the memory of the ancient
civilization through exaggerations, suppositions, bombasts, self-Praise
and fallacious reasonings, but they also resort to a scorn of Islamic
history and civilization in order to elevate the racial greatness of
Iranians, Arabs or Turks, and, try to ignore Islam altogether. But this
is wrong and prejudiced and it defeats the objective. As Dr. Shariati,
the martyred teacher, has pointed out: “During the whole course of
history, the Iranian race (and the Turks, Arabs and other Muslim
nations) has never found a better opportunity than the brilliant Islamic
centuries to show its talent and ability.”

Contrary to the nationalists, since the seventh century A.D., Iran,
Turkey and the Middle East embraced Islam, so strongly that their
history is the same as that of Islam, and their course has been the same
with the course of Islamic history, culture and civilization. The
greatness and honor of these nations lie in their share in promoting
Islam and in their creation of a magnificent Islamic culture and
civilization. They are the achievements of these Islamic nations whose
past history is not in any way comparable with their religion, and if
Islamic countries wish to be proud of their past, they have no basis but
Islam.

Moreover, the choice of history as a factor in building up a man's
identity is a feeble and illogical one, since the frontiers of countries
have not been the same throughout history. Afghanistan was once part of
Iran. How then can history be considered as the basis of independent
nationality?

D) Race: Most nationalists regard race as a factor which determines
nationality. But a careful analysis of it shows the weakness and
illogicality of it, like other factors based on prejudice, illusion and
superstition.

What is racism? It is a feeling of unity based on kinship. The first
line of this attachment is an objective reality, namely the bond with
one's father and mother. When this is extended, it reaches one's family,
tribe and lastly one's race. But extending it to race, the bond becomes
so remote from common ancestors that the racial root cannot be
scientifically and logically proved. Has there ever existed in history a
thing called the Aryan or Semitic race? Moreover, who can prove that a
man is an Aryan? For example half of the Iranians are Sayeds, who are
descendants of the Prophet of Islam who was not himself an Aryan. Can
those non-Sayeds claim that during these thousands of years, their blood
has not been blended with non-Aryan blood?

Belief in the race and racial unity has no objective and scientific
reality; it is only a subjective illusion on which nationalism wishes to
base its social-political relations. How comical and illogical!

Thirdly, if we were to adopt blood as a basis, as racism and nationalism
do, why should we not have our first ancestors, namely Adam and Eve, as
the basis of human generation. In such a case, instead of racism, we may
turn to humanism, and instead of nationalism to internationalism. This
would be a more logical and convincing idea than the question of race
which cannot be proved. Even if the Aryan, Semitic and other races have
a historical authenticity, if we do not stop at this point and go far
back in history, all these races end In common ancestors. Then why
should we not adopt this as a basis?

E) Political organization and economic factors: Some nationalistic
schools consider political organization and economic factors as the
basis of nationality. From apolitical angle, the Irish form part of
Britain, and yet they consider themselves independent. There are many
similar cases in the present and past history.

Economics has sometimes acted as a factor of unity like the union of the
customs among the various German provinces between 1819 and 1952, which
was a prelude to their political union. But such cases are only
exceptions to the rule. Economic harmony and collaboration of various
groups are not the requisites of national unity.

It is thus clear that the main foundations of nationalism are weak,
invalid and illogical, even though they may help occasionally in rousing
nationalistic sentiments. They are not determining and fundamental
factors behind unity and solidarity. For this reason, French
nationalists have been forced to claim that what causes a German, an
Englishman and a Frenchman to regard themselves respectively as
belonging to Germany, England and France is only and only the individual
will or desire. So long as the individual does not freely accept to be a
citizen of a particular nation, a common language, race, history or
geographical frontiers would be of no avail, and cannot by themselves
create a feeling of attachment and national awareness.

Unity on the above basis is a prelude to differences
----------------------------------------------------

An effort to create unity on the above basis leads to greater
differences and conflicts among human beings. A unity based on
geographical boundaries, race or language cannot include all human
beings. It is more like walls set up between them, separating them, and
intensifying their division. Ideological boundaries can expand without
force or imposition with the free acceptance of that school by
individuals and nations, and intellectually it is not impossible for it
to end with the unity of all mankind. But geographical nationality with
lingual and racial differences obviously include all men and so, it can
never sustain human unity permanently.

Nationalism creates division among mankind and thus, it cannot lead to
universal unity. In such a unit, the questions of minorities and aliens,
too, become insoluble. But an Ummah founded on belief is an 'open unit'
and it can admit people from every race, color, language and territory
who accept that belief. This unity can, therefore, expand and lead to
man's universal brotherhood.

In fact the only proper, scientific and logical basis for nationality
and unity is belief, ideology and school. Other factors as compared to
these are insignificant.

Thus we see that none of the principles that nationalists rely on are
universal and logical. But the nationality based on belief which Islam
upholds has an intellectual authenticity and is justifiable. Those who
have the same ideology possess the same world vision, religious belief,
culture, objective and destination, form thus a single Ummah.

So long as patriotism and nationalism exist, the danger of war and human
clashes cannot be removed, since national unity will dialectically lead
to international dispersion and confrontation. This opposition is not
soluble except through force and colonizing others. But a unity based on
belief and the acceptance of that belief will remove all differences and
one and all will become equal and brothers.

Nationalism defeats its own objectives
--------------------------------------

Would the country be subjected to division if we use 'religion' as a
basis or 'nationality' as a basis?

The aim of nationalism is the creation of unity, but its result is the
reverse and it defeats its own objective. The means adopted by
nationalism to realize its objectives of creating unity is to kindle
sharp sentiments of solidarity on f the basis of race, language or
nationality.

But in every country, there exist racial and lingual minorities. When
these minorities come to face nationalistic sentiments incited by the
propaganda of the majority, they may lose their own independent identity
within the majority and react. It is often seen that such propaganda
directed at inciting nationalistic sentiments by the majority rouses a
regional, racial or lingual nationalism among the minorities and results
in the dispersion and disunion of the country.

Logically there is no reason why the majority's nationalism should be
considered right and the minority's one wrong. Why should British
nationalism be regarded as right and laudable, while the Irish one, as
blameworthy and condemnable. If Iraqi Baathists have the right to speak
of Arab nationalism all day and night, why shouldn't an Iraqi Kurd have
the right to turn to Kurdish nationalism since he is not an Arab after
all. If territorial, racial and lingual prejudice is good, then it is
good for both sides, and if it is bad, it is so for both. We cannot
judge by two different criteria. If the nationalism of America's whites
is good, why should that of its blacks be bad?

We see, then, that nationalism has no logical basis, and it defeats its
own purpose, and has to establish solidarity by force. It secures what
is contrary to its goal, namely division and dispersion.

Contrary to the nationalists' claim, it is not religious beliefs, but
nationalistic feelings which check unity and produce division in the
country. The result of half a century of the nationalistic propaganda of
Reza Khan and Muhammad Reza was rebellion in Kurdestan and Turkeman
Sahara.

Nationalism has at no time been able to solve the question of racial,
lingual and regional minorities. On the, contrary it has intensified
oppositions and made them perpetual.

As the criterion is race, language or territory, and as race and
language and the like are not changeable, therefore those not belonging
to a certain race or having a certain language are always regarded and
live as a minority group and cannot share the sentiments of the
majority. Those who through emigration or change of geographical
boundaries or invasions become nationals of a country, even after many
generations and centuries, feel themselves to be a segregated and
alienated group, and others feel the same towards them. Armenians in
Turkey, Syria and Iran, and Kurds, Scots, Irish and American negroes are
the clearest examples of this.

Nationalism cannot solve the problem of minorities with the criteria of
blood and language. But when belief is used as a basis, since it is not
a property that can be inherited and something personal, it can perhaps
solve the minority question, so that ultimately no minority would
probably exist. Anyhow, this is not logically impossible. But the
problem of minorities will always exist as a cancerous tumor in
nationalistic societies. This is especially more felt in Islamic
societies where rousing nationalistic sentiments lead to division.

In Iran, Pakistan and Turkey and most Arab countries, the religious
minorities are not more than two to four percent of the population, and
even this number can benefit from all the civic and human laws under the
system of Islam and feel secure. The way is always open for everyone to
become a full member of the Islamic Ummah. But when nationality becomes
the basis, the number of racial, lingual and regional minorities
increases manifold, so that the total of these minorities in some of
these countries actually forms the majority of the population. If
nationality is adopted as a basis, the Kurds will turn to the Kurdish
nation, and the Turks to the Turkish race. Thus, these countries would
undoubtedly move towards division, and only force can keep them united.
As the above countries have adopted nationality as a basis, they have so
far been entangled with difficulties.

Is it only nationalism that can motivate people’s creativity?
-------------------------------------------------------------

Some thinkers like Harold Lasky[^2] believe that nationalism should be
accepted not as a reality, but as expediency. He writes: “In spite of
the shortcomings, defects and contradictions of nationalism, the
fanaticism that it creates releases people's energy and creativity.”

But Lasky and his likes only take the conditions of the West into
consideration where religion lacks sufficient dynamism for rousing
public zeal and sentiments. The history of the East and the Islamic
world shows that religion has been more effective than nationality in
activating and inspiring the Muslim people, in inciting their initiative
and creativity, and rousing intense zeal in the masses.

[^1]: Johann Herder, A Rehabilitation of Nationalism, London, 1962,
p.85.

[^2]: Harold J. Lasky: Nationalism and the Future of Civilization,
London 1971, p.66.


