Part Six: Dangers of Nationalism
================================

Ego-centrism and prejudice
--------------------------

Among the greatest dangers of nationalism is prejudice: a violent
affective state where the individual or the group, become ego-centric,
leading them to ignore reality and be harsh and inflexible in their
judgments.

Nationalistic sentiments in one country usually leads to prejudice
against other nations, and sociologically speaking, it encourages the
'we-group' or 'I-group' feeling and the people to love and praise their
own nation and regard all those outside this 'in-group' as contemptible
enemies. Self-glorification becomes the rule and no sympathy or
tolerance is shown to others.

This ego-centrism, an offshoot of this unbalanced nationalism manifests
itself in various ways under different conditions: Ethno-centrism,
chauvinism, race-centrism, racism etc.

Superiority complex and misinterpretation of history
----------------------------------------------------

Walter Lecquer, well-known sociologist says:  
 “One of the main peculiarities of nationalism is an over-estimation of
one's own nation, and a depreciation of others, a lack of
self-criticism, sense of responsibility and observance of fairness.
Nationalism abandons realism and allows an idealistic and mythical
vision to dominate society[^1].”

To glorify itself, nationalism generally resorts to suppositions,
exaggerations, fallacious reasonings, scorn and inadmissible
self-praise, and worst of all, it engages in the distortion of history,
model-making and fable-writing. Historical facts are twisted to
imaginary myths as it fears historical and social realism.

Will Durant says:[^2] “The 19th century discovered nationalism and
corrupted almost all historians.”

Treilschke, Von Sibel, Michellet, Martin, McCaulay, Green, Banderft and
Fetik were patriots first and historians later. Every nationalist
considers his country as God's select realm and the whole world full of
wickedness and barbarism.

Nationalism has made history so corrupt and tumultuous, that a wise man
suggested that for attaining universal peace, it would be better to
discard history instead of drawing up pacts of friendship and commerce.

Misinterpretation of history is one of the greatest harms of
nationalism. It may be argued that the case is so where an extreme form
of nationalism exists. But that is not the case. Any kind of nationalism
by essence inclines towards self-pride and scorn of others, for so long
as it does not rouse in people a false sense of pride in their nation,
how can it turn national prejudice in favor of itself and against
others?

Tribal prejudice or fanatical ignorance
---------------------------------------

As nationalism is based on man's animal instincts, not on belief and
intelligence, therefore, tribal prejudice which is called fanatical
ignorance by Islam, is its foundation and one of its peculiarities.

The accidental birth of a person in a certain country gives him the
wrong baseless idea that he may scorn others and consider them as
enemies. Having been born in Europe and having a white skin for example,
he gives himself the right to plunder the blacks and refuse to employ
towards others criteria he uses towards his own compatriots. Even a
genius like Einstein is disliked by a German because he is a Jew. Taking
birth in Germany or France, both a matter of accidental birth in a
certain land and not one of conscious choice, is no reason to dislike
other, be prejudiced and evaluate human beings with two different
criteria.

Can anything be more inhuman and unreasonable that to prefer a wicked,
corrupt and incompetent compatriot of the same race or language to an
honest, benevolent and competent person who is born beyond one's
frontiers?

A person is judged on the basis of his race, language, country and
considered a compatriot or alien, without the least consideration of his
deeds, virtues or views. Human honor and good deeds are disregarded
simply because one is born in a certain land. The yardstick for
evaluating the individual becomes territory and blood, not action,
faith, chastity or obligation.

The more popular nationalism becomes, the more intense will fanatical
ignorance and racial prejudice become, and the more limited will be
one's vision. A nationalist defends everything related to his country
solely through intellect or reflection. He considers everything outside
his country as alien and ignominious. Right and wrong become meaningless
concepts.

This is fanatical ignorance which is strongly condemned in Islam, it is
inherited from the inhuman tribal system, but with a more dangerous
dimension.

Nationalism culminates in racism
--------------------------------

Nationalism inevitably ends in racism and racial prejudice. In any land
where it attempts to base unity on the co-existence of a particular
group so as to create fanaticism and make that group an independent,
separate unit, it must attribute a certain name to that group like
Iranian, Turk or some other name; it must brainwash those in that group
into believing that they are superior to other on the basis of their
race, blood etc. Without attention to the criteria of virtue, belief and
action. Eventually, other neighboring countries come to manifest similar
feelings, leading to perpetual clashes, rivalry and racial hostilities.

History bears witness to the fact that nationalistic sentiments have
always ended in racism. The Greeks at the height of their civilization
called non-Greeks barbarians.  
 Aristotle said:

“It is nature's will that barbarians be the slaves of the Greeks.” The
Jews who were a national unit before being a religious unit, regarded
themselves as God's selected people. The Romans at the height of their
civilization believed that there were only three nations on earth, the
Romans, their confederates and the barbarians (non-Romans).

$$SUB[Nationalism results in a desire to dominate]  
*5- Nationalism results in a desire to dominate and colonize seeking
domination and colonization are due to three factors:*

1- Strong prejudice  
 2- Superiority complex  
 3- Self-interest (and disregard of others interests)

Nationalism relies on all these three factors and that is why it
eventually leads to domination and colonization. Nationalism has been
the cause of clashes, aggressions, and constant rivalry between nations,
causing much riot and bloodshed the world over. When a country thinks
only in terms of its own interests and gives itself the right to
dominate others, the result will obviously be conflicts, aggressions and
colonization . Some think that this is only true of extreme nationalism.
But history has taught us that there are no such things as healthy or
unhealthy nationalism, since nationalism in whatever form ultimately
ends in chauvinism and racism.

It may be argued that if patriotism and racism do cause fanaticism and
domination, religion and ideology, too, may do the same. But those who
think so are ignoring an obvious reality. It is true that every school
and ideology produces fanaticism and encourages one to believe that
one's school is superior to others, but as this is not based on the
authenticity l of territory or blood, and since its foundation is the
authenticity of intellect and reflection, its result is a scientific and
theoretical contest. A belief is such that when proved in a logical
manner or when it is attractive enough, people may agree to it without
being forced or pressurized. A society based on belief is an open
system, whereas, societies founded on nationalism and racism are closed
systems which elevate some and debase others, looking upon them as
inferiors and colonial slaves. But when belief or ideology expands, all
its followers become equal brothers. Nationalism in its expansion
results in imperialism, and colonization . A religious school of thought
prescribes the ideal system for all human beings, whether white or
black, eastern or western, all of whom can join the proposed union,
whereas nationalism can expand only through subjugating weak nations. An
Aryan can never become Semitic, and Turkey cannot become Iran except by
becoming a colony. But Egypt, Iraq and Iran accepted Islam without
becoming colonies.

Belief based on the intellect, expands without violence and through
guidance and propaganda, in the same way that traders and dervishes
carried Islam to the farthest parts[^3] of Asia and Africa. But
nationalism, having solely a racial and geographical foundation, can
expand only through colonization.

As mentioned in the previous chapters, the savage colonialism of the
West in the 19th century which spread over the Third World was caused by
nationalistic sentiments. The calamitous World Wars and the Nagasaki and
Hiroshima disasters and hundreds of other wars which have tainted man's
history with blood, are living proofs of nationalism as a dominating
force.

Nationalism is a factor of expansionism and a basis of injustice and
aggression. It has been the source of imperialism and it cruelly
transgresses over weak nations, imposing its illegitimate ambition on
others in the name of national desires and national expediencies.

Narrowing man’s mental horizon
------------------------------

Nationalism narrows man's mental horizon in two ways: Firstly, it
discourages man to think of the whole of mankind and of ways to help and
guide the latter. It encourages him to consider his compatriots only and
limit the radius of his vision within the framework of frontiers.
Secondly, it encourages man to reject belief, the spirituality, the
intellect, and to focus on land, blood, country and race, thereby
narrowing down his mental horizon.

Nationalists are the slaves of emotions, and have no regard for the
intellect and intelligence. Ideology, on the other hand, relies
extensively on reflection and by creating a sense of obligation and
responsibility, the intellect comes to dominate over emotions and not
the other way round as is the case with nationalism.

[^1]: Walter Lacquer: Communism and Nationalism in “The Middle East”
London, 1950, p. 8.

[^2]: Will Durrant: The Mansions of Philosophy, p. 239.

[^3]: Brown: The Spread of Islam.


