56. A special gift on the Judgment Day
======================================

In *Usool Kafi* through his own chain of narrators it is narrated from
Mufaddal from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) that he said:

“Indeed, a believer presents a gift to his brother.” I asked: “What
gift?” He replied: “Among them are giving him a place to sit, a pillow,
food, clothes and greetings, then Paradise is the reward for him. And
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime sent revelation to Paradise: I have
prohibited your food for the people of the world, except the Prophet and
the successor of the Prophet. And when it is the Judgment Day, the
Almighty Allah reveals to Paradise: Reward my friends according to their
gifts. At that time houries and youths would emerge from it carrying
trays of pearl. Thus when they see the terrible condition of Hell and
Paradise and whatever is there in it they would lose their senses and
refuse to eat from those trays.

So a caller will announce from below the *Arsh*: Indeed, Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime has prohibited Hell for anyone who has tasted the
food of Paradise. At that moment they would stretch out their hands and
eat from them.”[^1]

I say: The point of evidence is that, the gift to a brother mentioned
here implies doing him a favor in every way one can do a favor. It could
also be by the tongue, by the method that Imam (as) has also given the
example of greeting. On the basis of this it implies absolute favor and
goodness.

Thus I say: There is no doubt that *Dua* for a believer is the most
clear and highest type of favor, thus the reward that is mentioned in
the above tradition for praying for an early reappearance of our master,
the Master of the Time (aj) would be related to it. Rather it is of the
most perfect and complete way of favoring as is very much clear.

[^1]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 207


