58. Vast shade of the Almighty Allah
====================================

One who prays for the reappearance of the Master of the Time (aj) would
be under the vast shade of the Almighty Allah as long as he is reciting
the *Dua*for His Eminence, and divine mercy would be falling upon him
throughout.

That which proves this point is a tradition mentioned in *Usool Kafi*
through his own chain of narrators from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq
(as) that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“One who honors a Muslim brother with a word that through that word he
does a kindness on him and removes his distress, he shall continuously
remain under the widespread shade of the Almighty Allah and as long as
he is in that condition (of doing good) divine mercy would be falling
upon him.”[^1]

I say: We stated previously that praying for the elders and great
personalities is a form of paying them honor and is considered as
respect to them. In the same way kindness, expression of love and
removing their grief would be taken as a type of honoring. On the basis
of this, if the believer prays for his master during his absence and he
cannot remove the sorrow of His Eminence in any other way, he would
become eligible for the above-mentioned reward. This can be explained in
two points:

**First**: It is that we know from logic and religious texts that
between the Imam and his Shias there is a relationship of brotherhood.
This tradition proves that that reward is proved for one who prays for
his believer brother because *Dua* is effective in removing his sorrow
and warding off calamities from him. And also it is an expression of
love of a believer for his brother. Previously it was concluded that
praying for an early reappearance of our master, the Master of the Time
(aj) is effective.

**Second**: It is with regard to the matter of precedence. That reward
would first be there for praying for an early reappearance of our
master, the Master of the Time (aj) on the basis of precedence.

[^1]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 206


