64. Obedience of the Ulil Amr (those in authority)
==================================================

This *Dua* is obedience of *Ulil Amr* and it is the best thing through
which people can seek proximity to the court of the Almighty Allah.
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا
الرَّسُولَ وَأُولِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you.” (Qur’an, Surah Nisa 4:59)***

Here we shall be investigating some points:

First: The term *Ulil Amr* mentioned in the verse implies the Holy Imams
(as).

Second: Obligatory-ness of obeying the *Ulil Amr*.

Third: It is that this is the best thing through which people can seek
proximity to the Almighty Allah.

Fourth: It is that praying for an early reappearance of our master, the
Master of the Time (aj) is also implied in their obedience.

First point: Ulil Amr are the Holy Imams (as)
---------------------------------------------

There are innumerable traditional reports related through Shia and Sunni
channels that confirm this matter: they can be seen the books of *Kafi*,
*Ghaibat Nomani*, *Kamaluddin*, *Ghayat al-Maraam*, *Tafseer Burhan*,
*Biharul Anwar* and *Manaqib* etc. We present herewith some of them from
*Tafseer Burhan*without their chains of narrators:

It is narrated from Jabir Ibne Abdullah Ansari that he said:

When the Almighty Allah revealed the following verse on His Prophet:

“O ye who believe! Obey Allah and obey the messenger and those
possessing authority among you.”

I said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! We know Allah and His Messenger. But who
are the possessors of authority whose obedience Allah has accompanied
with your obedience?’ He (S) explained, “They are my caliphs, O Jabir,
and the Imams of the Muslims after me. The first of them is Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (as), then Hasan (as) and Husain (as), then Ali Ibn Husain (as),
then Muhammad Ibn Ali (as) the one who is famous as al-Baqir in the Old
Testament. Soon, you will meet him, O Jabir, so when you face him,
convey my salutation to him.

He will be followed by Sadiq, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad, then Moosa Ibn
Ja’far, then Ali Ibn Moosa, then Muhammad Ibn Ali, then Ali Ibn
Muhammad, then al-Hasan Ibn Ali, then the one who will be my namesake
and bear my patronymic, the proof of Allah in His earth and His
remainder among His servants, the son of Hasan Ibn Ali. He (aj) is the
one at whose hands Allah, High be His remembrance, will open the east of
the earth and its west. He (aj) is the one who will be concealed from
his Shias and his friends, an occultation in which none will be
steadfast on the belief of his Imamate except the one whose heart has
been tested by Allah for faith.”

Jabir says that he asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (S)! Will the Shias
benefit from him during the occultation?’ He (S) replied, “Yes, by the
One Who sent me with Prophethood! Surely they will benefit with his
light and gain from his mastership in his occultation like people derive
benefit from the sun when the clouds hide it. O Jabir! This is from the
hidden secrets of Allah and the treasures of His knowledge, so hide it
except from the ones worthy of it.”[^1]

It is narrated from Abu Baseer that His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as)
said regarding the statement of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

“O ye who believe! Obey Allah and obey the messenger and those
possessing authority among you.”

Imams from the progeny of Ali and Fatima (as) till the day of
*Qiyamat*.”[^2]

It is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) that he said
regarding the statement of the Almighty Allah:

“O ye who believe! Obey Allah and obey the messenger and those
possessing authority among you.

It is especially mentioned about us…”[^3]

Second point: Obligatory to obey the Ulil Amr
---------------------------------------------

The same verse proves that it is obligatory to obey the *Ulil Amr*:

“O ye who believe! Obey Allah and obey the messenger and those
possessing authority among you.”

There are many traditions that confirm this.

Third: The best thing through which people can seek proximity to the Almighty Allah
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

After the obedience of the Almighty Allah and obedience of the Holy
Prophet (S) the best thing is obedience of *Ulil Amr* through which one
can seek proximity of Almighty Allah. That which proves this is a
tradition in *Usool Kafi* through his own chain of narrators from
Muhammad bin Fuzail that he said:

I asked Imam (as) about the best thing through which people can seek
proximity of Almighty Allah. He replied: “The best thing through which
people can seek proximity of Almighty Allah is obedience of Almighty
Allah, obedience of His Prophet and obedience of the *Ulil Amr*…”[^4]

Fourth: Praying for an early reappearance of our master, the Master of the Time (aj) is also implied in their obedience
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

All traditions recorded from the True Imams (as) regarding the subject
of praying for the Master of the Time (aj) – some of which we shall
present in Part Six and Seven – prove this point. In addition to that,
is the blessed *Tawqee* quoted in Part One that: And pray more for the
early reappearance, for therein lies your success…”

[^1]: Tafseer Burhan; Vol. 1, Pg. 381

[^2]: Tafseer Burhan; Vol. 1, Pg. 383

[^3]: Tafseer Burhan; Vol. 1, Pg. 384

[^4]: Kafi; Vol. 1, Pg. 187


