70. A Kind Companion in Barzakh and Qiyamat
===========================================

These two honors are proved by the tradition mentioned in *Usool Kafi*
through authentic chain of narrators from Sudair Sairafee that he said:

His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) said in a lengthy tradition: “When
the Almighty Allah will raise the believer from his grave, a figure will
emerge with him, who will walk ahead of him, so that whenever the
believer sees a terrible scene of *Qiyamat* it will say to him: Do not
fear and aggrieve, glad tidings to you for the joy and rewards of Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime.

Till he reaches the presence of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. He would
take his account easily and send him to Paradise. While that figure
would be walking ahead of the believer, the believer will ask: May Allah
have mercy on you, how nice you were to accompany me from the time I was
raised from the grave and to console and congratulate me time and again
for the rewards and joys I was supposed to get till I actually reached
them. But who are you? It will reply: I am that same happiness and joy
that you gave to your believer brother in the world. Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime created me from that happiness so that I may congratulate
you.”[^1]

I say: The point concluded from this is, as we have mentioned time and
again, that without any doubt, our master, the Master of the Time (aj)
and his venerable forefathers (as) are pleased as a result of the *Dua*
of the believer for his early reappearance. On the basis of this, all
aspects applicable to making a believer happy are present in this *Dua*
also. In the same way all matters that cause pleasure and happiness of
His Eminence. In the thirty-fifth benefit we had mentioned another
tradition that conveys the same meaning.

[^1]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 190


