73. Praying during the period of occultation is better than doing it in the time of reappearance
================================================================================================

That which proves this is a tradition mentioned in *Usool Kafi* and
other books quoting Ammar Sabati that he said:

“I asked Abu ‘Abdillah, peace be upon him: ‘Which is better, worship in
secret with a hidden Imam from among you [in the time] of government by
an illegal ruler, or worship in [the time of] the manifestation of the
Truth and its government with the manifest Imam from among you?’ He
said:

‘O ‘Ammar, [the giving of] *Sadaqah*, which is a form of worship in
secret is better, by Allah, than [the giving of] the alms openly;
similarly, by Allah, your worship in secret with your hidden Imam in
[the time of] government of an illegal ruler, and your fear of your
enemy in [the time of] government of an illegal ruler and in a state of
truce [with your enemy], is better than that you should worship Allah,
may remembrance of Him be made Mighty and Majestic, in [the time of] the
manifestation of the Truth with the Imam of Truth which is manifest in
[the time of] the government of Truth.

Worship while you fear in [the time of] government of an illegal ruler
is not the same as worship and security in [the time of] the government
of Truth. Know that [for] whoever of you now prays a prescribed prayers
at its hour in congregation [with the others], thereby concealing
[himself] from his enemy, and completes it [correctly], Allah will
register [the rewards for having completed] fifty prescribed prayers in
congregation; and that [for] whoever of you prays a prescribed prayers
at its hour by himself, thereby concealing [himself] from his enemy, and
completes it [correctly], Allah to Whom belong Might and Majesty, will
register thereby [the reward for having completed] twenty-five
prescribed prayers [recited] alone; and that [for] whoever of you prays
a supererogatory prayers at its hour and completes it [correctly], Allah
will register thereby [the reward for having completed] ten
supererogatory prayers; and that [for] whoever of you performs a good
deed, Allah to Whom belong Mighty and Majesty, will register thereby
[the reward for having performed] twenty good deeds; and Allah, to Whom
belong Might and Majesty, will handsomely double [the reward] of the
good deeds of the believer among you when he does good deeds and
practices *Taqayyah* with regard to his religion, his Imam and himself,
and keeps his tongue in check; for Allah, to Whom belong Might and
Majesty is Generous.’

“I said: ‘May I be made your ransom, by Allah you have encouraged me to
[do good] deeds, and spurred me on to them, but I should like to know
how we shall be better in [our] deeds at this time than the companions
of the manifest Imam from among you in [the time of] the government of
Truth, since we are [both] of a single religion?’ He said: “Indeed, you
outstrip them in involvement in the religion of Allah, to Whom belong
Might and Majesty, and in prayers, fasting, hajj and in every good deed
and knowledge, and in worshipping Allah, may remembrance of Him be made
Mighty and Majestic, secretly from your enemy, while [at the same time]
concealing [the truth] about your Imam, being obedient to him and being
patient with him, awaiting the government of the Truth, apprehensive
about your Imam and yourselves before oppressive sovereigns. You see the
rights of your Imam and your own rights in the hands of the oppressors:
they take them away from you and force you to work hard on the land and
struggle to make a livelihood, and [you must also] be patient about your
religion, your worship, obedience to your Imam and fear of your enemy.
For this, Allah, to whom belong Might and Majesty, will double [the
reward for your] actions for you, may it be pleasing to you.’

“I said: ‘May I be your ransom, what do you think? That we should be
companions of al-Qaim and [see] the Truth manifest itself, or that
today, in your Imamate, obedient to you, we are better in [our] deeds
than the contemporaries of the government of Truth and Justice?’ He
said: “Good gracious! [subhan Allah!], do you not wish that Allah the
blessed, the sublime, should make the Truth and Justice appear in the
lands? That Allah should cause [people’s] speech to harmonize, and that
Allah should unite the diverse hearts [of people]? That they should not
rebel against Allah, to whom belong Might and Majesty, in His land?

That His restriction should apply among His creatures, and that Allah
should return the rights to His people so that it may become manifest,
so that nothing of the Truth might be concealed through fear of any one
of [His] creatures? By Allah, O ‘Ammar, indeed no one among you will die
in the condition you are in, but he will be more perfect before Allah
than many of the martyrs of Badr and Uhud. May you rejoice!’”[^1]

I say: We have quoted the complete text of this tradition from the point
of view that it contains many important benefits, and the point proved
from the statement of the Imam is that:

“Similarly, by Allah, your worship in secret…”

Because *Dua* is one of the best and one of the most important worship
acts.[^2]

Especially *Dua* for the Master of the Time (aj) and his early
reappearance as will know those who study the chapters of this book
carefully.

[^1]: Kafi; Vol. 1, Pg. 333

[^2]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 466


