Second: Right Of Survival In The World
======================================

It is necessary to take note of the fact that if Imam al-Zamana (as) had
not been there you will not remain for even a moment and rather nothing
in the earth shall remain. This matter is clearly understood from
traditions that Thiqatul Islam Kulaini has mentioned in Kafi, through
authentic chains of narrators from Hasan bin ‘Ali al-Washsha that it was
asked from His Eminence, Abu Hasan Imam Reza (as):

‘Can the earth remain without an Imam?’ He said: ‘No.’ I said: It has
been narrated to us from Abu Abdillah (as) that the earth cannot remain
without an Imam except when Allah, the All-high, becomes angered towards
the earth or (His) slaves.’ He said: ‘No, it (the earth) cannot remain
(thus), otherwise, it would become a mire.’[^1]

2. In another traditional report it has come from His Eminence, Abu
Abdillah Sadiq (as):

“If the earth remains without an Imam, it will become a mire.”[^2]

3. Shaykh Sadooq has narrated in his book, Ikmaluddin through strong
chain of narrators like correct or correct upon correct chain from Abu
Hamza Thumali from His Eminence, Ja’far bin Muhammad Sadiq from his
father from his forefathers (as) that:

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said, “Jibraeel (as) has reported to
me from the Lord of the Might, may His Majesty be Mighty, that He said,
‘Whoever knows (believes) that there is no god but Me alone, Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.) is My servant and My messenger, ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (as) is My
caliph and that surely the Imams from his progeny are My proofs, I will
make him enter Paradise on account of My mercy, save him from My hell
due to My forgiveness and allow him to reside in My neighborhood. I will
make My honor obligatory on him, complete My bounties on him and make
him from My special and pure (servants). If he calls Me, I will answer
him, if he invokes Me, I will accept his invocation and if he asks Me, I
will grant him. If he is silent, I will initiate the talk with him and
if he errs, I will have mercy on him. If he flees from Me, I will call
him and if he returns unto Me, I will accept him. If he knocks on My
door, I will open it.

But one who does not witness that there is no god but Me alone; or bears
testimony for the same but does not bear witness that Muhammad is My
servant and My messenger; or testifies for the above two but does not
acknowledge that ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (as) is My caliph; or witnesses for
all the above but refuses to confess that the Imams (as) from his
progeny are My proofs, then indeed He has denied My bounties, belittled
My greatness and disbelieved in My signs and My books. If he desires Me,
I will veil Myself from him and if he asks Me, I ccept his invocation.
If he expects from Me, I will disappoint him. This is my retribution for
will deprive him. When he calls Me, I will not hear his call and when he
invokes

Me, I will not ahim and I am not unjust unto My servants.’” At this
juncture, Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari stood up and asked, ‘O Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.)! Who are the Imams from the progeny of ‘Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (as)?’ He (s.a.w.s.) informed:

“Hasan and Husain, the two leaders of the youth of paradise. Then, the
chief of the worshippers in his time, ‘Ali Ibn Husain, then Baqir,
Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali; soon you will reach unto him, O Jabir, so when you
meet him, convey my salutations to him. He will be followed by Sadiq,
Ja’far Ibn Muhammad, then Kazim, Moosa Ibn Ja’far, then Reza, ‘Ali Ibn
Moosa, then Taqi, Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali, then Naqi, ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad, then
Zaki, Hasan Ibn ‘Ali, then his son, the one who will rise with the
truth, the Mahdi of this Ummah. He will fill the earth with justice and
equity, as it would be fraught with injustice and oppression.

These, O Jabir, are my caliphs, my successors, my descendants and my
progeny. Whoever obeys them has obeyed me and whoever disobeys them has
defied me. Whoever denies them or denies even one of them, then indeed
he has denied me. Through them, Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, will
prevent the skies from falling on the earth, of course, with His
permission. Due to them, Allah protects the earth from swallowing up its
inhabitants.”[^3]

In Ghaibat Nomani it is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) from Amirul
Momineen ‘Ali (as) that he said:

“Then Allah will bring a virtuous congregation, who will fill it with
equity and justice, as it will be full of oppression and injustice.”[^4]

There are numerous traditional reports regarding this point.

[^1]: Usul al-Kafi; Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini; Vol. 1/179

[^2]: Usul al-Kafi; Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini; Vol. 1/179

[^3]: Kamaluddin; Shaykh Saduq; Vol. 1/258

[^4]: Al-Ghaibah; Ibne Abi Zainab Nomani; Chap. 10, Pg. 141


