74. Angels pray for him
=======================

That which lends support to this are some traditions, one of which is as
follows:

In *Usool Kafi* through his own chain of narrators, it is narrated from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) that he said:

“The prayer that is accepted soonest is one that a believer brother
prays in favor of another in his absence. It is so because when he
begins praying, angels appointed on him say: ‘Amen and you shall have
twice that.’”[^1]

In the same book it is narrated from Ali bin Ibrahim from his father
that he said:

“I saw Abdullah bin Jundab at the halt of Arafat, so I have not seen a
halt better than that, continuously he had his hands raised to the sky
and his tears flowed on his cheeks till they fell to the ground. Thus
when people returned from Arafat I asked him: O Abu Muhammad, I have not
seen a halt better than yours. He said: By Allah, I did not pray but for
my brothers, as Abul Hasan Moosa bin Ja’far has informed that one who
prays for his brother in his absence, a voice comes from the *Arsh*: A
hundred thousand of that is for you. So I did not like that I should
leave a hundred thousand accepted prayers for one about which I don’t
even know if it would be accepted.”[^2]

It is narrated from the chief of those who prostrate, Ali bin al-Husain
(as) through authentic chain of narrators that he said:

“Indeed, if the angels hear a believer praying for his brother in his
absence or if he mentions his merits, they say: You are a good brother,
praying for good of your brother while he is away from you. And you
remember him with good words, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has given
twice that you wished for him and He has praised you twice…”[^3]

In *Wasail* it is narrated from Muhammad bin al-Hasan Tusi (q.s.) that
in his *Amali* he has mentioned from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq
(as) that he said:

“There are four people whose prayer is never rejected: Prayer of the
just Imam for his subjects, prayer of one brother in faith for another
in his absence. The Almighty Allah appoints an angel who tells him: For
you is same as you wished for your brother. And the *Dua* of a father
for his child and the *Dua* of an oppressed one. Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime says: By My might and majesty, I shall definitely take revenge
for you even though it be after a period of time.”[^4]

I say: This is the effect of *Dua* in the absence of a brother in faith.
Then what would be the effect of praying for an early reappearance of
our master, the Master of the Time (aj) in his occultation, whose
*Marefat* is a pillar of faith? May Allah give us *Tawfeeq* for this.

[^1]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 507

[^2]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 508

[^3]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 508

[^4]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 4, Pg. 1147


