75. Dua of His Eminence Sajjad (as) for the Supplicants
=======================================================

This *Dua* consists of numerous benefits and has many effects:

First: *Dua*, plea and *Salawaat* on them from Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime every morning and evening.

Second: *Salaam* on them from the Almighty Allah.

Third: Gathering of their affairs on piety.

Fourth: Reform and arrangement of their affairs and positions.

Fifth: Acceptance of their Taubah and the forgiveness of their sins.

Sixth: Settling them in Paradise in the neighborhood of the Purified
Imams (as).

That which proves this matter is the statement of Imam Ali Ibne Husain
(as) in the *Dua* of Arafah in which after praying for our master, the
Master of the Time (aj) he says:

“O Lord, bless their friends who acknowledge their rank, follow their
path, pursue their track, adhere strongly to them, are firmly attached
to their friendship, follow their leadership, submit to their ordinance,
endeavor to serve them, expect their days, and strain their eyes towards
them, with blessings auspicious, pure, growing, following one another
morning and evening. And confer peace on them and their souls. Let their
aims be unanimous in virtue. Reform their conditions for their benefit.
Accept their repentance. Verily, You are the greatest acceptor of
repentance, Merciful and the best of forgivers. With Your Grace let us
be with them in the abode of peace. O Most Merciful.”

I say: The matter proved from this paragraph is as follows: Without any
doubt, the prayer of His Eminence is accepted and effective in six ways
that are mentioned in it. He has prayed for believers who are having ten
characteristics and when the believer comes with the conditions
mentioned in the last part, he prays for early reappearance of his
master, which is among the implications mentioned in this *Dua*. Thus
this *Dua* will be accepted with regard to him. Here it is necessary to
mention three points for explanation:

First: Explanation of the above mentioned *Dua*; so we say: Perhaps
*Salawaat* implies mercy, as it is mentioned in a traditional report of
Tafseer.

Also it is possible that it implies praise of the Almighty Allah on a
man with an exalted status, since it is mentioned about one regarding
whom Allah boasts to the angels. And the meaning of the blessed
*Salawaat* is: innumerable worldly benefits and effects, and purifying:
devoid of divine anger and displeasure and it is that which causes
increase and multiplication of effects and consequences of the
hereafter. And the meaning of gathering their affairs on piety is: that
all their actions will be according to piety and devoid of carnality and
sensuality and no action which is against the command of Allah would be
committed by them. And there is a possibility that it implies their
unity and gathering on the word of piety, but the first possibility is
stronger. And arranging of their position: that is reforming their
worldly affairs.

Secondly: Explanation of the ten above-mentioned qualities based on the
sayings of the Purified Progeny of the Holy Prophet (S). Thus we say:

First quality: Belief in positions that the Almighty Allah has made
special for the Purified Imams (as). These beliefs may be in brief or in
detail and this is indicated by the words: so that they may accept their
positions.

Second quality: Following them in their beliefs and being steadfast in
things they are steadfast in. And this is the implication of the words:
Following their path.

Third quality: Imitating them in their manners and actions that are
performed by them, in all the aspects of life as the Imam has mentioned
about it by the words: ‘pursue their track’.

Fourth quality: It is that they should remain attached to that with
which the Imams are attached. And this could be achieved by acting
according to their commands and prohibitions. And this is the
implication of the words: ‘adhere strongly to them’.

Fifth quality: To remain firm upon their *Wilayat* in all important
matters. Imam Ali Ibne Husain (as) has alluded to this by saying: ‘are
firmly attached to their friendship’.

Sixth quality: It is that they must consider only them as their Imams
and they must not consider anyone else as Imams: like the Zaidiyyah and
their followers.

Seventh quality: Submission to their commands. It is mentioned in *Usool
Kafi* through authentic chains of narrators from Abdullah Kahili that he
said: His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) said:

“If people worship the One God without any partners, establish Prayer,
pay *Zakat*, perform the Hajj of Allah’s House and fast during the month
of Ramadan, then they say about something that the Almighty Allah of the
Messenger of Allah (S) has done that: Why did he not do the opposite of
it? Or that they feel it in his heart, due to this matter they become
polytheists. Then he recited the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا وَرَبِّكَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ حَتَّىٰ يُحَكِّمُوكَ فِيمَا شَجَرَ
بَيْنَهُمْ ثُمَّ لَا يَجِدُوا فِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ حَرَجًا مِمَّا قَضَيْتَ
وَيُسَلِّمُوا تَسْلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But no! by your Lord! they do not believe (in reality) until they
make you a judge of that which has become a matter of disagreement among
them, and then do not find any straitness in their hearts as to what you
have decided and submit with entire submission.” (Qur’an, Surah Nisa
4:65)***

After that His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) said: Submission is
must for you.”[^1]

It is also narrated from His Eminence that he said:

“People have three duties: Recognizing the Imams, submitting to that
which is received from them and referring to them in conflicting
matters.”[^2]

Eighth quality: To put in all the efforts in their obedience; and it is
from this view that Imam has said: ‘endeavor to serve them’.

Ninth quality: Awaiting their rule, as the Imam says: ‘expect their
days’. And the traditional report that has come in this regard will be
quoted in Part Eight.

Tenth quality: It is that one should consider his Imam to be before his
very eyes, and consider himself in the presence of the Imam such that
the Imam sees him in all circumstances and activities and hears his
calls, while he is concealed from his eyes. And if the curtain is
removed from his eyes, Imam (as) would be seen, and at this time one
should as a much as possible, try to accord respect to the holy presence
of the Imam and this is the meaning of the words of Imam Sajjad (as)
that: ‘and strain their eyes towards them’. And what we have mentioned
is supported by many traditional reports; for example:

In *Kharaij* it is narrated from Abu Baseer that he said:

I went to the Masjid with His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as). People
were coming and going. His Eminence said to me: “Ask the people if they
can see me?” I asked every person that entered: “Have you seen Abu
Ja’far?” He said: “No.” While His Eminence was standing over there. Till
there came Abu Haroon Makfoof (blind). His Eminence said: “Ask him
also.” I asked him: “Have you not seen Abu Ja’far (as)?” He replied: “Is
it not he that stands?” I asked: “How did you know?” He said: “How could
I not know it when he is a brilliant effulgence?”

Abu Baseer says: I heard His Eminence, Imam Baqir (as) ask a man from
Africa: “How is Abu Raashid?” That man replied politely: “I found him
alive and in good health. I will convey your greetings to him.” Imam
said: “May Allah have mercy on him.” The man asked: “Is he dead?” “Yes,”
said the Imam. “When?” “Two days after you left.” “By Allah, he was
neither sick nor had any disease.”

I asked: “Who was that man?” Imam said: “He was a man from our followers
and Shias.” Then he said: “If you think that we don’t have the seeing
eye and the hearing ear for you, you think wrongly. By Allah, nothing
from your affairs is concealed from us. You should always consider us to
be present and make a habit of performing good deeds and be from the
devout, so that you are identified with that. This is our request to our
children and Shias.”[^3]

I say: Some of the evidences supporting this were mentioned in the
forty-sixth benefit.

Third: In the explanation of this benefit being connected to praying for
an early reappearance of His Eminence we say: Without any doubt, the
supplicant for our master, the Master of the Time (aj) and early
reappearance of His Eminence fits the above-mentioned description
provided he has observed piety and guarded his self from sensuality and
kept himself away from worldly evil and base qualities. As will be
mentioned ahead, all the benefits mentioned in this book have a basic
requirement of piety and discipline of the self. Thus when the
supplicant had been such he would become eligible for all that is
mentioned. Because is *Dua* is loving the True Imams (as), a confession
of their status, following their examples, supporting their heritage,
reaching out to them, being attached to their *Wilayat*, having faith in
their Imamate, submission to their commands, striving to obey them, and
also a sign is waiting for their rule, as these matters, with a little
contemplation will be known for the followers of this family.

[^1]: Kafi; Vol. 1, Pg. 390

[^2]: Kafi; Vol. 1, Pg. 390

[^3]: Kharaij, Pg. 92


