78. Perfection of Faith
=======================

Since praying for an early reappearance of our master, the Master of the
Time (aj) is verbal expression of love to Amirul Momineen (as) it will
be an impetus to perfection of faith. In a number of traditional
reports, it is mentioned that one who loves His Eminence by the tongue,
one-third of his faith is complete. This tradition is mentioned in
*Tafseer al-Burhan*.

In addition to this is a traditional report mentioned in the ninth
volume of *Biharul Anwar* from His Eminence, Abul Hasan ar-Reza (as)
from his forefathers, from his venerable great-grandfather Ali (as) that
he said:

My brother, the Messenger of Allah (S) said to me: “One who wants to
meet Allah, the Mighty and Sublime in such a way that He should look at
and not ignore him, he should have *Wilayat* of Ali. And one who wants
to meet Allah, the Mighty and Sublime in such a way that He should be
pleased with him, he should love his son, Hasan. And one who wants to
meet Allah, the Mighty and Sublime in such a way that there is no fear
on him, he should be among the followers of Husain.

And one who wants to meet Allah, the Mighty and Sublime in such a
condition that He has forgiven all his sins, he should be a follower of
Ali Ibnal Husain. And one who wants to meet Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime with illuminated eyes, he should be a follower of Muhammad bin
Ali al-Baqir.

And one who wants to meet Allah, the Mighty and Sublime in such a way
that his scroll of deeds be given to him in his right hand, he should be
a follower of Ja’far bin Muhammad bin as-Sadiq. And one who wants to
meet Allah, the Mighty and Sublime in such a way that he is purified and
clean, he should be a follower of Moosa Kazim. And one who wants to meet
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime in a happy and joyful mood, he should be a
follower of Moosa ar-Reza. And one who wants to meet Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime in such a way that his grades be elevated and that his sins
be replaced with good deeds, he should be a follower of Muhammad Jawad.

And one who wants to meet Allah, the Mighty and Sublime in such a way
that his accounting is easy, he should be a follower of Ali Hadi. And
one who wants to meet Allah, the Mighty and Sublime in such a way that
he is from the successful ones, he should be a follower of Hasan Askari.
And one who wants to meet Allah, the Mighty and Sublime in such a way
that his faith is complete and his Islam is good, he should have the
*Wilayat* of Hujjat, the Master of the Time, the awaited one. They are
lamps in darkness, the Imams of guidance and signs of piety. Allah
guarantees Paradise to one who loves them and has their *Wilayat*.”[^1]

I say: The point of evidence in this tradition is that the *Wilayat* of
all the Imams must be expressed by the tongue as well as in actions,
which are the most liked deeds. Because faith in the *Wilayat* of all of
them is obligatory. And expression of devotion to them has special
effects mentioned in this tradition. Without any doubt, *Dua* for our
master, the Master of the Time (aj) and supplicating for his early
reappearance from Allah is an expression of love to him. The love which
is originally hidden in the hearts.

Thus this effect is related to it. And from the aspect that this effect
is present in having love with regard to our master, Hazrat Hujjat (as),
it is that faith cannot be complete without the recognition of all the
True Imams (as). And since the last part is the cause of completion,
then faith cannot be complete except through the *Wilayat* and love for
the seal of the Imams, the one who will remove the sorrow of this Ummah.
May the Almighty Allah hasten his reappearance.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 36, Pg. 296


