79. Reward of worshippers
=========================

That which proves that the supplicant for early reappearance of His
Eminence, Qaim (aj) earns rewards equal to all the worshippers of the
world is a tradition mentioned in *Tafseer Burhan* and other books from
the Holy Prophet (S) that he said:

“O Ali, your simile is like that of *Surah Qul huwallaaho Ahad* in the
Qur’an. One who recites it once, it is as if he has recited one-third of
the Qur’an and one who recites it twice, it is as if he has recited
two-thirds of the Qur’an and one who recites it thrice, it is as if he
has recited the whole of the Qur’an. You are also like this. One who
loves you by his heart has achieved one third of the rewards of people
and one who loves you by the heart and by the tongue has acquired two
thirds of rewards of people and one who loves you by the heart, the
tongue and by hands (action) the complete rewards of people would be
there for him.”[^1]

I say: The evidence provided by this narration is that love by the
tongue means that it should be an expression of inner love, and loving
by hand means that then inner love be expressed in actions. In every act
that he performs. Thus one who prays for the help and early reappearance
of our master, the Master of the Time (aj) has in fact done so for the
sake of his love for Amirul Momineen (as). Thus he is fitting the
qualifications of a devotee of Amirul Momineen (as) and he has expressed
his love for His Eminence by his tongue and as well as by actions.
Because when a person loves another and he knows that, that person has
as a son who is in prison or illness, he is extremely sad for that
person. His love for that person impels him to pray for his son, and
through this medium, he expresses his love for that person.

It should be known that expression of love is of different types, such
as:

Helping the beloved and removing harms from him, or from one who is
related to the beloved and expression of attachment in every way
possible.

Helping and supporting the beloved by praying for him and raising up the
hands in supplication.

Writing the excellences of the beloved and other matters that are
included in this type, with which it is possible to express the inner
feelings etc. as is very much clear.

[^1]: Tafseer Burhan; Vol. 4, Pg. 521.


