87. Elevation of ranks in Paradise
==================================

That which proves this is a traditional report mentioned in *Tafseer* of
Imam Hasan Askari (as) in a lengthy tradition of the Holy Prophet (S)
that he said:

“If you want Muhammad and Ali to elevate your status with the Almighty
Allah you must have regard for our Shias and followers and you must try
to fulfill the needs of the believers. Because when Allah, the Mighty
and the High admits the group of you, our Shias and followers, His
caller will announce in Paradise: O my servants, enter Paradise in
peace. Then they would divide them according to their love for the Shias
of Muhammad and Ali and their fulfillment of the rights of brothers in
faith. Thus as much one had love for the Shias and who fulfilled their
rights, their stations in Paradise will be as much elevated so that
there would be some of them living in palaces and gardens at a distance
equal to that traveled in 500 years.”[^1]

I say: We mentioned previously that *Dua* for our master, the Master of
the Time (aj) is fulfillment of many important rights of His Eminence
upon us. In addition to it, with regard to fulfilling the needs it is
also mentioned in his holy *Tawqee* that: “Pray more for early
reappearance as in it lies your deliverance…” and also praying more in
this regard would be a source of increase in love for His Eminence
because the improvement of the circumstances of the Shias is connected
to the reappearance of His Eminence as mentioned again and again in this
book.

[^1]: Tafseer Imam Askari, Pg. 155


