88. Security from a bad accounting
==================================

Since this *Dua* is a type of doing good to the kinsfolk of Muhammad (S)
and Allah, the Mighty and the High has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يَصِلُونَ مَا أَمَرَ اللَّهُ بِهِ أَنْ يُوصَلَ
وَيَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُمْ وَيَخَافُونَ سُوءَ الْحِسَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those who join that which Allah has bidden to be joined and have
awe of their Lord and fear the evil reckoning.” (Qur’an, Surah Raad
13:21)***

Shaykh Kulaini has mentioned in *Usool Kafi* through authentic chain of
narrators from Safwan Jammal that he said:

“There was an altercation between His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as)
and Abdullah bin Hasan; and it developed into a serious row, such that
people gathered to watch. Thus it continued in this manner till night
fell and they all went back to their houses. Next morning on way to an
errand I saw His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) at the door of
Abdullah saying: “O maid-servant, ask Abu Muhammad Abdullah bin Hasan to
come out.” The narrator says: So he came out asked: “O Abu Abdullah,
what has brought you here early in the morning?” He replied: “Last night
I recited a verse in the book of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime that had
me worried.” Abdullah asked: “Which verse?” He replied: Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime has said:

“And those who join that which Allah has bidden to be joined and have
awe of their Lord and fear the evil reckoning.”

Abdullah said: ‘You are right, it is as if I have never seen this verse
in the Book of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.’ After that they embraced
each other and wept.”[^1]

In that same book through authentic chain of narrators it is narrated
from Umar bin Yazid that he said:

I asked His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) about the verse:

“And those who join that which Allah has bidden to be joined.”

He replied: “It is revealed about doing good to the kinsfolk of Aale
Muhammad (S) and about your kinsfolk.” After that His Eminence (aj)
said: “One should not say about anything that: It is about only one
topic.”[^2]

In *Tafseer Burhan* through his own chain of narrators it is narrated
from Muhammad bin al-Fuzail that Abul Hasan Moosa bin Ja’far said:

“Indeed, the relationship to Aale Muhammad (S) says clinging to the
*Arsh*: O Lord, join one who keeps me joined and cut off one who
dissociates with me. And it is effective with every relationship and
this verse is revealed about Aale Muhammad and all those who have made a
pledge with them.”[^3]

Also quoting from Ayyashi it is narrated from Umar bin Maryam that he
said:

I asked His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) about the verse:

“And those who join that which Allah has bidden to be joined.”

He replied: “It is about all relationships and its ultimate
interpretation is related to us.”[^4]

I say: From these traditional reports, it is clear that attachment to
Imam (as) is a cause of security from a difficult accounting and thus
two points remain to be discussed:

First: Explanation that attachment will be effected through *Dua*.

Second: The proof that the implication of attachment is absolute good
and favor in any way it might be. Whether it be through the tongue or in
any other way. And *Dua* is the best type of favor through the tongue
and that which proves it, is a traditional report mentioned in *Usool*
*Kafi* through his own chain of narrators from His Eminence, Abu
Abdillah Sadiq (as) that Amirul Momineen (as) said:

“Join your relationships even if it be by a greeting.”[^5]

Also through authentic chain of narrators it is narrated from Ishaq bin
Ammar that he said:

I heard His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) say: “Indeed, *Sile Rahem*
(doing good to the kinsfolk) and doing good makes the accounting easy
and erases sins, so do good to your relatives and do good to your
brothers, even it be through greeting or replying to greeting.”[^6]

As for the meaning of hardship in accounting: It means a complete and
detailed accounting as mentioned in *Tafseer Burhan* through authentic
chain of narrators from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) that he
said to a man:

“So-and-so, what did you do with your brother?” He replied: “May I be
sacrificed on you, I had an account with him, so I took my rights
completely.” Imam Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) said: “Tell me about the
statement of the Almighty Allah: ‘And they fear an evil accounting’, so
you think that they fear that He will do injustice to them or oppress
them? No, by Allah they are afraid of a complete and detailed accounting
(*Istiqsa*).”[^7]

In *Kafi* also it is narrated from another chain that:

“No, by Allah, they do not fear except a complete accounting, thus
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime named it bad accounting and one who has
taken a detailed account has done bad.”[^8]

A similar tradition is narrated from Ayyashi also.

The meaning of ‘detailed accounting’ (*Istiqsa*) in the interpretation
of this verse is as follows: In *Burhan* it is narrated from Ayyashi
from Hisham bin Salim that His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) said
regarding the statement of Allah, the Mighty and the High:

“…and fear the evil reckoning.”

It is so because their sins would be taken into account while their good
deeds would not be counted, and this is *Istiqsa*.”[^9]

Tabarsi has also narrated from Hisham bin Salim from His Eminence, Abu
Abdillah (as) that he said:

“The evil accounting is that their sins will be taken into account and
their good deeds will not be counted and this is *Istiqsa*.”[^10]

I say: This tradition and others like it prove that the effect of some
sins is preventing good deeds from being accepted. Like traditions that
have come on the punishment of omitting Prayer, not paying *Zakat* and
disobeying parents etc. while these are by no means sins.

[^1]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 155

[^2]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 156

[^3]: Tafseer Burhan; Vol. 2, Pg. 288

[^4]: Tafseer Burhan; Vol. 2, Pg. 289

[^5]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 155

[^6]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 157

[^7]: Tafseer Burhan; Vol. 2, Pg. 289

[^8]: Kafi; Vol. 5, Pg. 100

[^9]: Tafseer Burhan; Vol. 2, Pg. 289

[^10]: Tafseer Burhan; Vol. 2, Pg. 290


