Fourth: The Right Of The Bestower Of Favor On Whom He Bestows And The Right Of Being The Medium Of Favor
========================================================================================================

It has come in the traditions of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) that
he said:

“You must reward the one who does good to you. If you are not able to do
that you must at least pray for that person till you are sure you have
recompensed that person for the good he has done.”

These two rights are there from our master, His Eminence, the Master of
the Time (aj) because all the favors and benefits that reach human
beings are due to the blessings of the being of the Imam of that time.
We read in Ziarat Jamia regarding the Imams (as) that: “And the patron
of the favors…”

Also in Kafi it is mentioned that he said: “The Almighty Allah created
us and made our creation good. And he shaped us in a goodly shape. And
he made us His eyes among His servants (so that we can witness their
deeds and behavior) and He made us His speaking tongue and He made us
His hand of mercy and beneficence spread over the head of His servants
and He made us His face (so that through us attention may be called to
Him). And He made us a gate (so that it may be a proof for the people
for His knowledge, faith and obedience). And a treasure (of His
knowledge, recognition and mercy) in His heavens and the earth.

The trees fructify and fruits grow by our Barakat and the streams flow
and the rain descends and plants grow from the earth. And through our
worship is Allah worshipped. And if we had not been there, the Almighty
Allah would not have been worshipped.”[^1]

And in Kharaij it is narrated from His Eminence, Sadiq (as) that he
said:

“O Dawood, if we had not been there, neither the streams would have
issued forth nor the fruits have grown, no the trees would have become
green.”[^2]

And in Kafi there is a famous tradition of His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Imam
Muhammad Baqir (as) that he said:

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “The Almighty Allah created Adam
(as) and left the earth for him. Thus whatever from it is was for Adam
it is for the Messenger of Allah. And whatever is for the Messenger of
Allah it is for the Imams of the Progeny of Muhammad.”[^3]

In another tradition it has come that, “the earth and whatever is in it
belongs to Allah, the Almighty, His Messenger and us. Thus whoever gets
anything from it, must practice piety and pay the share of Almighty
Allah, (Khums, Zakat and religious tax) and must do good towards his
brothers in faith and if he doesn’t do it he has dissociated from Allah,
His Messenger and us (family of the Prophet).”[^4]

And Darus Salam has quoted Basairud Darajaat from Abu Hamza that:The
fourth Imam, ‘Ali bin al-Husain (as) said to Abu Hamza:

“O Abu Hamza, do not sleep before the rising of the Sun, as it is not
good for you. Indeed, at that time the Almighty Allah distributes the
sustenance of the people and He distributes it through our hands.”

[^1]: Usul al-Kafi; Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini; Vol. 1/144

[^2]: Al-Kharaij; Saeed bin Hibtullah Rawandi

[^3]: Usul al-Kafi; Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini; Vol. 1/409

[^4]: Usul al-Kafi; Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini; Vol. 1/408


