Fifth: The Right Of The Father Upon His Son
===========================================

The Shias were created from the leftover clay that made the family of
revelation just as the son is created from his father. A tradition of
His Eminence, Reza (as) is mentioned in Kafi that he remarked: “The Imam
is a caring friend and a kind father.”[^1]

And it is narrated from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) that he said:
“I and ‘Ali are the fathers of this nation.”

It is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) that he said:

“The Almighty Allah created us from Illiyeen and created our souls from
its upper layer and He created the souls of our Shias from the Illiyeen
and their bodies from its lower portion. There is relationship and
proximity between us and them in every aspect and their hearts are eager
for us.”[^2]

And it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) that he
said:

“Indeed, the Almighty Allah created us from the Aale Illiyeen and
created the hearts of our Shias from the water of our creation and their
bodies from its lower most. Thus their hearts are devoted to us because
they are created from the same material with which we are created.”[^3]

In Ikmaluddin it is narrated from Umar bin Salih as-Sabiri that he said:

Muhammad Ibn Ajlaan narrates from Abu Abdillah (as), “When the Qa’im
rises, he will call people to Islam anew and will guide them to an order
that is worn out and the masses have led astray from it. The Qa’im has
been named the Mahdi because he will lead to an order that is led astray
from and he is named al- Qa’im for his rise with the Truth.”[^4]

In Bihar it is quoted from Amali of Shaykh Tusi from the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) that he said:

“I am a tree, Fatima is the branch, ‘Ali is the graft and Hasan and
Husain are the fruits and their friends from this nation of mine are the
leaves of this tree.”[^5]

Indeed, there are a large number of traditions regarding this matter and
they are mentioned in Kafi, Burhan and other books but we have refrained
from quoting more of them to avoid undue prolongation of our discussion
and to save our readers from undue hardships. As we all know an
indication is sufficient for the wise. And how beautifully the poet
says:

“And how tall is that tree that grew in the Paradise.

Such that no other tree is like that in Paradise.

Muhammad Mustafa is its root and Fatima its branch.

Then is its graft, that is the Chief and master of men, ‘Ali.

And those two Hashemites, the grandsons of the Prophet, the fruits of
that tree.

And the Shias are its leaves that are attached around the fruits. This
is the statement of the Messenger of Allah that the traditionists have
related through authentic chains of narrators in the corpus of hadith.”

Through their (Ahle Bayt’s) love I am hopeful of salvation on the Day of
Judgment. And success with the group that is the best of groups.

[^1]: Usul al-Kafi; Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini; Vol. 1/200

[^2]: Usul al-Kafi; Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini; Vol. 1/389

[^3]: Usul al-Kafi; Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini; Vol. 1/390

[^4]: Kamaluddin; Shaykh Saduq; Vol. 2/345

[^5]: Amali; Shaykh at-Taifa Abi Ja’far Muhammad bin Hasan Tusi


