Sixth: The Right Of The Master Over His Servants And Protégés
=============================================================

It is mentioned in Ziarat Jamia regarding the Holy Imams (as): “And the
chiefs of the guardianship…”

In a tradition from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) narrated through
Sunni channels it is reported that he said:

“We the sons of Abdul Muttalib are the leaders of the folks of Paradise,
I and ‘Ali and Ja’far and Hasan and Husain and Mahdi (aj).”

I say: The matter of the leadership and mastership of the Holy Imams
(as) with regard to us is proved for us and the meaning of the
leadership of those great personalities denotes: They are having more
authority on us in all matters than us, just the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النَّبِيُّ أَوْلَىٰ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْ أَنْفُسِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The Prophet has a greater claim on the faithful than they have on
themselves.” (Qur’an, Surah Ahzab 33:6)***

And in Kifayatul Athar it is narrated from Imam Husain bin ‘Ali (as)
that he said:

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said to ‘Ali (as): “I have a greater
claim on the faithful than they have on themselves, after that you ‘Ali
are having greater claim on the believers than they have on themselves.
Then after you it is Hasan, who has a greater claim on the believers
than they have on themselves. Then after him Husain has a greater claim
on the believers than they have on themselves. Then after him ‘Ali has a
greater claim on the believers than they have on themselves. Then after
him Muhammad has a greater claim on the believers than they have on
themselves.

Then after him Ja’far has a greater claim on the believers than they
have on themselves. Then after him Moosa has a greater claim on the
believers than they have on themselves. Then after him ‘Ali has a
greater claim on the believers than they have on themselves. Then after
him Muhammad has a greater claim on the believers than they have on
themselves. Then after him ‘Ali has a greater claim on the believers
than they have on themselves.

Then after him Hasan has a greater claim on the believers than they have
on themselves. And Hujjat Ibnul Hasan has a greater claim on the
believers than they have on themselves. They are the righteous Imams and
they are with the truth and the truth is with them.”[^1]

A somewhat similar thing is said in Kafi and Kamaluddin.

And it is narrated from His Eminence, Abul Hasan ar-Reza (as) that he
said:

“People are our slaves in obedience.”[^2]

Seventh: Right of the teacher on the pupil

That the Master of the Time (aj) and his purified forefathers are those
who are well versed in knowledge is mentioned in some traditions from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as). And also Allah, the Mighty and the High has also
ordered that people may ask the family of revelation whatever they want,
as they are the people of remembrance (Ahle Zikr):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاسْأَلُوا أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So ask the people of remembrance if you do not know.” (Surah Anbiya
21:7)***

Eighth: Right of the Imam on the followers

In Kafi it is narrated from Abu Hamza through his own chain of narrators
that:

I asked His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) what is the right of the
Imam on the people? He replied: “It is his right that they must hear
what he says and obey him.”

And in a sermon of Amirul Momineen (as) recorded in Raudatul Kafi it is
mentioned as follows:

“So to say, Allah, the Mighty and the High has given me a right upon you
and made me your Wali al-Amr (person of authority) and the Almighty
Allah, may His remembrance be exalted, has given me a position that is
higher than yours. So much so that He said: Thus the most important of
the rights made obligatory by Allah are those of the ruler and leader on
the subjects (followers).”[^3]

These were some of the rights of the Master of the Time (aj) on the
people and some of them will be explained to you in the coming chapters,
Insha Allah Taala.

[^1]: Kifayatul Athar/311, Usul al-Kafi; Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini;
Vol. 1/187, Kamaluddin; Shaykh Saduq; Vol. 1/270

[^2]: Usul al-Kafi; Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini; Vol. 1/187

[^3]: Rauda Kafi; Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini; Pg. 35


