About the Author
================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**In the name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful**

Praise be to Allah the Lord of the worlds and may Allah bless our chief
and our prophet, Muhammad and his pure and chaste progeny till the day
of Qiyamat.

The author was born in the 1301 year of the Hijra in Isfahan and he
passed away in the same town in 1348 A.H. at the age of 47 years. In
spite of such a brief life he has left behind a valuable treasure of
knowledge which is having such perfection and excellence that it could
only be as a result of his sincerity and devotion. He was in fact
extremely devoted to the family of the Prophet, especially the Awaited
Imam, al-Hujjat Ibnil Hasan al- Askari (aj). He has penned many
treatises and books on the subject of the duties of the believers during
the period of occultation, and the book in your hand is considered to be
the most important work on this subject.

In the year 1330 A.H. the author traveled to the Holy Mecca to perform
the Hajj. At that time there was a terrible epidemic of plague in Mecca
and innumerable Hajis and pilgrims succumbed to it. The author made a
vow that if he reaches his hometown safely he would write this book.
Upon returning home he fulfilled his vow.

The late author has stated in his preface about his deep longing to see
the Imam of the time which was fulfilled when he saw Imam Mahdi (aj) in
his dream who directed him to write this books and even suggested the
title.

The present book is divided into eight parts like the eight gates of
Paradise. It was first published by the efforts of his sons in 1369 A.H.
in Isfahan. It was published in two volume in 1398 A.H.


