The Letter H’a (H’)
===================

1. His Eminence’s Help (H’imayat) To Islam
------------------------------------------

The help of that great personality to protect the sanctity of Islam is
the matter that refers to *Jihad* and battle of His Eminence. In *Bihar*
it is related from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) quoted by Shaykh
Nomani that the fifth Imam said:

“As if I can see your religion continuously facing weakness and
destruction. It would be struggling in its own blood and no one would be
able to restore it to you except a man from us, Ahle Bayt.”[^1]

The complete tradition shall come in the topic of the generosity of His
Eminence and the expounding of the sciences, if Allah the Almighty
wills.

2. H’arb (War) With Opponents
-----------------------------

The difference between battle and *Jihad* is that *Jihad* is against
disbelievers, however ‘battle’ is general for those who recite the
testimony of Islam just as the verse with regard to fighting:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا جَزَاءُ الَّذِينَ يُحَارِبُونَ اللَّهَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The punishment of those who wage war against Allah…” (Qur’an, Surah
Maidah 5:33)***

And others prove this point.

In any case that which supports this statement is a tradition in *Bihar*
taken from Nomani from his chains from Fuzail that he said:

I heard from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Imam Sadiq (as) that he said:
“Indeed, when our Qaim rises up he would face more problems from the
people than the Holy Prophet (S) had faced from the people of Ignorance.
I asked: How? He replied: “The Holy Prophet (S) was sent to the people
while they worshipped stone, wood and logs carved into idols. However
our Qaim will arise and come to the people while they all would be
interpreting the Book of Allah and arguing with him.”[^2]

In another tradition it is narrated from the same Imam that he said:

“They would interpret the Book of Allah against His Eminence and on the
basis of its sources make war upon His Eminence.”[^3]

The same Imam has also stated:

“There are thirteen cities and tribes against whom the Qaim (aj) will
make war and they would also fight against His Eminence. The people of
Mecca, the people of Medina, the Syrians, the Umayyads, the Basrans, the
Damascenes, the Kurds, the Bedouins, the Zubba, the Ghina, the Bahili,
the Azds and the people of Rayy.”[^4]

In *Kamaluddin* it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as)
that he said:

“The master of this affair has a similarity to Moosa, to Isa, to Yusuf
and Muhammad (S).”

As for the similarity to Moosa: It is being fearful and watchful.

And as for Isa, it is that it would be said about him what was said
about Isa.

And as for Yusuf it is the prison and the occultation.

And as for Muhammad (S) it is rising with the sword and he will follow
the style of His Eminence and expound his traditions. At that time he
would carry his sword in his right hand for eight months and
continuously go on eliminating his enemies till the Almighty Allah is
satisfied.”

Abu Baseer says that he asked, “How do we know that the Almighty Allah
is satisfied?”

He replied, “The Almighty Allah will instill mercy into his heart.”[^5]

In the tradition of Mufaddal from His Eminence, Sadiq (as) it is
narrated that he said:

“Hasani is that elegant youth who will emerge from Dailam and with an
eloquent power of speech that he has, he shall plead: ‘O Progeny of
Muhammad! Please harken to call of the distressed ones.’ And this call
will be issued from the *Zari* (perhaps the reference is to the Kaaba).
Then divine treasures hidden in Taliqaan will harken to his call. These
will not be treasures of gold and silver, but they will be strong men
mounted on crimson horses and carrying weapons and slaying the
oppressors they will reach Kufa, by this time most of the areas will be
cleaned up and it will be a place of refuge for them.

Then the news of the reappearance of Mahdi (aj) will reach Sayyid Hasani
and his companions. His companions shall ask: O son of the Prophet, who
is this gentleman that has entered our boundaries? He will reply: “Come
on, lets go and see who it is”, while by Allah, Sayyid Hasani would know
that it is Mahdi, and he shall say that, only so that they may recognize
the companions of His Eminence. Then Hasani shall come out till he would
reach to the Mahdi (aj). Then he shall say: If you are the Mahdi of Aale
Muhammad, where is the staff of your grandfather, the Prophet, his
finger ring, his dress and coat of armor *(Fazil)?* Where is *(Sahaab*)
his turban, *Yarbu* (his horse), *Ghazba* (his camel), *Duldul* his
horse, *Yafoor* his donkey and the original horse of the Messenger of
Allah (S), *Buraq* and the *Mushaf* (scroll) of Amirul Momineen (as)?

Then His Eminence will show him all these things. He would take up the
staff of the Prophet and hit it upon a hard stone, it would instantly
produce sparks. His aim by this is to show the greatness and excellence
of Mahdi (aj) to his companions so that they pledge allegiance to him.

Then Sayyid Hasani would remark, “God is the Greatest (Allaahu Akbar), O
son of the Prophet, give me your hand so that I may pledge allegiance to
you. Mahdi (aj) will stretch out his hand. Sayyid Hasani and his
companions will pay allegiance to him. But 40000 persons having the
scroll, who will be known as Zaidiyyah, will not pay allegiance, saying:
This is great magic.

The armies shall confront each other. Mahdi (aj) will come out towards
the deviated group and dispense good counsel to them, inviting them
towards himself, but they would persist in their infidelity and
rebellion. His Eminence will order that they all be killed and they
shall be put to the sword.

Then Mahdi (aj) will say to his companions: Do not take their Qur’ans,
leave it as it will cause them despair just as they have changed and
tampered it and they have not acted according to it.”[^6]

There are numerous reports concerning this matter, some of which shall
be quoted in the topic of the elimination of the infidels, if Allah, the
Almighty wills.

3. Hajj Of His Eminence
-----------------------

Shaykh Sadooq has reported in *Kamaluddin* through a correct chain of
narrators from Muhammad bin Uthman al-Amari that he said:

“The master of this affair shall perform the Hajj rituals every year.
Thus he shall see the people and recognize them and they shall (also)
see him but will not recognize him.”[^7]

I say: Among the traditions that prove the recommended nature of praying
for Hajj pilgrims is a tradition quoted from His Eminence, Sadiq (as) in
*Faqih*that he said:

“When it is the time for the overnight halt at Arafat the Almighty Allah
sends two angels to search the faces of the people. So when they do not
find anyone having habituated himself to Hajj, one of them tells the
other: In what condition is such and such person? The other angel
replies: Allah knows better. Then he says: O God! If poverty prevents
him from coming, make him self sufficient. And if he is having debts,
please liquidate them for him. If some illness has prevented this person
from attending, give him cure. And if he has departed from the world,
forgive and have mercy on him.”[^8]

This *hadith* proves that it is recommended to pray for one who has
habituated himself to perform the Hajj regularly every year as is very
much clear. And this matter shall be further elaborated in the topic of
the similarity of His Eminence to His Eminence, Khizr, if Allah, the
Almighty wills.

4. Survival And Life Of The Earth Due To The Presence Of His Eminence
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Shaykh Sadooq has mentioned in *Kamaluddin* under the explanation of the
following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ يُحْيِي الْأَرْضَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Know that Allah gives life to the earth after its death…” (Qur’an,
Surah Hadid 57:17)***

that His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) said:

It means that the Almighty Allah will reform the earth for the Qaim of
Aale Muhammad (S), that is after the injustice and oppression of the
inhabitants of the earth.

“And truly We showed him Our signs”

For the Qaim of Aale Muhammad.

“…they may understand…”[^9]

His Eminence, Abu Ibrahim, Moosa bin Ja’far (as) is reported to have
said regarding the verse:

“…gives life to the earth after its death…”

“Not through rain, rather the Almighty Allah will raise a man, then the
earth shall be revived due to the establishment and revival of justice
and the application of a single penal law in it will be more beneficial
than forty days of rain.”[^10]

In *Jawahir* it is reported from Sudair that he said:

His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) said:

“The enforcement of one act of the penal law on the earth is more
purifying than forty days of rain.”[^11]

In *Al-Muhajja* it is narrated from Halabi that His Eminence, Abu
Abdillah Sadiq was asked about the explanation of the verse:

“Know that Allah gives life to the earth after its death…”

He replied: “It means through justice after injustice and
oppression.”[^12]

5. Forbearance Of His Eminence
------------------------------

We shall discuss this under the topic of the manners and good behavior
of His Eminence, if Allah wills.

6. Revival (From Dead) Of Some Divine Saints For The Reappearance Of His Eminence
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This will be discussed, if Allah the Almighty wills, under the topic of
the benefits of the reappearance of His Eminence.

7. Love And Regard Of His Eminence For Us
-----------------------------------------

From the discussion that has passed regarding the kindness of His
Eminence towards us, the love and regard of His Eminence is also clear,
because kindness is the fruit of love. Just as it has been mentioned in
the third part about the right of the father over the son and the
attending of funeral of our dead. Anyway, all the favors of His Eminence
towards us are as a result of his love for us, if Allah the Almighty
wills.

However we must not overlook one point and it is that his love for us is
not except from the aspect of our faith and obedience to the Almighty
Allah. So if you wish to obtain the love of that honorable personality,
it is necessary for you to obey the Almighty Allah. And it should not be
that by disobeying Allah you cause pain to him and display enmity
towards him. And thus you may be of those about whom the Almighty Allah
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُؤْذُونَ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ لَعَنَهُمُ اللَّهُ فِي
الدُّنْيَا وَالْآخِرَةِ وَأَعَدَّ لَهُمْ عَذَابًا مُهِينًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely (as for) those who speak evil things of Allah and His
Apostle, Allah has cursed them in this world and the hereafter, and He
has prepared for them a chastisement bringing disgrace.” (Qur’an, Surah
Ahzab 33:57)***

In *Darus Salaam* it is narrated from Imam Baqir (as) that he told Jabir
Jofi:

“A person does not achieve proximity to God except through His
obedience. There is no distancing from the fire (of Hell) by us. Indeed
one who is obedient to Allah will be our friend and follower. And
whoever disobeys Allah, is our enemy. Our *Wilayat* cannot be achieved
except by good deeds and keeping away from sins.”

There are numerous traditions on this topic. Indeed, just as the
obedience of God becomes a cause of love in the same way His
disobedience is the factor for its decline, as explained by His
Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) in *Kafi*:

Amirul Momineen (as) said: “There is no person except that there are
forty shields over him till he commits 40 deadly sins. Thus when he
commits forty major sins the shields are removed from over him. Then the
Almighty Allah reveals to the angels to shade that person by their
wings. So the angels begin to cover him with their wings. Then he does
not leave a single sinful act but that he commits it. So much so that he
even begins to boast about his sins to people and talks openly about
them. So the angels say: O our Lord, this servant of Yours has not
omitted a single act of sin and we are very much ashamed of what he has
done. So the Almighty Allah reveals upon the angels to remove their
wings from him. When this happens this person begins to have enmity
towards us, Ahle Bayt.”[^13]

8. His Eminence Will Judge With Truth
-------------------------------------

In *Kamaluddin* it is narrated through the author’s chain of narrators
from Aban bin Taghlib that he said:

His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) said: “Three hundred and thirteen
persons will come to your Masjid – that is the Masjid of Mecca. The
people of Mecca will recognize that they are not the natives of Mecca.
All of them shall be carrying swords engraved with a *Kalima* (word)
from which will issue a thousand Kalimas (words). Then the Almighty
Allah shall send a breeze that calls out in every valley, “This is
Mahdi, who shall judge like Prophet Dawood and Sulaiman and he shall not
need any testimony.”[^14]

The same book has quoted the saying of Abu Abdillah Ja’far as-Sadiq (as)
that he said:

“When the Qaim (aj) reappears, there will be a sign for every person by
which he would recognize whether he is righteous or evil-doer. And in it
is the sign for those who possess reason and it is the right path.”[^15]

In *Bihar* it is quoted from the *Ghaibat* of Sayyid Ali bin Abdul Hamid
from his chain of authorities from Abu Baseer from Imam Abu Ja’far Baqir
(as) that he said:

“Imam Qaim (aj) will judge a case according to the verdict of His
Eminence, Adam (as) and some of his companions will oppose him. So he
would summon them and strike off their necks. Then he would judge the
second case according to Prophet Dawood (as). Some people will oppose it
and they shall also be put to death. Then he will judge the third case
according to the judgment of Prophet Ibrahim (as) and again some will
oppose and they shall also be eliminated. After that he will decide the
fourth case according to the law of Prophet Muhammad (S) and now there
will not be anyone who opposes him.”[^16]

9. The Judgment Of His Eminence From Unseen
-------------------------------------------

That His Eminence (aj) will issue verdicts and pass judgment on the
basis of his hidden knowledge is a fact stated in traditions. As
mentioned in *Biharul Anwar* from the book of Nomani quoting His
Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) that he said:

“In the same way that the person will be standing before His Eminence,
Qaim (aj) and His Eminence, will be enjoining good and forbidding evil.
Suddenly he would order that he should be brought back to him. They will
bring him back to His Eminence. His Eminence will order his execution.
Then there would be no one in the whole world but that he would be
afraid of His Eminence.”[^17]

In *Irshad al-Qulub* of Dailami it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu
Abdillah Sadiq (as) that he said:

“When the Qaim of Aale Muhammad arises, he will judge between the people
according to the judgment of His Eminence, Dawood. He will not need
testimonies or evidence. The Almighty Allah will inspire him and then he
will judge according to his knowledge. He will inform the peoples about
what they conceal in themselves and he will distinguish his friends from
the enemies. The Almighty Allah says:

“Surely in this are signs for those who examine. And surely it is on a
road that still abides.”[^18]

It is related from Abdullah bin Mughaira that he said:

“When the Qaim reappears, he will pick up 500 persons from the Quraish
and have them executed. Then he will in the same way pick 500 people of
non-Quraishite origin and also have them executed. He will repeat this
procedure six times. The narrator says: I asked: Will their number be
such at that time?”

He replied: Yes, by himself and his followers.[^19]

It is quoted from His Eminence, Imam Sadiq (as) that he said:

“When the Qaim (aj) rises up he will demolish the Masjidul Haraam upto
its original construction and restore the *Maqaam-e-Ibrahim* to its
prior location. And he will cut off the hand of Bani Shaybah and hang it
upon the Kaaba and on it write: These are the thieves of the
Kaaba.”[^20]

I say: We have already discussed this matter in the forgone pages and if
Allah, the High wills, we shall again elaborate upon it in the topic of
the elimination of the infidels and the destruction of the foundations
of infidelity and polytheism.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 352, Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 125

[^2]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 362

[^3]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 363

[^4]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 363

[^5]: Kamaluddin; Vol. 1, Pg. 329

[^6]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 53, Pg. 15

[^7]: Kamaluddin; Vol. 2, Pg. 440

[^8]: Man Laa Yahzarul Faqih, Vol. 2, Pg. 12

[^9]: Kamaluddin; Vol. 2, Pg. 668

[^10]: Al-Muhajja, Pg. 752

[^11]: The original tradition is mentioned in Kafi, Vol. 7, Pg. 174

[^12]: Al-Muhajja, Pg. 753

[^13]: Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 279

[^14]: Kamaluddin; Vol. 2, Pg. 671

[^15]: Kamaluddin; Vol. 2, Pg. 671

[^16]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 389

[^17]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 355

[^18]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 339

[^19]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 338

[^20]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 338


