The Letter Kha (Kh)
===================

1. Khulq (Manners) Of His Eminence
----------------------------------

It is mentioned in *Bihar*, quoting from Nomani through his own chain of
authorities from Abu Waail that he said: Amirul Momineen (as) glanced at
Husain (as) and said:

“This son of mine is a liege, just as the Messenger of Allah (S) named
him a liege. Allah will bring from his progeny a man by the name of your
Apostle, who will be similar to him in his creation and in his
character. He will rise in a time of oblivion of the people, when the
truth will have died and perversion will be manifest.[^1] By Allah, if
he does not rise, his neck will be severed. The dwellers of the heavens
and its inhabitants will rejoice his rise. He is a man of broad forehead
and a high nose.”[^2]

It is narrated through Sunni authorities that the Messenger of Allah (S)
is reported to have said:

“Even if a single day remains from the tenure of the world, the Almighty
Allah shall raise a person whose name is same as mine and whose manners
and appearance are like mine.”

We can also refer to those traditions that have been mentioned by us in
the topic of elegance of His Eminence.

*Khulq* (Manners): According to the dictionary meaning it refers to
habits and disposition. On the basis of this it could be said that His
Eminence would resemble the Holy Prophet (S) in general behavior and
good qualities and habits, especially in interpersonal relationships.
This is further supported by the quotation of the author of *Kashful
Ghumma*, Muhammad bin Yusuf Shami in *Kifayatut Talib* in which, after
this tradition, he says:

“The statement of the Messenger of Allah (S) that his manners and habits
are like mine, is the best metaphor of the revenge of Mahdi (aj) from
the disbelievers just as the Holy Prophet (S) had been such that the
Almighty Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّكَ لَعَلَىٰ خُلُقٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And most surely you conform (yourself) to sublime morality.”
(Qur’an, Surah Qalam 68:4)***

He further adds: The humble and worthless servant of Allah, Ali bin Isa
(may Allah have mercy on him) says:

That the statement is the best metaphor, is an occasion of surprise. It
is not known how the word *‘Khulq’* is construed to be only concerned
with taking revenge from the infidels while it is well known that the
manners of the Holy Prophet (S) included all the general aspects of
behavior, that is kindness, knowledge, forbearance and courage…from the
mannerisms that are mentioned at the beginning of this book, it is more
surprising that he has brought the evidence of the verse for his own
opinion.[^3]

2. Khauf (Fear) Of His Eminence
-------------------------------

In *Kafi* it is narrated from the compiler’s own chain of authorities
that:

I heard Imam Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) saying: “There is an occultation
for the Qaim before his reappearance.” I asked: “Why is it so?” He
replied: “He is fearful.” And he pointed towards his belly, implying
that the Qaim fears for his life.[^4]

In another *hadith* it is narrated from Zurarah that he said:

I heard His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) say: “For that young man
before his uprising there will be an occultation.” I asked: “Why?” He
replied: “He is fearful.” And he gestured towards his belly. Then he
said: “O Zurarah; and he is that awaited one and he is the one in whose
birth they shall doubt. Thus some will say: His father died heirless and
some will say: He was in the womb of his mother when his father died.
Some others will allege that he was born two years before the passing
away of his father. And he is the Awaited one; but the Almighty Allah
likes to test the Shias. Thus it is the time when the doubts and
suspicions of the people of falsehood will begin.”

Zurarah says: I asked: “If I am able to live till that period, what
action I should perform?”

He replied: “O Zurarah if you live till that time you must recite the
following supplication:

‘O Allah introduce Yourself to me. For if You don’t introduce Yourself
to me I will not recognize Your Prophet. O Allah introduce Your
Messenger to me for if You don’t introduce Your Messenger to me I will
not recognize Your Proof. O Allah introduce Your proof to me for if You
don’t introduce Your proof to me I will deviate in my religion.’”[^5]

I say: In another tradition this supplication is as follows:

“O Allah, introduce Yourself to me; for if You do not introduce Yourself
to me I shall not recognize You. O Allah, introduce Your Prophet to me;
for if You do not introduce Your Prophet to me I will not recognize him.
O Allah, introduce Your Proof to me; for if You do not introduce Your
Proof to me I shall deviate in my religion.”[^6]

In *Kafi,* in a sermon, Amirul Momineen (as) is reported to have said:

“And You O Lord, do not leave Your earth without Proof over the
creatures whether he be apparent and not obeyed or fearful and unknown,
so that Your Proof is not invalidated and Your friends are not led
astray from guidance.”[^7]

In Part Two it has already passed that Imam Moosa bin Ja’far (as) said:

“He is my fifth descendant. He shall have an occultation which shall be
prolonged due the risk to his life.”

In *Kamaluddin* it is narrated from the author’s own chain of
authorities from His Eminence, the Chief of those who prostrate, the
fourth Imam (as) that he said:

“In His Eminence, Qaim (aj) are present similarities to seven prophets.
The practice of our father, Adam, the practice of Ibrahim, the practice
of Moosa, the practice of Isa, the practice of Ayyub and the practice of
Muhammad (S). As for the practice of Adam and Nuh (as) it is a long
life. As for the similarity with Prophet Ibrahim (as) it is a concealed
birth and being away from the people. And from Moosa it is the fear and
occultation. And from Isa is that he will have discord regarding him.
With Ayyub (as) he shares the occurrence of triumph after difficulties.
And from Muhammad (S) he will share the aspect of advent and armed
uprising.”[^8]

In the same book it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as)
that he said:

“In the Master of this affair are present, practices *(Sunnah)* of four
prophets: Moosa, Isa, Yusuf and Muhammad (S). From Moosa is being
fearful for his life and his occultation, from Yusuf is the
imprisonment, from Isa it is that it would be said: He is dead, while it
would not be so. And as for the similarity with Muhammad (S) it will be
his advent and rising up with the sword.”[^9]

Again the same book, *Kamaluddin* quotes a statement of His Eminence,
Sadiq (as) from his father (as) that he said:

“When Qaim (aj) rises up he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَفَرَرْتُ مِنْكُمْ لَمَّا خِفْتُكُمْ فَوَهَبَ لِي رَبِّي حُكْمًا
وَجَعَلَنِي مِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So I fled from you when I feared you, then my Lord granted me wisdom
and made me of the apostles…” (Qur’an, Surah Shuara 26:21)*** [^10]

And also in this book we have the author’s own chain of narrators
reporting from Zurarah that he heard: His Eminence, Sadiq, Ja’far bin
Muhammad (as) say:

“For Qaim (aj) before his uprising there will be an occultation.” I
asked: “May I be your ransom, why is it so?” He replied: “He shall fear
(for his life),” so saying the Imam gestured towards his belly and
neck.[^11]

In *al-Muhajja* it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said
under the exegesis of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنْكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ
قَبْلِهِمْ وَلَيُمَكِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ دِينَهُمُ الَّذِي ارْتَضَىٰ لَهُمْ
وَلَيُبَدِّلَنَّهُمْ مِنْ بَعْدِ خَوْفِهِمْ أَمْنًا ۚ يَعْبُدُونَنِي
لَا يُشْرِكُونَ بِي شَيْئًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good that He
will most certainly make them rulers in the earth as He made rulers
those before them, and that He will most certainly establish for them
their religion which He has chosen for them, and that He will most
certainly, after their fear, give them security in exchange; they shall
serve Me, not associating aught with Me.” (Qur’an, Surah Noor 24:55)***

“That is the Qaim and his companions.”[^12]

3. Khilafat (Caliphate) Of His Eminence Over The Muslims
--------------------------------------------------------

We have already mentioned some points in Part Three that prove this
matter and now let us see the following tradition of the Messenger of
Allah (S) narrated through Sunni authorities quoted in *Kifayatul
Athar:*

“After me there would be twelve caliphs, nine of whom shall be from the
descendants of Husain, the ninth of whom shall be their Qaim and Mahdi.
So blessed be his friends and woe be upon his enemies.”[^13]

In the same book it is mentioned that His Eminence said:

“The Hour shall not be established till the one who will rise up with
the truth from among us does not appear. And that is the time when
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime will give the permission. Thus whosoever
follows him will get salvation and whosoever denies him will be
destroyed. Thus for the sake of Allah, for the sake of Allah, O people,
go to him even if on ice and snow. Because he is the Caliph of
Allah.”[^14]

Another traditional report supporting this, is quoted in *Biharul Anwar*
on the authority of *Kashful Ghumma* quoting Sunni narrators from the
Messenger of Allah (S) that he said:

“Mahdi will reappear having a cloud that shall be shading him; upon
which a caller would be calling: This Mahdi is the Caliph of Allah.
Follow him.”[^15]

Another tradition of the Holy Prophet (S) is also narrated from Sunni
chain of narrators that says:

“My Ummah will enjoy a leisure in the time of the Mahdi (aj) the like of
which they have never enjoyed. The heavens will shower over them
bountifully and the earth will not leave any vegetation but to bring it
forth.”[^16]

4. Perfection Of The Sciences For Him
-------------------------------------

In the tradition of Kumayl in *Darus Salaam* it is mentioned that Amirul
Momineen (as) said:

“O Kumayl, there is no knowledge but that I am its initiator and there
is nothing but that the Qaim will take it to its end.”[^17]

I say: It could either imply knowledge according to the first method of
the tradition or it could imply all the perfections and good manners,
and sciences and recognition of truth that all the Imams (as) have
displayed; some of them during their own times for reform. However His
Eminence, Qaim (aj) will display all of them, thus all the
excellences…will become apparent by his reappearance.

O Allah, hasten the reappearance of Your *Wali* and ease his advent and
make us from his companions and Shias

Supporting this matter is a tradition that Shaykh Sadooq has narrated
from his respected father (as):

Imam al-Sadiq (as) narrates from his forefathers that the Messenger of
Allah (S) said, “Surely Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, chose Friday
from the days, the month of Ramadan from the months, the Night of Power
(ليلة القدر) from the nights, chose me from all the Prophets and chose
Ali (as) from me. He granted him (Ali) superiority over all the
successors. From Ali (as) He chose Hasan (as) and Husain (as) and from
Husain (as), He chose the successors from his descendants. They
(descendants) will dispel the distortion of the exaggerators (غالين)
from the Qur’an, the plagiarism of the liars and the interpretation of
the deviated ones. The ninth of them is their Qaim (aj) and he is their
apparent and their concealed.”[^18]

In *Kafi* it is mentioned under the tradition of a monk who became a
Muslim at the hands of our master, His Eminence, Kazim (as):

Thus the monk asked: I have been informed about eight letters[^19] that
are revealed and four of them have become apparent and the remaining
four still remain in the space. For whom are these four letters that
remain in the space are revealed? And who would interpret them?

The Imam replied:

“He is our Qaim. Thus the Almighty Allah will reveal them upon him, and
he will interpret them. And upon him shall be revealed things that are
not revealed upon the truthful ones, the messengers and the guided
ones.”[^20]

Matter pertaining to this topic shall again be presented under the
discussion of ‘exposition of sciences’, if Allah wills.

5. Rising Up Of His Eminence, With The Sword After His Reappearance
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Indeed it is obligatory upon His Eminence, to rise up with the sword in
an armed uprising, may our souls be sacrificed for him for the sake of
obeying the command of Allah and to ward off his enemies and protect
himself as you have seen in the discussion of the manners of His
Eminence explained in the tradition of Amirul Momineen (as) that if he
does not rise up they would assassinate him. More details shall be
presented in the traditional reports about the occultation and the calls
of His Eminence, if Allah wills.

[^1]: Since reappearance is general, from rising up with the sword etc.,
His Eminence has mentioned an aspect of the rising of Qaim (aj) that in
order not to be killed and to protect his self he will be impelled to
rise up with the sword and if not the enemies of His Eminence will put
him to death, Allah, the Mighty and the High is all-knowing. (The
Author)

[^2]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 39

[^3]: Kifayatut Talib, Pg. 520

[^4]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 337

[^5]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 337

[^6]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 53, Pg. 187

[^7]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 339

[^8]: Kamaluddin; Vol. 1, Pg. 322

[^9]: Kamaluddin; Vol. 1, Pg. 326

[^10]: Kamaluddin; Vol. 1, Pg. 328

[^11]: Kamaluddin; Vol. 2, Pg. 346

[^12]: Al-Muhajja, Pg. 742

[^13]: Kifayatul Athar, Pg. 292

[^14]: Ibid. Pg. 301

[^15]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 81

[^16]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 83

[^17]: Darus Salaam

[^18]: Kamaluddin; Vol. 1, Pg. 281

[^19]: The ‘letter’ here is in the meaning of ‘sentence’ just as in the
case of Azaan and Iqamah it is narrated about the Imams that they
recited ‘three or four letters’ and the ‘four letter’ mentioned in this
tradition – in the tradition of Kafi – are as follows: ‘There is no god
except Allah, the One, He has no partner. Second: Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah, Third: We are the Ahle Bayt (as) Fourth: Our Shias
are from us and we are from the Messenger of Allah and the Messenger of
Allah is from Allah.

[^20]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 483


