The Letter Ra (R)
=================

1. Rabat (Vigil)
----------------

We shall present the suitable discussion under the letter ‘M’ in the
topic of “vigil in the way of Allah.”

2. Rahat (Comfort) For The Creatures By The Reappearance And Government Of His Eminence
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In *Biharul Anwar* it is narrated from Ibne Abbas regarding the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists may be averse.” (Qur’an, Surah Taubah 9:33)***

That he said:

He said, “By Allah, its realization has not come yet.” I asked, “May I
be your ransom, when will it be realized?” He said, “When the Qaim
rises, God willing. When the Qaim rises, there will be no disbeliever or
a polytheist but he will dislike his rise. Even if there will be a
disbeliever or a polytheist inside a rock, the rock will call out, ‘O,
believer, there is a disbeliever or a polytheist inside me, so kill
him.’ So Allah brings the disbeliever to him, and he kills him.”[^1]

Also in *Biharul Anwar,* Amirul Momineen (as) has described the
qualities of His Eminence, as follows:

“During his government the beasts shall make peace and the earth shall
throw up its treasures and sky shall rain down its blessings.”[^2]

In the same book it is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that he said:

“The Mahdi is a man from my progeny. His color is an Arabic color and
his body is an Israelite body. There is a mole on his right cheek, like
a glittering star. He will fill the earth with equity and justice as it
will be full of oppression. The dwellers of the heavens and the earth
and birds of the sky will be happy in his rule.”[^3]

In another tradition it is narrated from His Eminence that he said:

“The Mahdi will rise while there will be a cloud over his head from
which a caller will be calling. This is the Mahdi, the Vicegerent of
Allah; follow him.”[^4]

In the same book it is quoted from Saad as-Saud from the scroll of
Prophet Idrees (as) that:

“…and in that time I shall bestow security to the world. Thus nothing
will receive harm from anything. And no living thing shall fear any
other creature. At that time the quadrupeds shall be among the humans
and they shall not harm each other. I shall take away the sting of every
stinging creature and make their venom ineffective. And I will send the
blessings from the heavens and the earth and the earth will become green
with its vegetation and all types of fruits will grow and put forth
different kinds of perfumes and I will put mercy and love among the
people.”[^5]

It is narrated from Amirul Momineen Ali (as) that he said:

“When our Qaim reappears, the sky will send down rain and the earth will
expose its treasures. Malice and hatred shall disappear from the hearts
of the people; beasts and animals will live in amity. So much so that a
lady will travel to Iraq and Syria walking only on greenery and grass
and wearing her ornaments and no beast will frighten her.”

Traditions supporting the above have already been quoted under the
letter ‘A’.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 61

[^2]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 280

[^3]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 80

[^4]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 81

[^5]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 384


