The Letter Za (Z)
=================

1. Zahmat (Struggle) Of His Eminence On The Path Of Faith
---------------------------------------------------------

This point is the same that we discussed under the topic of the *Jihad*
and battle of His Eminence with the enemies and disbelievers. Other
traditions that support this matter will be presented under the topic of
patience of His Eminence, the elimination of infidels and other topics,
if Allah the Almighty wills.

2. Zuhd (Piety) Of His Eminence
-------------------------------

In *Kafi* it is related through the author’s own chain of narrators from
Hammad bin Uthman that he said:

I was in the illuminated assembly of His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq
(as) when a person said to His Eminence:

“May Allah bless you, as you know, Ali Ibne Abi Talib (as) used to wear
coarse woolen clothes and use very cheap garments etc…while you have put
on a new dress.” The Imam said: “Ali Ibne Abi Talib (as) wore such
clothes at that time so that it may not seem extravagant and hence
people would have rejected it. But if such clothes are worn today it
would seem odd. Thus the best garments of every age are those that are
the garments of that time except that when our (Ahle Bayt’s) Qaim arises
he will take to wearing the dress of Ali (as) and he shall display his
manners and behavior.”[^1]

I say: Probably Amirul Momineen Ali (as) meant the same thing in his
statement to Abu Abdullah Jadali when he said: “Shall I not inform you
about the nose and eye of Mahdi?” He replied: “Please do.” Then His
Eminence thumped his breast and said: “I am, because the nose implies
the leader or the master of the affair and eye signifies
something/someone who is similar to it.” Thus His Eminence is the nose
of Mahdi, that is his leader in his actions and his eyes is his own
supposition in piety, worship, manners, valor and all the good qualities
and excellences of His Eminence. And this usage is common and well-known
in idiom and general conversation. For example when something is having
most of its qualities same as another thing it is said that it is the
*‘Ain’* of it. And as for the usage of the word ‘nose’ in Arabic
language to denote chief or predecessor we can present the example of
the following line of Arabic poetry:

A nation that is the ‘nose’ and others are its followers.

And Allah knows best.

In the same book it is narrated from Mualla bin Khunais that he said:

“One day I mentioned to His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Sadiq (as): I
recalled the progeny of so and so (that is Bani Abbas) and the bounties
they possessed and said to myself: If the kingdom had reached you, we
would also have shared in your wealth and had a prosperous life. The
Imam said: Alas, O Mualla, by Allah, if we had the reins of the
government in our hands, we would have prayed during the nights and in
the day cared for the welfare of the people. We would have worn coarse
clothes, ate low quality food. Except regarding this have you seen that
Allah, the Mighty and the High has made the usurpation of rights a
bounty?”[^2]

In *Biharul Anwar* it is quoted from Shaykh Tusi through his own chains
of narrators from Abu Baseer that His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as)
said:

“Why are you impatient for the advent of Qaim (aj)? By Allah, there will
be no garments except the coarse ones and no food except barley with
bran. His advent is not except with the sword and death under the shade
of the sword.”[^3]

In the same book it is narrated from His Eminence, Reza (as) that he
said:

“Today you are more comfortable than you would be at that time.” The
narrator asked: “How?” The Imam replied: “If the Qaim rises there would
be nothing except blood, sweat and toil. People mounted on horses will
rush in all directions. The dress of the Qaim will be coarse and his
food shall be hard.”[^4]

3. Ziarat Of His Eminence At The Tomb Of Abi Abdullah Al-Husain And Other Infallibles (as)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

That which proves this point is the matter quoted in *Biharul Anwar*
under the account of Green Island:

Sayyid Shamsuddin said in reply to the narrator who had asked: Does the
Imam (aj) performs the Hajj?

He said: “The world is a step for the believer, what can be said about
the one that except for whose existence and that of his forefathers this
world has not been created? Yes, he performs the Hajj every year and he
visits his forefathers in Medina, Iraq and Tus.”[^5]

As for praying for those who visit the graves of the Masoomeen (as) it
is obviously expected from all those who have faith in the religion of
Islam. The tradition of Muawiyah bin Wahab from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as)
also supports this point. It was that the Holy Imam (as) recited a long
supplication for the pilgrims of the tomb of Husain (as) and he begged
the Almighty Allah to bestow them a great reward. He also beseeched the
Almighty to make them righteous. Then he remarked:

“O Muawiyah, those who pray in the heavens for the pilgrim of Imam
Husain (as) are more than those who pray for them on the earth.”[^6]

The full text of the above tradition shall be presented in Part Eight,
if Allah wills.

[^1]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 411

[^2]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 410

[^3]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 354

[^4]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 358

[^5]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 173

[^6]: Kamil az-Ziyarat, Pg. 116


