The Letter Seen (S)
===================

1. Sirah (Behavior) And Manners Of His Eminence
-----------------------------------------------

His manners have become clear from what we have mentioned in the topic
of the piety of His Eminence. In addition to this is the tradition of
His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) when he described Imam Qaim (aj):

“When he reappears he shall observe the behavior and manners of the
Prophet (S).”[^1]

In the topic about the call of His Eminence towards truth we have
already mentioned points that prove the above matter.

In the same way *Biharul Anwar* has quoted Shaykh Nomani through his own
series of reporters from Abdullah bin Ata that he said:

I asked His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as): When Qaim (aj) reappears
how would he behave among the people? He replied: “He would raze the
foundations preceding him just as the Messenger of Allah (S) had done
and he would initiate Islam anew.”[^2]

In the book, *Basairud Darajaat* it is narrated through the author’s own
chains of narrators from Abdul Malik bin Ayyin that he said:

His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) showed some writings of Ali (as) to
us and then he asked: “For what are these books written?”

I said: “How clear and obvious is the meaning.”

He said: “Mention it.”

I said: “Since he knew that one day your Qaim will arise, thus he
preferred to undertake this job.”

The Imam said: “You are right.”[^3]

2. Sakhaawat (Charity) Of His Eminence
--------------------------------------

From that which has been mentioned in the topic of the good manners of
His Eminence and that which shall come in the ‘calls’ explains the
matter. And also in *Biharul Anwar* quoting from Shaykh Nomani from His
Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) it is mentioned:

“As if I could see that this religion of yours is in its terminal stage
and no one is able to restore it to you except a man from Ahle Bayt who
will pray for your forgiveness twice every year and give you two
salaries (incomes) every month. In his time, wisdom would be bestowed
upon you in such a measure that ladies sitting at home will dispense
justice on the basis of the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of the Holy
Prophet (S).”[^4]

In another tradition it is narrated from His Eminence:

“All the apparent and hidden wealth of the world will be brought
together for him and the people would be told: Come and take this, for
which you had broken off relations and shed innocent blood and for
obtaining which you had committed unlawful acts.

Then His Eminence would give them so much as none before that has
done.”[^5]

A tradition of the Holy Prophet (S) has been recorded through Sunni
channels that he said:

“A person will come to the Mahdi and say: Give me. The skirt of this man
will be filled with so much money that he would not be able to lift
it.”[^6]

In another tradition from their channels it is mentioned that:

“Such wealth will be accumulated at that time that when a person will
come and say: O Mahdi, give me. The Mahdi will say: Take it.”[^7]

In *Ghayat al-Maraam* it is narrated through their channels that the
Messenger of Allah (S) is quoted by Abu Saeed Khudri to have said:

“Monies and wealth will be piled up at that time. Whoever will come and
request him for funds will be given as much as he could carry.”[^8]

In another *hadith* from Abu Huraira it is mentioned that:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “In the last period of time there shall
be a caliph who would distribute incalculable wealth.”[^9]

I say: Matters pertaining to this subject shall be discussed in the
topic of the munificence of His Eminence, if Allah the High wills. And
how nicely it is said:

“Good morals in your hands have achieved a status, thus all your wealth
is lawful for the people, and if one day generosity locks up and closes
its door, then you are the key to those locks.”

Someone else says:

He is the sea that bestows from all its sides. And its waves are
goodness and well-being for the shores.

His hands are in the habit of giving, even if he were to keep the fist
closed, his fingers will not obey him.

If indeed there is nothing in his hand except his soul, he will give
that also, so the one who is asking should fear Allah.

The writer of this book, may Allah forgive him, has composed the
following couplets on the same lines:

Indeed the one who created the perfect morals

In the being of Adam for the Imam-e-Qaim.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 347

[^2]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 354; Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 121

[^3]: Basairud Darajaat, Pg. 162

[^4]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 352, Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 125

[^5]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 390

[^6]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 88

[^7]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 88

[^8]: Ghayat al-Maraam Pg. 698

[^9]: Ghayat al-Maraam Pg. 698


