Author’s Preface
================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**In the name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful**

O One whose greatness is such that the height of intellectual courage
cannot appreciate, and the divings of understanding cannot reach. O One
in whose awe the heads humble. And the necks humble themselves for His
greatness. And in His fear all the hearts are worried. O Lord You are my
hope in the two abodes. Your sacredness is more exalted that Your
praise. Glory be to You. Your praise cannot be sufficient and Your
glorification cannot encompass.

You are like You have praised Yourself and above than what the sayers
say. Praise be to You for one bounty after another and tremendous
blessings. Send Your blessings and peace on the seal of Your prophets
and the most superior of Your chosen ones, Muhammad and his infallible
progeny, Your proofs and trustees. Especially the one who is saved for
taking revenge from Your enemies. Through whose reappearance is the
deliverance of all Your Awliya. And permanent and multiple curses on his
enemies who are also Your enemies.

The most important and the most obligatory matter from the point of view
of intellect and law is that: You must fulfill the rights of one who has
them upon you. And also that you must recompense one who has done a
favor to you. And the one who is having the most rights upon us[^1] and
the one who has done the best and the most favors on us is the same who
according to Almighty Allah is the one whose recognition is the
completion of our faith, belief in whom is the perfection of our faith,
awaiting whose reappearance is our best worship act, to see whom is the
heartfelt desire of us all.

That is the Master of the Age, the Standard bearer of justice and
goodness, the eliminator of the signs of disbelief and rebellion;
following whom is made incumbent upon us, whose name we are not supposed
to pronounce[^2]; the twelfth Infallible Imam and the last of the
favorite successors and legatees of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): the
Imam al-Qa’im (one who will rise) al-Muntazar (the awaited one) ar-Radi
bin az-Zaki al-Hasan al-Askari, may Allah hasten his reappearance and
may He ease his program of reappearance and uprising and let us not be
separated from him in the world and the hereafter:

From the author:

My I be sacrificed on the one in whose separation I am distressed.

He was the sun and I am a moth in his love.

In his hand would be the God-given standard of victory and help.

That unique gem of ours is unseen to the eyes of the people.

He shall revive the religion of his grandfather and destroy falsehood.

That ruler of our time will judge like Prophet Dawood.

He shall completely eliminate the branches and roots of oppressors.

My soul be sacrificed on him, I am obsessive about him.

May Allah hasten the reappearance of His representative.

May He destroy the arrogance, rebellion and mischief of the oppressors.

Since we are incapable of fulfilling the rights of His Eminence, or to
thank him as it befits, we should at least make efforts to fulfill them
as much as is possible to do: “If it is not possible to carry out the
required obligation one must at least do as much as one can.”

The best worship act during the period of occultation of His Eminence is
waiting for the reappearance and praying for his early reappearance; and
to prepare for that which will earn his

pleasure and make us close to him.

I have written about 80 odd secular and spiritual benefits of praying
for the reappearance of His Eminence (aj) in the book, Abwaab al-Jannaat
Fee Adaab al-Jama-aa.

Reason for Writing this book
----------------------------

Then I began to think about writing a unique book which would contain
those benefits, arranged in a distinctive manner. However the events of
the time, the unfavorable circumstances and one calamity after another
prevented me from this pursuit. Till the time I saw in my dream one whom
I can neither describe in my writing nor by speech, that is, my Master
and by beloved;

the Imam for whom I am waiting. I saw him telling me:

*“Do write this book, and also write its Arabic version and give it the
title: Mikyalul Makarim Fee Fawaaid ad-Duaa Lil Qaaim.”*

In this way I awoke from the dream eagerly and began to fulfill his
command but I did not get continued Tawfeeq till the year 1330 A.H. when
I traveled to Mecca. Because there was an epidemic of plague, I made a
vow to the Almighty Allah that if He saved me from that peril and
conveyed me to my hometown safely I will begin the compilation of this
book.

The Almighty Allah answered my prayers and I reached home safely just as
He has always showered His blessings and favors on me. Thus I began to
work on the book in order to

fulfill the vow because the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَوْفُواْ بِعَهْدِ اللّهِ إِذَا عَاهَدتُّمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And fulfill the covenant of Allah when you have made a covenant.”
(Surah Nahl 16:91)***

And He also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَوْفُواْ بِالْعَهْدِ إِنَّ الْعَهْدَ كَانَ مَسْؤُولاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and fulfill the promise; surely (every) promise shall be questioned
about.” (Surah Isra 17:34)***

Now this book is like ‘a lofty garden, the fruits of which are near at
hand: Wherein you shall not hear vain talk.’ ‘Therein flow springs (of
knowledge and recognition);’ It has eight doors (chapters) so that it
may be a reminder for you. And indeed, the hearing ears will hear it.
And I have made a seal for this book in which there is neither
intoxication nor drunkenness. The sealing of it is (with) musk; and for
that let the aspirers aspire. And it is for this reward that the workers
must work.’[^3]

[^1]: It is narrated from His Eminence, Abi Abdullah Sadiq (as) in Kafi
that he said, “The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) did not depart from the
world until he made this Ummah obliged with regard to our
rights…”(Author)

[^2]: According to some scholars it is prohibited to pronounce the name
of the Twelfth Imam (as). One should just mention the Arabic Letters
M-H-M-D. Some think it is detestable (Makruh) and some consider it to be
permissible. Other opinions are mentioned in the second volume of this
book.

[^3]: Words within quotes are adapted from the translation of Qur’an
from Surahs, Haqqah, Ghashiya, Waqiyah, Mutaffifeen and Saffat.


