The Letter Sheen (Sh)
=====================

1. Shuja-At (Valor) Of His Eminence
-----------------------------------

Points pertaining to this discussion have already been presented in the
topic of the *Jihad* and battles of His Eminence, and again in the
heading of the knowledge of His Eminence, we shall present additional
arguments and further clarify the matter.

2. Shafa-At (Intercession) Of His Eminence For Us – If Allah, The High Wills
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

In *Ghayat al-Maraam* it is mentioned through Sunni channels from Amirul
Momineen (as) that he said:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “I will be at the *Hauz* (Kauthar) with
you, and you O Ali is the dispenser of drinks at the Pool and Hasan is
an assistant and Husain is the commander, Ali bin al-Husain the
distributor, Muhammad bin Ali is propagator, Ja’far bin Muhammad is
mobilizer, Moosa bin Ja’far is counter of the friends and enemies and
restrainer of the hypocrites, Ali bin Moosa is the beautifier of the
believers, Muhammad bin Ali is the escort of the folks of Paradise to
their places and stages, Ali bin Muhammad is the speaker and sermon
giver for his Shias and the one who would wed them to the Hoor al-Ein,
Hasan bin Ali is the lamp for the people of Paradise through whom they
would get light. Mahdi is their intercessor on the Day of Judgment, on
the day when the Almighty Allah will not permit intercession except to
those He would allow and with whom He is satisfied.”[^1]

I say: The important point is that intercession is special for our
Maula, Hazrat Hujjat (as) – even though all of them (as) are
intercessors on the Day of Judgment – their intercession will not be for
anyone who is a denier in our master, the master of the time, (thus for
them there shall neither be any intercessor nor any helper),[^2] even
though they may believe in the Imamate of all the Imams (as). It is from
this aspect that in *Kamaluddin* it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(as) that he said:

“Whosoever believes in the Imamate of my forefathers and descendants but
denies the Mahdi from my descendants is just like one who has faith in
all the prophets but denies Muhammad (S).”[^3]

There are other narrations also on this topic that we could have quoted
but for the intelligent people this much would be sufficient.

3. Shahadat (Testimony) Of His Eminence For Us
----------------------------------------------

In *Kafi* under the exegesis of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَيْفَ إِذَا جِئْنَا مِنْ كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ بِشَهِيدٍ وَجِئْنَا بِكَ
عَلَىٰ هَٰؤُلَاءِ شَهِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“How will it be, then, when We bring from every people a witness and
bring you as a witness against these?” (Qur’an, Surah Nisa 4:41)***

Abu Abdillah (as) said concerning the above words: “It was sent down
especially for the community of Muhammad (S). In every generation of
them there will be an Imam from amongst us, who is a witness over them,
and Muhammad (S) is a witness over us.”[^4]

It is also narrated from His Eminence, that he said:

“And we are witness over mankind. So, on the Day of Resurrection, we
shall confirm the truth of those who confirm the truth of us, and, on
the Day of Resurrection, we shall attribute untruth to those who
attribute untruth to us.”[^5]

“I asked Abu Ja’far (as) about the words of Allah, to Whom belong Might
and Majesty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَٰلِكَ جَعَلْنَاكُمْ أُمَّةً وَسَطًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Thus we appointed you a midmost people… (Qur’an, Surah Baqarah
2:143)***

He said: ‘We are the mid-most people and we are the witness of Allah,
the Blessed, the Sublime, over His creatures, and His Proofs on His
earth.’”[^6]

It is mentioned from Amirul Momineen Ali (as) that he said:

“Verily, Allah, the Blessed, the Sublime, has purified us, made us
immaculate and made us witness over His creatures, and His Proofs on His
earth. He has linked us with the Qur’an and linked the Qur’an with us.
We shall never part from it, nor shall it part from us.”[^7]

4. Sharaafat – Nobility Of His Eminence
---------------------------------------

It is mentioned in *Bihar*, quoting from Nomani through his own chain of
authorities that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) was asked:

Has the Qaim taken birth? The Imam replied: “No, but if I live till his
time I shall serve him all my life.”[^8]

I say: Dear intelligent reader, pay close attention to these statements
and take heed of these teachings, it should not be, God forbid, that
instead of serving the Holy Imam (as) all our life we may cause hurt to
him like a sword due to our bad character and acerbic words.

[^1]: Ghayat al-Maraam Pg. 692

[^2]: Ref. Surah Shuara 26:101

[^3]: Kamaluddin; Vol. 2, Pg. 338

[^4]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 190

[^5]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 190

[^6]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 190

[^7]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 191

[^8]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 148


