The Letter A’in (A’)
====================

1. I’lm (Knowledge) Of His Eminence
-----------------------------------

In the discussion about the rule of His Eminence we mentioned some
sayings and quotations that prove the above. Also in the book of
*Kamaluddin* it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as)
that he said:

“Knowledge of the book of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and the
*Sunnah* of His Messenger develops in the heart of our Mahdi, just as a
plant grows to perfection. Thus whosoever of you survives till he sees
him, when you meet him you must greet him by the words: “Peace be on
you, O folks of the house of mercy and prophethood and the mine of
knowledge and the abode of messengership.”[^1]

In *Biharul Anwar* it is narrated from Nomani through his own chain of
narrators from His Eminence, Ja’far bin Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) from his
grandfather Husain bin Ali (as) that he said:

A man came to Amirul Momineen (as) and said, “O Amirul Momineen (as),
inform us about your Mahdi.” Amirul Momineen (as) said, “When
generations come and perish, and believers become few, and the followers
of righteousness and supporters of the religion go, then he shall be.”

He said, “O Amirul Momineen (as), from which tribe is he going to be?”
Amirul Momineen (as) said, “From Bani Hashim, the best of the Arabs. He
is an ocean who will water a world of oases and will not run short, who
is oppressed by his kinsfolk, and an abode of purity when all will
degenerate. He will not fear when deaths charge, and will not turn away
(recede) when the faithful surround him, and will not hesitate when
warriors struggle. He will be prepared, far-reaching, a victorious lion,
a reaper, an injurer, a warrior, a sword from the swords of Allah,
generous, and adventurous. His head will be high in dignity, his
nobility firmly rooted in the most distinguished character. No
discouraging leader – who will be moving towards mischief, who if
speaks, is the worst speaker and if remains silent, possesses evil –
should mislead you from following him.”

Then he talked about the Mahdi and said, “He is the best refuge, the
most knowledgeable, and the kindest of you all. O Allah, make the pledge
of allegiance to him the occasion of exit from affliction, and unite the
dispersion of the Ummah through him. When it is permissible for you, do
it, but do not turn away from him if you find your way to him. Ah,” said
Amirul Momineen (as), pointing with his hand to his chest, expressing
his anxiety to see to see the Mahdi.”[^2]

2. I’zzat – Respect Of The Saints By The Reappearance Of His Eminence
---------------------------------------------------------------------

In *Dua*-e-Nudbah we read:

“Where is the one who honors the saints and disgraces the enemies?”

In *Kamaluddin* it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as)
that he said:

“As if I can see the companions of the Qaim (aj) that have filled up the
earth from the east to the west. Everything, even the wild beasts and
the jungle birds will obey them, and everything will seek his
satisfaction, so much so that a piece of land will pride itself over
others and say: Today a companion of the Imam passed over me.”[^3]

3. A’dhaab – Punishment Of The Enemies
--------------------------------------

It is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) that he said
regarding the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِنْ أَخَّرْنَا عَنْهُمُ الْعَذَابَ إِلَىٰ أُمَّةٍ مَعْدُودَةٍ
لَيَقُولُنَّ مَا يَحْبِسُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if We hold back from them the punishment until a stated period
of time…” (Qur’an, Surah Hud 11:8)***

“Punishment is the reappearance of the Qaim and the medium nation are
the people of Badr and companions of the Holy Imam (as).”

Ali bin Ibrahim says under the explanation of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَأَلَ سَائِلٌ بِعَذَابٍ وَاقِعٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“One demanding, demanded the chastisement which must befall.”
(Qur’an, Surah Maarij 70:1)***

That:

When His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) was asked about the
interpretation of the above verse he said: It is a fire that would rise
from the west and rulership will be mobilized behind it till it reaches
the house of Saad bin Hamaam near his Masjid. Then not a single house
will remain for Bani Umayyah but that the fire will burn it down with
its inmates and a house in which a killer of Aale Muhammad (an oppressor
of Aale Muhammad) will not be spared but that it would be burnt down by
that fire. And that is Mahdi (aj).[^4]

I say: Traditions supporting the above shall come under the topic of
‘Q’.

4. A’dl – Justice Of His Eminence
---------------------------------

His most prominent good quality is ‘Justice’, therefore he is given the
title of ‘the just one’ as mentioned in the supplication of the nights
of the month of Ramadan (known as *Dua* Iftitah) narrated from His
Eminence himself:

“O Allah, bless the master of Your affair who is the hope of the people
and the awaited one.”

In the tradition of Ubayy mentioned in *Kamaluddin* it is narrated from
the Holy Prophet (S) that he said describing the qualities of His
Eminence:

“He is justice, first and last.”

There are very few traditions about His Eminence that do not mention his
justice.

In *Kamaluddin* it is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that he said:

“Indeed, my caliphs and legatees and the divine proofs over the
creatures after me shall be twelve. The first of whom is my brother and
the last is my son. He was asked: O Messenger of Allah, who is your
brother? He replied: Ali Ibne Abi Talib. Then he was asked: Who is your
son? The same Mahdi who would fill the earth with justice and equity
just as it would be fraught with injustice and oppression.

By the One Who sent me as the giver of glad tidings even if a day
remains from the tenure of the world, the Almighty Allah would
definitely prolong that day to such an extent that he reappears in it.
At that time Isa bin Maryam, the spirit of Allah will descend and pray
behind him. And the earth shall be illuminated by his effulgence and
kingdom and power will stretch to the east and the west of the earth.”

It is narrated from the Chief of the Martyrs (as) that he said:

“Even if only a day remains from the tenure of the world, Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, would prolong it so much so as to allow a man from
my progeny to appear. Then he would fill up the earth with justice and
equity just as it would be fraught with injustice and oppression.” The
narrator says: I heard the Holy Prophet (S) say the same thing.[^5]

I say: Traditions recorded on this particular topic reach to the level
of *Mutawatir* (widely narrated). Some of them would be quoted in the
coming pages if Allah, the High wills. And that which becomes clear for
us from contemplation and research on the use of this terminology is
that ‘justice’ is the general form of ‘equitability’.

Because ‘equitability’ is used in the fulfillment of rights of others.
Like in the giving of testimony, judgment, criterion and weight etc.
However justice is used in place of equitability as well as in other
instances. While on the other hand equitability is not used in a way
other than with regard to the rights of others. While justice is
concerned with the person himself and is also for others. On the basis
of this justice is on the whole connected to the rights while
equitability is related to the rights of other people. This is more
clearly explained by the verses of the Holy Qur’an that mention both
justice and equitability. And oppression is the opposite of equitability
and injustice is the opposite of justice. Injustice denotes the trespass
of rights but oppression implies the trespass of the rights of other
people.

Traditions recorded on this matter prove that the rulers, kings and
judges in the last period of time will oppress the people and in
terminology they would be oppressors, they would also be committing
injustice upon themselves. Thus when His Eminence, Qaim (aj) reappears,
he would remove oppression and he would establish a government of
justice among the people. He would root out the oppressors till the time
justice shall be established in all the world. No one would oppress
anyone else.

Therefore His Eminence, Sadiq (as) is recorded in *Biharul Anwar* on the
authority of *Ghaibah* Nomani to have said:

“By Allah, his justice will enter their houses just as the heat and cold
enters.”[^6]

Some traditional reports that explain the justice of His Eminence will
be presented in the coming pages.

5. A’t’f – The Turning Of Selfish Desires To Guidance
-----------------------------------------------------

In the statements of Amirul Momineen Ali (as) describing the qualities
of Imam Qaim (aj) it is mentioned:

“He will direct desires to guidance, when people have turned to avarice.
He will direct views to the Qur’an, when they have directed the Qur’an
to their views.”[^7]

6. A’t’aa (Benevolence) And Bestowals Of His Eminence
-----------------------------------------------------

In *Biharul Anwar* and *Ghayat al-Maraam* it is related through Sunni
channels that the Holy Prophet (S) said:

“At the time of the conflicts and appearance of mischief and calamities,
there will be a man whose generosity will be praised.”[^8]

I say: It is that the bestowals of His Eminence will be pleasant due to
the fact that before his reappearance the believers will be suffering
great trials and going through very difficult times. They would be
involved in different types of problems and calamities. This is also
mentioned in the exegesis of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَنَبْلُوَنَّكُمْ بِشَيْءٍ مِنَ الْخَوْفِ وَالْجُوعِ وَنَقْصٍ مِنَ
الْأَمْوَالِ وَالْأَنْفُسِ وَالثَّمَرَاتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We will most certainly try you with somewhat of fear and hunger
and loss of property and lives and fruits.” (Qur’an, Surah Baqarah
2:155)***

It is reported from Imam Sadiq (as) that the above verse is concerning
the believers before the reappearance of Qaim (aj). The tradition on
this matter will be quoted in Part Eight, if Allah, the High wills.

In the tradition of Ibrahim, recorded in *Kamaluddin* from His Eminence,
Sadiq (as) describing the qualities of His Eminence Qaim (aj) it is
said:[^9]

“O Ibrahim, he is the one who would accord release to the Shias after
they have been involved in severe hardships, prolonged tribulations,
fear and grief…”[^10]

We would be providing the full text of this narration, if Allah, the
High wills, in the letter ‘F’.

In the Tafseer of the verse: H’aa Meem A’in Seen Qaaf[^11] it is
narrated from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) that he said:

*“H’aa Meem* is to be *‘H’atmi’* that is certain; *A’in* is for
*A’dhaab,* that is punishment; *Seen* is for *Sunoon*, that is draughts
and famines like in the times of Prophet Yusuf (as); *Qaaf* is for
*Qazaf,* that is shots/missiles that will occur in the last period of
time.”[^12]

It should not remain hidden that: Prosperity and comfort of the
situation after severity, and fruits received after toil and labor, are
more pleasant than otherwise. From this aspect at the beginning of the
tradition His Eminence has mentioned that:

“At the time of the conflicts and appearance of mischief…”

It is also possible that the bestowals of His Eminence (aj) would be
very pleasant and it is not related to request. Just as it is the habit
of some people that when they give something they give in a very less
quantity and they would behave as if they have done a great favor. Or it
could also be from the aspect that His Eminence is the most munificent
person and the best of them in nobility and greatness and there is no
doubt that the bestowal of the noble one is more pleasant than of the
others. Or it could be due to the fact that His Eminence shall bestow
everything in excess as mentioned in a tradition related through Sunni
channels that the Holy Prophet (S) said:

“In the last period of time there shall be a caliph who would dispense
wealth in huge quantities.”[^13]

In another tradition it is narrated from His Eminence that he said:

“In that time wealth and income shall be in exceeding quantity. A man
would say: O Mahdi give me. Mahdi will say: Take it.”[^14]

These two traditions mentioned in *Ghayat al-Maraam* have previously
been quoted in the topic of the generosity of His Eminence and
appropriate matter will be further given in the discussion about the
nobility of His Eminence, if Allah wills.

7. A’zlat – Seclusion And Self Imposed Isolation Of His Eminence From The People
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the discussion about the fear of His Eminence we have stated some
points that also support the above matter and in an authentic tradition
of His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) it is mentioned that he said:

“Occultation is necessary for the master of this affair and seclusion is
necessary in this occultation and the best place of residence is Tayyaba
(Medina) and with the thirty he will not feel lonely.”[^15]

In the anecdote of Ali bin Mahziyar mentioned in *Kamaluddin* and other
books it is narrated from His Eminence himself that he said:

“My father – may Allah bless him – took oath from me that I would not
reside in one place but in hidden and far off lands. So that I may
protect myself from the deceit and plots of deviated and rejected people
that are present in wayward communities.”[^16]

8. I’baadat – Worship Of His Eminence
-------------------------------------

In a tradition of His Eminence, Moosa Kazim (as) about the description
of the qualities of His Eminence it is mentioned:

“Paleness would also be apparent on wheat complexion due to remaining
awake for many nights.”

I say: And this is the meaning of the statement of the Holy Prophet (S)
that he made describing his qualities that: “His face shall be like a
Dinar (golden/yellow).[^17] That is, his face would be having a golden
hue due to the yellowness.”

The respected Muhaddith Noori says:

“It implies that it would be golden like a Dinar in purity and
luminescence, and Allah knows best.”

The writer says: The first tradition is quoted in the books of *Falah
as-Saail* and *Biharul Anwar*[^18] from Imam Kazim (as) and after that
is the following:

“My father be sacrificed on one who spends the night keeping awake and
in vigil, and performs genuflections and prostrations (prayers).”

The complete tradition will be quoted in Part Six. On the basis of this
to associate this tradition to His Eminence, Sadiq (as) as the writer of
*An-Najmus Thaqib* has done is a mistake and also probably he had seen
another tradition from His Eminence on the same topic.

[^1]: Kamaluddin; Vol. 2, Pg. 653

[^2]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 115

[^3]: Kamaluddin; Vol. 2, Pg. 673

[^4]: Tafseer al-Qummi, Vol. 2, Pg. 385

[^5]: Kamaluddin; Vol. 1, Pg. 280

[^6]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 362

[^7]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 130

[^8]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 82

[^9]: Al-Burhan, Vol. 1, Pg. 167

[^10]: Kamaluddin; Vol. 2, Pg. 335

[^11]: Surah Shura 42:1

[^12]: Al-Muhajja, Pg. 748

[^13]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 105

[^14]: Ghayat al-Maraam Pg. 702

[^15]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 157

[^16]: Kamaluddin; Vol. 2, Pg. 447

[^17]: Bihar, Vol. 51, Pg. 77

[^18]: Falah as-Saail, Pg. 200, Biharul Anwar; Vol. 86, Pg. 81


