The Letter Fa (F)
=================

1. Fadl (Grace) And Generosity Of His Eminence With Regard To Us
----------------------------------------------------------------

Points regarding this matter are mentioned in Part Three of this book
and also in this section. They should suffice for those who are wise.

2. Fasl (Distance) And Separation Of His Eminence Between Truth And Falsehood
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

That which proves the above point is a tradition quoted in *Biharul
Anwar* from *Tafseer Ayyashi* reported by Ijlaan Abu Salih that he said:

His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) said: “The days and the nights
shall not come to an end till a caller does not call out from the sky: O
people of truth, separate. O people of falsehood, separate. Then the
former would separate from the latter and the latter would separate from
the former. The narrator says: I asked with due respect: May Allah be
good to you, after this call would they again mix together? “No,”
replied he, “The Almighty Allah says in His Book:

***“On no account will Allah leave the believers in the condition which
you are in until He separates the evil from the good…”(Surah Aale Imran
3:179)***[^1]

In the same book it is narrated from Amirul Momineen (as) in a lengthy
tradition about the happenings of the time of the reappearance and
advent of the Qaim (aj):

“…and the caller will call out in the month of Ramadan from the east at
dawn: O people of guidance, come together: and a caller will announce
from the west after the disappearance of the glow from the horizon: O
people of falsehood, come together. And the next day at the time of
reappearance the color of the Sun will be changed from red to yellow,
after that it will become black and dark.

On the third day the Almighty Allah will separate the truth and
falsehood from each other and the walker of the earth will emerge. And
the Romans till the youths of the cave will come forward. So the
Almighty Allah will bring them out of their cave along with their dog.
One of them is named Maleekha and one is named Hamlaha and they shall be
the two Muslim witnesses for Qaim (aj).”[^2]

It is mentioned in *Ghaibat Nomani* quoting from Aban bin Taghlib that
he said:

I heard His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Ja’far bin Muhammad (as) say: “The
world would not end till a caller calls out from the sky: O people of
truth, come together. Then they shall remain in an area. Then he will
call out again: O people of falsehood, come together. So they would come
together and remain in another area.”

I asked politely: “Would they be able to leave one group and enter
another?” He said, “No, by Allah, and it is the saying of the Almighty
Allah that:

***“On no account will Allah leave the believers in the condition which
you are in until He separates the evil from the good.”*** ***(Surah Aale
Imran 3:179)***[^3]

I say: Truth and falsehood shall be separated in another way also. It is
that His Eminence knows them by their faces. At that time he would
eliminate his enemies. Appropriate points shall be mentioned in the
topic of the slaying of the infidels, if Allah the Almighty wills.

3. Faraj – Success Of Believers Through His Eminence
----------------------------------------------------

That which proves the above point is the statement mentioned in the
blessed *Tawqee* (epistle) quoted in the book of *Ihtijaaj*:

“And pray more for *Faraj* (the reappearance) because in it lies *Faraj*
(the success) of you all.”[^4]

Apparently the indication is to ‘*Faraj’*; that is your *Faraj* will be
as a result of the *Faraj* and reappearance of His Eminence, may Allah
bless him and may Allah hasten his *Faraj*.

Also in the *Ziarat* of Friday we recite:

“And today is Friday, which is your day, the day of your reappearance
and the *Faraj* of the believers through your hands and the slaying of
the infidels through your sword is awaited on this day.”

Also in the book of *Kamaluddin*, through the author’s own chains of
reporters it is stated from Ibrahim Karkhi that he said:

“I had gone to His Eminence, Abi Abdullah Sadiq (as) and while I was
sitting in his company that Abul Hasan Moosa bin Ja’far (as) who was a
young boy at that time arrived. I stood up by way of respect and kissed
him, then returned to my seat. His Eminence, Sadiq (as) said to me: O
Ibrahim, he is your master after me, however a group will achieve
salvation through belief in him and other groups will be destroyed.

Thus the Almighty Allah would curse his killer and increase His
chastisement upon him two-fold. Indeed, the Almighty Allah will bring
out from his loins the best of the people of his time whose name shall
be the same as the name of our great grandfather.

He shall be the inheritor of the knowledge, commands and merits of the
Prophet. He shall be the mine of Imamate and the repository of wisdom.
He shall eliminate the tyrants of Bani so and so. People would be
jealous of his excellence but Allah would complete His affair even
though the polytheists may be averse. From his loins the Almighty Allah
would bring out the completion of twelve Imams, Imam Mahdi. He would
endow him especially with His blessings and make lawful for him the
sacred position. One who awaits the twelfth Imam is like one who fights
on the side of the Holy Prophet (S) and defends him.”

Ibrahim says that a supporter of Bani Umayyah entered and the Imam
stopped his discourse. After that I attended the Holy Imam (as) eleven
times to listen to the rest of the discourse but no opportunity arose
for this. After a long time when I went to Imam (as) he was sitting. He
said, “O Ibrahim, he (Imam Qaim) (aj) will reappear after a long period
of distress, calamities, fear and sorrow for the Shias. Thus *Tooba*
(congratulations) for those who live in his time. O Ibrahim, this much
is sufficient for you.”

Ibrahim says that no statement had ever caused such happiness to me and
brightened my eyes before.[^5]

It is narrated from His Eminence, Amirul Momineen Ali (as) that he said
regarding the conditions of the believers during the rule of tyranny:

“Till the time that none of you will be able to find a place to put your
foot, so much so that you will become of less worth in the view of the
people than a dead animal in the view of its owner and you shall be in
this way when (all of a sudden you will receive the help of Allah and
victory). And that is the interpretation of the saying of the Almighty
in His book:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتَّىٰ إِذَا اسْتَيْأَسَ الرُّسُلُ وَظَنُّوا أَنَّهُمْ قَدْ كُذِبُوا
جَاءَهُمْ نَصْرُنَا فَنُجِّيَ مَنْ نَشَاءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Until when the apostles despaired and the people became sure that
they were indeed told a lie, Our help came to them.” (Qur’an, Surah
Yusuf 12:110)***

In *Biharul Anwar* it is quoted from *Ghaibat* of Shaykh Tusi that Wahab
bin Munabbah reported from Ibne Abbas a lengthy tradition in which he
said:

“…O Wahab, then the Mahdi will rise.” I asked, “Is he from your
progeny?” He said, “No, by Allah, he is not from my progeny. He is from
the progeny of Ali (as). Bliss be for the one who reaches his time.
Through him Allah will relieve the Ummah’s stress, until he makes the
earth full of equity and justice…”[^6]

In the supplication of Imam Sadiq (as) of 21st Ramadan for His Eminence
quoted in *Iqbalul A’maal* it is mentioned:

“And that You give permission for the reappearance of one through whose
*Faraj* Your friends and chosen ones would also get *Faraj*.”[^7]

If Allah wills, we shall again refer to this supplication.

4. Fath (Conquest) Of The Cities And Countries Of The Infidels
--------------------------------------------------------------

In the book, *Kamaluddin* it is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that
he said:

“The Imams after me are twelve. The first of them is you, O Ali and the
last is the Qaim; at the hand of whom the Almighty Allah would conquer
the east and the west of the earth.”[^8]

In the ninth volume of *Biharul Anwar* is quoted from the *Amali* of
Shaykh Tusi the saying of the Holy Prophet (S) that he said to Jabir:

“…thus the Almighty Allah ended prophethood with me and Ali was born.
Thus He ended the legateeship with him. After that the seeds from both
me and Ali joined together and from us were born, *Jahar* and *Jaheer*,
Hasnain.

Then the Almighty Allah through these two, ended the grandsonship of
prophethood and made my progeny to proceed through them and also the one
who would conquer the cities – or he said ‘countries’ – of the infidels
and fill up the earth with justice and equity just as it would fraught
with injustice and oppression.”[^9]

I say: *Jahar* and *Jaheer* means handsome and elegant as the experts of
language have stated. In the 16th volume of *Biharul Anwar* it is
narrated from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) that he said:

“The Qaim will rule for 309 years equal to the number of years the folks
of the cave (As-haab-e-Kahaf) remained in their cave. He would fill up
the earth with justice and equity just as it would fraught with
injustice and oppression. After that the Almighty Allah will conquer the
east and the west of the earth for him and kill the people till no
religion remains, except that of Muhammad (S). He (the Qaim) will deal
in the manner of Sulaiman bin Dawood. He would call out to the Sun and
the Moon and they would respond to him and the earth shall be
illuminated by his effulgence and divine revelation would descend for
him and he would act according to divine commands and revelation.”[^10]

In the book of *Ghayat al-Maraam* and other books, it is narrated
through Sunni channels that the Holy Prophet (S) said:

“Mahdi is from my progeny. In appearance he is like a forty year old.
His face shall be shinning as a brilliant star. Upon his right cheek
would be a black mole. He would be donning two cloaks of cotton. He
would resemble a man of Bani Israel. He would bring out the treasures
and conquer the countries of the polytheists.”[^11]

Also it is narrated from His Eminence that he said:

“*Qiyamat* shall not be established till a person from my family rules.
He would conquer Constantinople and Mount Dailam. And even if a day
remains from the tenure of the earth, the Almighty Allah will prolong
that day so much as to enable him to be victorious.”[^12]

In *Biharul Anwar* it is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) that he said:

“When Qaim (aj) rises up, he will appoint a person in every province of
the earth and tell him: If you ever be in a position when you cannot
understand or you do not know that what judgment you should deliver,
glance at the palm of your hand and act upon what is mentioned there.
And he would dispatch an army to Constantinople. When it reaches the
gulf they would write something with their feet and walk on the surface
of the water. The people of Constantinople will say: They are the
companions of one who walks on water, then what would be his own
excellence? At that moment they would open up the gates of the city for
them. They would enter the city and order whatever they desire.”[^13]

5. Fath (Opening) Of The Red Scroll For Taking Revenge For The Imams (as)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

In *Kafi* it is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) that he said to Ibne Abi
Ya’fur:

“The red *jafr* is in my possession.”

“I asked, ‘What is in the red *jafr*?’ He said: ‘The armory; (it is
called red) because it will be opened only for blood, the owner of the
sword (Imam Mahdi) will open it for fighting.’”[^14]

6. Farah (Joy) Of The Believers At The Reappearance And Advent Of His Eminence
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Regarding this matter we shall talk in detail under the topic of Letter
*Noon* (N) in the sub heading of *Nafa’* (Benefits) of His Eminence, if
the Almighty Allah wills.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 222, Tafseer al-Ayyashi, Vol. 1, Pg.
207

[^2]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 274

[^3]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 320

[^4]: Al-Ihtijaaj, Vol. 2, Pg. 284

[^5]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 1, Pg. 334

[^6]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 76

[^7]: Iqbal, Vol. 1, Pg. 201

[^8]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 1, Pg. 282

[^9]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 37, Pg. 46

[^10]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 290

[^11]: Ghayat al-Maraam, Pg. 693

[^12]: Ghayat al-Maraam, Pg. 695

[^13]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 365

[^14]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 240


