The Letter Kaaf (K)
===================

1. Karam (Munificence) Of His Eminence
--------------------------------------

To love persons who are munificent is ingrained in human nature and it
is a part of it and the intelligent ones are unanimous that it is
preferable, rather necessary to pray for such persons.

The difference between a generous and a munificent person is that the
former gives only after being asked for something but the latter is such
that he gives before being asked. And in the life history of Imam Hasan
(as) it is mentioned that a Bedouin came to him and before he could say
anything Imam Mujtaba (as) said:

“Give whatever is in the treasury.” There were twenty thousand dinars
(or dirham) in the treasury. They were handed over to that man. The
Bedouin said in a polite manner: “O my master, will you not let me
mention my need and sing your praise?” Imam Hasan (as) recited the
following couplets:

1. We are people whose bestowal is having freshness so that people and
hopeful ones may get enjoyment from them.

2. We give before we are asked. So that the dignity of the petitioner is
not reduced.

3. If the sea comes to know our remaining generosity, it will feel
ashamed of its raging waves.

Traditions that prove the perfection of this quality in His Eminence,
Qaim (aj) are in large number, whether it be traditions that are general
or which are especially about him. Among them it is that in every period
of time the Imam is the most munificent and charitable person of the
world. And it is that the manners and behavior of Imam Qaim (aj) are
same as the manners and behavior of the Holy Prophet (S). And it is also
a fact that His Eminence has made Khums on the things that are in
possession of the opponents – from the war booty etc. – lawful for the
believers – in the event when they purchase them from the opponents. So
that their offspring and wealth is purified and it is mentioned in
*Biharul Anwar* from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) that he said:

“When His Eminence, Qaim (aj) reappears and enters Kufa, the Almighty
Allah would send seventy thousand *Siddiqeen* (who have testified him)
and they shall join the ranks of his companions and helpers. He would
pay stipends to his followers twice a year and pay such high salaries
twice every month that there would not remain anyone in need of taking
*Zakat*. Those who are liable to pay *Zakat* would search for eligible
Shias to give their *Zakat* to; they would go to each of their houses
and call out but the people would come out and say that they are not in
need of charity.”

(Allamah Majlisi says: The tradition continues and further on the Imam
says:) “And all the wealth of the world, whether it be on the surface of
it or below its surface, would come together to collect with Qaim (aj).
He would say to the people: Come to that for which you used to break off
relations, shed unlawful blood and commit sinful acts. Then he would
give them so much money as none had ever paid before.”[^1]

I say: We have mentioned the relevant points in the discussion of the
charity of His Eminence.

2. Expounding The Sciences For The People
-----------------------------------------

This unprecedented expounding and unveiling of sciences and learning was
not present in any period of time and will not be there in any period
except the time of the reappearance. In *Basair* it is related by the
author through his own chain of narrators from Saad bin Tareef from
Asbagh bin Nubatah that he said:

Amirul Momineen (as) was such that whenever a person came to him he used
to tell him: “O so and so, be ready for the journey of the Hereafter,
and gather for yourself all the provisions that you want as on such and
such day at such and such time illness would strike you and the cause of
your illness is such and such, and you will die in so and so month on
such and such day at such and such hour.” Saad says: I mentioned this
statement to Imam Muhammad Baqir (as). He said it was right. I said:
“May I be sacrificed on you, why do you not give us such information so
that we may be ready for the journey of the Hereafter?” He replied: “Ali
Ibnul Husain (as) has closed this door till the time our Qaim (aj)
arises.”[^2]

In *Biharul Anwar* it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq
(as) that he said:

“Knowledge consists of twenty-seven letters – all that the prophets
brought is two letters and people have not received till date more than
two letters. And when our Qaim arises he would bring another twenty-five
letters and spread them among the people and add them to the two letters
and spread the knowledge of twenty-seven letters.”[^3]

In that same book is related in a lengthy tradition from His Eminence,
Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) with reference to the qualities of Imam Qaim (aj)
and the practice of His Eminence during the period of his reappearance
that he said:

“…then he would return to Kufa and send those three hundred and thirteen
persons to all the parts of the world. He would (also) stroke their
shoulders and chests, (by which) they would not face any difficulty in
any judgment and every part of the earth would echo with the call of:

‘There is no god except Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.’

And that is the implication of the words of the Almighty Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَغَيْرَ دِينِ اللَّهِ يَبْغُونَ وَلَهُ أَسْلَمَ مَنْ فِي
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ طَوْعًا وَكَرْهًا وَإِلَيْهِ يُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And to Him submits whoever is in the heavens and the earth,
willingly or unwillingly, and to Him shall they be returned.” (Qur’an,
Surah Aale Imran 3:83)***

And the master of this affair is not such that he would agree to accept
Jizyah like the Holy Prophet (S). And that is the meaning of the
statement of the Almighty Allah:

“And fight with them until there is no more persecution and religion
should be only for Allah.”[^4]

In another tradition from His Eminence it is mentioned that he said:

“And in his time, wisdom would be bestowed to you; so much so that a
woman would dispense justice from her home on the basis of the Book of
Allah and the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah (S).”[^5]

In another report from His Eminence it is stated that he remarked:

“When Qaim (aj) arises, he would appoint a person in each country of the
world and say to him: Your guidance is present in the palm of your hand.
So whenever you are faced with a decision you find difficult, you should
glance at your palm and act accordingly…”[^6]

In *Kharaij* there is a tradition from the Chief of the Martyrs (as)
that he said:

“Then the Almighty Allah would bestow a miracle to our Shias, such that
nothing would be hidden from them. So much so, that a man from them
would like to know what his family knows. He would inform them of what
they know.”[^7]

In *Biharul Anwar,* in a lengthy tradition from Amirul Momineen (as) it
is mentioned that he said:

“…and knowledge would be located in the hearts of the believers. Thus no
one would be needful of the knowledge that his brother has and the
interpretation of this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ يَتَفَرَّقَا يُغْنِ اللَّهُ كُلًّا مِنْ سَعَتِهِ ۚ وَكَانَ
اللَّهُ وَاسِعًا حَكِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah will render them both free from want out of His ampleness.”
(Qur’an, Surah Nisa 4:130)***

Would be realized on that day and the earth would expose its treasures
for them and the Qaim (aj) would say:

“Eat and drink pleasantly for what you did beforehand in the days gone
by.”[^8]

3. Clearing And Removing Hardships From The Believers
-----------------------------------------------------

The Imam of the Age (aj), by praying for the believers, generally
removes their problems and difficulties, and he also prays especially
for those who seek his mediation and refuge and removes so many
hardships from them as they could not even estimate. Among all the
scholars the noted academic, Allamah Majlisi (r.a.) in his nineteenth
volume of *Bihar* has quoted through some channels from Abul Wafa
Shirazi that:

“I was a captive in the hands of Ibne Ilyas in Kerman. He had fettered
me in chains so that I should be aware that he had decided to hang me
from the gate (after executing me). Thus I made Imam Zainul Abideen Ali
bin al-Husain (as) as my medium to approach Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, to save me. I went to sleep and saw the Messenger of Allah (S)
in dream saying to me: In any problem of the world do not take the
medium of me, my daughter and my sons (son), but you may take our
mediation for the hereafter and whatever you want from the rewards of
the Almighty Allah. However my brother Abul Hasan would take revenge for
you from whoever that oppresses you.

I respectfully said: O Messenger of Allah (S), is it not a fact that
injustice was done to Fatima and she observed patience and was also
patient on those who had oppressed her? Then how could he (Ali) take
revenge from one who is unjust to me?

He replied: It was the covenant I had made with him and it was my order,
so he had to obey it as her right will be restored but at present he
takes up the cause of those of his followers who are oppressed. And as
for Ali bin al-Husain, he is for saving from the clutches of rulers,
kings and rebellious satans. As for Muhammad bin Ali and Ja’far bin
Muhammad, for the Hereafter. And as for Moosa bin Ja’far; pray to him
for health and well being. As for Ali bin Moosa, pray through him for
safety in journeys by the sea or land.

And as for Muhammad bin Ali ask the Almighty Allah for sustenance
through his mediation. And as for Ali bin Muhammad, he is for the
recommended acts and doing good to the believing brothers. And as for
Hasan bin Ali, he is of the Hereafter and as for Hazrat Hujjat, when the
sword reaches your throat – at this point His Eminence (S) pointed to
this throat – pray fervently to him and take refuge with him as he comes
to help one who calls him and he is a refuge for those who seek his
refuge.

Thus I said: O my master, O my Master of the Time, I take refuge with
you. Suddenly I saw a person come down from the sky mounted on a horse
holding an iron (or bright) weapon. I pleaded: O my master, Protect me
from one who is torturing me. He said: I prayed to Allah that I may be
allowed to defend you and Allah, the Mighty and Sublime accepted my
prayer.

In the morning Ibne Ilyas summoned me and removed the chains. He gave me
a robe and said: Through whose mediation did you pray? I replied: I
sought the refuge of one who is the refuge-giver, so that he may beseech
the Almighty on my behalf:

And praise be to Allah the Lord of the worlds.”[^9]

Second Incident: In the thirteenth volume of *Biharul Anwar*, Allamah
Majlisi has quoted his father, the honorable scholar, Maulana Muhammad
Taqi well known as Majlisi, that he said:

In our time was a noble and righteous personality by the name of Amir
Ishaq Astarabadi. He had completed 40 Hajjs on foot. It was famous among
the people that the earth used to fold up for him. One year he came to
Isfahan. I went to him to ask him about the fame he had earned. He told
me: “The cause of that honor is that one year when I was on my way to
the Holy House of Allah, along with other pilgrims, and when we were at
a distance of seven or nine stages from Mecca, I was, for some reason,
left behind the caravan and soon they went out of my sight. I lost my
way and overcome with thirst, I was about to die when I prayed:

O the righteous one, O Aba Salih guide us to the path, may Allah have
mercy on you.

Suddenly an apparition became visible at the end of the desert, before I
could make it out, it had already reached me. I saw a handsome youth
wearing clean clothes of green hue and having a noble demeanor riding a
camel and carrying a water in a container. I saluted him and he replied
to my *Salaam* and asked: Are you thirsty? ‘Yes,’ I replied. He gave me
the vessel and I drank the water. Then he asked: Would you like to join
your caravan? “Yes,’ said I. He made me mount behind him and moved to
Mecca. I had the habit of reciting the Hirz-e-Yamaani everyday. At that
time also I began to recite it, at some points he used to say: ‘Recite
like this.’

Not much time passed that he said to me: ‘Do you recognize this place?’
I looked and saw that I was at Abtah. He said: ‘Alight.’ I alighted, but
when I turned back he had disappeared. At that moment I realized that he
was Qaim (aj). I became regretful and sad at his separation and was
affected that I had not recognized him. Thus when seven days had passed,
my caravan reached Mecca and found me there – while they had lost hopes
of my survival – therefore I became famous for having the land folded
for me.”

Majlisi says in *Biharul Anwar*: My father said: I recited the
Hirz-e-Yamaani in his presence and got it corrected and he gave the
permit also.

And praise be to Allah.[^10]

Another Incident: The practical scholar, Mirza Husain Noori, in the
book, *Jannatul Maawa* quotes *Kunooz an-Najaah* of the prominent Shaykh
Ameenul Islam Fadl bin al-Hasan Tabarsi that he said:

It is the supplication that His Eminence, the Master of the Time – may
Allah the King and the Bestower bless him – has taught to Abul Hasan
Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Abi Laith – (r.a.). Abul Hasan fled to the
Quraish Cemetery in Baghdad for fear of being killed and he was saved by
the bounty of this supplication. Abul Hasan says: His Eminence (aj)
taught me to recite as follows:

“O Allah, terrible was the calamity, and its evil consequences are
visible, the covering has been removed, (all) hopes have been cut off,
the (plentiful) earth has shrunk, the heavenly blessings have been
withheld. Thou alone can help, we refer our grief and sorrow to Thee, we
have full faith in Thee, in the time of distress, as well as in good
fortune. O Allah send blessings on Muhammad and on the children of
Muhammad, whom we must obey as per Thy command, through which we become
aware of their rank and status, and let there be joy after sorrow for
us, for their sake, right away, in the twinkle of an eye, more rapidly
than that.

O Muhammad! O Ali! O Ali! O Muhammad! Help me, because both of you help
and protect. Give me enough, because both of you provide sufficiently. O
our Master! O master of the time! Help! Help! Help! Reach me! Reach me!
Reach me! At once, in this hour. Be quick, be quick, be quick, O the
Most Merciful, for the sake of Muhammad and his pure children.”

The narrator says: When His Eminence said ‘O master of the time’ he
pointed towards himself.

I say: If you desire to learn other aspects of this you may refer to the
book of *An-Najmus Thaqib.* May the Almighty Allah give the best of
rewards to its author.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 390

[^2]: Basairud Darajaat, Part 6, Pg. 262

[^3]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 336

[^4]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 345, Surah Anfaal 8:39

[^5]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 352

[^6]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 365

[^7]: Al-Kharaij; Pg. 138

[^8]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 53, Pg. 86, Surah Haqqah 69:24

[^9]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 94, Pg. 35

[^10]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 175


