The Letter Laam (L)
===================

1. Liwa (Flag) Of His Eminence
------------------------------

Among the important matters is to pray for the hoisting of the flag of
His Eminence, as due to it, people would be happy and their distress
shall be dispelled as mentioned in *Kamaluddin* from Amirul Momineen
(as) that he said from the pulpit:

“A man from my descendants would appear in the last age of time. His
complexion would be fair with a reddish hue and he would have a broad
stomach, his thighs would be big. And his sides would be broad. He would
have two moles, one skin colored and the other like the seal of
prophethood of the Holy Prophet (S). He would have two names, one is
confidential and the other, popular. His secret name is Ahmad and his
known name is Muhammad. When he hoists and waves his flag, he would
illuminate the east and the west. He would stroke the heads of the
people.

Thus there would not remain any believer but that his heart would become
as a strong as a mountain of steel and Allah, the Mighty and the High
would give each of them the strength of forty men. And no corpse would
remain but that the celebration of his reappearance would reach its
grave as the believers in the grave also would see him in their graves
and they would greet each other upon the reappearance of Qaim (aj).”[^1]

I say: Grave implies the spiritual state of the believers in the
Purgatory *(Barzakh).* That which proves this matter is a tradition
quoted by some elders.

Also in *Kamaluddin* it is narrated that in the standard of Mahdi (aj)
is the pledge of allegiance to Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.[^2]

In the same book it is narrated from Amirul Momineen (as) that he said:

“There is a flag for us; and one who goes ahead of it, is a transgressor
and one who lags behind it, is destroyed and one who follows it, would
achieve the aim.”[^3]

It is reported from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said:

“As if I could see Qaim (aj) that he has reached to the rear of Najaf.
When he reaches to the back of Najaf he would mount a dark colored
pie-bald horse having a white streak between its eyes. Then he would fly
on it. Thus there will not remain any city that would not think that
Qaim (aj) is with them in that town. And when he unfurls the flag of the
Messenger of Allah (S) 13013 angels would descend to him from the sky as
they all would be in anticipation of the orders of Qaim (aj)…”[^4]

It is narrated from Abu Hamza that he said:

His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) told me: “As if I can see Qaim (aj)
appearing in Kufa at the back of Najaf. When he arrives at Najaf he
would unfurl the standard of the Messenger of Allah (S). Its pole would
be a pillar of the *Arsh* and those who accompany it would be helpers of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. He would not bring it down for anyone but
that the Almighty Allah would destroy that person.”

The narrator says: I asked in a polite manner: “Is that flag with him or
it would be brought for him?” He said: “It would be brought for him by
Jibraeel (as).”[^5]

In the same book it is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) in a lengthy
tradition that he said:

“He would be having a standard which would unfurl itself automatically
when the time is ripe for his reappearance. And the Almighty Allah would
give it the power to speak and it would say: O *Wali* of Allah, march
forward and eliminate the enemies of Allah. And he would have two flags
and two emblems. And he is having a sheathed sword, which at the time of
reappearance would come out its sheath automatically and Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime would bestow the power of speech to it and it would
call out to His Eminence: O *Wali* of Allah, march forward as it is not
right for you to avoid the enemies of Allah.”[^6]

In *Biharul Anwar* it is narrated from Abu Baseer that he said:

His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) said: “When Amirul Momineen (as)
confronted the Basrans, he unfurled his standard, that is the standard
of the Holy Prophet (S), therefore they were routed and the sun had not
yet set when they called out: O son of Abu Talib, you have destroyed us
(or we bring faith).[^7] At that time His Eminence ordered that the
prisoners not be killed, the wounded must not be attacked, the runaways
must not be pursued and whosoever drops his weapons would be secure and
whosoever shuts the door, his house (and one who remains there) is
safe.”

In the battle of Siffeen (the companions of His Eminence) requested him
to wave that flag once more but the Imam did not agree to it. They
petitioned him through the mediation of Hasan, Husain (as) and Ammar
Yasir (r.a.). His Eminence said to Husain (as): “My son, a time period
is appointed for these people and they would reach it, and it is a flag
that none would wave after me, except Qaim (aj).”[^8]

Another tradition from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) about the
description of this flag says:

“By Allah, that flag is not made of cotton, silk or muslin.” The
narrator says: I asked: “Then of what material is it?” Imam replied:
“Made of the leaves of the tree of Paradise. The Holy Prophet (S)
unfurled it on the day of the battle of Badr. After that he folded it up
and gave it to Ali (as). It always remained with Ali (as) till he
unfurled it in Basra (in the battle of Jamal).

When Amirul Momineen (as) unfurled it, the Almighty Allah granted
victory to him. After that he rolled it up again. And that flag is with
us. No one would open it till Qaim (aj) reappears. When he arises no one
would remain either in the east or west but that he would see it. Its
awe would travel a month’s distance before as well as after it and to
right as well as left.”

Then he said: “He would rise up to take revenge for his forefathers.
Infuriated and aggrieved for the fury of the Almighty Allah on the
people. He would be wearing the dress the Holy Prophet (S) had used on
the day of the battle of Uhud. Upon his head would be the turban called
*Sahaab* and he would also be equipped with the armor of the Prophet.
*Zulfiqar,* the sword of the Messenger of Allah (S) shall be in his
hand. At that moment he would extract the sword and go on fighting for
eight months…”[^9]

I say: This tradition proves that His Eminence is having more than one
flag. Other reports also support this point but in this brief discussion
we shall refrain from quoting them.

[^1]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 653

[^2]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 653

[^3]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 653

[^4]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 653

[^5]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 672

[^6]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 1, Pg. 268

[^7]: In Biharul Anwar it is ‘you have killed us’ and in Ghaibat of
Nomani it is ‘we bring faith’.

[^8]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 367

[^9]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 360


