The Letter Meem (M)
===================

1. Marabata (Vigil) Of His Eminence In The Path Of God
------------------------------------------------------

We shall, if Allah the High wills, would explain the meaning and
excellence of *Marabat* in Part Eight. As for the merit of praying for
the two*Maratabas* it is supported by reason as well as religious texts.

The logical proof is that: Those who are in vigil are in fact supporters
of Islam and they are the sentries of the Muslims and reason and logic
state that such persons deserve our best wishes and prayers.

Textual proof: The supplication of our Imam and Master, His Eminence,
the chief the worshippers (as) in *Sahifa Sajjadiya* – the
twenty-seventh supplication – is sufficient for this matter.

And that which confirms that Hazrat Hujjat is in *Marabata* on the path
of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime are some traditional reports. Some of
them are as follows:

1. In a *Tawqee* to Shaykh Abu Abdillah Muhammad bin Muhammad an-Noman,
alias Shaykh Mufeed he says:

“From the slave of Allah who is in *Marabata* on His path, to the one
inspired and guided to truth…”[^1]

2. In the book of *Ghaibat Shaykh Nomani* through his own chain of
narrators from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali Baqir (as) from
his father His Eminence, Ali bin al-Husain (as) it is mentioned that he
said:

Ibne Abbas sent a person to His Eminence to ask him the interpretation
of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اصْبِرُوا وَصَابِرُوا وَرَابِطُوا
وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! be patient and excel in patience and remain
steadfast, and be careful of (your duty to) Allah, that you may be
successful.” (Qur’an, Surah Aale Imran 3:200)***

His Eminence, Ali bin al-Husain (as) became angry and said: “I wish that
one who sent you with this had approached me directly.” Then he said:
“This verse was revealed for my father and us, and the perseverance that
we have been ordered for has not yet occurred, it would be for some of
our descendants…”

3. It is mentioned in *Burhan* from Ayyashi in a *Mursal* tradition
(having incomplete chain of narrators) from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far
Baqir (as) regarding this verse that he said:

“It was revealed for us and until now the time of steadfastness that is
commanded, has not arrived, and it would be in our descendants.”[^2]

I say: It is obvious that in the above mentioned traditions the implied
*Marabit* is none but our master, His Eminence, the Master of the Age,
the Imam of the time (as), on the basis of his statement in the *Tawqee*
and as also explained in the chapter of Letter ‘L’. And here it is clear
that this matter is a special act of worship of His Eminence just as
performing the Hajj of the House of Allah is a special quality of His
Eminence as mentioned in the chapter of Letter ‘H’a’.

In addition to this, the length of his patience and his constant
lamenting for his great ancestor, the Chief of the Martyrs (as) are
among his distinguishing qualities which were not present in his
predecessors. In the *Ziarat*, famous as *Ziarat* Nahiya His Eminence
says:

“Since I have been pushed behind by the passage of time and being
prevented from helping you by fate and I could not fight those who had
fought you. And (since) I had not been able to face your enemies I will
continue to weep morning and evening…”[^3]

This *Ziarat* is mentioned in the part of *Mazaar Kabeer* in *Biharul
Anwar* of Allamah Majlisi.

2. Miracles Of His Eminence
---------------------------

The special concern and effort of His Eminence in religious propagation
and guiding the people is the basis for his showing of miracles. To pray
for one who is concerned with spreading divine customs and struggling to
reform the people, is a praiseworthy act according to logic and
religious texts. That is why angels pray for the seekers of knowledge in
addition to the fact that guidance of the people is the most beneficial
matter for them and it is a favor upon them. Thus it is necessary that
prayers should be recited for one who guides the people to the right
path.

And as for the miracles of His Eminence: The great traditionist Shaykh
Hurr Aamili (q.s.) in his book, *Athbaat al-Huda* quoting from the book
of Fadl bin Shazan through his own chain of narrators from Abdullah bin
Abi Ya’fur has said:

Imam Abu Abdullah Ja’far bin Muhammad, peace be upon both of them and
their forefathers said: “There is no miracle of the Prophets and their
legatees but that Allah, the Mighty and the High would display the like
of it at the hands of our Qaim for exhausting the proof on the
enemies.”[^4]

Details about the miracles that would be shown by His Eminence could be
studied in comprehensive books like *Biharul Anwar* etc.

3. Mehnat (Hardships) Of His Eminence
-------------------------------------

In the book of *Ghaibat Nomani* through the author’s own chain of
narrators it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) that
he said:

“When the Qaim arises he would have to face more problems from ignorant
people than the Holy Prophet (S) had to face in his time. Fuzail says: I
asked: How would that be? He replied: The Messenger of Allah (S) was
such that when he approached the people, they threw stones, clods and
pieces of wood at him; however when our Qaim arises, during his debates
with the people all his opponents would be arguing on the basis of the
Book of Allah and its interpretation…”[^5]

There is another traditional report about this which cannot be quoted
here for the sake of brevity.

These are the hardships during the reappearance of His Eminence, and as
for the hardships experienced during the period of his occultation, they
are not concealed on anyone.

4. Masaib (Calamities) Of His Eminence
--------------------------------------

There are numerous calamities upon His Eminence, like his great
ancestors and elders had to face, especially the hardships of His
Eminence, the Chief of the Martyrs, would all be there for His Eminence
also, as he is the one who would take revenge from him as mentioned in
the interpretation of Qur’an.

It is a recommended act to pray for those who are afflicted with
calamities as mentioned in reports and traditions quoted from the
Purified Imams (as).

5. Mohabbat Mutaqaabil (Reciprocal Love) Of His Eminence And The Believers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Love of His Eminence for the believers and the love of the believers for
His Eminence is the most important aim of praying for His Eminence and
for beseeching the Almighty Allah for his early reappearance.

As for the love of His Eminence with regard to his believers, there are
various groups of traditions that prove this matter. Some of them are as
follows:

1. Traditions that prove that: Imam (as) is a loving and affectionate
father for the believers, rather he is the most affectionate father.

2. Reports that prove that: Shias are like the leaves of the tree of
Imamate.

3. Traditions that prove that: The Imam (as) is sad at the sorrow of the
Shias, is moved by their hardships and is pained by their illness.

4. Reports that prove that: Imam (as) prays for the Shias and their well
being.

5. Reports that prove that: Imam (as) has made things like the war booty
etc. lawful for his Shias during the period of his occultation.

6. Reports that prove that: Imam (as) harkens to the call of help of his
friends, also there are numerous instances that prove this matter and we
have related quite of few of such instances in this book.

7. That which proves: Imam (as) is present at the funeral of the
believers.

8. Traditions that indicate that Imams (as) weep at the calamities of
their friends and at the time of their death etc. as it must now be
clear for those who have investigated the matter thoroughly.

And indeed the love of the believers towards His Eminence is incumbent
and is a part of faith and religion and the acceptance of good deeds
depends upon that. Rather there is a special effect of the love for His
Eminence, which we shall explain in Part Eight of this book, if Allah
wills. So, O devout followers and devotees of His Eminence, pray for
your beloved and beseech the Almighty Allah that He may grant you the
glimpse of His *Wali*.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 53, Pg. 176

[^2]: Tafseer Al-Burhan; Vol. 1, Pg. 335

[^3]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 101, Pg. 320

[^4]: Ithbaath al-Huda, Vol. 7, Pg. 357

[^5]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 296


