The Letter Noon (N)
===================

1. Nafa’ (Benefit) Of His Eminence
----------------------------------

You should know that the benefits of the blessed existence of His
Eminence are of few types:

First Type: Benefits of His Eminence whether he is in *Ghaibat* or
present among the people. These are again of two kinds:

First kind: In which all the creatures are partners; like: life and
survival in the world etc. as all these are the bounties and benefits of
the blessed being of His Eminence – as we have mentioned in Part One and
Two of this book – therefore he says in his *Tawqee* thus:

“And as for getting benefits from me while I am in the occultation, it
is like benefiting from the Sun when the clouds conceal it from the
sight, and I am the security for the folks of the earth just like the
stars are security for the folks of the heavens…”[^1]

Another report of the Purified Imams (as) has been recorded with the
same meaning that shall be mentioned at the end of the book, in a
section on sources and references, *Insha Allah Taala.*

Second kind: Scientific benefits and divine bestowals that are
especially granted to the believers like: Becoming clear of the time of
Daily Prayers and things like that, as mentioned in *Wasail* through the
author’s own chain of narrators from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq
(as) that he said:

“There is no cloudy day on which the time of *Zawaal* (decline of the
sun) is unknown to the people, but that Imam (as) will call the Sun and
it will come out. So that people of every populated place become ready
for Prayer and not let it lapse.”[^2]

### Second Type: Benefits Of The Occultation Of His Eminence; These Are Also Of Two Kinds:

First kind: They are restricted for the believers and they are many in
number. Among them is that: There is much reward related to the
anticipation of the reappearance of His Eminence and it shall be
explained in Part Eight, if Allah wills. And also that which is among
the rewards related to their patience and forbearance during the period
of occultation; it shall also be explained in Part Eight, if Allah
wills. Also the doubling of the rewards for good deeds during that time
as mentioned in *Usool Kafi* and other books quoting Ammar Saabaati that
he said:

“I asked Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him: ‘Which is better, worship
*[‘ibadah]* in secret with a hidden Imam from among you [in the time] of
government by an illegal ruler, or worship in the time of the
manifestation of the Truth *[al-Haqq]* and its government with the
manifest Imam from among you?’

He said: ‘O Ammar, the giving of alms, which is a form of worship in
secret is better, by Allah, than giving openly; similarly, by Allah,
your worship in secret with your hidden Imam in the time of government
of an illegal ruler, and your fear of your enemy in the time of
government of an illegal ruler and in a state of truce with your enemy,
is better than that you should worship Allah, may remembrance of Him be
made Mighty and Majestic, in the time of the manifestation of the Truth
with the Imam of Truth which is manifest in the time of the government
of Truth.

Worship while you fear in the time of government of an illegal ruler is
not the same as worship and security in the time of the government of
Truth. Know that, for whoever of you now prays a prescribed prayers at
its hour in congregation with the others, thereby concealing himself
from his enemy, and completes it correctly, Allah will register the
rewards for having completed fifty prescribed prayers in congregation;
and that for whoever of you prays a prescribed prayers at its hour by
himself, thereby concealing himself from his enemy, and completes it
correctly, Allah to Whom belong Might and Majesty, will register thereby
the reward for having completed twenty-five prescribed prayers recited
alone; and that for whoever of you prays a supererogatory prayers at its
hour and completes it correctly, Allah will register thereby the reward
for having completed ten supererogatory prayers; and that for whoever of
you performs a good deed, Allah to Whom belong Mighty and Majesty, will
register thereby the reward for having performed twenty good deeds; and
Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty, will handsomely double the
reward of the good deeds of the believer among you when he does good
deeds and practices *Taqayyah* with regard to his religion, his Imam and
himself, and keeps his tongue in check; for Allah, to Whom belong Might
and Majesty is Generous.’

“I said: ‘May I be made your ransom, by Allah, you have encouraged me to
[do good] deeds, and spurred me on to them, but I should like to know
how we shall be better in [our] deeds at this time than the companions
of the manifest Imam from among you in [the time of] the government of
Truth, since we are [both] of a single religion?’

He said: “Indeed, you outstrip them in involvement in the religion of
Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty, and in prayers, fasting, hajj
and in every good deed and knowledge, and in worshipping Allah, may
remembrance of Him be made Mighty and Majestic, secretly from your
enemy, while [at the same time] concealing [the truth] about your Imam,
being obedient to him and being patient with him, awaiting the
government of the Truth, apprehensive about your Imam and yourselves
before oppressive kings.

You see the rights of your Imam and your own rights in the hands of the
oppressors: they take them away from you and force you to work hard on
the land and struggle to make a livelihood, and [you must also] be
patient about your religion, your worship, obedience to your Imam and
fear of your enemy. For this, Allah, to whom belong Might and Majesty,
will double [the reward for your] actions for you, may it be pleasing to
you.’

“I said: ‘May I be your ransom, what do you think? That we should be
companions of al-Qaim and [see] the Truth manifest itself, or that
today, in your Imamate, obedient to you, we are better in [our] deeds
than the contemporaries of the government of Truth and Justice?’ He
said: “Good gracious! [subhan Allah!], do you not wish that Allah the
blessed, the sublime, should make the Truth and Justice appear in the
lands? That Allah should cause [people’s] speech to harmonize, and that
Allah should unite the diverse hearts [of people]? That they should not
rebel against Allah, to whom belong Might and Majesty, in His land?

That His restriction should apply among His creatures, and that Allah
should return the rights to His people so that it may become manifest,
so that nothing of the Truth might be concealed through fear of any one
of [His] creatures? By Allah, O Ammar, indeed no one among you will die
in the condition you are in, but he will be more perfect before Allah
than many of the martyrs of Badr and Uhud. May you rejoice!’”[^3]

There are more rewards and greater recompense for some deeds restricted
to the time of His Eminence (aj) and if Allah wills we shall discuss in
it Part Eight of this book.

Second kind: It is restricted to the disbelievers and hypocrites, and it
is that they have got respite and their punishment has been postponed:
as mentioned in the *Tafseer* of Ali bin Ibrahim al-Qummi (r.a.) in the
interpretation of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَهِّلِ الْكَافِرِينَ أَمْهِلْهُمْ رُوَيْدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So (O Muhammad) grant the unbelievers a respite.”*** (Qur’an, Surah
Tariq 86:17)

“During the period of the proclamation of Qaim, he will take revenge on
my behalf from the oppressors and rebels of Quraish, Bani Umayyah and
all the people.”[^4]

Third Type: Benefits during the period of his reappearance; they are of
two kinds:

First: They are in the share of all the creatures and beings like the
spread of effulgence, and the advent of his justice, and the security of
country roads, appearance of bounties of the earth, accord between wild
beasts and quadrupeds, absence of harm caused by any stinging creature
to anyone, and exceeding bounties and other unlimited benefits…as
mentioned in *Biharul Anwar* in the description of His Eminence, Qaim
(aj) by Amirul Momineen (as) when he said:

“And the sky would send rain, the trees would put forth fruits and the
earth will put out vegetation and it will decorate for its people, and
the beasts shall be safe, so much so that they would roam about the
earth like domestic animals…”[^5]

Second: It is restricted to the believers and it is of two kinds:

First: It is for their life, and it is benefiting and profiting from the
honor of the presence of His Eminence and gaining from the effulgence of
and receiving from his knowledge; removal of hardships, calamities and
illnesses from their bodies. As mentioned in *Biharul Anwar* and other
books from Imam Sadiq (as) when he said:

“When our Qaim (aj) reappears, the Almighty Allah would remove hardships
from every believer and restore their strength.”[^6]

The increase in their physical strength has already been explained in
the chapter of Letter ‘Q’, and increase in their lifespan as also their
witnessing how His Eminence would take revenge from his enemies, and
other countless benefits…

Second: For their dead: Among them is that the gaiety of the success of
the reappearance of His Eminence would enter their graves as mentioned
in *al-Muhajjja* from Imam Sadiq (as) under the explanation of the
following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَئِذٍ يَفْرَحُ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And on that day the believers shall rejoice with the help of Allah.”
(Qur’an, Surah Rum 30:4-5)***

That he said: “In their graves due to the reappearance of Qaim
(aj).”[^7]

In Letter ‘L’ we already brought some points that go on to prove this
matter, and among the benefits of the period of reappearance is that the
deceased believers shall be brought back to life as mentioned in
*Biharul Anwar* quoting from Imam Sadiq (as) that he said:

“When the time comes for his reappearance in the month of Jumadi II and
ten days of Rajab, there would be such heavy rainfall as people have not
seen before. Through it, the Almighty Allah would expose the flesh and
bodies of the believers in their graves. As if I could see them coming
from Jahina shaking off dust from their hair.”[^8]

In Letter ‘K’ also, appropriate discussions were mentioned and in Part
Five more such points would be discussed, that all those who pray for
the reappearance of His Eminence would be brought back to life so that
they may have the honor to serve in the ranks of the Imam, if Allah the
Mighty wills.

2. Noor (Effulgence) Of His Eminence
------------------------------------

Among the most important stimuli of praying for His Eminence is his
effulgence. That which proves this logic can be explained as follows: If
you were on a difficult path in a dark night, which is also having
terribly slippery grass and ferocious dogs whose affliction is severe
and escaping from there is not possible except through a lamp that may
illuminate the way which is not there.

At that time someone brings for you a lamp that would enable you escape
those horrors. Now intellect, rather nature and psychology impels you to
pray for that person without even considering whether it is a man or a
woman, a scholar or an ignorant person, a slave or a free man, as due to
only this he is the cause of your escape and freedom and therefore he
deserves your prayers. Now that you have understood this matter you
should know that investigation into this requires some explanations as
follows:

First: Meaning of *Noor* (Effulgence).

Second: Luminosity is the sign of nobility and perfection of one who
possesses it.

Third: About the concept that the being of His Eminence (aj) is *Noor*.

Fourth: Regarding the illuminations of the *Noor* of His Eminence in his
occultation and appearance.

### Section One: Meaning Of Noor (Effulgence)

You should know that *Noor* is something that is visible on its own and
it also illuminates other things by its luminosity. Whether its becoming
visible is by itself or it may be taken from someone else. The next
point is also the same that it becomes apparent through *Noor*. Because
the becoming visible of other things is a branch of this same *Noor*.
Someone who does not have it, what he can give to others?

As said in the description of *Noor*, it is visible on its own and makes
other things also visible. However if its aim is that it is visible by
itself and not dependant on any other thing and the visibility of other
things depends upon it, this is itself not lawful. Because it would
imply that the word *Noor* cannot be used for anyone else except Allah.
So this is not a comprehensive sentence. On the basis of this, *Noor*
and its parts are separate and one who sees them thinks that they must
all be different but its highest implication is the being of the
Almighty Allah; and how beautifully it is said:

O one who is concealed due to the intensity of his luminescence – a
visibility that is hidden in his visibility and appearance.

Neither is this *Noor* of the essence nor of form, rather the one that
is making apparent is all essence and form; by this explanation the
implication of *Noor* is on Allah, the Mighty and the High as mentioned
in the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ نُورُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth.” (Qur’an, Surah
Noor 24:35)***

There is no need to consider it a metaphor or simile etc, and in the
same way is a *Dua* narrated in *Muhajjud Dawaat* from the Holy Prophet
(S):

In the name of Allah, the light, In the name of Allah, the light, the
light, In the name of Allah, the light over light…[^9]

Another type of *Noor* occurs under the topic of *Jauhar* (essence)
whose highest implication is to the holy being of the Prophet and our
beloved, His Eminence, Muhammad bin Abdullah (S) as the Almighty Allah
has made him in likeness of His own *Noor* and the holy existence of
Imam (as) is also of this same type as shall be explained ahead – and
among the types of the *Noor* *Jauhar* is the scholar, and other types
that are having different grades…

Another type of *Noor* is included in the topic of *Arz* (form), like:
The *Noor* of lightning, the lamp and similar things. It is worth noting
that application of*Noor* on them is true, and by this explanation it
becomes clear that there is no contradiction between the traditional
reports in the exegesis of the verse of*Noor*, because each of them is
talking of one implication of that *Noor*, and if we did not fear the
lengthening of discussion, we would have presented full research into
this subject.

### Section Two: Luminosity Is The Sign Of Nobility

Now that you know that *Noor* is of many types which are having grades
one over the other, there is no doubt that *Noor* is the sign of the
nobility of its owner and its perfection is the proof of the perfection
of his nobility. This matter is absolutely clear and there is no sort of
doubt about it and that which proves this, in addition to intellect, are
verses of the Holy Qur’an and numerous traditions. Of them are:

The Verse of *Noor*: Almighty Allah, in this verse, has described
Himself with this quality, such that there is no further need of proofs.

Verses revealed about thankfulness expected from the people due to His
creation of the Sun and the Moon, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلَ الْقَمَرَ فِيهِنَّ نُورًا وَجَعَلَ الشَّمْسَ سِرَاجًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And made the moon therein a light, and made the sun a lamp?”
(Qur’an, Surah Nuh 71:16)***

Verses in which Allah has sworn by the Sun and the Moon, for example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالشَّمْسِ وَضُحَاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْقَمَرِ إِذَا تَلَاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I swear by the sun and its brilliance, and the moon when it follows
the sun.” (Qur’an, Surah Shams 91:1-2)***

As for the traditional reports, they are exceeding in number, such as:

Traditions regarding the *Noor* of the Holy Prophet (S) – as mentioned
in the sixth volume of *Biharul Anwar* – from Imam Sadiq (as) that he
said:

“Muhammad and Ali (as) were *Noor* with Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
two thousand years before His creation of (other) creatures. When the
angels saw that *Noor*, they saw shinning roots and branches on it. So
they asked: O our Lord and God, what effulgence is it? Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime revealed to them: This is an effulgence of My *Noor*, its
root is Prophethood and the branches are Imamate, prophethood is for
Muhammad (S), My servant and my Prophet and Imamate is for Ali, My Proof
and My *Wali* and if the two were not there I would not have created the
creations.”[^10]

In the same book it is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that he said:

“The Almighty Allah created me, Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain before the
creation of Adam. When neither the sky was constructed nor the earth
spread. There was neither darkness nor light, neither the Sun nor Moon,
neither Paradise nor Hell.” Abbas asked: “Thus how was the beginning of
your creation, O Messenger of Allah (S)?” He (the Prophet) replied: “O
my uncle, when the Almighty Allah intended to create us, He created a
*Noor* from a word. Then with another word He created a soul. Then he
joined the soul to the *Noor*; at that time He created me, Ali, Fatima,
Hasan and Husain. And we glorified His praise at the time when there was
no glorification and we hallowed Him when there was no hallowing.

When the Almighty Allah intended to create the creatures, He split my
*Noor* and with it created the *Arsh* (throne), the *Arsh* is made from
my *Noor* and my *Noor* is superior to the *Arsh*. Then He split the
*Noor* of my brother, Ali, and from it created the angels. Thus angels
are from the *Noor* of Ali and the *Noor* of Ali is from the *Noor* of
Allah and Ali is superior to the angels. Then He split the*Noor* of my
daughter and from it created the heavens and the earth. Thus the heavens
and the earth are from the *Noor* of my daughter, Fatima. And the
*Noor*of Fatima is from the *Noor* of Allah and my daughter, Fatima is
superior to the heavens and the earth.

Then He split the *Noor* of my son, Hasan and from it created the Sun
and the Moon. Thus the Sun and the Moon are from the *Noor* of my son,
Hasan. And the *Noor* of Hasan is from the *Noor* of Allah and Hasan is
superior to the Sun and the Moon. After that He split the *Noor* of my
son, Husain and He created from the *Noor* of my son, Husain, Paradise
and Hoorul Ein. And the *Noor* of my son, Husain is from the *Noor* of
Allah. And my son, Husain is superior to Paradise and Hoorul Ein.”[^11]

There are also traditional reports that prove the luminosity of the
*Noor* of Her Eminence, Fatima Zahra (s.a.) on the sky for the angels
after the Almighty Allah appointed darkness upon them. And in the world
at the time of the Prayers the *Noor* from the *Mihraab* (Prayer Niche)
of His Eminence throws light for the angels of the sky.

Both these traditions are recorded in the tenth volume of *Biharul
Anwar* but for the sake of conciseness we have refrained from quoting
them here.

Also among such traditions are those that prove that there shall be
different grades for different believers depending on the level of their
faith. This tradition is recorded in the third volume of *Biharul Anwar*
quoted from Abu Zar Ghiffari who has reported from the Holy Prophet (S)
that he said:

“The flag of the Master of the Believers and the leader of the
bright-faced ones would arrive at the cistern of Kauthar. So I would
step forward and take his hand. At that moment his face and the faces of
his companions would brighten up. They would be asked: How did you
behave with the Two Weighty Things after me?

They would reply: We followed the Greater Weighty Thing and testified to
it; and we supported and helped the Lesser Weighty Thing and we fought
in its service. Then I would say: Drink till your thirst is quenched,
and they would drink to the full; such that after that they would never
feel thirsty. The face of their Imam would be bright like the Sun, their
faces would be luminous like the full Moon and some would resemble the
brightest stars of the sky.”[^12]

### Section Three: Regarding The Concept That The Being Of His Eminence Is Noor

Here we would discuss two points:

Point One: That the Imam (as) is *Noor*.

Point Two: That the being of the Imam of the Age (aj) – especially – is
*Noor*.

Point One: When it is known that *Noor* is something that shows up on
its own, and it also makes other things visible, and there is no doubt
that Imam (as) according to the perfections and guidance that he
possesses, is the most evident and obvious creature, therefore His
Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) – in a tradition that we have quoted in
the first part of this book – said to Muhammad bin Muslim as follows:

“…A Muslim who begins his day without having a just Imam appointed by
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, would be deviated and misguided…”

On the basis of this, the reappearance of Imam (as) is by the virtue of
his excellences and proofs.

Indeed it is sometimes possible that the person of the Imam may be
hidden from a group of people and it is possible that he may become
visible to them but he, even in the occultation is at the pinnacle of
visibility and appearance. Just as Imam Sadiq (as) said to Mufaddal bin
Umar – when he wept on hearing from His Eminence that doubts would
increase and the flags of suspicion would be hoisted during the period
of occultation – His Eminence told him:

Do you see this Sun? “Yes,” he replied. He said: “By Allah, our matter
(Imamate) is more illuminated than this Sun.”

The complete text of the tradition containing the above statements would
be mentioned in Part Eight, if the Almighty Allah wills, in the section
about weeping for the occultation of His Eminence during the period of
his occultation.

In *Kamaluddin* it is narrated from Amirul Momineen (as) that he said
from the pulpit of Kufa Masjid:

“O Allah, it is necessary that Your earth does not remain devoid of Your
Proof on Your creatures, who may guide the people to Your religion and
who teaches Your religion, so that Your argument is not rendered invalid
and those who follow Your saints may not be misguided after having
received guidance, whether this Proof be seen and not be obeyed or be
hidden and the enemies are lying in ambush for him and himself he is
hidden from the view of the people while his knowledge will not be
hidden from the people and his laws are firm in the hearts of the
believers and they act upon them.”[^13]

As for the realization of possibilities by the being of Imam (as): We
have already discussed the relevant points in this part itself as also
in Part Three of this book, so we shall not be repeating them here. As
mentioned therein, the exposition of sciences did not take place except
through the beings of Imams (as) as explained in the chapter of Letter
‘K’. There are also clear traditions about this, some of which we quote
hereunder:

1. Shaykh Kulaini (q.s.) has quoted in *Usool Kafi* from Abu Khalid
Kabuli that he said:

“I asked Abu Ja’far (as) concerning the words of Allah, to Whom belong
Might and Majesty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَآمِنُوا بِاللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ وَالنُّورِ الَّذِي أَنْزَلْنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Therefore believe in Allah and His Messenger and in the Light which
we have sent down…” (Qur’an, Surah Taghabun 64:8)***

He said: ‘O Abu Khalid! The Light, by Allah, is the Light of the Imams
from the Household of Muhammad (S) till the Day of Resurrection. They,
by Allah, are the Lights which Allah has sent down, and they, by Allah,
are the Lights of Allah in the heavens and on the earth.”[^14]

2. In the same way, the trustworthy one of Islam, Kulaini, in the same
book has written that:

His Eminence, Abi Abdillah (as) said, concerning the words of Allah, the
Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّبَعُوا النُّورَ الَّذِي أُنْزِلَ مَعَهُ ۙ أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ
الْمُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and follow the Light that has been sent down with him, - they are
the prosperous…” (Qur’an, Surah Araaf 7:157)***

The Light in this matter is Ali, Amir al-Momineen and the Imams
(as).”[^15]

3. And also His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) has said regarding the
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَجْعَلْ لَكُمْ نُورًا تَمْشُونَ بِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He will appoint for you a light whereby you shall walk.” (Qur’an,
Surah Hadid 57:28)***

It means an Imam who is to be followed.”[^16]

4. Also His Eminence, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) has remarked with reference
to the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمْ يَجْعَلِ اللَّهُ لَهُ نُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And to whomsoever Allah assigns no light…” (Qur’an, Surah Noor
24:40)***

It is an Imam from the children of Fatima (as).”[^17]

There are other traditions also that could be referred in their sources.

Point Two: Regarding the fact that the being of His Eminence, the
Remnant of Allah *(Baqiyatullah)* – may we be sacrificed on him – itself
is especially ‘*Noor*’.

That which proves this, in addition to that which shall be discussed in
Part Four are some traditional reports, of which a few are quoted below:

1. In *Ziarat* Jamia it is mentioned with regard to the qualities of His
Eminence that:

“The brilliant *Noor* through which very soon the earth shall be
illuminated…”

2. In another *Ziarat* we read:

“And His (Allah’s) *Noor* in the heavens and the earth.”[^18]

3. In the *Ziarat* of His Eminence on Friday it is said:

“Peace be on you, O *Noor* of the Almighty Allah through whom are guided
the seekers of guidance…”[^19]

4. And in the Supplication of 15th Shaban regarding the qualities of His
Eminence, the Master of the Age (as), we read as follows:

“Your *Noor* is luminous and your rays are radiant…”

*Muta-alliq:* It is in the meaning of brilliance, especially related to
the appearance of his *Noor* and the radiance of his noble being.

Or it implies that: It has beautified, as he is embellished with a
particular effulgence and an extraordinary grace.

Or it might be that: He is prepared for confrontation, as His Eminence
would take revenge on behalf of the righteous and good people – as
mentioned in numerous traditions.

5. There is a tradition that Sayyid Ibne Tawus has recorded in *Falaah
as-Saalileen* and Allamah Majlisi has quoted in *Biharul Anwar* that
Ibaad bin Muhammad Madaini says:

I went to meet His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) in Medina while he
had just concluded the *Zuhr* (noon) prayer and spreading his hands to
the heavens he was saying:

“O One Who hears all the voices…”

Till the end of the supplication that we shall be quoting Part Seven of
this book, if the Almighty Allah wills.

The narrator says: I asked very humbly: “May I be sacrificed on you, did
you not pray for yourself?” He said: “I prayed for the effulgence of
Aale Muhammad and the foremost of them and the one who would take
revenge by the command of the Almighty Allah from His enemies.” I asked:
“When would his reappearance occur, may Allah make me your sacrifice?”
“Always the creation and the command will be for Him only.” I asked:
“Are there signs preceding his reappearance?” He said: “Yes, there are
different signs.” I asked: “Such as?” He replied: “The appearance of a
walking creature from the east, flags from the west, and mischiefs that
shall continuously befall the people of Zauraa (Tehran or Baghdad), and
the advent of a descendant my cousin, Zaid in Yemen and the plunder of
the Kaaba covering and what Allah likes, does.”[^20]

6. And in *Tafseer Burhan* and other books it is narrated from Jabir bin
Abdullah Ansari that he said:

“I entered the Kufa Masjid to find Amirul Momineen (as) writing
something with his finger and smiling at the same time. I asked most
politely: O Amirul Momineen (as), what is the reason behind your smile?
He replied: I am astonished at the one who reads this verse but is not
cognizant about its meaning in the way it deserves to be. I asked: Which
verse, O Amirul Momineen (as)? He said:

“Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth; a likeness of His
light is as a niche…”

The ‘niche’ is Muhammad (S).

“in which is a lamp,”

I am the lamp.

“the lamp is in a glass,”

The glass is Hasan and Husain.

“(and) the glass is as it were a brightly shining star,”

It is Ali bin al-Husain.

“lit from a blessed”

It is Muhammad bin Ali.

“olive-tree,”

It is Ja’far bin Muhammad.

“neither eastern”

It is Moosa bin Ja’far.

“nor western,”

It is Ali bin Moosa.

“the oil whereof almost gives light”

It is Muhammad bin Ali.

“though fire touch it not”

It is Ali bin Muhammad.

“- light upon light..”

It is Hasan bin Ali.

“Allah guides to His light whom He pleases,”

Qaim, Mahdi (aj).

“and Allah sets forth parables for men, and Allah is Cognizant of all
things.”[^21]

The main points in this are: Just as the being of His Eminence is *Noor*
and he is from *Noor* and he guides to *Noor* and his followers are in
*Noor*, the date of his birth is itself *Noor* – as we have previously
said: The date of his birth is 15 Shaban 256 A.H. and it is the sum
total of the numeric equivalent of its letters. May Allah make us among
his Shias and those who see him.

### Section Four: Regarding The Illuminations Of The Noor Of His Eminence At The Beginning Of The Reappearance, During Occultation And Presence

In the heavenly world the illuminations of the *Noor* of His Eminence
were revealed for Ibrahim (as) when the ethereal spheres of the heavens
were unveiled for him. The tradition that mentions this would be cited
in Part Eight under the proofs of justification for taking the name of
the Imam of the Age – may our selves be sacrificed on him.

Also the *Noor* of His Eminence was made visible for the angels when
Imam Husain (as) was martyred.

In the same way it was shown to His Eminence, the Seal of the Prophets
(S) on the night of ascension as mentioned in a lengthy tradition of the
Holy Prophet (S) in *Ghayat al-Maraam* narrated through Sunni channels
regarding the description of the ascension that he said:

“…O Muhammad, would you like to see them (your successors)? I said: Yes,
my Lord. He said: Glance to the right side of the *Arsh*. When I glanced
there, I saw Ali, Fatima, Hasan, Husain, Ali bin al-Husain, Muhammad bin
Ali, Ja’far bin Muhammad, Moosa bin Ja’far, Ali bin Moosa, Muhammad bin
Ali, Ali bin Muhammad, Hasan bin Ali and Mahdi; they were in form of
luminosities, performing prayers and he – that is Mahdi – was like a
brilliant star among them…”[^22]

In the same book it is mentioned through Shia sources from the Holy
Prophet (S) that he said in the narrative about *Me’raaj* (ascension)
that:

“…O Muhammad, would you like to see them? I said: Yes. He (Allah) said:
Step forward. I arose and stepped forward. Suddenly I saw Ali Ibne Abi
Talib, Hasan bin Ali, Husain bin Ali, Ali bin al-Husain, Muhammad bin
Ali, Ja’far bin Muhammad, Moosa bin Ja’far, Ali bin Moosa, Muhammad bin
Ali, Ali bin Muhammad, Hasan bin Ali and Hujjat Qaim; and he – Mahdi –
was like a brilliant star among them…”[^23]

If Allah, the High wills we would see the complete text of the above
narration in Part Eight.

I say: The effulgence of Maula Hujjat Ibnul Hasan (aj) on the basis of
these two traditions, has a special distinction. Firstly: Among the
lights it is like a brilliant star, perhaps due to the fact that the
reappearance of His Eminence in this world itself is more complete and
perfect than that of all the other Infallibles (as); his domination and
decisive victory of religion and grandeur and glory of the people of
faith would be effected through His Eminence as would be further
explained in the coming pages, if Allah the High wills.

Secondly: The fact that the effulgence of His Eminence was placed in the
centre of the lights was due to five possible reasons.

First: It is the proof and indication of nobility and exalted position,
as seen in practice of great people; rather this method is seen in all
classes: whenever a goldsmith wants to make a piece of jewellery studded
with numerous precious stones, he places the most valuable and the most
expensive gem in the center, this is seen in the work of all
professionals.

In *Tafseer Majmaul Bayan* it is quoted from *Kitabul Ain* that:

“The center of every object is its best and most equitable place.”[^24]

Indeed in the description of our Holy Prophet (S) it is mentioned that
he used to sit at the center of his companions. In *Makarimul Akhlaq* it
is narrated from Abu Zar that he said:

“The Messenger of Allah (S) used to sit in the center of his companions
in such a way that when a stranger arrived he could not make out who the
Prophet was till he asked about it…”[^25]

That which further supports this matter is that Allah, the Mighty and
the High placed the Baitul Ma’moor, which is the most superior place of
the heavens, at the center and also that He placed Kaaba at the centre
of the earth, the heart of man – which is the most important organ in
the centre of the body, the pupil of the eye at the center of the
eyeball, the Sun – which is the greatest and brightest body of the solar
system – at the center of the system and finally, the Firdaus garden,
which is situated in the centre of Paradise.

In *Riyadh as-Salikeen*, written by the spiritual scholar, Sayyid
Alikhaan Madani it is mentioned that:

There are a hundred levels in Paradise and the distance between each
level is equal to the distance between the earth and the sky. And the
highest level is that of Firdaus as the *Arsh* is placed upon it and it
is the center-most place of Paradise and the streams of Paradise have
their sources therein, thus if you pray, beseech the Almighty Allah to
grant you Firdaus.

In *Biharul Anwar* it is narrated from Amirul Momineen (as) that he
said:

“And as for the residence of Muhammad in Paradise, it is in the Adn
Paradise[^26] and it is situated in the center of Paradise and it is the
most proximate location to the *Arsh* of the Almighty Allah, the
Merciful, exalted be His majesty (and he went on to say that) And whose
who shall live with him in that Paradise would be the twelve
Imams.”[^27]

That which further supports this is: The Almighty Allah has commanded
the people to guard and be regular in the *‘Wusta’* (middle) prayer,
from the view that first He has exhorted them to be constant in all the
Prayers. Also in the Holy Qur’an it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَٰلِكَ جَعَلْنَاكُمْ أُمَّةً وَسَطًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And thus We have made you a medium (just) nation…” (Qur’an, Surah
Baqarah 2:143)***

In the same way Allah, the Mighty and the High has bestowed a special
excellence to the middle of the month, therefore the fasts of *Baiz*
days (three days of the middle of the month) are especially emphasized
and recommended.

In the famous tradition of the Holy Prophet (S) it is mentioned that he
said:

“The best of the affairs are their most moderate.”

There are numerous testifications to this…

Second: It is an indication of the perfection of reappearance and spread
of the effulgence of His Eminence, in the same way as when the Sun
reaches to the center of the sky its light will be visible to all the
spectators in all the cities and its radiance will reach to the maximum
limit as is very much clear.

Third: Anything that is placed at the center of something is one that
attracts the most attention, and as the attention of the Purified Imams
(as) was continuously directed to the Hidden Imam – it was so because
Allah, the Mighty and the High has promised his reappearance and decided
that their revenge shall be taken at the hands of His Eminence – Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime therefore placed his effulgence in their center.

Four: Perhaps the indication is towards that the perfections and
sciences of the Infallible Imams and the past Prophets (as) would be
concluded in His Eminence – as we explained in the chapter of Letter ‘K’
– just as the different writings that are around a circle end at its
middle, which the astronomers call the center.

Five: It implies that the Maula, the Master of the Time (as) – according
to the time sequence – would be coming at the middle in the line of
Imams, as the belief in the *Raja’t* (Return) of the Imams is a cardinal
principle of Shia faith; and the Qur’an and Sunnah prove its validity.

### Section Five: Brilliance Of The Effulgence Of His Eminence In The World

The brilliance of the noble effulgence of His Eminence in the world is
of various kinds:

First: At the time of birth.

Second: During the period of his occultation and reappearance.

Third: During the period of his occultation in particular.

Four: During the period of his reappearance in particular.

First type: At the time of his birth the effulgence of His Eminence was
such that it reached upto the sky. As mentioned in *Kamaluddin* from
Muhammad bin Uthman Amri – (q.s.) – that he said:

When the *Khalaf* Mahdi (aj) was born, a luminosity arose from above his
head and spread above upto the sky, then he fell into prostration for
the Almighty Allah. He raised up his head reciting:

“Allah testifies that there is no god except Him…”

He (as) was born on Friday.[^28]

In another report from the maidservant of Abu Muhammad Askari it is
narrated that she said:

“When the Sayyid was born, I saw a light from His Eminence that reached
upto the horizon and I also saw white birds descending from the sky,
they rubbed their feathers on his head, face and all the parts of his
body, then they flew away. And when I reported this to His Eminence, Abi
Muhammad (as), he smiled and said: They were angels and they had come
down for this baby and they shall be his helpers when he
reappears.”[^29]

In another traditional report it is narrated by Hakima that:

“I suddenly saw her (Narjis) that the effect of the light was on her so
much that it held my gaze.”[^30]

This point is mentioned in *Kamaluddin*, *Biharul Anwar* and other
books.

Second type: Brilliance of the effulgence of His Eminence both during
his reappearance and his occultation is having two aspects:

1. Illuminations without any intermediary for some of the believers who
were honored by seeing him in person. Among such reports is one
mentioned in*Kamaluddin* from Muhammad bin al-Hasan Karkhi that he said:

“Abu Haroon – a person who belongs our school of thought – said: I saw
His Eminence, the Master of the Age, while his face shone like a full
moon…”[^31]

The great traditionist, Muhammad bin al-Hasan Hurr Amili in his book
*Asbaat al-Huda Bi Nusoos wal Mojizaat* quoting from *Asbaat ar-Rajaa*
of the prominent Shaykh Fadl bin Shazan that he said:

Ibrahim bin Muhammad bin Faris Nishapuri said: When Amr bin Auf decided
to kill me, a terrible fear struck me. I bid farewell to my family and
wanted to flee. I went to the house of His Eminence, Abu Muhammad [Imam
Hasan Askari (as)]. When I reached his place I saw a youth sitting by
his side; his face shone like a full moon.

I was astonished by his effulgence and light and I had almost forgotten
my circumstances and conditions when he said to me: O Ibrahim, do not
flee as the Almighty Allah would remove his mischief from you. I was
highly astonished at this and I asked Imam Abu Muhammad: O son of the
Prophet, my master, who is this person, that informed about my inner
reality? He replied: He is my son and successor…”[^32]

Among those who witnessed the brilliance of the effulgence of His
Eminence, is Ahmad bin Ishaq Qummi whose traditional report we have
quoted in the chapter of the Letter ‘Ain’ in the fourth part.

2. Illuminations of the effulgence of His Eminence are through a medium:
You should know that all the brilliance of the *Noor* in the night and
day, of the Moon, the Sun and other heavenly bodies are illuminations of
His Eminence and the benefits of his blessed being during the period of
his occultation as well as his reappearance. This can be explained under
few points:

First: It is that the Sun, the Moon and other heavenly bodies were
created from the *Noor* of His Eminence (aj) – as proved by traditional
reports on this subject – and it is having no contradiction with
traditional reports that state that the Sun and the Moon were created
through the *Noor* of Imam Hasan (as), because it is also mentioned in
traditions that the *Noor*, the souls and the essence of the family of
inerrancy are one. That is they are created from one and the same root.
On the basis of this, it is correct to say that: The Moon is created
from the *Noor* of the Holy Prophet (S) or the *Noor* of Amirul Momineen
or the*Noor* of His Eminence, Qaim or other Imams (as). A similar thing
is mentioned by the spiritual scholar, Shaykh Ja’far Shushtari (q.s.) in
the book, *Khasais al-Husain (as).* Under that discussion he proves that
the *Noor* of Imam Husain (as) is among the first creations by saying
that:

It is so because his *Noor* is from the *Noor* of the Holy Prophet (S)
and the Messenger of Allah (S) has said:

“The first thing that Allah created was my *Noor*.”

Second: Traditional reports that prove that all the creatures have been
created basically for the sake of the being of His Eminence and his
noble forefathers. Thus they are the final cause of creation of the
created world. On the basis of this the existence of the Sun and its
*Noor* and brilliance is through Hazrat Hujjat and the infallible
ancestors of His Eminence.

Third: Traditional reports that prove that the survival of the world and
whatever is there in it – like the Sun and Moon etc. – is as a result of
the existence of His Eminence, Qaim (aj). On the basis of this, the
brilliance of the effulgence of the Sun and the Moon is from the effects
of the *Noor* of His Eminence in his occultation as well as presence. It
is a statement that has been proved in Part Three of this book.

Third type: It is that the illuminations of the *Noor* of His Eminence
during the period of his occultation in particular. These are again of
two types: the apparent and the hidden:

Hidden illuminations: It is in the heart of the believers as they behold
the existence of the Imam with the realities of faith, which is visible
in front of their eyes in all the times and in every place. I have
composed some couplets that state this matter:

I have made a house for your master in my heart. I reside in it since I
was in ultimate love from the time I was born.

By the one who if he wants he will not create the seed: If he disappears
from my sight he is not absent from my heart.

It is this eagerness that embodies your thought for me; as if I speak
softly near you, even though you may not be near me.

O our friends, if you be hidden from the view – you will not be hidden
and unseen from my heart and memory.

There are numerous traditional reports that prove this matter and we
have presented some of them in Part Three. Among other such traditional
reports is the following:

The Thiqatul Islam, Kulaini in *Usool Kafi* has narrated from Abu Khalid
Kabuli from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) that he said:

“By Allah, O Abu Khalid, the *Noor* of the Imam in the hearts of the
believers is more brilliant than the Sun during the day. And it
illuminates the hearts of the believers. Allah, the Mighty and Sublime
prevents their *Noor* from the hearts of whosoever He likes, leaving
them in darkness. By Allah, O Abu Khalid, there is no man that
cultivates love and affinity for us but that the Almighty Allah purifies
his heart. Thus if he submits to us, the Almighty Allah saves him from a
severe accounting and secures him from the terrible horror of the
Judgment Day.”[^33]

In the same way Shaykh Sadooq has narrated a tradition in *Kamaluddin*
from Jabir Ansari that the Messenger of Allah (S) named the twelve Imams
clearly till he said:

“…then the one who will be my namesake and bear my patronymic, the proof
of Allah in His earth and His remainder among His servants, the son of
Hasan Ibn Ali. He (aj) is the one at whose hands Allah, High be His
remembrance, will open the east of the earth and its west. He (aj) is
the one who will be concealed from his Shias and his friends, an
occultation in which none will be steadfast on the belief of his Imamate
except the one whose heart has been tested by Allah for faith.”

Jabir says that he asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (S)! Will the Shias
benefit from him during the occultation?’ He (S) replied, “Yes, by the
One Who sent me with Prophethood! Surely they will benefit with his
light and gain from his mastership in his occultation like the people
derive benefit from the sun when the clouds hide it. O Jabir! This is
from the hidden secrets of Allah and the treasures of His knowledge, so
hide it except from the ones worthy of it.”[^34]

Apparent illumination: The apparent illumination of the effulgence of
His Eminence is for some selected pious personages and this matter is
restricted to some very special, righteous and sincere people about whom
we shall narrate in three anecdotes:

First Incident: *Biharul Anwar* quotes Sayyid Ali bin Abdul Hameed, a
person of faith, in the book of *Sultan al-Mufarraj,* that he said:

The incident most famous and well known in all the areas is about Abu
Rahjeh Hamaami in Hilla, and it is narrated by a group of scholars and
eminent people of that town. Among those eminent personalities is also
the pious, senior and virtuous Shaykh Shamsuddin Muhammad bin Qaroon. He
says that there was a ruler in Hilla called ‘Marjaan, the younger’. Some
people reported to him that Abu Rajeh abuses the companions of the
Prophet. So got Rajeh arrested and ordered him to be beaten. They beat
him so severely that each part of his body was injured and they hit at
his mouth so much that his teeth were broken.

Then they pierced his tongue with a thick iron needle. Then they pierced
his nose and put a rope through it. After that he was given over to the
ruler’s men to take him around the lanes of Hilla in this manner and
ordered that he should be thrashed from every side. It happened in this
way and the poor man fell down exhausted; people thought that he was
dead. They informed the king and he ordered his execution.

Those present in the court wanted to know what purpose would be served
by his execution. Since he was an old man this much punishment was
enough for him. He was already dead, so he should be left now, and he
would die his natural death. Why should the king take the responsibility
of his death? When people petitioned much he ordered his release. Since
he was seriously injured his relatives carried him home like a corpse.
Everyone was sure that he would not survive that night as no sign of
life remained in his body.

However when people came to see him the next day they found him in
perfect health and physically fit, engrossed in ritual prayers. His
teeth, that had been broken, were back in his mouth in a perfect
condition. The wounds of his body and face had healed so completely as
if he never had any injuries in the first place.

They were shocked at his sight and asked him how that came to be. He
said: I was looking at death with my own eyes. Since my tongue could not
move, I was unable to utter any supplication so I prayed to Allah in my
mind and beseeched my master. When the greater part of the night had
passed, I saw that the complete house was lit by a luminosity and my
master. His Eminence, the Master of the Time was stroking my face and
saying: Now get up and go to your family. You are perfectly all right
now.

Thus when I got up in the morning I was absolutely healthy as you can
all see. Shamsuddin Muhammad bin Qaroon says: By Allah, Abu Rajeh was a
frail and thin man, having sallow complexion; he was very ugly and had a
small beard. I used to visit the same public bath he frequented and I
always saw him in the above condition. But that morning when I went to
see him with other people I saw him physically strong, his limbs
powerful and his height had also increased. The beard was also bigger
than before and the complexion had a pinkish hue. It seemed as if he
were a young man of twenty years. And he remained in that way till his
end…”[^35]

Second Incident: In the same way it is mentioned in *Biharul Anwar* from
the same source that the author said: A reliable gentleman has narrated
this incident, although this report is famous among the people of Najaf
al-Ashraf. The incident is as follows:

The house in which I reside, in this year 789 A.H., once belonged to a
virtuous and pious man named Husain Mudallil and *Sabaat Mudallil* is
named after him. And this *Sabaat* (a roof between two houses) is
adjacent to the walls of the Holy mausoleum of Najaf. This person also
had a family. He became affected by such terrible paralysis that he
could not even stand up.

The members of his family used to assist him in fulfilling his necessary
needs. He remained affected by this malady for a long time as a result
of which his family had to face penury and began to depend on charity.
In 720 A.H. when a fourth part of the night had passed, he awoke his
family members. They saw that the house and the ceiling were illuminated
with such a bright light that it dazzled the eyes. They asked him what
the matter was.

He said: The Imam of the Time (as) had come and he told me: O Husain,
stand up. I said: My master, I am unable to stand up as you can see. He
took my hand and made me stand up and all the signs of paralysis
disappeared. Now I am perfectly healthy and cured. The Imam (as) also
said: This canopy is my route to visit my grandfather Amirul Momineen
(as) so you must close it every night. I said:

We hear and obey Allah and you, our master!

After that the man arose and by way of thanksgiving for this divine
mercy and kindness he went to visit the mausoleum of His Eminence,
Amirul Momineen (as). And that canopy, till this day is a place where
people pray during times of need and all those who make petitions at
this spot achieve success by the blessings of the holy footsteps of the
Qaim (aj).”[^36]

Third Incident: The great divine scholar, Haaj Mirza Husain Noori has
written in *Jannatul Maawa* thus:

Some righteous associates – among whom is: The real Sayyid and
intellectual, the avowed scholar, practically devout, jurisprudent and
expert, Sayyid Muhammad son of the exceptional scholar, Sayyid Ahmad son
of Sayyid Haider Kazmi, may Allah the High help him, who was among the
outstanding students of the great teacher, Muhaqqiq Ansari, the refuge
of students, pilgrims and those who lived in the neighborhood of Kazmain
and his family was famous in Iraq for its nobility, purity, knowledge
and merits and had become famous as the House of Sayyid Haider. He has
narrated to me – in writing and verbally – the incident related by him
is as follows:

Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Haider Hasani Husaini says: When I resided in
Najaf al-Ashraf for my religious studies – that is in the period around
1275 A.H. – I heard that some intellectuals and other reliable persons
who sold mules and other things to them had informed them that he had
been honored by meeting Maula Sahib az-Zaman, may Allah bless him and
his purified forefathers. I investigated in order to recognize this man
and found him to be righteous and trustworthy. I wanted to find him
alone so that I could ask him about his meeting with Hazrat Hujjat, may
our souls be sacrificed on him.

I began to show friendship towards him, greeted him often and made many
purchases from him till there developed a type of friendship between the
two of us. All this was a preface so that I may hear the incident under
discussion. Finally one day I went to Masjid Sahla for worship, prayers
and supplications on a Wednesday.

When I reached the Masjid I saw the above mentioned person there. I
found an opportunity and asked him to stay the night with me. He
accepted, when I concluded the rituals of Masjid Sahla, according to the
practice prevalent at that time when there was no arrangement for
lodging at Masjid Sahla I headed for the Great Masjid of Kufa. When we
reached there and also finished performing the rituals particular to the
Masjid, I asked him about his story and requested him to relate the
incident in detail for me. He related to me as follows:

I had always heard from people having divine recognition and who were
honest that one who spends forty consecutive nights in Masjid Sahla with
the intention of meeting the Imam would receive that honor and it has
been effective many a times. I also developed a desire for it and made
an intention that I would perform this act every Wednesday and that hot,
cold and rain would not restrain me from this program. I continued it
for almost a year and after completing the rituals of Masjid Sahla I
used to go and stay at Masjid Kufa.

It was the time of Asr (late afternoon) and as per practice I was
traveling on foot; the day was hot and the atmosphere very dark. Dark
clouds had veiled the sky and a drizzle was falling. Feeling assured
that according to the usual practice, people would come, I set out; but
when I reached the Masjid, the Sun had set and the surroundings were
dark and lightning and thunder burst forth from the sky. I was very
frightened because in the first place there was no one there besides me,
not even the caretaker of the Masjid who used to come every Wednesday.

Though I was terribly scared I thought to myself that I should at least
perform the Maghrib prayer and complete the special rituals and then go
to Masjid Kufa as soon as possible. I egged myself to be brave and arose
to perform the Maghrib Prayer. After that I began to recite the special
devotions, which by this time, I knew by heart. While I was engrossed in
the prayer at the place known as the place of the Master of the Time
which was in front of the place of my prayer – I perceived a perfect
light there and heard someone reciting the ritual prayer. I was glad and
absolutely comfortable because I thought that there was someone from the
pilgrims who was worshipping at that blessed place, whom I had not seen
when I arrived. So under this impression I continued to recite my
devotions according to the original program.

Then I went toward that sacred place. When I entered I saw a great
effulgence but did not see any lamp casting such light. Thinking that I
might have missed it, I beheld a majestic Sayyid with an aura of awe
dressed in the manners of religious scholars standing in prayer. My
heart became comfortable by his presence, whom I thought to be a foreign
pilgrim, but after some reflection I concluded that he was a resident of
Najaf al-Ashraf.

I became engrossed in reciting the *Ziarat* of Hazrat Hujjat (as) and
then prayed the *Ziarat* Prayer. When I concluded, I decided to speak to
him about going to Masjid Kufa together. But his awe and majesty struck
me so, that I looked outside, but I saw the darkness punctuated with
lightning and heard the thunder. That gentleman turned to me with a
smiling and kind face and said: “Do you want to go Masjid Kufa?” I said:
“Yes, my master, it is usual for us, residents of Najaf that when we
finish the rituals of this Masjid we go to Masjid Kufa and spend the
night there as there are people, servants and water there.”

He arose and said: “Come, let us go to Masjid Kufa together.” I went out
with him while I was pleased with him and his good company. We walked in
illuminated and pleasant atmosphere on dry ground and I completely
forgot the rain and darkness that was present before, till we reached
the Masjid and His Eminence – may I be sacrificed on him – was with me
and I was in such a happy mood and absolute security in his company that
neither I saw darkness nor rain.

I knocked at the outer gate of the Masjid which was locked. “Who is it?”
asked the attendant. I said: “Please open up.” He said: “From where have
you some in such darkness and rain?” I replied: “From Masjid Sahla.”
When the attendant opened the door I turned towards that respected
Sayyid but he was gone and all of a sudden there was same darkness, and
rain fell on me. I began to call out: “O our master, my lord, come, the
door has opened.”

And I went out to search for him and continued to call out aloud but
there was no one there at all. Feeling uncomfortable by the slightly
cold air and rain I entered the Masjid and at that time I came out of my
unawareness as I had waken up from a dream. I scolded myself that though
I had witnessed such a miracle I had not realized it. The great light
that I had seen at that blessed place was not by any lamp. Even twenty
lamps could not produce that much light.

Now I remembered that the noble Sayyid had addressed me by name inspite
of the fact that I didn’t know him and I had not seen him before. And I
also recalled that when I had glanced out of that place, the atmosphere
outside was dark and rain was falling and there was also severe
lightning and thunder. But when I came out in his company it was so
bright that I could see where I put my steps and the ground was also dry
and the air pleasant, till I reached the Masjid gate.

And since he left me, I again saw the terrible weather and rain and many
other strange matters that made me certain that he was Hazrat Hujjat,
the Master of the Time, who, by the grace of Allah had fulfilled my
desire to meet him, for which I had unerringly performed the prescribed
rituals without being impeded by hot or cold. Thus I thanked the Lord
for this grace in excess:

“And praise be to Allah.”[^37]

Fourth type: Illuminations of the effulgence of His Eminence during the
time of his reappearance. This type is also of two kinds: Hidden and
apparent. And that which proves the first kind had already been
discussed in the third type and that which proves the second type is a
tradition that the honorable Shaykh, Ali bin Ibrahim Qummi (q.s.) has
narrated from Mufaddal bin Umar that His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq
(as) said regarding the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَشْرَقَتِ الْأَرْضُ بِنُورِ رَبِّهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the earth shall beam with the light of its Lord.” (Qur’an, Surah
Zumar 39:69)***

“Lord of the earth means, the Imam of the earth.”

I asked: What should happen when he reappears? He replied: “On the basis
of this the people would become needless of the light of the Sun and the
light of the Moon and they would be content with the *Noor* of the
Imam.”[^38]

Also the respected Sayyid Hashim Bahrani in his book, *al-Muhajja* has
narrated from Mufaddal that he said:

I heard Imam Sadiq (as) say: “When the Qaim arises, the earth would be
illuminated by the light of its Lord and the people would become
needless of the light of the Sun. And the night and the day would be the
same and man would have a lifespan of a thousand years during that
period. Every year he would be blessed by a son, and daughters would not
be born. There would be a garment upon the newborn child that would grow
with him and it would assume any color that he may like.”[^39]

In the same way the prominent and accomplished scholar, Allamah Majlisi
(r.a.) has also narrated from Mufaddal in *Biharul Anwar* that he said:

I heard His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) say: “When the Qaim (aj)
arises, the earth would light up with the luminescence of its Lord and
the people would become needless of sunlight and darkness shall be
dispelled.”[^40]

In the same book it is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that he said:

“Even if a single day remains from the tenure of this world, the
Almighty Allah would prolong that day to such an extent that my
descendant, Mahdi would reappear on that day. Then, the Spirit of Allah,
Isa bin Maryam would descend and recite prayers under his lead, and the
earth would be illuminated by the light of its Lord and his kingdom
would reach to the east and the west (cover all the world).”[^41]

As for the illuminations of His Eminence in the Hereafter: a tradition
that the Thiqatul Islam, Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini has mentioned in
*Usool Kafi*, proves it. The traditional report is as follows:

It is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) that he said
regarding the verse:

“Their light running before them, and on their right hands…”

On the Day of Resurrection the Imams of the believers move before the
believers and on their right hands, till they have set them down in the
abodes of the people of Paradise.”[^42]

Sayyid Bahrani has also mentioned in his *Tafseer Burhan* from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْعَىٰ نُورُهُمْ بَيْنَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَبِأَيْمَانِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Their light running before them, and on their right hands… (Qur’an,
Surah Hadid 57:12)***

The *Noor* of the Imams of the believers would move ahead to the right
side of the believers till it takes them to their abodes in
Paradise.”[^43]

#### Bounties of His Eminence

In Part Three of the book it was learnt that all bounties in which
people are immersed, be they hidden or apparent, are all as a result of
the being of Hazrat Hujjat (as) and this matter is the greatest reasons
to pray for His Eminence. Further explanations shall be give in Part
five, if Allah the Mighty wills.

It is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) that he said:

“This Ummah would be made to account for the bounties that the Almighty
Allah had granted it for the sake of the Holy Prophet (S) and his Ahle
Bayt.”[^44]

It is also narrated from His Eminence that he said regarding the verse:

“Then on that day you shall most certainly be questioned about the
boons.”

“We are those bounties.”[^45]

A similar traditional report is recorded from Amirul Momineen (as).

It is narrated by Abu Khalid Kabuli that he said:

I came to His Eminence, Muhammad bin Ali (as) and food was brought for
me, which was so tasty that I had never tasted anything more delicious.
He (the Imam) asked me: “O Abu Khalid, how did you find our food?” I
replied: “May I be sacrificed on you, what delicious food it was. But I
was reminded of the verse of the Book of Allah.” He became annoyed and
asked, “Which verse?” I said:

“Then on that day you shall most certainly be questioned about the
boons.”

He said: “By Allah, you will never be asked about this food.” Then he
put on such a wide smile that his teeth showed and he asked, “Do you
know what that bounty is?” “No,” said I. He said: “We are the
bounties.”[^46]

There are a large number of traditional reports on this topic that are
quoted in *Burhan* and other books.

If it is said: In some traditions, ‘bounty’ is interpreted as security,
health, dates and cool water. Then how can we reconcile them with the
above tradition?

I say: There is no contradiction between these traditions because the
Imams have spoken of a particular bounty in each tradition, this does
not mean that it is limited to that particular thing. That which proves
this matter is a traditional report recorded in *Burhan* from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (as) when he said:

“We are from the bounties.”

Indeed the existence of the Imam is among the greatest of the divine
bounties because it is root of all the apparent and hidden bounties. It
is on the basis of this, it is said that on the Judgment Day people
would be asked about the bounties.[^47]

As for tasty food and cool water etc., Allah, the Mighty and the High
would not ask His servants about them – since it is mentioned in some
traditions – in other words all the people would be questioned about the
Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imam (as). One who has thanked Allah for
this great bounty and had been among the followers and devotees of the
Infallibles (as) would be from the successful ones and he would then not
be asked about other bounties.

But if he is from the opponents and disbelievers he would be
interrogated about every bounty – small and big – he would be taken to a
complete accounting which is sometime referred to as the ‘Soo-al-hisaab’
(evil accounting).

By this explanation we can reconcile the traditional reports which are
apparently contradictory as some traditions state that the Almighty
Allah is more dignified than that He should ask His servants about food
and water that He bestowed them. But in other traditional reports it is
mentioned that the lawful things of the world would be asked about.

The explanation of this matter is that the accounting will be there for
sure and the Holy Qur’an proves this, but the people are of various
kinds:

1. Some would be exempted from the whole accounting, and this has no
contradiction with the verses of Qur’an that are talking about the
accounting since the verses are absolute and they could be specific and
restricted. It is thus quoted from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) in *Tafseer
Qummi* that he said:

“The Imam of its time would take the account of every community. The
Imams would recognize their friends and their enemies by their faces and
this is mentioned in the words of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلَى الْأَعْرَافِ رِجَالٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And on the most elevated places there shall be men.” (Qur’an, Surah
Araaf 7:46)***

They are the Imams.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعْرِفُونَ كُلًّا بِسِيمَاهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Who know all by their marks.”*** (Qur’an, Surah Araaf 7:46)

They would give the scroll of deeds of their friends in their right
hands and they would enter Paradise without accounting; and they would
give the scroll of their enemies in their left hands and they would head
towards Hell without any accounting.”[^48]

In the same book it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as)
that he said regarding the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلَّذِينَ أَحْسَنُوا الْحُسْنَىٰ وَزِيَادَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“For those who do good is good (reward) and more (than this).”
(Qur’an, Surah Yunus 10:26)***

*“Husna* is Paradise and *Ziyadah* is the world. Whatever Allah gives
them in the world He will not take account from them in the
hereafter.”[^49]

A similar tradition is mentioned in *Biharul Anwar* quoting Amirul
Momineen (as).

It is the group of the same believers who did not spend the divine
bounties in the path of His displeasure and anger. That which proves
this is the word*‘Ahsanoo’* in the holy verse. They have paid thanks for
the bounty of Imam and they fulfilled the rights and duties of *Wilayat*
(mastership).

2. The second group is of those who would have to face the accounting
but the Almighty Allah would pardon them and forgive their sins. He
would take his accounting in such a way that no creature would know
about it. Or the Imam of their time would take their accounts in this
manner. This is a group of believers, who had recognized the great
bounty of *Wilayat* but they wasted other divine bounties or some of
them in way of Allah’s anger and displeasure. The Almighty Allah would
take their accounts but in the end forgive them.

That which supports this is a tradition quoted in *Biharul Anwar* from
*Amali* of Shaykh Sadooq through his own chain of narrators from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said:

“When it would be the Judgment Day they would look upon two believers
who are both eligible for Paradise. One of them was poor and the other
rich in the world. The poor man would say: O my Lord, what am I worth? I
did not possess any such position that I could have dealt with justice
or injustice. You also did not give me any wealth that You can ask me
about the fulfillment of its rights. My livelihood was just enough for
my survival as You know it and You had decreed it.

So the Almighty Allah would say: My servant is right, release him so
that he may proceed to Paradise.

The other person would remain so long that he would be perspiring so
much that if forty camels drank it, it would be sufficient for them.
Then they would enter Paradise. That poor man would ask him: What
delayed you? He would reply: The long accounting. I was continuously
asked about one thing and forgiven and then again asked about another
thing (and this went on) till the Almighty Allah immersed me in His
mercy and put me among the repentants. Who are you? The man will reply:
I am that same beggar who was with you at the accounting place. He
asked: Only this much period in the blessings of Paradise changed
you!”[^50]

And in that same book it is quoted from *Amali* of Shaykh Tusi from His
Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) that he said regarding the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا مَنْ تَابَ وَآمَنَ وَعَمِلَ عَمَلًا صَالِحًا فَأُولَٰئِكَ
يُبَدِّلُ اللَّهُ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ حَسَنَاتٍ ۗ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ غَفُورًا
رَحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Except him who repents and believes and does a good deed; so these
are they of whom Allah changes the evil deeds to good ones; and Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.” (Qur’an, Surah Furqan 25:70)***

He said: They would bring a guilty believer on Judgment Day so that his
account may be taken. Then the Almighty Allah would personally take his
accounts and none of the people would know about his sins. His sins
would be mentioned to him and he would confess to them.

Then Allah, the Mighty and Sublime would say to the scribes: Change them
into good deeds and make them visible to the people. People would say:
This man doesn’t have a single guilt. Then the Almighty Allah would
order him to be taken to Paradise. This is the exegesis of this verse
and it is especially about the sinners from among our Shias.”[^51]

In the same book it is narrated from *Uyun Ahkbar ar-Reza* through the
author’s own chain of narrators that Ibrahim bin Abbas Suli has reported
thus:

One day I was in the service of Ali bin Moosa ar-Reza (as) when he said
to me: “There is no real bounty in the world.”

A *Faqih* present there said: Allah, the Mighty and Sublime says:

“Then on that day you shall most certainly be questioned about the
boons.”

Is this bounty of the world not cold water?

His Eminence, Reza (as) said with his voice raised:

“You have interpreted in this way and you explained the meaning of
‘bounty’ in different ways. Some have said: It is cold water, other
claimed: It is good food, yet others stated: it is good sleep and
certainly, my father has narrated from his father, Abu Abdillah (as)
that these statements of yours regarding the verse:

“Then on that day you shall most certainly be questioned about the
boons.”

Were mentioned to him. He became angry and said: Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime would question His servants about what He has bestowed and given
them as bounty and He will not remind about His favors. Reminding about
favors is considered a bad quality in the people, how can be attributed
to the Creator something that is not acceptable from His servants?
However, the ‘bounty’ is love and *Wilayat* for us Ahle Bayt. After
*Tauheed* and *Nubuwwat* the Almighty Allah would ask about that because
if he has fulfilled their rights properly He would give him the bounty
of Paradise which is eternal.

And indeed, my father has narrated from his father from Muhammad bin Ali
from his father Ali bin al-Husain from his father Husain bin Ali from
his father that he said: the Messenger of Allah (S) said: O Ali, the
first thing that every man will be asked after death is about the
testimony of ‘There is no god, except Allah.’ And that ‘Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah’ and that you are the *Wali* (master) of the
believers since the Almighty Allah has appointed that *Wilayat* for you
and I appointed it for you.  
 Thus all those who confess to it and have faith in it would achieve the
‘bounty’ that is going to remain forever.”[^52]

In *Tafseer Burhan* Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) has been reported to have
said:

“The Almighty Allah, the Blessed and the High, whenever He wants to take
the account of the believer, He gives him the scroll his deeds in his
right hand and begins to take his account saying: My servant, you did
this and that and in this way and that way? He will say: Yes, my Lord, I
have done all these things. Then the Almighty Allah says: I have
forgiven you and have changed your sins into good deeds…”[^53]

3. The third group is of those who would be questioned about everything
they have been given as a bounty from the Imam – big or small – so much
so that they would also be questioned about dates, cold water and things
like that as Amirul Momineen (as) is reported to have said in another
tradition:

- and they shall not be forgiven. They would be those who would not have
thanked the Almighty for the great bounty, that is the *Wilayat* of the
Imam and his being is. The Almighty Allah says in Surah Raad:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلَّذِينَ اسْتَجَابُوا لِرَبِّهِمُ الْحُسْنَىٰ ۚ وَالَّذِينَ لَمْ
يَسْتَجِيبُوا لَهُ لَوْ أَنَّ لَهُمْ مَا فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا
وَمِثْلَهُ مَعَهُ لَافْتَدَوْا بِهِ ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمْ سُوءُ
الْحِسَابِ وَمَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ ۖ وَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“For those who respond to their Lord is good; and (as for) those who
do not respond to Him, had they all that is in the earth and the like
thereof with it they would certainly offer it for a ransom. (As for)
those, an evil reckoning shall be theirs and their abode is hell, and
evil is the resting-place.” (Qur’an, Surah Raad 13:18)***

In *Biharul Anwar* it is narrated from Ayyashi through his own chain of
narrators that Imam Sadiq (as) said regarding the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“An evil reckoning shall be theirs.”***

“That is the long time during which the sins he has committed would be
accounted for but the good deeds that he has done would not be taken
into account.”[^54]

I say: It is because of their denial of the great divine bounty due to
which good deeds are accepted.

4. The fourth group would be of those about whom His Eminence, the Chief
of those Who Prostrate (Sayyid-us-Saajideen) (as) has said in the sermon
of Friday as follows:

“And know that scales would not be set for the polytheists and the
scroll would not be unfurled for them. Rather some groups would be
herded towards Hell…”[^55]

Anyone who studies and investigates into traditional reports would
accept this research.

Here we discussed a matter in detail which though it was beyond the
scope of our discussion, it is that thankfulness must be observed for
the bounties of His Eminence.

Though the bounties of His Eminence – may Allah bless him – during the
period of his reappearance have a special significance, as traditions
have been recorded on this matter. Among them is that: In *Biharul
Anwar* it is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that he said:

“My Ummah will enjoy a leisure in the time of the Mahdi (aj) the like of
which they have never enjoyed. The heavens will shower over them
bountifully and the earth will not leave any vegetation but bring it
forth.”[^56]

Also in that book under the tradition of Mufaddal bin Umar it is
narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said:

“…Then Mahdi will return to Kufa and the sky would rain golden locusts –
just as the Almighty Allah rained them on Ayyub in Bani Israel - and on
his companions treasures of the earth from gold and jewels and … he
would distribute…”[^57]

#### Help of Islam, Forbidding Evil and Enjoining Good by His Eminence

Each of these matters are motivations, according to reason as well as
religious law to pray for one who performs these actions, as those who
enjoin good and forbid evil are defenders of religion and shelters for
Muslims and the Qur’anic verses and traditions in large numbers have
stressed observance of these two Islamic duties. In *Kafi* it is
narrated from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) in a lengthy tradition
that he said:

“Enjoining good and forbidding evil is the path of the prophets and the
style of the reformers. It is an important duty and through it,
obligatory duties are established and tendencies remain safe and the
earnings become lawful, and injustices are repelled and the earth is
inhabited and revenge is taken from the enemies in an equitable manner.
And the affair of religion is made firm. So you must deny by your hearts
and speak it with your tongue and hit at the faces of sinners and do not
fear the criticism of anyone in the way of Allah.”[^58]

In *Layali al-Akhbaar* it is recorded from the Holy Prophet (S) that he
said:

“As long as people practice enjoining good and forbidding evil and
cooperate in good deeds they shall always remain in happiness and
prosperity. Thus if they do not practice this deed, bounties would be
taken away from them and they would dominate each other and help would
remain for them neither in the earth nor in the heavens.”

It is narrated from His Eminence that he said:

“If people do not enjoin good and do not forbid evil and do not have the
leadership of the righteous ones of my Ahle Bayt, the Almighty Allah
would make the evil and the wicked of them rule over them. At that time
when the devout ones of them supplicate, their supplications would not
be accepted.”  
 There are exceeding number of traditions on this topic and in the
discussion of the similarities of His Eminence with His Eminence, the
Chief of the Martyrs, we have seen how the Imam had struggled and
strived to enjoin good and forbid evil. And how his efforts had been
such that no one else has struggled so much. Since the Imam of the Age
(as) is appointed by the Almighty Allah to remove all the evil from the
world. In a way that no one else will remain who can be given refuge for
his own evil deeds.

In the book of *al-Muhajja* under the exegesis of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ إِنْ مَكَّنَّاهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَقَامُوا الصَّلَاةَ
وَآتَوُا الزَّكَاةَ وَأَمَرُوا بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَنَهَوْا عَنِ
الْمُنْكَرِ ۗ وَلِلَّهِ عَاقِبَةُ الْأُمُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who, should We establish them in the land, will keep up prayer
and pay the poor-rate and enjoin good and forbid evil; and Allah’s is
the end of affairs.” (Qur’an, Surah Hajj 22:41)***

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) that he said:

“It is for Aale Muhammad, Mahdi and his companions. Allah, the Mighty
and the High would give the control of the whole world to them and
reveal the religion. And Allah, the Mighty and the High would destroy
the innovations and falsehood through him and his companions in the same
way as the Sufyanis have killed the truth. Till there would not remain
any trace of oppression and they will enjoin good and forbid evil and
the end of matters is in the hands of Allah.”

Now that you know this matter, I say: It is possible to give two reasons
that it is recommended, rather compulsorily for every Muslim to pray for
one who enjoins good and forbids evil:

First: It is that reason and religious law order to pray for the well
being of and to support those who enjoin good and forbid evil because
they are the helpers of religion of Allah and the defenders of its
limits; as enjoining good and forbidding evil is itself a favor on the
Muslims and an act of kindness towards them. And this meaning is
absolutely clear.

Second: It is that the first stage of forbidding evil is denial by
conscience. And this matter though hidden and internal, has numerous
important effects and is very much valuable that are seen through the
organs and limbs. That which proves this is a tradition mentioned in
*Kafi* through a trustworthy chain of narrators almost of authentic
quality reporting from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) that he
said:

Amirul Momineen (as) said: “The Holy Prophet (S) ordered us to face the
sinners with a frown and an angry face.”[^59]

In that same book through a single narrator it is mentioned that His
Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) said:

“Allah, the Mighty and Sublime sent two angels to a town to turn it
upside down.

When they reached there, they saw a man calling Allah and paying
obeisance to Him. One angel said to another: Do you not see this
worshipper? He replied: Why? Do what the Almighty Allah has ordered. He
said: No, I will not do anything till I once again take fresh orders
from my Lord. So he returned to Allah, the Mighty and the High and said
in a polite manner: O my Lord, I had gone to that town. I saw such and
such servant of Yours calling You and paying obeisance in Your court.
The Almighty Allah said: Go and do what I had commanded you as this
person was such that he never made his face contorted in anger for
Me.”[^60]

And numerous other reports…that which is implied by this is that if the
believer sees an evil which he is not having the power to forbid and
prevent, he must at least oppose it by his heart and he must pray to the
Almighty Allah to send a person who is capable of preventing that evil.
In the same way, it is necessary for him to pray for one who forbids
evil.

And this condition is natural for the believing men and believing women
and it is present in their nature. And since we know that the one to
remove all evils and one who will destroy all ills and disputes is that
same Qaim Mahdi (aj), it is incumbent on us that we beg the Almighty
Allah to hasten his reappearance and help and assist him for removing
the various evils and prohibited things.

#### Nida (Call) of His Eminence

Reason and religious law has made it compulsory on us to pray for His
Eminence as he has himself asked us to do so. Call of His Eminence has
come in his blessed *Tawqee* recorded in *Ihtijaaj* and other books as
follows:

“Pray more for my early reappearance, as in it lies your success.”[^61]

Explanation regarding this would be presented in Part Five, if Allah,
the High wills.

The point that the call of His Eminence – blessings of Allah and peace
be on him – is a cause for praying for him, is not in need of
elaboration, because it is a natural thing that anyone considering it
with justice would agree that when a righteous and a noble person has
been oppressed and deprived of his rights and he is calling for help, is
it not the right thing to heed his call and go out to help him? Yes, by
Allah, especially if one is from the people of love and*Wilayat* (Shia).
And in Part Three we shall mention the discussion relevant to this
topic.

As for the proof based on religious law, there are numerous traditional
reports. Among them is the one mentioned in *Usool Kafi* from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (as) that the Holy Prophet (S) said:

“One who begins his day without being concerned for the affairs of the
Muslims is not from them. And one who hears a man calling: ‘O Muslims’
and he does not heed his call, is not a Muslim.”[^62]

I say: Do you not hear the call of your Master and leader? Do you heed
his call?

Do you fulfill his needs? That he, through his circumstances and by
statements, calls for your help. Then, O people who have understanding,
help him. And since the discussion has reached this stage, it would not
be out of place to quote some of the calls of His Eminence before and
after his reappearance. And we would also mention the other calls that
are related to His Eminence:

1. In *Biharul Anwar* it is quoted from Nomani through his own chain of
narrators from Abu Baseer from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said:

“Qaim (aj) would not reappear till an announcement in his name is not
made from the sky on Friday eve, the 23rd of the month of Ramadan. I
asked: What would that announcement be? He replied: His name will be
announced with that of his father’s that so an so, son of so and so is
the Qaim Aale Muhammad (as). Listen to him and obey him. Then there
would not remain any living thing but that it would hear that call. The
announcement would be so loud that sleeping people would wake up and
come out in their courtyards. Rather the veiled ladies would also be
brought out. And hearing this, Qaim (aj) will rise up. And this
announcement would be made by Jibraeel.”[^63]

In *Kamaluddin* it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as)
that he said:

“A caller will call out from the sky that so and so son of so and so is
Imam. And he would call out his name. While Iblees, may Allah curse him,
would call out from the earth, in the same way as he had called the Holy
Prophet (S) on the night of Uqbah.”[^64]

2. In the same book it is narrated from Abu Hamza Thumali that he said:

I asked His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as): Abu Ja’far (Imam Baqir
a.s.) says: The advent of Sufyani is inevitable. He replied:

“Yes, and the conflict of Bani Abbas, the killing of the Pure Soul
(Nafs-e-Zakiyya), the advent of Qaim (aj) are among the inevitable
occurrences. I asked: How would the call be? He said: On the first day
the caller will call out from the sky: Indeed, the truth is with Ali and
his Shias. After that Iblees, may Allah curse him, will call at the end
of the day that: Indeed, the truth is with Uthman and his followers.
Thus at that time those who are inclined to falsehood will fall into
doubt.”[^65]

3. In *Biharul Anwar* it is quoted from Ayyashi from Ajlan Abu Salih
that he said:

I heard His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) say: “The days and the
nights will not end till the caller announces from the sky: O people of
truth come away, O people of falsehood come away. Thus the former would
separate from the latter and the latter would separate from the former.”
The narrator says: I asked: “May Allah bless you, after this
announcement would they again mix together?” He replied: “No, the
Almighty Allah says in the Holy Qur’an:

“On no account will Allah leave the believers in the condition which you
are in until He separates the evil from the good.”[^66]

4. Aso in that book in a lengthy tradition from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far
Baqir (as) it is mentioned that he said:

“Thus Qaim (aj) would stand between the *Rukn* and *Maqaam* and perform
the prayer and his deputy would also be with him. After that he would
say: O people, we ask Allah to help us against those who oppress us and
take away our rights. One who argues about Allah should know that I am
the most deserving person with regard to the Almighty Allah.

Anyone who argues with me with regard to Adam should know that I am the
nearest one to Adam. And one who argues with me with regard to Nuh
should know that I am the nearest one to Nuh. And one who argues with me
with regard to Ibrahim should know that I am the nearest one to Ibrahim.
And one who argues me with regard to Muhammad (S) should know that I am
the nearest one to Muhammad (S).

And one who argues with me with regard to the prophets should know that
I am the nearest one to the prophets. One who talks with me with regard
to the Book of Allah should know that I am the nearest one to the Book
of Allah. We and every Muslim would give sacrifice today as we have been
oppressed and we have been made homeless, and injustice has been done to
us and we have been forced to leave our homes, our property and
families. Today we beseech the Almighty to help us and all the Muslims.
By Allah three hundred and odd persons, among whom would be fifty women,
would come and gather at Mecca without fail, like autumnal clouds and
this is what the Almighty Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُوا يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللَّهُ جَمِيعًا ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ
عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together; surely Allah
has power over all things.” (Qur’an, Surah Baqarah 2:148)***

At that time a man from the family of the Holy Prophet (S) would say:
This is the town whose people are oppressors. Then he would leave Mecca
with those who accompany him numbering three hundred and odd persons
would pledge allegiance to him between the *Rukn* and *Maqaam* after
seeing the pledge of the Holy Prophet (S) and the flag and the weapon of
His Eminence. And it is at the time when his deputy would be
accompanying him. After that the announcer will call out from the sky
under his name and command in Mecca till all the people of the world
would hear (his name).”[^67]

5. In *Ghaibat Nomani* it is mentioned from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far
Baqir (as) that he said:

“If you see a great fire burning in the east for three days or seven
days, then wait for the victory of Muhammad’s progeny, if Allah wills,
Allah is Mighty, Wise.”

Then he said: “The cry will not occur except in the month of Ramadan
because Ramadan is the month of Allah and the cry is the cry of Jibraeel
to the people.”

Then he added: “A call will come from the heaven with the name of Qaim
(aj). It will be heard by everyone in the east and the everyone in the
west. The cry will make every sleeper awake, every stander sit and every
sitter stand because of fright. Allah will have mercy upon whoever
submits to the cry and obeys the caller because the first cry will be
the cry of Jibraeel.”

Then he said: “The cry will be in the month of Ramadan, on Friday eve,
which will be the 23rd of the month. Do never doubt that. Listen and
obey. At the end of the day there will be the voice of Iblees, the
cursed, calling out: ‘So and so (Uthman) is killed unjustly’ just to
make people doubt and become confused. On that day many people would
doubt and become confused…”[^68]

6. In the same book it is narrated from Abdullah bin Sinan that he said:

I was in the presence of His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) when I
heard a man from Hamadan say: These Sunnis criticize us and tell us: You
claim that a caller from heaven will call out the name of the man of
deliverance.

His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) became so angry. He changed his
sitting position and said: “Do not narrate this from me but narrate it
from my father and you are not to be blamed for that. I have heard my
father saying: By Allah, it has been mentioned in the Qur’an. Allah has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ نَشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِمْ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ
أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven
so that their necks should stoop to it.” (Qur’an, Surah Shuara 26:4)***

Everyone on the earth then will submit to that (the call coming from the
heaven) and his neck will stoop when a call is heard from the heaven
announcing that: ‘The right is with Ali Ibne Abi Talib and his
followers.’ The next day Iblees will rise in the space until he
disappears from the people of the earth and calls out: ‘The right is
with Uthman bin Affan and his followers. He has been killed unjustly, so
you are to avenge his blood.’

Allah will confirm the believers, who believe in the first call and then
those, whose hearts are full of diseases, will doubt and become
confused. By Allah, the disease of the heart is enmity towards us. Then
they will turn away from us and begin to criticize us. They will say
that the first call is a piece of magic of the people of this house
(Ahle Bayt).

Then His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) recited this Qur’anic verse:

“And if they see a miracle they turn aside and say: Transient
magic.”[^69]

7. In the same book it is narrated from Zurarah that he said:

I heard His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) say: “A caller will call
out from the heaven that so-and-so is the Emir and that Ali and his
followers are the victorious ones.”[^70]

8. It is also mentioned that Abu Baseer reports Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as)
saying:

“It will be announced in the name of His Eminence, Qaim (aj) that: O
so-and-so son of so-and-so, rise up.”[^71]

9. The voice of His Eminence himself: We have explained about it in his
resemblance to his forefather, His Eminence, Abu Abdillah al-Husain
(as).

10. In *Ghaibat Nomani* in the report of Huzaifa bin Mansoor it is
narrated that His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) said:

“The Almighty Allah has a banquet at a place called Qirqisiya where a
caller from the heaven calls out: O birds of the sky and beasts of the
earth, come to eat and be satiated of the flesh of the tyrants.”[^72]

11. Again in a lengthy tradition it is reported that His Eminence, Abu
Ja’far Baqir (as) said:

“The commander of Sufyani’s army will stop in the desert. A caller from
the heaven will call out: O desert, destroy these people. The desert
will sink with the army and none of them will escape death except three
persons from the Kalb tribe, whose faces Allah will turn towards their
backs…”[^73]

12. In *Biharul Anwar,* in a lengthy tradition from Amirul Momineen (as)
it is narrated that he said:

“And in the month of Ramadan from the east at dawn a caller will call
out: O people of guidance come together. And after sunset a caller will
say: O people of falsehood, come together.”[^74]

13. In *Kamaluddin* it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq
(as) that he said:

“The first one to pledge allegiance to Qaim (aj) is Jibraeel who would
come down in the form of a white bird and give him oath of allegiance.
Then keeping one foot on the Holy Kaaba and another on the Holy Qods,
issue such a loud call that when the creatures hear it, they would cry:

“Allah’s commandment has come, therefore do not desire to hasten
it.”[^75]

14. In *Biharul Anwar* it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far
Baqir (as) that he said:

“As if I can see Qaim (aj) on the day of Aashura, on Saturday standing
between the *Rukn* and *Maqaam* and Jibraeel is announcing before him:
Allegiance is for Allah. Then he would fill the earth with justice and
equity like it would have been fraught with injustice and
oppression.”[^76]

15. In *Ghaibat Nomani* it is narrated by Ubaid bin Zurarah that His
Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) said:

“The name of Qaim (aj) will be called out (from the heaven). It will be
said to him while he is behind the place of Ibrahim: Your name has been
called out. What are you waiting for? Then his hand will be taken to pay
oath of allegiance.”

Zurarah said: Praise be to Allah! We often heard that Qaim (aj) would be
paid allegiance unwillingly and we did not know the reason behind that.
Though we knew this unwillingness is not a sin.[^77]

16. In the same book it is narrated from Abdullah bin Sinan that he
said:

I heard His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) say:

“Death and killing will spread among the people until they resort to the
Kaaba. Then a caller (from the heaven) will call out when fighting and
killing become so violent: What are all these fights and killing for?
Your man is so-and-so.”[^78]

17. In *Biharul Anwar* it is narrated from the Messenger of Allah (S)
that he said:

“Mahdi will reappear having a cloud that shall be shading him; upon
which a caller would be calling: This Mahdi is the Caliph of Allah.
Follow him.”[^79]

In another report it is reported as follows:

“There is a white cloud over his head which would be shading him from
the Sun. A call will be made in such a clear voice that all the Jinns
and human beings in the east and the west of the earth would hear it. It
will say: He is Mahdi from Aale Muhammad, he would fill the earth with
justice and equity like it would have been fraught with injustice and
oppression.”[^80]

18. In *Ghaibat Nomani* it is reported by Hasan bin Mahboob that His
Eminence, Reza (as) said:

“As if I can see him pleasing the hearts of the people. A call will be
made, such that all those who are near as well as far would hear it. And
that call would be a mercy for the believers and a punishment for the
disbelievers. I asked: May my parents be sacrificed on you, what is
that? He replied: Three calls would be made in the month of Rajab, first
would be:

Verily, the curse of Allah is on the oppressors.

Second:

The near event draws nigh, O group of believers.

Third: They would see a body clearly before the Sun and it would be
calling: The Almighty Allah has sent so-and-so to overthrow the tyrants.

At that time the deliverance of the believers would take place and the
Almighty Allah would bestow cure to their breasts and remove the knots
from their hearts.”[^81]

19. Call of the sword and flag of His Eminence: In a lengthy tradition
in *Kamaluddin* it is quoted from the ninth Imam, from his forefathers
from the Messenger of Allah (S) that he said:

He would be having a standard which would unfurl itself automatically
when the time is ripe for his reappearance. The Almighty Allah would
give it power of speech and it would say: O *Wali* of Allah, march
forward and eliminate the enemies of Allah. And he would have two flags
and two emblems. And he is having a sheathed sword, which at the time of
reappearance would come out of its sheath automatically and Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime would bestow power of speech to it and it would call
out to His Eminence: O *Wali* of Allah, march forward as it is not right
for you to avoid the enemies of Allah. So he would march forward and
eliminate the enemies of Allah.”[^82]

20. In *Biharul Anwar* it is quoted from His Eminence, Ali bin al-Husain
(as) that he said regarding Imam Qaim (aj):

“Then they would sit under the common locust-tree; Jibraeel would come
to him in the form of a man from Kalb tribe and say: O servant of Allah,
why are you sitting here? He would reply: I am waiting for the night so
that I may move to Mecca and I don’t like setting out in this hot
weather. Then Jibraeel would smile and when he smiles, His Eminence
would recognize him that he is Jibraeel.

Then Jibraeel would take his hand and do *Musafeha* (handshake) with
him, salute him and say: Arise, I have brought a steed for you called
Buraq. So His Eminence would mount it and reach mount Razva. At that
time His Eminence, Muhammad and His Eminence, Ali (as) would arrive and
write for him a long proclamation that may be read out to the people.
Then he would come out to Mecca where people would be gathered.

Imam Sajjad (as) said: Then a man would come forward to His Eminence and
call out: O people this is one you were in anticipation of, He is
calling to the same thing that the Holy Prophet (S) was calling for.
Then they would arise from their place. Then His Eminence would himself
arise and say: O people, I am so-and-so son of so-and-so. I am the son
of Prophet of Allah. I am calling you to that to which the Prophet of
Allah called.

Then some people would get up to kill him, and three hundred or three
hundred and odd persons would get up and prevent them from this. Fifty
persons from Kufa and the rest from other people would not recognize
each other and would have gathered there without prior decision.”[^83]

21. Call of the announcer of His Eminence saying: ‘Pay attention, no one
should carry any rations with him’, which we have already discussed in
the resemblance to His Eminence, Moosa (as).

22. In *Biharul Anwar* it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah
Sadiq (as) that he said:

“When Qaim (aj) arises there would not remain any place where the
following statement does not echo: There is no god except Allah and
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.”[^84]

23. In *Ghaibat* of Shaykh Nomani it is narrated from Aban bin Taghlib
that he said:

I was with His Eminence, Ja’far bin Muhammad (as) in a masjid in Mecca
when His Eminence took my hand and said: “O Aban, the Almighty Allah
would bring three hundred and thirteen persons in this Masjid of yours.
The people of Mecca know that neither their (those men’s) fathers nor
grandfathers have been created yet. They will come with their swords on
their shoulders. On each sword the name of its owner, his father’s name,
his aspect and lineage are written. Then a caller will call out” “This
is Mahdi. He judges with the judgments of Prophet Dawood and Prophet
Sulaiman. He does not ask for evidence.”[^85]

24. In the same book it is narrated from His Eminence that: “And the
Almighty Allah would make a wind to blow from every wilderness that
would say:

This is Mahdi, who judges according to the judgment of Dawood and does
not ask for evidence.”[^86]

A tradition with almost similar meaning is mentioned in *Kamaluddin*.

25. In the same book is a tradition from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) a part
of which was mentioned in the discussion about the flag of His Eminence:

“The first thing on his agenda would be that he would cut off the hand
of Bani Shaiba and hang it upon the Kaaba and the announcer of His
Eminence would call out: This was a thief of the property of
Allah.”[^87]

26. In *Biharul Anwar* it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah
Sadiq (as) that he said:

“The first thing on the agenda of justice that Qaim (aj) would perform
is that: the announcer of His Eminence would call out: Those who are
performing the recommended Hajj may please leave the Black Stone and
circumambulation for those who are performing obligatory Hajj.”[^88]

27. In the tradition of Mufaddal it is mentioned:

“Then he will stand between *Rukn* and *Maqaam* and call out loudly: O
my deputies! My special helpers, whom the Almighty Allah had kept alive
on the earth since before my reappearance to help me. Come to me at
once! Thus these people will hear him from the east and the west,
wherever they might be, whether busy in worship or sleeping on their
beds. His voice will reach to everyone of them and in an instant they
would all reach Mecca and join him between *Rukn* and *Maqaam*. Then the
Almighty Allah will command the ‘*Noor*’ and a pillar of light will be
established from the earth to the heavens through which all the
believers of the earth receive light. The light of this effulgence will
even enter their homes by which the believers shall be extremely happy.
While they would not be aware of the reappearance of the Qaim of us,
Ahle Bayt (as). Thus they would be in the service of His Eminence the
next morning and they would be three hundred and thirteen persons, equal
to the number of companions of the Holy Prophet (S) on the day of the
battle of Badr.”[^89]

28. It is mentioned in the same book that:

“The announcer of Mahdi would call out that whoever loves the two
companions of the Messenger of Allah (S) should move to one side. So the
people will divide into two groups, a group that loves them and a group
that is aloof from them. Then Mahdi would present aloofness of the two
to his followers.

They would say: O Mahdi of the progeny of the Messenger of Allah (S),
since at that time we were not aware of your status and the position
that the Almighty Allah has given you we did not become aloof from them.
Should we become aloof from them now inspite of seeing their bodies so
fresh and how the leafless tree became green due to them?

By Allah we seek aloofness from you and those who have faith in you and
from those who don’t bring faith on them, and those who have hung them
on the tree and dug them out of the grave and done this with them. Thus
Mahdi (aj) will order the black wind to blow on them and they will fall
dead like dry date palms…”[^90]

29. It is also mentioned in that book that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) said:

“The first thing on the agenda of Mahdi (aj) is that he would have it
announced openly in all the world: Pay attention, if from among our
Shias anyone owes anything to anyone he must inform us so that it may be
repaid. Thus even if a piece of garlic or a grain of mustard is owed by
a Shia it would be repaid. All the debts shall be repaid even if they
constitute huge amounts of gold and silver or some other wealth.”[^91]

30. It is mentioned in *Biharul Anwar* in a tradition narrated through
Ahle Sunnat channels that the Holy Prophet (S) said:

“…till that time that His Eminence would order that a caller announce,
‘Who is there who has a need for wealth?’ And no one rises from the
people except one who says, ‘I’. The caller says, ‘Go to the treasurer
and tell him that the Mahdi orders you to give me riches.’

He says to the treasurer, throw, while he is collecting the riches in
the tail of his shirt. Remorse overwhelms him and he says, ‘I have been
the greediest soul from the Ummah of Muhammad and have failed the
contentment that dominates them.’ He returns the riches but they are not
taken back from him. It is said to him, ‘We do not take back something
we have given away.’”[^92]

#### Advice of His Eminence about Allah, the Messenger and the Believers

All these topics, according to the dictates of reason and religious law
are initiatives for praying for His Eminence and that which proves this
are all those traditions that are recorded about the efforts of His
Eminence in revival of the religion of Allah and the exaltation of the
word of Allah, elimination of the enemies of Allah, establishing peace
in the lands and guiding the people to truth. In addition to this is the
point mentioned in the *Ziarat* of His Eminence:

Peace be on you O giver of good advice.

The same point is also mentioned in the supplication recited after the
*Ziarat* quoted from His Eminence. And in one of the blessed epistles of
His Eminence, it is mentioned as follows:

“So fear Allah and submit to us, and leave the matter to us as the
return is towards us, just as it is mentioned (that the matter of
religion) also began with us, and do not try to unveil that which is
concealed from you; and don’t incline to the right and deviate from the
left, and make us your aim with love based on a clear practice, as we
advise you; and the Almighty Allah is a witness upon me and you.”[^93]

This statement is sufficient for the betterment of the condition of the
world and the hereafter.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 53, Pg. 181

[^2]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 3, Pg. 79

[^3]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 333

[^4]: Tafseer al-Qummi, Vol. 2, Pg. 416

[^5]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 53, Pg. 85

[^6]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52

[^7]: Al-Muhajja, Pg. 746

[^8]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 337

[^9]: Muhajj ad-Dawaat, Pg. 7

[^10]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 15, Pg. 11

[^11]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 15, Pg. 10

[^12]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 8, Pg. 24

[^13]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 1, Pg. 302

[^14]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 194

[^15]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 194

[^16]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 195

[^17]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 195

[^18]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 102, Pg. 227

[^19]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 102, Pg. 215

[^20]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 86, Pg. 62

[^21]: Tafseer Al-Burhan; Vol. 3, Pg. 136, Under the exegesis of verse
24:40

[^22]: Ghayat al-Maraam Pg.194

[^23]: Ghayat al-Maraam Pg. 189

[^24]: Majma al-Bayan, Vol. 1, Pg. 224

[^25]: Makarimul Akhlaq, Pg. 16 (Beirut)

[^26]: It is possible that this Paradise is having two names. Therefore
in the first tradition it is called ‘Firdaus’ and in the second it is
called ‘Adn’. And Allah knows best. (The Author)

[^27]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 10, Pg. 22

[^28]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 433

[^29]: This tradition is not in contradiction to the one which says that
His Eminence was born in the night because he was born at the time of
dawn so it can be said that he was born in the day as well it can be
said that he was born at night.

[^30]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 434

[^31]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 434

[^32]: Ithbaath al-Huda, Vol. 7, Pg. 356

[^33]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 194

[^34]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 1, Pg. 253

[^35]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 70

[^36]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 73

[^37]: Jannatul Maawa; Pg. 309

[^38]: Tafseer al-Qummi, Vol. 2, Pg. 253

[^39]: Al-Muhajja, Pg. 748

[^40]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 330

[^41]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 71

[^42]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 195

[^43]: Tafseer Al-Burhan, Vol. 4, Pg. 289

[^44]: Tafseer Al-Burhan, Vol. 4, Pg. 502

[^45]: Tafseer Al-Burhan, Vol. 4, Pg. 503

[^46]: Tafseer Al-Burhan, Vol. 4, Pg. 503

[^47]: Ghayat al-Maraam Pg.258

[^48]: Tafseer al-Qummi, Pg. 694

[^49]: Tafseer al-Qummi, Vol. 1, Pg. 311

[^50]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 7, Pg. 259

[^51]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 7, Pg. 261

[^52]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 7, Pg. 272

[^53]: Tafseer Al-Burhan, Vol. 3, Pg. 175

[^54]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 7, Pg. 266

[^55]: Rauda Kafi; Pg. 75

[^56]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 83

[^57]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 53, Pg. 34

[^58]: Furu Kafi; Vol. 5, Pg. 56

[^59]: Kafi; Vol. 5, Pg. 58

[^60]: Kafi; Vol. 5, Pg. 58

[^61]: Ihtijaaj; Vol. 2, Pg. 284

[^62]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 164

[^63]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 119

[^64]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 650

[^65]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 652

[^66]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 222, Surah Aale Imran 3:179

[^67]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 223

[^68]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 253

[^69]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 260, Surah Qamar 54:2

[^70]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 264

[^71]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 279

[^72]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 148. I say: From the tradition also quoted
from Ghaibat Nomani it is learnt that this call would be after the
coming out of Sufyani. (The Author)

[^73]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 280

[^74]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 274

[^75]: Kamaluddin; Vol. 2, Pg. 671, Surah Nahl 16:1

[^76]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 290

[^77]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 263

[^78]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 267

[^79]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 81

[^80]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 378

[^81]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 181

[^82]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 1, Pg. 268

[^83]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 306

[^84]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 340

[^85]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 313

[^86]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 315

[^87]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 361

[^88]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 374

[^89]: Biharul Anwar; Vol.53, Pg. 7

[^90]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 53, Pg. 13. Another report about the
demolishing of the foundations of infidelity and hypocrisy will come at
the end of this section. (The Author)

[^91]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 53, Pg. 34

[^92]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 92

[^93]: Ihtijaaj; Vol. 2, Pg. 279


