The Letter Waw (W)
==================

1. Wilayat (Mastership) Of His Eminence
---------------------------------------

Our *Wilayat* with regard to His Eminence and the *Wilayat* of His
Eminence for the Almighty Allah are of the most important matters that
are incumbent according to reason as well as religion and are
initiatives for praying for His Eminence. Here this would be discussed
in three sub-headings:

Topic One: The *Wilayat* of His Eminence with regard to the Almighty
Allah: Here *Wilayat* pronounced as ‘Walayat’ is in the meaning of love,
thus whosoever has the love of the Almighty Allah is the *Wali* of
Allah. On the basis of this, all believers who are superior and
righteous would be the *Awliya* of the Almighty Allah and that which
proves this is the following verse of Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَا إِنَّ أَوْلِيَاءَ اللَّهِ لَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَا هُمْ
يَحْزَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Now surely the friends of Allah- they shall have no fear nor shall
they grieve. Those who believe and guarded (against evil)…” (Qur’an,
Surah Yunus 10:62)***

It is so because:

“Those who believe and guarded (against evil)…”

In traditions: The Thiqatul Islam, Kulaini through his own chain of
narrators, has narrated from Mufaddal bin Umar that he said: Abu
Abdillah Imam Sadiq (as) said: “When it is the Judgment Day, a caller
would call out: Where are those who have prevented our *Awliya*? So a
group of people would stand up who have no flesh on their faces. At that
moment it would be announced: These are the ones who harassed the
believers and had been inimical to them and they had been arrogant in
their religion. Then it would be ordered that they be taken to
Hell.”[^1]

In the same book it is mentioned in a report of Aban bin Taghlib from
His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) that he said:

When the Holy Prophet (S) was taken up during *Me’raaj* he asked: “O
Lord, what is the position of a believer with You? The Almighty Allah
said: O Muhammad (S), one who disgraces one of My *Awliya* has openly
made war on Me. And I am the most swift in helping My *Awliya*.”[^2]

Also in the same book through the author’s own chain of narrators from
His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) it is mentioned that he said:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The Almighty Allah took me on
*Me’raaj* and revealed to me from behind the veil what He revealed and
said to me: O Muhammad, one who disgraces a devotee of Mine has made war
on Me. And one who makes war on Me, I make war on him. I asked: O my
Lord, who is this*Wali* of Yours? He replied: It is the one who has made
a covenant of *Wilayat* for you, for your successor and your
progeny.”[^3]

As you have understood this, we say: There is no doubt in the necessity
of love and devotion to the *Awliya* of Allah and the necessity of
hatred and enmity to the enemies of Allah. Rather it is a fundamental
requirement of our faith. Reason and religious texts also prove this.

As for reason: Perhaps there is no reason to discuss this.

As for religion: There are widely related texts (*Mutawatir*) about it
but we shall be content by quoting only some of them, for good augury:

1. In *Kafi* through an authentic chain of narrators it is mentioned
from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far the Second, Imam Jawad (as) from his
father from his grandfather that Amirul Momineen (as) said:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The Almighty Allah created Islam,
appointed for it a field, a light, a fort and a help.”

“The breadth of the field of Islam is Qur’an, its light is wisdom and
its fort is good deeds and charitable acts. And as for its helpers and
supporters it is me, my family and our Shias. So have love for my family
and their Shias because when I was taken up to the sky of the world in
*Me’raaj*, Jibraeel introduced to me the folks of the heavens, the
Almighty Allah has entrusted to the hearts of the angels love for my
family and their Shias and it is a trust with them till Judgment Day.

Then he brought me to the inhabitants of the earth and introduced the
people of the world to me. So Allah, the Mighty and Sublime kept in the
hearts of the believers of my Ummah love for me, my family and their
Shias. On the basis of this, the believers of my Ummah guard our trust
till Judgment Day. Know that if someone from my Ummah worships Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime, all his life, but meets Him having hatred of my
family and his Shias, the Almighty Allah has not expanded his heart but
with hypocrisy.”[^4]

2. In the same way it is mentioned in *Kafi* through his own chain of
narrators from Yaqoob bin Zahak from one of our companions that Siraj, a
servant of His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) said:

“Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) was in Hira when he sent me and a group of his
followers…till he said: Thus we returned. Mention was made of some
people. I said: May I be sacrificed on you, we seek aloofness from them
as they are not having the same beliefs as us. He said: They have
*Wilayat* and love for us but they do not have the same beliefs as you,
so you want to be aloof from them? I replied: Yes. He said: So there are
some things that you are also not aware of, thus would it be better for
us to be aloof from you? I said: May I be sacrificed on you, no. He
said: In the same way, there are some matters that are with Allah and
not with us, so should not Allah be aloof of us? I said: No, by Allah,
may I be sacrificed on you. He said: So have love for them and do not be
aloof from them, some of the Muslims have one, some two, some three
portions of faith…”[^5]

This is a lengthy tradition and it is mentioned in the chapter of levels
of faith in *Usool Kafi*.

3. In the chapter of ‘Love for Allah’ in the above book, it is narrated
from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) that he said:

“Among the most solid grasps of faith is that: One should love for
Allah, be angry for Allah, give for Allah and prohibit for Allah.”[^6]

4. And also in the same chapter, it is narrated from His Eminence, the
Messenger of Allah (S) that he said:

“Which is the most firm handle of faith? The companions said: Allah and
His Messenger know better. And some said: Prayer, some said, *Zakat*,
some said fasting and others said Hajj and Umrah, while yet others said
*Jihad*. At that moment the Holy Prophet (S) said: There is an
excellence in everything that you have mentioned but it is not what I
asked. The firmest handle of faith is love in the path of Allah, hatred
in the path of Allah, devotion to the friends of Allah and aloofness
from the enemies of Allah.”

5. It is also related from His Eminence, Sadiq (as) that he said:

“One who does not love for the sake of religion and does not become
angry for the sake of religion, does not have religion.”[^7]

I say: These are some traditions that have come in connection with the
necessity of having regard for the *Awliya* and friends of Allah. And
since the matter has now become clear, I say: There is no doubt that one
who has more perfect faith would also have deeper love for the people of
faith; and one who is a more perfect believer, it is necessary that love
towards him should be more intense because this love is as a result of
the connection of faith that exists between the believers. By this logic
it becomes necessary for you to have more intense love for the Imam of
your time who is the root and handle of faith and the mountain of
*Wilayat* and its fort, than your love for other believers. Rather it is
necessary that you must love His Eminence more than you love your
father, your children and even more than you love yourself as elaborated
in the following verse of the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنْ كَانَ آبَاؤُكُمْ وَأَبْنَاؤُكُمْ وَإِخْوَانُكُمْ
وَأَزْوَاجُكُمْ وَعَشِيرَتُكُمْ وَأَمْوَالٌ اقْتَرَفْتُمُوهَا
وَتِجَارَةٌ تَخْشَوْنَ كَسَادَهَا وَمَسَاكِنُ تَرْضَوْنَهَا أَحَبَّ
إِلَيْكُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ وَجِهَادٍ فِي سَبِيلِهِ
فَتَرَبَّصُوا حَتَّىٰ يَأْتِيَ اللَّهُ بِأَمْرِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: If your fathers and your sons and your brethren and your mates
and your kinsfolk and property which you have acquired, and the
slackness of trade which you fear and dwellings which you like, are
dearer to you than Allah and His Apostle and striving in His way, then
wait till Allah brings about His command…” (Qur’an, Surah Taubah
9:24)***

And also there is a tradition in *Darus Salam* and other books quoted
from *Ilalush Sharai* that the Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“No man has believed till he does not love me more than he loves
himself, and he does not love my progeny more than he loves his own
progeny and family members, and till he does not love my family more
than his own family, and till he does not love my being more than his
own being.”[^8]

The point is that: It is obvious that love is a matter connected to the
conscience and it is a mental condition. However it is having apparent
signs and effects, through which one could know the intensity of ones
love to ones object of love. Among the visible signs of love are: If it
is away from your sight you make it a point to pray for it. If it is in
trouble you must feel sad for it.

But don’t you realize that if you have a handsome son who is your sole
heir and if he is gone on a journey and you don’t know his whereabouts,
there is not a moment in day or night when you are not worried about
him; and you pray for him continuously. And you request the believers
and good people to pray for him. Is all this not because of intense love
and attachment? On the basis of this, anyone who claims to love his
master, does a day pass when you forget him? Thus pray more for him in
his occultation and consider this an opportunity.

Topic Two: It is that our love demands that we must struggle and make
more efforts in praying for His Eminence.

Praying for the object of love is from human nature and this matter is
absolutely clear, however here we follow another view that: It is
necessary that prayers for His Eminence should be given precedence to
praying for everything else. Explanation of this matter requires a
preface that we present as follows:

There are three things that motivate and cause love: Pleasure, profit
and goodness. The most important and perfect is the third one.[^9]
Rather we could say that: The first and second causes also return to the
third.

Goodness implies that the thing should be a cause of goodness. As when a
man knows that the existence of a particular thing is having some
goodness, he is naturally inclined to love it even though the goodness
of that thing may not reach him. And as much is the goodness of that
thing, as much is love and attachment of man towards it, though it would
be according to the level of recognition of the goodness of its
existence. Now that you have understood the preamble to this, you should
know that all the motivations of love have gathered in the love for the
existence of our master, Hazrat Hujjat (aj).[^10]

As for pleasure: Which pleasure is sweeter and loftier for the believers
than seeing the blessed elegance of His Eminence and being honored by
meeting him? As its apparent and hidden pleasures are so great that it
is not possible for you to estimate it because even Amirul Momineen (as)
had expressed the desire for it as mentioned in a tradition from
*Ghaibat Nomani*.

And as for profit: As you learnt in Part Five of the book, all the
benefits and bounties reach the creatures through the being of His
Eminence. In addition to this, are the special benefits and effects
special to the reappearance of His Eminence and how aptly it is said:

You possess sum total of all the virtues that all others have.

And as for the goodness of his being: Our intellects are small and our
thoughts are lowly to understand them as we are not given knowledge
except a little. However everyone understands according to ones
understanding and every believer, as per his share. One who has more
knowledge of the goodness of the being of His Eminence, it is more
important in his view to pray for His Eminence.

Because arranging prayers and making efforts for it, is among the
sources of perfect love and friendship and the perfection of love is
obtained from the perfection of recognition and it is one of the causes
of intensity of preparation of the Holy Imams (as) in reciting
supplications for His Eminence and praying to the Almighty Allah for the
hastening of his reappearance. Some other causes would be explained in
more details in the beginning part of Part Seven.

The conclusion is that: Our love, devotion and *Wilayat* towards His
Eminence necessitates our preparations and efforts to pray for his
reappearance as it is more important than praying for ourselves and that
which is related to us, *Insha Allah Taala*.

Topic Three: *Wilayat* of His Eminence on us: *Wilayat* here pronounced
as *Wilayat* is in the meaning of authority, power and domination. And
*Wilayat*of His Eminence on us is in this manner as mentioned in the
verse:

“The Prophet has a greater claim on the faithful than they have on
themselves.”

As can be seen in a tradition mentioned in Part Three in the right of
the master upon his slave.

Now when we have got certainty and belief that His Eminence is having
precedence over us in all that is connected to us, we consider it
necessary upon us that in all the things that are objects of our
affection, we should consider His Eminence to be more preferable and
having more precedence.

Perhaps the same point is mentioned in the following statement of
*Ziarat* Jamia:

You are having precedence before my needs and desires and intentions in
all my circumstances and affairs.

Thus *Wilayat* of His Eminence necessitates that we, in all matters,
should prefer His Eminence, and the tradition of the Prophet also proves
this. And the most important matter of supplication is that it is the
key of every goodness and the well being of every pious person. Thus it
deserves that we must give precedence to His Eminence over ourselves and
everything related to us in praying for deliverance and success. We have
explained this matter supported by detailed arguments and extensive
proofs.

### Joining His Eminence

The most important wish of the lovers, the final aim of the eager ones
and the ultimate desire of those who have divine recognition is that
most of their supplications and the most important of their aspirations
is regarding the matter of the hastening in joining the Imam of the
time, the Hujjat Ibnul Hasan (aj). How beautifully it is said:

My heart and my eyes are nostalgic about you.

And my life is with you and your remembrance is with me.

I take no pleasure from life till I am able to see you.

Even though I may in the Firdaus of the eternal Paradise.

Among the most significant matters is the impatience to meet him that is
mentioned in the following composition of mine:

1. My youth passed away quickly in separation and the life was spent in
anticipation.

2. In eagerness to join him, I survive, and except for his remembrance,
I don’t derive pleasure from anything.

3. O fulfillment of the best hopes of the worshipper and supplicant, my
eagerness for you is very intense.

4. O the best of the aims and the best of the refuge-givers. – and O
best of those who harken (who say: Here I am) and the best of those who
struggle (do*Sayy*).

5. The bowl of my patience is brimming in your separation as the
sorrowful, the homeless, the mourners and the troubled ones have
abandoned me.

6. O my soul and life, and O my constant comfort, heed my call because
my heart is about to melt with distress.

7. In whichever abode I looked I didn’t find refuge except in your
abode.

8. From the day were created in the world good deeds, justice and
charity, they found no place except with you.

9. Give me refuge by your favor which has blessed all the land and the
seas.

10. If you had not been there the earth would have sunk into itself and
the heart of the dust would have become the repose of the dead.

11. And if you had not been there all the mountains would have
scattered - and if you had not been there the pillars of the sky would
have been shaken.

12. If you had not been there not a seed would have grown from the earth
and not one tree would have borne any fruit.

13. And the Sun and the stars would not have given any light, and no
spring would have burst forth and no lightning would have flashed.

14. And if you had not been there our enemies would have debased us and
we would have had to put on the garment of disgrace.

15. None except you can provide succor – and whoever seeks deliverance
from someone other than you is stupid.

16. O my beloved, my sorrow and distress have prolonged – and hasten for
help before I am finished.

17. You are much higher than the praises I sing about you – you are
better than all that is said in your praise.

[^1]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 351

[^2]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 352

[^3]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 353

[^4]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 46

[^5]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 43

[^6]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 125

[^7]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 127

[^8]: Ilalush Sharai, Pg. 140

[^9]: Because mostly these causes also destroy love, but the being of
our master, the Master of the Time (aj) is such that the benefits of his
presence are forever and therefore pleasure of the believers is
unending. (The Author)

[^10]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 214


