2. Increase In Bounties
=======================

This can be discussed under a few subheadings:

1. It is that the being of His Eminence is a bounty.

2. Thankfulness of bounty is obligatory.

3. Thankfulness of bounty is source of its increase.

4. Meaning of thankfulness.

5. Praying is a kind of thankfulness and it is indication to other types
of thankfulness.

1. The Being Of His Eminence Is A Bounty
----------------------------------------

Both reason and religious texts prove this matter.

Rational proof: There is no doubt that the most important and the most
important of the bounties are those that are sources of discerning and
divine recognition, useful sciences, achieving high grades and bounties
of the hereafter. And this bounty is the Imam himself, as through him is
Allah recognized and worshipped, and the people through him attain high
positions and special bestowals as proved by a large number of
traditional reports some of which we have quoted in Part One of this
book.

As for textual proof: There are a large number of traditional reports
that support this, some of them are as follows:

1. In *Usool Kafi* through his own chain of narrators from His Eminence,
Amirul Momineen (as) in the exegesis of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ بَدَّلُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ كُفْرًا
وَأَحَلُّوا قَوْمَهُمْ دَارَ الْبَوَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Hast thou not seen those who exchanged the bounty of Allah with
unthankfulness…” (Qur’an, Surah Ibrahim 14:28)***

He said:

“We are that bounty which Allah has bestowed on His creatures, and
whoever triumphs on the Day of Resurrection, will triumph through
us.”[^1]

2. In *Ghayat al-Maraam* quoting from *Tafseer* of Ayyashi it is
reported that Amirul Momineen (as) said regarding the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ لَتُسْأَلُنَّ يَوْمَئِذٍ عَنِ النَّعِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then on that day you shall most certainly be questioned about the
boons.” (Qur’an, Surah Takathur 102:8)***

We are the ‘bounty’.”[^2]

A similar tradition has also come down from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as).

3. It is narrated from His Eminence, Abul Hasan Moosa bin Ja’far (as)
that he said:

“We are bounty for the believers and *Alqam* for the disbelievers.”

*Alqam* is colocynth, a bitter fruit which is used to describe something
very offending. Indeed the disbeliever in his corrupted view considers
the Imam to be bitter since he is aloof from the Imam. Or it is possible
that it may imply the Judgment Day when the believer due to his faith
would be given different types of bounties by the Infallible Imams (as)
and the disbeliever due to his infidelity would be subjected to an
everlasting punishment and permanent torture by the Imams.

*Majmaul Bayan* quotes Ayyashi through his own chain of narrators that
His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) said:

“We, Ahle Bayt, are that same bounty the Almighty Allah has bestowed to
His creatures through us. And by us people obtain amity after they had
been disunited. And through us the Almighty Allah has made their hearts
friendly and made them brothers after they had been enemies. And through
us He guided them to Islam and it is the same bounty that would not be
stopped and the Almighty Allah would question the people about the
bounty that He has given them – that is the Prophet and his Family.”[^3]

In *Kifayatul Athar* and *Kamaluddin* it is narrated from Muhammad bin
Ziyad Azadi that he said that he heard Imam Moosa Ibne Ja’far (as) say
regarding the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَسْبَغَ عَلَيْكُمْ نِعَمَهُ ظَاهِرَةً وَبَاطِنَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“and made complete to you His favors outwardly and …inwardly.”
(Qur’an, Surah Luqman 31:20)***

“The apparent bounty is the Imam who is seen and the hidden bounty is
the Imam who is in occultation.” The narrator says: I asked: “Is there
any among the Imams that shall go into occultation?” He replied: “Yes,
his person would be unseen by the people but his remembrance would
remain hidden in the hearts of the believers. And he is the twelfth one
of us. For him the Almighty Allah would make every difficult thing easy
and tame every disobedient one. He would open up the treasures of the
earth for him and make every remoteness a proximity for him.

He would destroy every disobedient sinner and eliminate every
transgressing satan at his hands. He is the son of the best of the
maids. His birth would be concealed from the people and it won’t be
lawful for them to mention his name. Till the time the Almighty Allah
would make him appear. Then he would fill the earth with justice and
equity, as it would be fraught with injustice and oppression.”[^4]

2. Thankfulness Of Bounty Is Obligatory
---------------------------------------

It was mentioned that a healthy intellect commands that thankfulness be
observed for blessings received. Verses of the Holy Qur’an also prove
this matter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاذْكُرُونِي أَذْكُرْكُمْ وَاشْكُرُوا لِي وَلَا تَكْفُرُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Therefore remember Me, I will remember you, and be thankful to Me,
and do not be ungrateful to Me.” (Qur’an, Surah Baqarah 2:152)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ تَأَذَّنَ رَبُّكُمْ لَئِنْ شَكَرْتُمْ لَأَزِيدَنَّكُمْ ۖ
وَلَئِنْ كَفَرْتُمْ إِنَّ عَذَابِي لَشَدِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when your Lord made it known: If you are grateful, I would
certainly give to you more, and if you are ungrateful, My chastisement
is truly severe.” (Qur’an, Surah Ibrahim 14:7)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاشْكُرُوا لِلَّهِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ إِيَّاهُ تَعْبُدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And give thanks to Allah if Him it is that you serve.” (Qur’an,
Surah Baqarah 2:172)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاشْكُرُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ إِيَّاهُ تَعْبُدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And give thanks for Allah’s favor if Him do you serve.” (Qur’an,
Surah Nahl 16:114)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاشْكُرُوا لَهُ ۖ إِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And be grateful to Him; to Him you shall be brought back.” (Qur’an,
Surah Ankaboot 29:17)***

3. Thankfulness Of Bounty Is Source Of Its Increase
---------------------------------------------------

In addition to the verse:

“If you thank…”

There are numerous traditions also that prove this meaning. Some of them
are as follows:

1. In *Kafi* from a chain of narrators that is equal to authentic, from
His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) it is narrated that he said:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The Almighty Allah opens a door for
His servant by his thankfulness whose increase had been stopped.”[^5]

2. In the same book it is narrated from His Eminence, Sadiq (as) that he
said:

It is written in the Torah that: Thank the one who has given you a
blessing and reward the one who has thanked you. Because if blessings
are thanked for, they shall not be destroyed. But if they are not
thanked for they would not be lasting. Thankfulness is the source of
increase in bounties and is a guarantee against their being changed.[^6]

3. Also in the tradition of Muawiyah bin Wahab quoted from His Eminence,
Sadiq (as) it is mentioned that he said:

“Anyone who thanks is given an increase. The Almighty Allah says:

“If you are grateful, I would certainly give to you more…”[^7]

4. Meaning Of Thankfulness
--------------------------

Thankfulness is a recompense for the bounty received and thanklessness
is its denial. I have realized this by the grace and inspiration of the
Almighty Allah and all the explanations about thankfulness go back to
this same point. And also its types that have come in traditions also
revert to this same meaning. And consideration and perfect contemplation
on Qur’anic verses and traditions that are related from Infallible Imams
(as) on this matter also guide to this meaning. For example traditions
that say: The believer is such that all his defects are destroyed. And
that: The most thankful of men with regard to the Almighty Allah is one
who is most thankful to the people. And other such traditions. On the
basis of this, attribution of thankfulness to Allah is a reality, just
as its attribution to the people is also a fact.

This description is the most correct and brief of the explanations about
thankfulness, that: To use or spend the divine bounties in the way they
are meant to be.

As the definition that we have presented includes both thankfulness to
Creator as well as thankfulness to the creatures.

5. Types Of Thankfulness – Praying Is A Type Of Thankfulness
------------------------------------------------------------

When it is understood that thankfulness is a recompense of the kindness
received, it is obvious that it is of different types and their root is
thankfulness by the heart, thankfulness of the Lord and thankfulness of
the parts of the body.

Thankfulness by the heart: It is performed by recognizing the blessing
and knowing that it is from the Almighty Allah, as Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(as) says in the following tradition:

“If one who is given a bounty by the Almighty Allah, recognizes it by
his conscience, he had fulfilled its thanks.”[^8]

Allamah Majlisi (r.a.) says:

“Recognizing by the conscience means knowing the value of that bounty
and realizing that it is the Almighty Allah Who has given him this
bounty.”

I say: Among the effects of this recognition in planning the honoring of
that bounty and the display of its aim by the tongue and body – being
two other types of thankfulness. And among the signs of thankfulness by
the tongue, is mention of praise and admiration and repeated mention of
the bounty and praying for its continuation; and among the signs of
bodily thanks is to make effort and prepare to observe obedience and
worship.

As mentioned in *Kafi* from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) that he
said:

“On a night of her turn Ayesha said: O Messenger of Allah, why do you
subject yourself to so much hardship while the Almighty Allah has
forgiven your past and future sins? He replied: O Ayesha, should I not
be a thankful servant?”

It is also narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said:

“Thankfulness of a bounty is keeping away from prohibited things and the
complete thankfulness is that one says: Praise be to Allah, the Lord of
the Worlds.

I say: The apparent meaning of this tradition is that true thankfulness
is keeping away from sinful acts and praise by the tongue completes it.
And among the bodily signs of thankfulness is giving water for the sake
of Allah as some traditions have mentioned.

Other physical signs include performing the prostration of thanks.

Also that one should give respect to the bounty, for example picking up
a piece of bread from the ground and eating it, and such other things…

Now that you have understood this, I say: When the being of our Master,
Hazrat Hujjat (as) is one of the most important divine blessings on us,
and our recognition of this bounty is itself a great bounty, rather it
is such a blessing that nothing could be compared to it, because it is a
part of perfection of faith and a cause of its completion. And we have
explained that all the apparent and hidden bounties and favors branch
out from this great blessing – that is the existence of the Imam – thus
it is obligatory on us that we try our utmost to perform the thanks of
this bounty so that we may attain other great bounties also as Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime has promised that He would increase the blessings
of those who thank and a divine promise is never broken.

Indeed it must be said that according to correct reasoning it is
impossible to fulfill all the rights of this great divine bounty:

What is apparent from the hand and the tongue

May we be able to offer thankfulness to You as it behoves.

However, we have to do what is possible so that something is
accomplished:

1. Sincere recognition and knowledge of this lofty divine blessing.

2. Relating his merits and publicizing the proofs of this great
personality.

3. Giving *Sadaqah* for the safety of His Eminence.

4. Seeking proximity to him by performing those acts that he likes.

5. Praying to the Almighty to bestow us his true recognition so that we
could be of those who thank and accept him.

6. Arranging for sincere supplication for early reappearance and the
removal of the ending of occultation.

This is one of the types of thankfulness for bounties and that which
support it are the following:

First: It is that this act is a way of honoring and respecting His
Eminence as it is known that whoever wants to pay respect to a person he
prays for him and revives his remembrance among his friends and we have
previously mentioned that paying respect to a bounty is also a kind of
bounty and thankfulness also is a favor in recompense of a favor.

Second: By praying for His Eminence, we would be able to be fully
attentive to him. And it was also said before that being attentive to a
blessing is a type of thankfulness and ignoring it, is a kind of
thanklessness.

That which proves this matter are verses of the Holy Qur’an from Surah
Saba mentioned after the passing away of Sulaiman (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ كَانَ لِسَبَإٍ فِي مَسْكَنِهِمْ آيَةٌ ۖ جَنَّتَانِ عَنْ يَمِينٍ
وَشِمَالٍ ۖ كُلُوا مِنْ رِزْقِ رَبِّكُمْ وَاشْكُرُوا لَهُ ۚ بَلْدَةٌ
طَيِّبَةٌ وَرَبٌّ غَفُورٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَعْرَضُوا فَأَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ سَيْلَ الْعَرِمِ
وَبَدَّلْنَاهُمْ بِجَنَّتَيْهِمْ جَنَّتَيْنِ ذَوَاتَيْ أُكُلٍ خَمْطٍ
وَأَثْلٍ وَشَيْءٍ مِنْ سِدْرٍ قَلِيلٍ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَٰلِكَ جَزَيْنَاهُمْ بِمَا كَفَرُوا ۖ وَهَلْ نُجَازِي إِلَّا
الْكَفُورَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly there was a sign for Saba in their abode; two gardens on
the right and the left; eat of the sustenance of your Lord and give
thanks to Him: a good land and a Forgiving Lord! But they turned aside,
so We sent upon them a torrent of which the rush could not be withstood,
and in place of their two gardens We gave to them two gardens yielding
bitter fruit and (growing) tamarisk and a few lote-trees. This We
requited them with because they disbelieved; and We do not punish any
but the ungrateful.” (Qur’an, Surah Saba 34:15-17)***

In these verses their forsaking is compared to disbelief.

Third: In some authentic books it is narrated from the Messenger of
Allah (S) that he said:

“Reward one who does good to you, if you cannot, pray for him till you
are sure his favor has been recompensed.”[^9]

It is also quoted from the fourth Imam, Zainul Aabideen (as) in *The
Charter of Rights* that he said:

“And as for the right of one who has done a favor to you, it is that you
thank him and do a good turn to him in return and accord respect to him
and pray to Allah with all sincerity in his favor. Thus if you do all
this you have thanked him secretly and openly; and if one day you are
capable, reward him.”[^10]

Fourth: We have previously mentioned that practical thankfulness is that
one should spend every divine blessing in way specified for it by Allah.
If this is not done, it would tantamount to be thanklessness and this is
the meaning of denial of the favor.

Without any doubt, praying of an early reappearance of our master, the
Master of the Time (aj) is from the aims for which the tongue was
created, and by this *Dua* one would be fulfilling the thanks for the
blessing of the tongue.

The proof of what we have stated is: This *Dua* is one of those things
for which the tongue is created, traditional reports and supplications
are recorded from the Family of Revelation about this important matter.
Among the supplications are: *Iftitah*, Day of Arafah, Day of *Dahwul
Ardh*, *Dua* of Yunus bin Abdur Rahman, *Dua* *Amrawi* that has come
from the Imam of the Time (as), *Dua* after Midnight Prayer, and in
Prostration, and *Duas* mentioned in *Kafi*,*Dua* for Friday Morning and
after the Noon and Afternoon Prayer, *Qunoot* of Friday recorded in
*Jamaal al-Usboo*, *Dua* of the 15th of Shaban, *Dua* of 21stRamadan,
*Dua* of our master, His Eminence, Moosa bin Ja’far after *Asr* Prayer
and on Friday after Prayer of Ja’far, *Qunoot* of His Eminence, Imam
Hasan Askari (as) and other numerous prayers…whose mention alone is
sufficient here and their details will be given in Part Seven of this
book.

[^1]: Kafi; Vol. 1, Pg. 217

[^2]: Ghayat al-Maraam Pg. 259

[^3]: Majma al-Bayan, Vol. 10, Pg. 535

[^4]: Kifayatul Athar, 323; Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 368

[^5]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 94

[^6]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 94

[^7]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 95

[^8]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 96

[^9]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 11, Pg. 537

[^10]: Amali, Sadooq, Pg. 304, Gathering no. 59, Beirut


