5. Revival Of The Command Of The Purified Imams (as)
====================================================

This prayer is revival of the command of the Infallible Imams (as). This
much honor is sufficient for the people of certainty that they make
special arrangement for this *Dua*. Some traditions recorded on this
subject are as follows:

1. In *Usool Kafi* through an authentic chain of narrators it is related
from Khatheema that he said:

I went to say farewell to Imam Abu Ja’far Baqir (as). His Eminence said:
“O Khatheema convey salutations to any of our friends that you meet and
advise them about fear of Allah and piety, and that: the rich must be
kind to the poor and the powerful should be sympathetic to the weak.
Those who are alive must attend the funeral of the dead and the people
must visit each other. As this socializing is a way of reviving our
command. May Allah have mercy on the one who revives our command. O
Khatheema, convey to our friends that nothing takes us away from the
chastisement of Allah except (good) deeds; and they can never obtain our
*Wilayat* except by refraining from sins. And the most regretful person
on the day of *Qiyamat* would be the one who praised justice and
generosity but acted in contravention to it…”[^1]

2. It is mentioned in *Biharul Anwar,* quoting from *Amali* of Shaykh
Sadooq from the Eighth Imam, His Eminence, Reza (as) that he said:

“One who attends a gathering where our command is being enlivened, his
heart will not die on the day the hearts die.”[^2]

3. In *Layali* it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said:

“Meet each other and repeat words of knowledge to each other as the
rusted hearts are polished through traditions and by traditions our
command is enlivened and Allah forgives one who enlivens our command.”

[^1]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 175

[^2]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 44, Pg. 278


