6. Distress And Fear Of The Satan
=================================

Praying for early reappearance is a source of increase in the distress
of the accursed Satan and it will cause him to go further away from the
person who prays. The proof of this claim rests on two aspects:

First: Logic/Reason: The detail of this is that without any doubt, this
noble deed is a valuable worship act – as will be explained, if Allah
wills – it is a cause of the perfection of faith and gaining proximity
to the Lord. And it is absolutely clear that as much man becomes
proximate to the court of the Lord, the Satan goes as much away from him
and becomes more aloof from him because whatever is there in this world,
is inclined to that which is similar to it.

All the particles that are present in the earth and the sky

Are attracted to their kind, like the straw is to chaff.

Once man becomes perfect from every aspect in grades of worship and
obedience and makes efforts to obtain the best morals and qualities he
comes closer to the spiritual world and numerous realities are exposed
to him. Therefore it is mentioned in traditions that:

“If Satan had not surrounded the hearts of men, they would have seen the
heavenly world.”[^1]

In the same way, he becomes distanced from satanic instigations, selfish
desires and animal sensualities. And he goes away from destructive
circumstances and reaches a stage mentioned in the following statement
of Allah quoted by Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as):

“No servant of Mine obtains proximity to Me except through obligatory
deeds most liked by Me and which I have made incumbent on him. And he
seeks proximity to Me through the *Nafila* Prayers till I make him My
friend. And when he becomes My friend I become his ears through which he
hears and his eyes through which he sees and his tongue through which he
speaks and his hands through which he works. If he asks from Me, I give
him and when he calls Me, I respond to him…”[^2]

I say: Two aspects are seen in the explanation of this matter:

1. When man attains that lofty grade and high station he has no aim
except Allah and he forgets everything else. Ears, eyes and tongue are
mentioned by way of examples. That is: There would be nothing except
Allah, thus he would become his ears, eyes and tongue.

The Fourth Imam, the chief of the worshippers, Ali Ibne Husain (as) has
indicated the same thing when he said in one of his *Munajaat*
(confidential supplication) to the Almighty Allah:

“My aspirations have stopped in Your realm. And all my desires are aimed
at You. Only You, no one except You is my desire. And I am only for You
and not for anyone else, in my sleep and awakened state…”

2. Or that it implies that when man attains that lofty status, whatever
he desires, happens. And no door is closed for him. Thus the meaning of
that Allah, the Mighty and the High becomes his ears, eyes and hands is
that he can hear all that is possible to be heard, he sees all that is
possible to be seen and he does whatever what he wants. Thus he hears,
sees and does what others cannot hear, see and do. And these are divine
qualities that the Almighty Allah has bestowed to me by taking him as
His friend. Therefore it is said: If man obeys Allah, everything obeys
him. That which proves this is the statement of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime in *Hadith Qudsi*:

“If he asks Me, I give him and when he calls Me, I respond to him…”

In the book of *Layali* there is an anecdote narrated by Ibrahim bin
Adham:

I passed by a cattle-herd and asked him: Do you have water or milk that
you can give me? He asked: Which would you prefer? I replied: Water.
Thus with his staff, he strikes at a hard stone that had no crack and
water burst forth from it. I drank from it. It was colder than ice and
sweeter than honey which astounded me. The cattle-herd said: Do not be
surprised, if man obeys the Lord, anything that he orders, happens.

After being inspired by divine grace and mercy, I referred to the *Sharh
al-Arbaeen* of Shaykh Bahai, *Sharh Usool Kafi* of the divine scholar,
Mulla Salih Mazandarani and *Miraat al-Uqool* of Allamah Majlisi. In the
statements of the first two gentlemen I obtained the matter that applies
to the first aspect and in the statements of Allamah Majlisi there was
support to the second aspect. There is another aspect also of the
opinion of Allamah Majlisi that applies to both the aspects – even
though his method is different – it does not remain hidden that these
discussions are such that steps waver in them and the Almighty Allah is
the guide and protector.

From the past discussion the meaning of the following verse is also
learnt:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الصَّلَاةَ تَنْهَىٰ عَنِ الْفَحْشَاءِ وَالْمُنْكَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely prayer keeps (one) away from indecency and evil.” (Qur’anb
Surah Ankaboot 29:45)***

That apparently – though Allah knows better – this statement mentions
two matters and the second is higher than the first:

First matter: From the aspect that Prayer is the *Me’raaj* of the
believer and a cause of proximity of man to the court of the Almighty
Allah, if man performs it in the way the Almighty Allah has commanded,
this prayer would take him away from Satan and it would necessarily make
him shun evils and bad deeds. Numerous traditional reports also confirm
this matter. For example:

In *Tafseer Majmaul Bayan* it is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that
he said:

“One whose prayer does not take him away from sins and evils would not
get anything except that he would be distanced from Allah.”[^3]

I say: That is he has not fulfilled perfectly the rights of Prayer,
therefore the effect of Prayer is not seen upon him, and Allah knows
best.

In *Wasailush Shia,* it is narrated from Imam Ali Reza from his
forefathers (as) that the Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“Satan is always afraid of the believer as long as he observes the daily
prayers with punctuality. Thus if he misses the Prayers, Satan dares to
approach him and make him commit greater sins.”[^4]

I say: Every worship act is same; that if the believer performs it in
the way Allah has commanded – from the view of the requirements of
worship – it takes him closer to Allah and further away from Satan. And
every worship act that in the view of religious law is more important
and greater, there are more requirements in it, for example: Prayer,
*Zakat*, *Wilayat*, recitation of Qur’an, praying for an early
reappearance of the Master of the Time etc. And every worship act that
is performed fulfilling most conditions of its acceptance, would give
more swift and better results. By this we come to know the reason of
praying for an early reappearance of the Master of the Time.

Second matter: As mentioned in the blessed verse of the Holy Qur’an, and
it is higher than the first. It is that Prayer is only and only the
remembrance of Allah and it is forgetting that there are heavens and
earth and this matter would be achieved by the fact that one should
spend every moment of his life in the worship of Allah and that he does
not see anything else. And he pays no attention to anything else. And
the same thing is learnt from the statement of the Fourth Imam (as)
quoted above and other words of His Eminence. On the basis of this, if
one performs his Prayer with perfection, fulfilling all the conditions,
Satan goes so far away from him that he does not come near him.

One day a scholar asked me about the meaning of the tradition that:
Prayer is having 400 rules. I told him: Total sins number 400 according
to some scholars. It is possible that it implies that these are limits
that the true worshipper could not trespass. It means that the proof of
his having performed the Prayer perfectly is that he has abstained from
every sin. Thus whoever does not avoid sins, has not performed the
Prayer in the true sense and he has trespassed the divine limits. That
scholar liked this reasoning.

That which proves this is a tradition mentioned in *Majmaul Bayan* from
the Messenger of Allah (S) which we have quoted previously.[^5]

Also it is narrated from Ibne Masood from the Holy Prophet (S) that he
said:

“One who does not obey the Prayer, has not prayed. And obedience of
Prayer means keeping away from all sins and evils.”

Shaykh Tabarsi says:

“It means that since Prayer prevents from sins, one who performs it, but
does not keep away from sins, it will not be the Prayer that Allah has
described. But if after sometime he repents and keeps away from sins, it
would imply that his Prayer has benefited him.”

He also said:

Anas has narrated that a young man from Ansaar prayed with the Messenger
of Allah (S) but at the same time he used to commit sinful acts. This
matter came to the attention of the Holy Prophet (S). He said: One day
his Prayer would restrain him from his sins.

It is narrated from Jabir that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) was
asked:

“So-and-so prays in the days but steals during the night. He (the
Prophet) said: His Prayer would restrain him.”

Our companions have narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said:

“One who wants to know whether his Prayer has been accepted or not
should see whether his Prayer restrains him from sins? As much as it
restrains him from sins as much it is accepted.”[^6]

I say: All the statements we have quoted are with the aim that no one
should say: If praying for an early reappearance keeps the Satan away,
then should not most people be keeping away from sins? As in reply we
shall say: This noble deed is like Prayer and whatever we have stated
about it is also applicable to this.

Second: It is quoted in *Amali* of Shaykh Sadooq that Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(as) reports from his forefathers from the Holy Prophet (S) that he said
to his companions:

“Should I tell you about something that if you perform it, the Satan
will keep away from you, like the east is away from the west? They said:
Yes, (please do). Fasting blackens his face, *Sadaqah* breaks his back,
loving for the sake of Allah and cooperating in good deeds cuts off his
tail, seeking forgiveness cuts off his life-vein. And *Zakat* is
applicable on everything and the *Zakat* of the body is fasting.”[^7]

I say: The point of evidence in this tradition for the above statement
stops at the introductory explanation that:

Love is having grades and levels and each of its grades have a
particular effect. The first grade of love is the love of the heart
which in Persian is termed as ‘dost daashtan’ (liking).

Faith on this grade is subject to love and for becoming eligible for
mercy of the Lord and entering Paradise, this level is necessary. Thus
if one is not able to openly express his heartfelt love and devotion to
Allah and His *Awliya*, only this much is sufficient according to the
Holy Qur’an which says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا مَنْ أُكْرِهَ وَقَلْبُهُ مُطْمَئِنٌّ بِالْإِيمَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…not he who is compelled while his heart is at rest on account of
faith.” (Qur’an, Surah Nahl 16:106)***

And different effects develop from this position, so that people will be
of the second level, the second grade in Persian is termed ‘dosti
kardan’ (affection). In Arabic it is called ‘Tahaabab’ and ‘Mawaada’ and
sometimes it is called loving for the sake of Allah.

A number of traditions have been recorded about the merits of having
affection. Quoting them all here would prolong the discussion. Among the
effects mentioned in those traditions are keeping away of the Satan from
that person and it is the best divine gift.

Now that you have studied this introduction it is necessary to say that:
The implication of ‘Loving for the sake of Allah’ according to the
method of the first tradition that says: If you do that which is visible
in the physical actions of man it is the same ‘loving and affection’.
That is expression of love towards elders and believing brothers through
physical actions.

Without any doubt, the greatest of the believers, that is our Master,
the Imam of the Time (aj) is superior to all the people for expressing
love and the fruits of loving him – which keeps away the Satan – by
praying for an early reappearance of His Eminence would be achieved
sooner than the fruits of loving anyone else. And in the same way to
have regard through other acts other than supplicating, has the same
quality. And also love with regard to the Holy Prophet and the Noble
Family of His Eminence (aj) and the believers have different effects
depending on the level of love.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 70, Pg. 59

[^2]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 352

[^3]: Majma al-Bayan, Vol. 8, Pg. 285

[^4]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 3, Pg. 81

[^5]: Majma al-Bayan, Vol. 8, Pg. 285

[^6]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 82, Pg. 192

[^7]: Amali, Sadooq, Pg. 59, Gathering no. 15, Vol. 1, Beirut


