7. Deliverance From The Mischiefs Of The Last Age And Remaining Safe From Satanic Traps
=======================================================================================

That which proves this – in addition to what will come, that it is the
source of perfection of faith and what has been mentioned previously
that it is a cause of distancing of Satan – is a tradition that the
great traditionist, Shaykh Sadooq has quoted in *Kamaluddin* from Ali
bin Abdullah Warraaq that Saad bin Abdullah reports from Ahmad bin Ishaq
bin Saad Ashari that he said:

I went to Imam Hasan Askari (as) and wanted to inquire about his
successor. His Eminence, preceded me in the matter and said as follows:

“O Ahmad bin Ishaq! The Almighty Allah has not left the earth without a
Divine Proof since the creation of Adam (as) and would not leave it
without a Divine Proof till the hour shall be established (Day of
Judgment). Through the Divine Proof calamities are repelled from the
inhabitants of the Earth, rain falls and the bounties of the earth come
out.”

After hearing these words Ahmad asked His Eminence: “Who is the Imam and
Caliph after you?” Imam Hasan Askari arose from his seat and hurried
inside his house and returned after a short while in such a way that
upon his neck on his shoulders sat a boy, whose face seemed to be like
the full moon and it seemed that he was three years old. After that, His
Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari (as) said:

“O Ahmad! If you were not having a special and exalted position before
Allah and the Proof of Allah, I would not have shown this son of mine to
you. His name and patronymic is the same as that of the Messenger of
Allah (S). He would fill the earth with justice and equity, as it would
be fraught with injustice and oppressions. O Ahmad! In this community
his example is like that of Khizr and Dhulqarnain. By Allah! He will
have an occultation and none shall be safe from destruction but one whom
Allah has kept steadfast in the belief of his Imam and given the divine
opportunity (*Tawfeeq*) to pray for his reappearance.”[^1]

The complete text of the above tradition has already been quoted in the
chapter of the occultation of His Eminence in ‘Letter ‘Gh’.

[^1]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 384


