10. Prayer Of His Eminence, The Master Of The Time For Those Who Supplicate For His Early Reappearance
======================================================================================================

As this is the recompense for favor. And that which proves this is the
statement of Maula Sahib az-Zaman (as) in his supplication recorded in
the book of*Muhajjud Dawaat*.

“And strengthen those who follow me for helping Your religion and
consider them to be fighters on Your path and make them victorious over
all those who desire bad for me and for them…”[^1]

Without any doubt praying for His Eminence and for his early
reappearance is a way of following and helping him as it is a kind of
helping and supporting the faith and the Master of the Time by ones
tongue and praying for His Eminence is a way of helping by the tongue.

That which proves this also is that which is mentioned under the
exegesis of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا حُيِّيتُمْ بِتَحِيَّةٍ فَحَيُّوا بِأَحْسَنَ مِنْهَا أَوْ
رُدُّوهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when you are greeted with a greeting, greet with a better
(greeting) than it or return it.” (Qur’an, Surah Nisa 4:86)***

That is:

“Salutation and other good deeds.”[^2]

It is clear that it is the best kind of good deed. So if the believer
sincerely prays for his master, his master would also pray sincerely for
him and the *Dua*of His Eminence is the key to every good thing and a
shield against every evil. That which proves and supports this claim is
a tradition Qutub Rawandi has mentioned in *Kharaij* that:

Some people of Isfahan including Abul Abbas Ahmad bin an-Nasr and Abu
Ja’far Muhammad bin Alawia have narrated that: A person named Abdur
Rahman lived in Isfahan and he was a Shia. They asked him: Why do you
believe in the Imamat of His Eminence, Ali an-Naqi (as)? He replied: I
saw something that impelled be have such faith. I was a poor man but
having the audacity to speak out. One year the people of Isfahan threw
me out of the city. Along with others I went to the court of Mutawakkil
to complain about it. While I was in the Mutawakkil’s court an order was
issued from him for the arrest of Ali bin Muhammad bin ar-Reza (as). I
asked a person there: “Who is this man whose arrest is ordered?” He
replied: “He is an Alawite in whose Imamat the Rafidis believe.” Then he
said: Thus I came to know that Mutawakkil has summoned him for
execution.

I said to myself: I will not leave this place till I do not see this man
that how he looks. He says: Then he arrived mounted on a horse and
people stood in rows on both the sides watching him. The moment I saw
him, affection for him appeared in my heart. Without conscious effort I
began to pray that may Allah save him from Mutawakkil. He moved forward
among the people with his eyes resting on the crest of the horse and he
did not look either to the right or the left. I repeated the prayer
inwardly. When he passed by my side, he glanced at me and said: “May the
Almighty Allah accept your *Dua*, prolong your lifespan and give you a
lot of children and wealth.”

Due to his awe I began to tremble and stood amidst my companions who
asked: “What happened?” I replied: “It is good.” And I didn’t tell
anyone about what has occurred. After this strange encounter I returned
to Isfahan. The Almighty Allah by the bounty of his *Dua* opened up ways
of income for me in such a way that today I am having thousands of
Dinars only at home in addition to what I have outside. I got ten
children and my age is more than seventy years. I am having faith in the
Imamat of this person as he knew what I was thinking and the Almighty
Allah accepted his *Dua* in my favor.[^3]

I say: O sensible people, see how Imam Hadi (as) rewarded the man for
his prayers and that when he came to know that he has prayed for him, he
also prayed for him even though at that time he was not believer in his
Imamate. So what do you think about His Eminence, the Master of the
Time? Would he not pray for you if you pray for him, while you even have
faith in his Imamat? No, by the One who is the creator of men and jinns,
His Eminence indeed prays for the believers even if they are themselves
neglectful because he is the *Wali* (guardian) of favor and whatever we
have mentioned in Part Four under the Chapter of the Letter ‘D’ is
sufficient as proof.

In support of what we have discussed here a righteous brother narrated
to me that he saw His Eminence in the dream. His Eminence said to him:

“I pray for all those who pray after the narration of the calamities of
the Chief of the martyrs in a gathering of Azadari.”

We beseech the Almighty Allah to give the *Tawfeeq* to perform deeds
that enable the acceptance of our *Dua*.

[^1]: Muhajj ad-Dawaat, Pg. 302

[^2]: Tafseer al-Qummi, Vol. 1, Pg. 145

[^3]: Kharaij; Chapter 11, Regarding the Miracles of Imam Ali bin
Muhammad al-Hadi (as).


