12. Eligibility For Intercession Of The Holy Prophet (S) And Attaining The Great Intercession
=============================================================================================

That which proves this matter – in addition to that which was mentioned
previously that mediation of the Imam of the Age (aj) is the mediation
of the Holy Prophet (S) – are traditions that the chief of the
traditionists has mentioned in *Khisaal* through his own chain of
narrators from His Eminence, Reza (as) from his respected forefathers
from Amirul Momineen (as) that he said:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “I will intercede for four kinds of
people even if they come to me with the sins of all humanity: one who
has helped my Ahle Bayt, one who fulfills their need while they are in
need of it, one who loves them with words and deeds and one who removes
their distress practically.”[^1]

Allamah Hilli (r.a.) has narrated from the Messenger of Allah (S)
directly that he said:

“I will intercede for four kinds of people even if they come to me with
the sins of all people of the world: one who has helped my descendants,
one who spent his wealth in the difficult times of my progeny, one who
loved my descendants with words and deeds and one who tried to fulfill
the needs of my descendants while they are persecuted and in
flight.”[^2]

In *Biharul Anwar* through his own chain of narrators it is mentioned
from His Eminence, Reza (as) from his Purified Forefathers from Amirul
Momineen (as) that the Holy Prophet (S) said:

“I will intercede for four people on the Judgment Day: one who honored
my progeny, one who fulfilled their needs, one who performed their work
in their times of distress, and one who loved them with the heart and
the tongue.”[^3]

I say: It is clear that three topics can be derived from it to apply for
praying for an early reappearance of Maula Sahib al-Amr (aj) because it
is type of help, verbal love and fulfillment of need as shall be
explained ahead.

Among the matters that prove this aim are the advices of Allamah Hilli
to his son in which he quotes the following tradition of Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (as):

“On the Judgment Day a caller would call out: Silence! And pay
attention, as Muhammad (S) would like to address you. So all the
creatures would fall silent and the Holy Prophet (S) would arise and
say: O gathering of creatures, anyone having a favor or a goodness upon
me may please get up so that I can reward him. They would say: May our
parents be sacrificed on you, what favors and acts of kindness? Allah
and the Messenger of Allah (S) are having all rights, favors and good
turns upon all the creatures. He would say: All right, if anyone has
given shelter to one of my family, or did them a good turn, or clothed
or satiated their hunger, may please come forward so that I could reward
him.

At that moment some people who have performed such deeds would come
forward. Then a voice would come from the Almighty Allah: O Muhammad, O
My Friend, I give you the authority to reward them as you like. Give
them whichever place you like in Paradise. Thus he would give them a
house in ‘*Waseela*’ such that their view will not be obstructed from
Muhammad and his Ahle Bayt (as).”[^4]

I say: Without any doubt, praying for well-being is a kind of a good
turn, thus its effect on that supplicant is that he would become
eligible for the intercession of the Messenger of Allah (S) on the
Judgment Day. And this tradition also proves increase of rewards through
intercession just as it proves removal of punishment.

Among the other proofs is a tradition that Shaykh Sadooq has mentioned
in *Amali* from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) from his forefathers from the
Messenger of Allah (S) that he said:

“One who wants to obtain my mediation and that he should have the right
upon me to intercede for him on Judgment Day, it is necessary that he
should always recite *Salawaat* for my family and please them.”[^5]

I say: There is no doubt that all of Ahle Bayt (as) become pleased if
you pray for the early reappearance of Hazrat Hujjat bin al-Hasan (as);
rather it is possible that it could be a kind of attachment to them
(think upon it).

[^1]: Al-Khisaal, Vol. 1, 196

[^2]: Al-Muntaha, Vol. 1, 544

[^3]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 8, Pg. 49

[^4]: Al-Muntaha, Vol. 1, 544

[^5]: Amali, Sadooq, Gathering no. 60, Vol. 5, Pg. 310, Beirut


