19. Becoming Eligible To Meet His Eminence In Person Or In Sleep
================================================================

With regard to this honor there is a special *hadith* that: Allamah
Majlisi in *Biharul Anwar* has quoted from *al-Ikhtiyaar* of Sayyid Ali
bin Husain bin Baqi from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said:

“One who recites the following supplication after every obligatory
Prayer would definitely see Imam M-H-M-D bin al-Hasan (as) in sleep or
in person:

Bismillaahir Rah’maanir Raheem. Allaahumma balligh…”

If Allah wills, we would quote the full text of this *Dua* in the coming
section as its subject matter is concerned with early reappearance of
Imam (as).

Also in the book of *Jannatul Amaan* it is narrated from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (as) that he said:

“One who recites after every Morning and Noon Prayer:

*Allaahumma s’alli a’laa Muh’mmadinw wa aali Muh’mmad wa a’jjil
farajahum.*

would not die unless he meets Qaim of Aale Muhammad (S).”[^1]

The great Shaykh, Hasan bin Fadl Tabarsi in *Makarimul Akhlaq* quotes
directly that:

“One who recites the following supplication after every obligatory
Prayer regularly would live so long as to be honored by seeing the
Master of the Affair (aj). The starting words of the *Dua* are:

Allaahumma s’alli a’laa Muh’ammadinw wa aali Muh’ammad, Allaahumma inna
rasoolakas’ s’aadiqul mus’addaq…[^2]

This *Dua* is also concerned with early reappearance of our master,
Hazrat Hujjat (as). It is narrated through various channels. We would
quote it in the coming section if Allah wills.

Reminder And Encouragement
--------------------------

You should know that I have regularly recited this *Dua* since attaining
maturity and I have had the honor of seeing the Imam three times in my
dreams till now in such a way that I became sure he was my master, the
Master of the Time (aj).

One of those three times was as follows:

One night I saw in dream that a prophet of Bani Israel along with His
Eminence came to the house I reside and seated themselves in a room
facing the*Qibla* and he ordered me to narrate the tragic circumstances
of our martyred master, His Eminence, Aba Abdillah al-Husain (as). I did
as I was ordered and His Eminence sat facing me listening to the
*Masaib*. After I concluded the *Masaib* I began to recite the *Ziarat*
of His Eminence, the chief of the martyrs, Imam Husain (as) facing
Kerbala, after that I recited the *Ziarat* of His Eminence, Abul Hasan
Imam Reza (as) in the direction of Tus.

Then I recited the *Ziarat* of my master, Hazrat Hujjat (aj) facing him.
After I completed all these recitations, and His Eminence prepared to
leave, the gentleman accompanying him gave me a sum of money on behalf
of His Eminence, whose figure I don’t know and they vanished from my
sight.

The next day was better and more sunny. I met a great scholar and he
gave me a good amount of money which was like a windfall for me.. So I
said: This is the interpretation of the dream I saw previously, the
Almighty Allah made it come true and revealed the correctness of my
dream till my eagerness increased.

In addition to this, after this dream so many internal blessings,
complete knowledges, religious recognitions and divine graces were
bestowed to me that they are impossible to be described. And in the
reason of writing this book I had mentioned another dream and in another
place in this same book I will write about my third dream also which is
very much edifying.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 86, Pg. 77

[^2]: Makarimul Akhlaq, Pg. 284


