20. Return (Raja’t) To The World During The Time Of Reappearance
================================================================

It is the last aspiration of the eager believers – God forbid – if the
reappearance of His Eminence, the Master of the Affair (aj) is postponed
from this period of time and we would not be able to derive the benefits
of his favors in the near future and in our lifetime we are unable to be
honored by the wealth of seeing him and our death occurs, we would be
once again raised from the dead during the time of his reappearance.

That which proves this is a tradition that the practical scholar and
*Faqih*, Muhaqqiq Ardebeli has mentioned in *Hadiqatush Shia* from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (as) whose matter is as follows: Every believer that
aspires to offer his services to the Imam and prays for his early
reappearance, someone would come to his grave and say: O so-and-so your
Master of the Time (aj) has reappeared, if you want you can arise and
join him or you can continue to lie there till *Qiyamat*. Thus a huge
number of people would return to the world and sons would be born to
them.

I say: Only the Persian translation of this tradition is present in
*Hadiqa* and I have copied it without looking at the Arabic text. And
also especially in this excellence – return to the world during the time
of reappearance – traditions that are mentioned about *Dua* Ahad prove
this matter clearly. For example in the books of *Biharul Anwar*,
*Anwaarun No’maaniya*, *al-Maqbaas*, *Zaad al-Maad* and other books it
is mentioned without chain of narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as). The
text of *Anwaarun No’maaniya* is as follows:

One who recites this supplication for forty days every morning, would be
included among the companions of Qaim (aj). If he dies before the
reappearance of His Eminence, the Almighty Allah would make him alive so
that he may perform *Jihad* in his service and for each word of this
*Dua* one thousand rewards would be written for him and one thousand of
his sins will be erased and the *Dua* is as follows:

Bismillaahir Rah’maanir Raheem. Allaahumma rabban nooril a’z’eem
wal…[^1]

It will be mentioned in the coming sections, *Insha Allah Taala* and
this blessed *Dua* is concerned with the plea for an early reappearance
of our master, the Imam of the time (aj).

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 86, Pg. 61, Zaad al-Maad, Pg. 489, Anwaar
an-No’maaniya, Vol. 2, Pg. 104-105


