23. Following The Prophet And The Holy Imam (as)
================================================

Praying for the early reappearance of the Master of the Time (aj) is in
keeping with the practice of the Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams
(as). This would be explained clearly in Part Six and Seven of this
book, if Allah wills. Here we shall mention only one tradition and move
forward:

Shaykh Nomani in his book, *Ghaibat* has narrated through his own chain
of narrators from Yunus bin Zibyan from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq
(as) that he said:

“When the night of Friday comes, Allah sends down an angel to the lower
heaven. When dawn comes, the angel sits on a throne on the House (the
Kaaba) and sets pulpits of light for Muhammad, Ali, Hasan and Husain
(as). They ascend the pulpits. The angels, the prophets and the
believers are invited to gather before them. The gates of the heavens
are opened. When the sun declines, the Prophet (S) says: O my Lord,
carry out Your promise that You mentioned in Your Book by this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنْكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ
قَبْلِهِمْ وَلَيُمَكِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ دِينَهُمُ الَّذِي ارْتَضَىٰ لَهُمْ
وَلَيُبَدِّلَنَّهُمْ مِنْ بَعْدِ خَوْفِهِمْ أَمْنًا َ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good that He
will most certainly make them rulers in the earth as He made rulers
those before them, and that He will most certainly establish for them
their religion which He has chosen for them, and that He will*** ***most
certainly, after their fear, give them security in exchange… (Qur’an,
Surah Noor 24:55)***

“The angels and the prophets say the same thing. Then Muhammad, Ali,
Hasan and Husain prostrate themselves and pray to Allah: O our Lord,
avenge! Your sanctum has been dishonored, Your chosen ones have been
killed and Your faithful slaves have been disregarded. Then Allah does
as He wills and that will be a great day.”[^1]

Explanation
-----------

Some scholars are of the opinion that Yunus bin Zibyan is weak and he
has exaggerated in lying and some others have considered him all right.
But the fact is that in following the view of Muhaddith Noori he is
reliable and trustworthy in such a way that he has narrated a large
number of traditions and is a keeper of secrets. Further details about
him can be obtained by referring to books of *Mustadrak al-Wasail* and
*Mustanbat al-Masail*.

Here there is a doubt that sometimes the mind is prone to make mistakes:
there is no doubt that conditions of acceptance are present in the
prayers of Prophet, Imams, angels and prophets (as), Thus if they pray
every Friday for early reappearance of the avenger from enemies what is
the reason of its delay? And what is the use of their prayers? This
doubt can be answered from some aspects:

First: As we stated before, it is not improbable that two times are
fixed for the reappearance of the Imam of the Age; one of which is
earlier than the other and its occurrence at the earlier time is
dependant on the efforts in praying for it and that not praying would
delay it.

Second: It is said that: Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has accepted
their prayer but without any doubt the actualization of this matter –
according to divine wisdom – is dependant on the actualization of
specified matters and on removal of other factors and this will take
place in a gradual manner. On the basis of this, delay in reappearance
till our time and after that is not proof of the prayer not having been
accepted.

Third: It is possible that as a result of their prayers, the
reappearance will take place at the earlier time but as a result of the
deeds of the people it would create hurdles, which would delay it. And
this is the meaning of saying that it is among the matters subject to
*Bada*. And such traditions are many.

For example it is mentioned: A servant prays for something and his
prayer is accepted at the appointed time. Then he commits sin and the
Almighty Allah says thus to the angels: Delay the fulfillment of his
prayers because he has become eligible for My anger and displeasure and
he has become fit to be deprived.

In some books like *Ghaibat Nomani*, *Ghaibat Tusi* and *Biharul Anwar*
it is narrated from Abu Hamza Thumali that he said: I asked His
Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as): Ali (as) said:

“There is mischief till the year 70 A.H. and he also said: After the
mischief there is peace and prosperity. Though year 70 A.H. has passed
we have not seen peace and prosperity.” Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said:
“O Thabit! The Almighty Allah has fixed this matter for the year 70 A.H.
But since Imam Husain (as) was martyred, the Almighty Allah was enraged
at the people of the world. So He postponed it to 140 A.H. But we told
you about it and you divulged it and removed the veil of secrecy. Thus
the Almighty Allah again postponed the matter and He did not inform us
about it. And whatever Allah likes, He erases and whatever He likes, He
confirms and He is having the source of the book (*Ummul Kitaab*).”[^2]

[^1]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 147

[^2]: Ghaibat Tusi, Pg. 263, Allah makes to pass away and establishes
what He pleases, and with Him is the basis of the Book.


