Part 2: Proofs of the Imamate of His Eminence, Hujjat bin al-Hasan al-Askari (aj)
=================================================================================

Dear Readers!

May Allah keep you and me steadfast on the confirmed word and faith in
truth in the world and the hereafter, and may He gather us together with
the Khalaf al-Muntazar (the awaited vicegerent) of the family of
infallibility and purity as there is no way to prove the Imamate except
Nass (text of appointment) and miracle just as it is proved that
infallibility is among the proven conditions of the Imam. Such that if
the Imam is not infallible, the aim of his appointment will not be
served and in religious terminology it would be ‘against purpose’.

Infallibility is a personal condition and a grade hidden from common
view and no one is aware of it except the Almighty Allah and one whose
knowledge Allah has inspired it with. In this connection it is necessary
for the Almighty Allah to introduce the infallible Imam in one of the
following two ways:

1 – Through the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) or the preceding Imam.

2 – or through a miracle performed by him. And when the Imam has been
appointed for the people it is incumbent on them to refer to him and
rest assured that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لِمُؤْمِنٍ وَلَا مُؤْمِنَةٍ إِذَا قَضَى اللَّهُ
وَرَسُولُهُ أَمْرًا أَنْ يَكُونَ لَهُمُ الْخِيَرَةُ مِنْ أَمْرِهِمْ ۗ
وَمَنْ يَعْصِ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ فَقَدْ ضَلَّ ضَلَالًا مُبِينًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And it behoves not a believing man and a believing woman that they
should have any choice in their matter when Allah and His Apostle have
decided a matter; and whoever disobeys Allah and His Apostle, he surely
strays off a manifest straying.” (Surah Ahzab 33:36)***

What we have stated above is supported by a Mutawatir (widely related)
tradition from the aspect of its meaning.

1 – It is a tradition that the great trustworthy Shaykh Ahmad bin Abi
Talib Tabarsi has mentioned in Ihtijaaj. Though very lengthy, this
traditional report is having many benefits and important matters. In
this tradition is proved the Imamate of our Master (aj) through Nass and
miracle so that the Ummah may not appoint an Imam for itself. Thus we
quote the full text of the tradition and pray to Allah that He include
us among those who accept it. Shaykh Tabarsi (a.r.) has stated: In the
debate of His Eminence, Hujjat Qa’im Muntazar Sahib az-Zaman, peace be
upon him and his ancestors Saad bin Abdullah Qummi Ashari has said:

“I became involved in a debate with a Nasibi (Ahle Bayt hater) who was
the strongest among Nasibi debaters. One day during the debate he told
me: Death be on you and all your co- religionists. You Rafidis lay curse
on the Emigrants and Helpers and deny their love for the Holy Prophet
while the Siddiq was the most exalted persons among the companions and
he had precedence in accepting Islam. Don’t you know that the Messenger
of Allah took him along to the cave on the night of migration due to the
risk to his life, just as he was concerned for his own safety. Because
he knew that he would be his caliph and successor.

Therefore he wanted to protect his life like he was concerned about his
own security. So that the religion may not be destroyed after him. In
those very circumstances he made ‘Ali sleep on his bed as he knew that
even if he were killed there would be no problem for Islam in the future
because there were people among the companions who could have taken his
place, therefore he did not accord much importance to his (‘Ali) getting
killed.”

Saad says: I replied to it but the replies were not so effective. So he
said: “You Rafidis say that the first and the second caliphs were
hypocrites and you support it by what happened on the Lailatul Uqbah.”
Then he said: “Come let us see if they accepted Islam willingly and
happily or it was under duress and pressure?”

Here I did not give any reply, because if I said it was under duress it
would not be correct as Islam at that time was not dominant and if I
said they accepted willingly it would negate their hypocrisy. I returned
from this debate with a heavy heart, took a paper and wrote down forty
odd questions that were difficult for me and said to myself that I must
hand it over to the representative of Maula Abu Muhammad Hasan bin ‘Ali
Askari (as) (that is Ahmad bin Ishaq who resided in Qom). But when I
went to him I learnt that he had left on a journey. I departed in his
pursuit and when I reached him I told him all that had happened.

Ahmad bin Ishaq said to me: Come let us go together to Surre man Raa
(Samarrah) and ask our master, Hasan bin ‘Ali (as) about this. So I
accompanied him to Surre man Raa till we reached the house of our master
and asked for permission to enter, which was given and we went inside.
Ahmad bin Ishaq had a leather bag that he had concealed inside his
Tiberian cloak. The bag contained one hundred and sixty purses
containing gold and silver coins. Each purse was sealed with the seal of
the sender. When our eyes fell on the elegant face of His Eminence, Abu
Muhammad al-Hasan bin ‘Ali (as) we saw that his face was like a full
moon and a child was sitting in his lap. He was very beautiful, like a
Jupiter star having nice locks of hair. In front of the Imam was placed
a golden pomegranate decorated with jewels and precious stones; it was
presented by an affluent gentleman from Basra. T

he Imam was holding a pen and writing something on paper. Whenever the
child caught his hand he tossed the pomegranate and the little one
chased it and brought it back. In the meanwhile he wrote whatever he
wanted. So Ahmad bin Ishaq opened the cloak and the leather bag before
Imam Hadi (as) [a title of Imam Hasan Askari (as)]. His Eminence threw a
glance at the child and said: Remove the seals from the gifts of your
Shias and friends. It was asked: O my master, is it lawful that a pure
hand should extend towards impure gifts and filthy monies?”

His Eminence asked Ahmad bin Ishaq to take out the contents of the bag
so the lawful and the unlawful can be separated. He did as he was told.
The child said: “This is from so-and-so of so-and-so locality of Qom,
containing 62 dinars from sales proceeds of a house, and inheritance
from his father 45 dinars and from the money of six dresses 40 dinars
and the rent of three shops amounting to three dinars.” Our master said:
“You are right, my son. Now tell us what is unlawful in it?”

The child said: “There is a dinar in this purse which was minted in Ray
in so-and-so year. Half of its inscription is worn out; its three
corners are cropped, such that its weight is reduced by 1.5 Daniq. This
same amount is unlawful in it because the sender of this purse in
so-and-so year, so-and-so month gave to a weaver who was his neighbor a
mound and a quarter of old cotton for spinning. That cotton was stolen
from the weaver who informed him about it but he didn’t accept his
version and in its place took a mound and a half of softer cotton.

Then he ordered a garment to be made for him from this material. Thus
that money and the cropped amount is from that money.” Ahmad bin Ishaq
untied the purse and removed from it the said dinar and the cropped
pieces from it. Then he took out another purse. The child said: “This is
from so-and-so of so-and-so locality of Qom, containing 50 dinars. It
does not befit us to touch it at all.” Ahmad bin Ishaq asked: “Why?” He
replied: “It is the sale proceed of wheat that the sender had paid to
his farmers but while giving he measured some with a correct measure and
some with a tampered measure.”

Imam Hasan Askari (as) said: “You are right my son.” Then he said: “O
Ibne Ishaq, take that purse and return it to the sender and tell him to
give the money to its actual owner, that is those farmers as we are not
in need of this money.” At that moment he said: “Give me the garment
sent by the old lady.” Ahmad bin Ishaq said: “I have forgotten it.” He
went out to look for it.

At that moment my master, His Eminence, Abu Muhammad Hadi (as) looked at
me and asked: “What a surprise that you came here?” I said: “Ahmad bin
Ishaq encouraged me to come and meet you.” He asked: “What happened to
those questions that you wanted to ask?” I said: “They are yet
unanswered, my master.” He said: “Ask whatever you want from my dearest
son.” And he gestured to the child. I asked: “O our master and master’s
son, it is narrated to us that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) had given
Amirul Momineen (as) the right to divorce his wives. Therefore on the
day of Jamal he sent message to Ayesha that she had wreaked havoc with
Islam and Muslims (and taken wrong advantage of her position). That she
has in an ignorant way condemned her children to perdition. ‘Thus if you
do not refrain from your act I will divorce you.’ Tell me, my master,
that what is the meaning of divorce here? That the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) left it at the discretion of Amirul Momineen (as)?”

He replied: “The Almighty Allah, hallowed be His name, gave an exalted
status to the wives of the Prophet and gave them the honor of being the
mothers of the faithful. Thus the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) told
Amirul Momineen (as): O Abal Hasan, this status is valid for them till
they remain in the obedience of the Almighty Allah. So whoever of them
disobeys Allah and after me comes out in armed confrontation against
you, remove her from my wifehood and take away her status of motherhood
of faithful.”

Then I asked: “What is open obscenity? That if the wife commits, the
husband is entitled to expel her from his house even during her menses?”

He replied: “It is Musahiqa and not fornication. Because if she commits
fornication they will apply the penalty on her and if one wants to marry
her there is no problem in it. And the penalty that is given is no
obstacle for it. But if she commits Musahiqa, it is obligatory that she
must be stoned and being stoned is a disgrace as for whomsoever Allah
has ordered stoning, He has disgraced that person. Therefore no is
permitted to marry her.”

Then I asked: “O son of the Prophet, Tell me about the statement of the
Almighty Allah to His Prophet Moosa (as) that:

“Therefore put off your shoes; surely you are in the sacred valley,
Tuwa.”

Scholars of the two sects are of the view that the shoes of Moosa (as)
were made of skin of dead animal?”

He replied: “Whoever says this has made a false allegation against His
Eminence, Moosa and considers him ignorant in his prophethood because it
implies one of the two possibilities and each of them is a mistake;
either prayer was allowed in it or not. If it was allowed it would also
be allowed to hide them in that place as it is pure. If his prayer was
not allowed, then His Eminence, Moosa (as) failed to discriminate
between lawful and unlawful, that wearing what one can pray and with
what not, and this is infidelity.”

I said: “So, my master, tell me the exegesis of this verse.” He replied:
“His Eminence, was in the sacred valley when he said: ‘O my Lord, I have
made my love sincere to You and washed my heart of everything other than
You. But Moosa was very much attached to his family. So the Almighty
Allah told him:

“Therefore put off your shoes…”

If your love for Me is sincere and your heart is devoid of inclination
for anyone except Me, remove the love of your family from your heart.”

“Please tell me what is the interpretation of the verse Kaaf Ha Ya Ain
Saad?”

He replied: “These letters are from the unseen informations that the
Almighty Allah conveyed to His servant, Zakariya. Then He related the
story to Muhammad (s.a.w.s.). It was that when Zakariya implored his
Lord to teach him the names of Panjetan (the holy five) the Almighty
Allah sent Jibraeel to him and he taught him their names. Thus whenever
Zakariya mentioned (remembered) the names of Muhammad, ‘Ali, Fatima or
Hasan (as) his sorrow and grief used to go away, but whenever he thought
of Husain (as) a terrible grief used to beset him and he was very much
astonished why it was so. Thus one day he prayed to the Almighty:

O my God, how is it so that when I remember the four names I obtain
peace, but when I think of Husain tears flow from my eyes and I begin to
wail?

Allah, the Mighty and the High informed him about the tragedy of Imam
Husain (as) and told him that in Kaaf Ha Ya Ain Saad: Kaaf is for
Kerbala, Ha stands for Halakat (getting killed) of ‘Itrat’ (progeny) the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), Yaimplies Yazid who would oppress Husain (as),
Ain denotes ‘Atash’ (thirst) of Husain (as) and Saad indicates ‘Sabr’
(patience).

Thus when Zakariya heard this he did not leave the Masjid for three days
and did not allow anyone to meet him and continued to weep and wail. He
lamented on Husain (as) and prayed to Allah: My God, will they make the
best of Your creature sit in mourning for his son? O Lord, would this
tremendous tragedy befall him? My God, would they make ‘Ali and Fatima
put on the dress of mourning? Would they make the shock of this calamity
reach their abode? Then he said: Bestow me a son so that I can be
pleased in my old age and that his love affects my heart. After that
make me sit in his mourning as You would make Muhammad, Your beloved
sit. So the Almighty Allah gave him Yahya and later his martyrdom made
him aggrieved. And the period of Yahya’s pregnancy was six months like
in the case of Husain (as).”

Then I asked: “O my master, why is it so that people cannot select the
Imam for themselves?”

He replied: “Righteous or a corrupt Imam?” I said: “Righteous.”

He said: “Is there a possibility that they may choose a transgressor
while they are not aware what goes on in his mind, whether is righteous
or corrupt?” “Yes,” I said.

He said: “That is the reason that I shall explain to you with logical
argument.” I said: “Please do.”

He said: “Let us consider the prophets that the Almighty Allah has
appointed, on whom He revealed heavenly scriptures and supported them
with revelation and infallibility. They were the leaders of nations,
like Moosa and Isa. Inspite of having knowledge and sharp insight were
they not prone to select hypocrites considering them believers?”

“No,” said I.

The Imam said: “Then how did it happen that His Eminence, Moosa
Kalimullah, inspite of having that same knowledge and receiving
revelations he chose seventy persons from the senior ones of the
community and those who were in the forefront of his army; about whose
sincerity he was sure and about whom he had no doubt, in fact he had
selected hypocrites. Allah, the Mighty and the High says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاخْتَارَ مُوسَىٰ قَوْمَهُ سَبْعِينَ رَجُلًا لِمِيقَاتِنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Moosa chose out of his people seventy men for Our
appointment…”(Surah Araaf 7:155)***

As we have seen that when someone who is appointed by the Almighty Allah
(like Moosa and Isa) when he could select the corrupt instead of the
righteous we realize that selection is not lawful except for one who is
aware of hidden secrets and the concealed thoughts. And we understand
that the selection of the Emigrants and Helpers was worthless, after the
prophets intending to select good people ended up choosing corrupt men.

Then he said: O Saad, your opponents claim that the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) took with him the selected one of this Ummah to the cave as
he was afraid for his safety in the same way as he was worried about his
personal security because he knew that he would be the caliph of the
Ummah after him. While the necessity of hiding in the cave only arose
because he took him along.

As for ‘Ali (as) he made him sleep on his bed as he knew that the vacuum
created by the death of Abu Bakr will not be as that due to the death of
‘Ali because there were others who could fill that vacuum. You can reply
by asking him that are you not having the belief that the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) said: After me the caliphate shall be for thirty years. And
they apply it to the tenures of the four persons, Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman
and ‘Ali (as).

The opponent will have to agree. Tell him if this is correct, why did he
take only one caliph, Abu Bakr, to the cave, leaving the other three.
This shows that the Prophet considered them unimportant since it was
necessary that he acts with them all like he did with Abu Bakr. Since he
did not do it, he considered their rights unimportant and he
discriminated between them in his kindness to them while it was
necessary for him to have the same concern for all of them.

And as for your opponent’s question that: Did those two accept Islam
willingly or unwillingly?

Why don’t you say: It was due to greed. Because they used to sit in the
company of Jews and they were knowing about the proclamation and victory
of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) on the Arabs. The Jews had told them all about
the prophecies in the Old Testament and ancient scriptures. They had
said that his domination over the Arabs would resemble that of
Nebuchadnezzar in Bani Israel except that he would be claiming
prophethood while in fact he would not be one.

Thus when the proclamation of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) was made
they helped him on the testimony of ‘There is no god except Allah and
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah’ with the greedy intention that when
circumstances are good and his affairs are in order, they would also be
able to get his deputyship and authority. But when they despaired of
getting rulership from His Eminence they joined other people having same
view on the night of Uqbah to frighten the camel of Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
so that it may throw him down, killing him.

They covered their faces like others but the Almighty Allah kept His
Prophet safe from their plot and they could not harm him in any way.
Those two were just like Talha and Zubair who came and pledged
allegiance to ‘Ali (as) coveting governorship of a province. But when
they despaired, they broke the pledge and rose up in rebellion against
His Eminence till they met the fate of those who break the pledge of
allegiance.”

When the conversation reached this point, our master, Imam Hasan bin
‘Ali (as) arose to pray. Qa’im (as) also arose with him and I returned
from their company and came out looking for Ahmad bin Ishaq. I saw him
coming to me weeping. I asked: “Why were you delayed? And why are you
crying?”

He replied: “I don’t have the garment that my master has asked for.” I
said: “Don’t be upset, go and tell the Imam about it.” So he went inside
and returned smiling and reciting Durood on Muhammad and Aale Muhammad.
I asked: “What happened?” He replied: “I saw the garment concealed under
the feet of my master.” So we praised Allah the Almighty. After that day
we visited the house of our master a few times more but did not see that
child with His Eminence again. When it was time to say farewell I, Ahmad
bin Ishaq and some of our co-religionists came to His Eminence.

Ahmad bin Ishaq stood up and said: “O son of Allah’s Messenger,
departure is soon and our grief is intense. I pray to Allah to convey
our Durood on your grandfather Muhammad Mustafa, your father, Murtuza,
your mother, Sayydatunnisa and the two chiefs of the youths of Paradise,
your uncle and your father and the Purified Imams after them from your
forefathers. And also we convey our Durood and Salawaat on you and your
son. And we pray that may your station be exalted and may your enemies
be disgraced. And may not Allah make this our last audience with you.”
When Ahmad bin Ishaq reached this point His Eminence was moved to such
an extent that tears flowed from his eyes. Then he said:

“O Ahmad bin Ishaq, in your supplication, do not ask for invalid thing
as in this journey you will meet the Lord.” When Ahmad bin Ishaq heard
this he fell down unconscious. On regaining consciousness he said: “I
implore you by the sanctity of your grandfather, grant me a piece of
cloth that I can take as my shroud.”

Our master, put his hand under his seat and removed thirteen dirhams and
said: “Take this and don’t spend anything else on yourself and you will
not be deprived of what you desire. Indeed Allah does not waste the
reward of the doers of good.”

Saad continues: “On the return journey when three farsangs remained from
Halwan, Ahmad bin Ishaq developed fever and became seriously ill and was
on the verge of death. When we arrived at Halwan and lodged at one of
the caravanserai, Ahmad bin Ishaq summoned one of his townsmen who lived
in that place, and after that he said to us: ‘Tonight, you all leave me
alone.’ Each of us retired to our bedrooms, and near dawn a thought came
to my mind. When I opened my eyes I saw Kafoor, servant of my master,
Abu Muhammad (as) who said to me: ‘May Allah increase your reward in
this calamity and may He compensate you for this tragedy. We have
finished the funeral bath and shrouding of your friend. You may please
get up for his burial, because his status in the view of your master is
more exalted than that of you all.’ After that he went out of my sight
and we participated in the funeral of Ahmad bin Ishaq, weeping and
wailing. We fulfilled his rights and completed his last rituals, may
Allah have mercy on him.”[^1]

2 – There is a traditional report quoted by the Thiqatul Islam Kulaini
in Kafi that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) said:

“I heard Abu Abdillah (as) say: ‘Do you think that the appointer among
us (Imams) can make anyone he wants his successor? No, by Allah, it is
rather a covenant from Allah and His Messenger (s.a.w.s.) for one man
after another, until it comes down to the one who is entrusted with
it.”[^2]

As you have understood this matter it must be said that the Imamate of
our Maula and Sayyid, Hujjat Ibnul Hasan al-Askari, the Master of the
Time (aj) is proved in two ways, through Nass (Islamic texts) and
Miracle by the medium of Mutawatir traditions some of which we would
mention in the coming section so that this book is not lacking in proof

[^1]: Al-Ihtijaaj; Shaykh Tabarsi; Vol. 2/268

[^2]: Usul al-Kafi; Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini; Vol. 1/277


