26. Safe Keeping Trust And Returning It Honestly
================================================

Imam (as) is a divine trust as mentioned in *Ziarat* Jamia that:

“You are the most illuminated path and the most prominent way and the
martyrs of the mortal world and the intercessors of the everlasting
world and continuous and permanent mercy and the treasured sign and the
safe trust.”[^1]

Abul Hasan Shareef in the book, *Miraat al-Anwaar wa Mishkaat ul-Asraar*
has said: And as for the trust, the Imams themselves have interpreted it
to be their *Wilayat* and Imamate, such that in every place – according
to proportion – has a special interpretation. In some traditional
reports it is mentioned that the Imams are keeper of trusts, that the
Almighty Allah has given to His saints in the world.

In some Ziarats it is mentioned:

“I witness that…that you are the safe trusts.”

Apparently the purport of obligatory fulfillment and obedience and
following them and refraining from that which makes them unhappy is same
as mentioned in the tradition of two weighty things, which is considered
authentic both by the Shias and Sunnis.[^2]

In another *Ziarat* it is mentioned:

You are the trusts of prophethood. That is the trusts of the Holy
Prophet (S).

In *Tafseer Furat* it is mentioned from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) that he
said:

“We are that trust that was offered to the heavens, earths and
mountains…”[^3]

I say: The matter of another tradition from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) is as
follows:

“Allah, the Mighty and Sublime presented the souls of the Imams to the
heavens, earth and mountains and He said whatever He said about their
excellence…”[^4]

The gist of the matter is that: Without any doubt, keeping safe trusts –
according to reason and verses of the Holy Qur’an and the traditions –
is obligatory and also there is no doubt that the keeping and restoring
of different types of trust is different. On the basis of this, every
trust demands a particular method of keeping and restoring. And thus the
restoring of this divine trust is by expression of love, in trying to
render help and obedience.

Since all these factors are present in praying for early reappearance of
the Master of the Time (aj) it is inevitable that by performing this act
one can fulfill the payment of trust. And the detail of this will be
possible only by relying on the help of the Almighty Allah and the
mediation of the Holy Imams (as).

This shall be discussed under few headings:

First: Regarding the meaning of protected trust.

Second: Regarding the obligatory nature of protecting the trust and its
care and safe return to its owner – according to the dictates of wisdom,
logic and reason.

Third: Regarding how the divine trust can be taken care of.

Fourth: Regarding the fact that praying for the Master of the Time (aj)
and supplicating to Allah for his early reappearance is a way of
restoring the divine trust.

First Matter: Regarding The Meaning Of Protected Trust
------------------------------------------------------

We should know that this statement has twelve aspects and each of them –
except for the eleventh – revert to that: Imams (as) are divine deposits
and trusts that the Almighty Allah has kept under His own care and
safety – by different types of protections and concessions related to
divine wisdom.

First: Protection in all conditions till they are made apparent in the
last period of time. In other words: It is that trust that the Almighty
Allah has kept in His safe custody in the realm of lights, souls,
shadows, spirits and in this world from the time of creation of Adam
till the period of the Last Prophet. Inspite of the fact that all
opponents, haters and envious ones who united to eliminate them and were
intending to put out the light of truth. But the Almighty Allah did not
want but that His light should be perfected even though the infidels may
find it displeasing.

The conclusion is that: The Imams (as) are divine trusts that Allah, the
Mighty and the High has brought from His divine unseen for His servants
so that His light may be perfected and He placed them in His safety and
protection so that none can apprehend them and they cannot be attacked
in all conditions and circumstances and in all places in such a way that
no enemy and opponent may put out His light and destroy them, till the
time they are brought out in the last period of time.

Second: Protected means: Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has guarded this
trust from all types of filth and dirt of deviation by not entrusting
them except to the pure loins and purified wombs because it is the
unanimity of the scholars – rather it is a basic point of faith – that
the fathers of the Holy Imams (as) whom the Almighty Allah bestowed with
divine trust – from the Seal of the prophets upto Adam (as) – all of
them were believers and pure and none of them did ever commit polytheism
for even a blink of the eye like their mothers who were entrusted with
these deposits. It is thus mentioned in the *Ziarat*:

The dirt of polytheism has not contaminated you and the dress of
disgrace never covered you.

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said:

“Indeed there was Allah and nothing else, then He created time and space
and created the light of lights such that all lights took their
luminosity from it. And in that (light of lights) He continued His own
light, so that all lights took their luminosity from it. And it is this
light from which He created Muhammad and Ali. Thus Muhammad and Ali were
the first two lights because nothing had come into existence before them
and always those two continued in pure loins till they came to the most
pure of them – that is Abdullah and Abu Talib – they split from each
other.”[^5]

In *Ihtijaaj* in reply of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) to queries and doubts
of heretics it is mentioned that:

“The Almighty Allah brought out from Adam, a pure and chaste progeny
from which He created the prophets and messengers. They were the chosen
ones of the Lord and the purest gems in the pure loins and protected
wombs. The unchastity of ignorance did not reach them and their ancestry
never contaminated because Allah, the Mighty and the High kept them in a
place that had nothing higher to it in status and nobility.

Each of them were repositories of divine knowledge and trustees of the
unseen and the center of secret and proof on His creatures. They were
His interpreters and spokesmen. They would not have been anything except
this. Thus the proof is not but from this progeny that will rise up
among the people in place of the Holy Prophet (S)…”[^6]

If we like, we can mention all that is written on this topic but it
would do nothing but prolong the matter out of proportion.

Shaykh Sadooq (r.a.) in his *Book of Beliefs,* in the chapter of the
faith of the ancestors of the Holy Prophet (S) has said:

“Our belief regarding them is that they were Muslims from Adam till his
father Abdullah, and that Abu Talib was a Muslim and the mother of the
Prophet, Amina binte Wahab was a Muslim. And the Holy Prophet (S) said:
I was born through marriage and not through adultery, from the time of
Adam. And it is narrated that Abdul Muttalib was the divine proof and
Abu Talib took up his successorship.”[^7]

Third: That is they were safe from sins and evils, because the Imams
(as) were infallible in such a way that all their life the Almighty
Allah protected them from sins and evil deeds and it is a cornerstone of
Imamite faith.

Fourth: They are protected from allegations and being related to
mistakes and defects in such a way that none of them were ever blamed by
their enemies for any defect; their opponents did not deny any of their
excellences – rather, inspite of the jealousy and enmity they bore
against the Imams – they confessed to their majesty and greatness.

Fifth: They were in such a way that no creature could apprehend them as
mentioned in the Holy Qur’an that: In a protected tablet. On the basis
of this it denotes that no one of the creatures could recognize the
Imams till the final stage of recognition about the reality of their
being and their qualities, because those who are at a lower position
than them since they are deficient in relation to them they cannot
perceive the absolute reality. Don’t you see that infants are unable to
understand the reality of their father and their qualities since they
are having deficiency and are less able. It is thus mentioned in
*Ziarat* Jamia:

“O my masters, I am not able to praise you nor can I reach the utmost
limit in your glorification. Neither can I describe you perfectly.”

It is mentioned in the tradition of the Holy Prophet (S) that:

“O Ali, no one has recognized Allah except you and me, and none has
recognized me except Allah and you and none has recognized you except
Allah and me.”[^8]

In *Usool Kafi* in the tradition of Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) it is
mentioned that:

“Indeed, the Almighty Allah cannot be described and just as Allah cannot
be described in the same way our description is also not possible…”[^9]

Also through authentic chain of narrators it is narrated from His
Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) that he said:

“Allah, the Mighty and Sublime cannot be described and how can He be
descried when He says in his book:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا قَدَرُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they do not assign to Allah the attributes due to Him.” (Qur’an,
Surah Anaam 6:91)***

As much as He may be praised, He is greater than it. And the Holy
Prophet (S) also has not been described perfectly. How can one describe
a slave that the Almighty Allah has kept under seven veils and whose
obedience He made as good as His obedience and He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا آتَاكُمُ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ فَانْتَهُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whatever the Apostle gives you, accept it, and from whatever he
forbids you, keep back.”(Qur’an, Surah Hashr 59:7)*** [^10]

One who obeys this prophet has obeyed Me and one who disobeys him has
disobeyed Me and has left the matter to him.

We (Imams) have also not been described. How can be described those from
whom the Almighty Allah has removed impurity, which is defeat.

The believer has also not been described, and certainly the believer
meets his brother and shakes hands with him, the Almighty Allah
continuously pays attention to him and sins fall off his cheeks like
leaves from the tree.”[^11]

I say: This tradition is one of the most difficult ones and after a lot
of study what we have concluded is as follows: The purport of the
tradition is the impossibility to fully comprehend the real recognition
of Allah by the creatures. And the impossibility for others to fully
comprehend the true status and reality of His Eminence. And the
impossibility for others to perfectly know about the qualities and real
being of the Imams. Also the impossibility for non-believer to become
fully aware of the true position of the believer because the deficient
cannot encompass the perfect. Therefore it is mentioned in traditions
that:

“If Abu Zar knew what is in the heart of Salman, he would have killed
him.”[^12]

Or as mentioned in another tradition:

“He would have accused him of infidelity.”

The explanation with regard to the *Marefat* of Allah is clear. And as
for the point regarding the Holy Prophet (S) it says:

“How can be described that which the Almighty Allah has kept under seven
veils.”

Thus it is possible that it implies that the Holy Prophet (S) is veiled
under seven curtains of faith as it is mentioned in a tradition of
*Usool Kafi*: so it means that since the Holy Prophet (S) is perfect in
the stages of faith in Allah in such a way that none is higher than him,
therefore anyone else cannot know him perfectly because the deficient
cannot fully understand one who is perfect.

It is possible that the word seven is for seven heavens, that is: How
can be described a servant who is on such an exalted stage and elevated
position: as the Almighty Allah took him on a such lofty level that no
man could reach it. And on the basis of both the meanings the object is
omitted, that is:

“How can be described (a slave) that Almighty Allah has kept under seven
veils.”

The word of ‘slave’ is the object; and this omission is quite common.
For example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ يَبْسُطُ الرِّزْقَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَقْدِرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah amplifies and straitens the means of subsistence for whom He
pleases.” (Qur’an, Surah Raad 13:26)***

And the meaning of this statement:

“How can be described (a slave) that Almighty Allah has kept under seven
veils.”

A remote possibility has also been mentioned that can be referred in the
book of *Miraat al-Uqool* if anyone is interested.

Then His Eminence said: “And we (Imams) have also not been described.
How can be described those from whom the Almighty Allah has removed
impurity, which is defeat.”

I say: This is the explanation of their loftiness and status that those
who are lower than them could never have recognition (*Marefat*) of them
perfectly because no believer can have as perfect certainty of faith as
the Imam (as) except going through various stages and all those stages
and steps are having doubts. On the contrary the Imam (as) whose
*Marefat* is higher than that of all the *Awliya* of Allah and their
position is that of complete certainty and one who is such cannot be
described by anyone at a lower level of faith.

Also the Imams (as) are expressions of the qualities of Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, thus one who is having these qualities would not
have any kind of doubt or instigation in his being. While those other
than him are susceptible to this. Thus it is not possible that those who
are at a lower level may have complete recognition about him.

As for the believer: With relation to other creatures they are also like
that. That is those who have not reached that particular level of faith
cannot have perfect recognition of the position of a believer. In the
same way believers at a lower level like Abu Zar was in relation to
Salman, cannot have perfect recognition of the believer at a higher
level.

And His Eminence said: “And certainly the believer meets his brother and
shakes hands with him…”it shows the loftiness of the position of the
believer and it does not mean to highlight the deficiency of those at
the lower level who cannot describe him perfectly as is very much
obvious. (Think upon it).

Sixth: It is that the purport of the protected trust is that: Trustees
have guarded this great divine trust in every age. It means that: The
forefathers of the Holy Prophet (S) upto Prophet Adam (as) were
cognizant of the rights of this trust and they cared for them and they
did not transfer them anywhere except into pure wombs, that were immune
to the filth of polytheism and dirt of infidelity which were the ones
deserving of these trusts. In spite of the fact that opponents and
enemies throughout history have grudged this divine tree; as will be
clear to those who undertake the study of the history of the forefathers
of the Holy Prophet (S).

Seven: The implication of ‘protected’ is that believers have protected
in their hearts the *Marefat* and true position of the Imams. They have
guarded these beliefs inspite of the opponents and enemies by acting
upon their commands in secret and resorting to the best dissimulation
before the enemies. So that he is also protected from the plots and
intentions of every transgressing tyrant and his valuable heritage is
protected from being forgotten. And also they supported and guarded them
by their body and heart and wealth and sons and it is this point that
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) has mentioned:

“A person who often relates our traditions to strengthen the hearts of
our Shias is better than a thousand worshippers.”[^13]

*Insha Allah* we would quote traditions of *Kafi* on this subject.

Eighth: It is that ‘protected trust’ implies that the Almighty Allah has
kept them in His protection and security so that no one can bring down
their position or to remove them from the status that the Almighty Allah
has granted them, or to destroy their status. Such that no matter how
much the tyrants tried to put out the divine light, the Almighty Allah
perfected His light further.

The difference between this meaning and the first and the fourth is
that: In the first aspect the aim of protection was from nonentity,
negativity and non-existence. Such that the enemies and opponents tried
time and again to destroy them and came to kill them. And the
implication of the fourth meaning is that remaining protected from the
tongue of the haters and usurpers, because our Imams (as) inspite that
all enemies, united and became dominant in all the corners of the world,
the enemies were not able to accuse them of any immorality or make any
allegations against them.

Yes, a group of *Nasibis* (Ahle Bayt haters) – may Allah curse them –
cursed and abused them but they never attributed immoral acts to them.
And this is not in contradiction of that which was mentioned earlier.
Rather, the enemies have also confessed to the excellence and greatness
of the Holy Imams (as). Thus the usurpers of the rights of Amirul
Momineen (as) were compelled to make such statements as are recorded in
history and books of scholars of the opposite sect are full of
excellences of the Purified Imams (as).

The implication of the eighth meaning is that: Allah, the Mighty and the
High, protected the Imams (as) from the lowering of their position
through people like Zaid bin al-Hasan, Abdullah Aftah and Muhammad bin
Abdullah who claimed Mahdaviyat. And Ja’far the Kazzab who wanted to
occupy the elevated seat of Imamate and other people like them who
claimed the position that Allah has restricted for the Imams (as) and
the Almighty Allah exposed their falsehood and proved the miracles,
sciences, superiority of the position of the true Imams for the people,
and in this way all false claimants and heresy makers were destroyed.

Ninth: It is that the meaning of protected is restricted and specialized
as mentioned in *Qamoos*: To save for oneself means to make it special
and restricted for oneself. Thus the meaning of the phrase ‘protected
trust’ on the basis of this is as follows: Allah, the Mighty and Sublime
created the Imams (as) for Himself and endowed on them His blessings and
kept them as his trusts among the people in His world.

That which supports this matter is a tradition narrated from Amirul
Momineen (as) that he said:

“We are the creations of our Lord and the people are our
creations.”[^14]

In the blessed *Tawqee* narrated in *Ihtijaaj*[^15] the word mentioned
is ‘our creation’ – without ‘for us’ as mentioned in Part Three of the
book.

Also that which supports this is a *Hadith Qudsi* mentioned in many
reliable books:

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, addressed the Holy Prophet (S) thus: “I
created the things for you and created you for Myself.”

I say: The points derived from this tradition are as follows:

1. It is that the first cause was the being of His Eminence, Muhammad
(S) and not the other creatures. Thus if the Almighty Allah had not
created him, He would not have created others also.

2. Allah, the Mighty and Sublime created Muhammad and his progeny (as)
to display His absolute power and knowledge since the perfection of the
thing made shows the perfection of the maker. Thus display of power and
knowledge of the Almighty Allah from the aspect of the creation of
Muhammad and his progeny (as) actualized and after that He created all
the creatures so that their status, perfections and position may be
displayed in all the worlds.

3. It is that Allah, the Mighty and the High created Muhammad and Aale
Muhammad (as) and made them the medium of all blessings and favors – as
mentioned in the words of *Ziarat* Jamia and other numerous traditions –
and no benefit reaches any thing except through them and their blessings
(as). And since existence and being is the highest form of benefit,
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime created everything else through their
bounty, and if they had not been there, He would not have created
anything.

Possibly the meaning of the statement of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) is this
when he says: “The Almighty Allah created the will for His own decree
then He created the things for the divine will.” It implied that the
basic cause of creation was Muhammad and the Almighty Allah created the
other creatures due to the bounty of His Eminence.

As the nine points mentioned so far are based on the assumption that the
meaning of trust is divine trust, that is Allah, the Mighty and the High
reposed them with the people as His trust, and it is implied in
different types of protections, and this is not among the usage of the
word in multiple meanings, because protection is a whole matter that is
applicable in different kinds and forms. On the basis of this, all the
meanings return to that only, that the Imams (as) are divine trusts whom
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has protected through His various
protections.

Tenth: It is that the trust denotes the trust of prophethood, that is
the Holy Prophet (S) kept the Imams (as) as his trust with his Ummah
till the Judgment Day. And the meaning of its protection is the
commanding of His Eminence to protect them and care for their rights and
that which proves this is a tradition accepted by Shias as well as
Sunnis that the Holy Prophet (S) said:

“I leave among you two weighty things: the Book of Allah and my
progeny.”

The Almighty Allah inspired these ten aspects to me by the *Barakat* of
the Purified Progeny (as).

Eleventh: One of the scholars have said: The trust means absolute
*Wilayat*, high status and position that the Almighty Allah has given to
the True Imams (as) and which He has restricted only to them as
mentioned in some traditional reports, and the Imams (as) are the
bearers of this trust and their comparison to trust – on the basis of
this aspect – is metaphorical.

Twelfth: One of our co-religionists has mentioned the possibility that:
The trust implies the Imams (as) themselves and the meaning of their
being protected is that: being protected from change and annihilation,
that is: Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has bestowed their souls among
all the souls the special of quality of never being susceptible to
change and annihilation.

I say: That which proves this is the statement of the Almighty Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَبْقَىٰ وَجْهُ رَبِّكَ ذُو الْجَلَالِ وَالْإِكْرَامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And there will endure for ever the person of your Lord, the Lord of
glory and honor.” (Qur’an, Surah Rahman 55:27)***

As appendix we mention here traditional reports that clearly say that
Imams (as) are face of Allah:

In *Tafseer al-Burhan* it is quoted from *Kafi* through his own chain of
narrators that His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) said:

“And we are the face of the Almighty Allah that frequents the world
among you.”[^16]

And also in the same book it is mentioned that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as)
said:

“The Almighty Allah created us and made our creation good. And he shaped
us in a goodly shape. And he made us His eyes among His servants (so
that we can witness their deeds and behavior) and He made us His
speaking tongue and He made us His hand of mercy and beneficence spread
over the head of His servants and He made us His face (so that through
us attention may be called to Him).

And He made us a gate (so that it may be a proof for the people for His
knowledge, faith and obedience). And a treasure (of His knowledge,
recognition and mercy) in His heavens and the earth. The trees fructify
and fruits grow by our *Barakat* and the streams flow and the rain
descends and plants grow from the earth. And through our worship is
Allah worshipped. And if we had not been there, the Almighty Allah would
not have been worshipped.”[^17]

I say: The saying of His Eminence, Sadiq (as) that: “Through our worship
is Allah worshipped” carries two meanings:

First: No creature however great he may be, has worshipped Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime like them (as), because their *Marefat* of the
Almighty Allah is more perfect than that of others. Thus their worship
is also like that as perfection of worship is a branch of the perfection
of *Marefat*. On the basis of this, if they had not been there, the
Almighty Allah would not have been worshipped. The conclusion is that
the perfect worship of the Almighty Allah is restricted only to them.

Second: The Imams (as) taught the way of obedience to the people in all
conditions. They taught worship in such a way that angels learnt from
them how to praise and glorify the Lord – as mentioned in the Part Three
in the tradition of the Holy Prophet (S). Thus their worship is the
cause of the worship of others. On the basis of this, through their
worship is Allah worshipped and Allah is recognized through their
guidance.

That which supports this is the tradition that Shaykh Sadooq has
mentioned in his book of *Tawheed* quoting from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as)
that he said:

“O Ibne Abi Ya’fur, we are the proof of Allah on His servants and the
witnesses on the creatures and the trustees of revelation and the
repositories of knowledge of the Almighty Allah and His face with which
He pays attention to you and His eyes in His creatures and His speaking
tongue and His heart and the door by which He is proved. We are
executors of the command of Allah and the callers to His path and the
Almighty Allah is recognized through us and through us He is worshipped.
We are those who prove on the Almighty Allah and if we had not been
there the Almighty Allah would not have been worshipped.”[^18]

### Conclusion

Apparently the statement of the Almighty Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ شَيْءٍ هَالِكٌ إِلَّا وَجْهَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Everything is perishable but His face.” (Qur’an, Surah Qasas
28:88)***

By the appendix of traditional reports that clearly mention that: The
face of Allah implies Muhammad and Aale Muhammad (as). Other traditions
also prove that at the time of the blowing of the horn (*soor*) all the
things would be annihilated – even the souls – except for the souls of
Muhammad and his infallible progeny (as) – and some of our scholars have
accepted and adopted this only.

Allamah Majlisi in *Biharul Anwar* has attributed this statement to the
scholastic theologians.[^19]

Some others have opined that all the souls would remain alive.
Precaution lies in leaving this matter to the Purified Imams (as) since
it is a matter of principle and we don’t have proof of any of the two
theories.

Among those traditions that support the first assertion is a traditional
report mentioned in *Ihtijaaj* under the reply of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as)
to the doubts and queries of heretical people:

The Zindiq asked: “After leaving the body, does the soul perish or
continues to live?” Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) replied: “It remains alive
till the blowing of the horn. Thus at that time all things would be
annihilated in such a way that they would neither feel nor be felt. Then
once more they would be brought back into existence like they were in
the beginning. And it is for a period of four hundred years that the
creatures would remain thus, that is the period between two blowings of
the horn…”[^20]

In *Nahjul Balagha* in one of the sermons of Amirul Momineen (as) it is
mentioned:

“Surely, after the extinction of the world, Allah the Glorified will
remain alone with nothing else beside Him. He will be, after its
extinction, as He was before its production: without time or place or
moment or period. At this moment, period and time will not exist, and
years and hours will disappear. There will be nothing except Allah, the
One, the All-powerful…”[^21]

Second Matter: Regarding The Obligatory Nature Of Protecting The Trusts
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Protecting the trust by dictates of logic and reason is obligatory and
also that it must be restored to the owner. As for reason, it proves
that failure in this tantamount to injustice and the evil of injustice
is clear to all.

As for the Holy Qur’an; in it the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَأْمُرُكُمْ أَنْ تُؤَدُّوا الْأَمَانَاتِ إِلَىٰ
أَهْلِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah commands you to make over trusts to their owners.”
(Qur’an, Surah Nisa 4:58)***

“And those who are keepers of their trusts and their covenant.”

He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا تَخُونُوا اللَّهَ وَالرَّسُولَ وَتَخُونُوا أَمَانَاتِكُمْ
وَأَنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Be not unfaithful to Allah and the Apostle, nor be unfaithful to
your trusts while you know.” (Qur’an, Surah Anfaal 8:27)***

As for traditional reports regarding this, they are present in large
numbers and shall be quoted at appropriate places.

Third Matter: How The Divine Trust Is Cared For
-----------------------------------------------

Regarding this it must be mentioned that: This matter is derived from
few points, like:

1. It is obligatory for all to have love and regard for the Imams, have
belief in their *Wilayat* and their obedience is compulsory for all and
no is exempted from these things in any condition.

2. Attachment to the service of and following them (as) in all matters
and aspects and taking them as role models which is the very aim of
their appointment.

3. Striving as much as possible to remove their problems and this is the
preface for guarding their secrets, their family, their property, their
children and their Shias. And it is for this that *Taqayyah* is
explained and emphatic orders have been issued about it.

4. All the efforts should be made to convey benefits to them – from that
which Allah Almighty has made obligatory and recommended.

5. Mention of their rightfulness and Imamate and repeating their
excellences and merits and exposing the deviation of their enemies –
though it is for those who are qualified for it; if not, then if one is
compelled to observe *Taqayyah* one must keep them concealed.

6. Expression of sincere love through the tongue and hands etc… and
through other modes of helping and caring.

Fourth Matter: Praying For An Early Reappearance Is Among The Forms Of Caring
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Although this matter is clear and there is no need to explain it,
because praying for His Eminence, Qaim (aj) and supplicating for his
early reappearance, taking the divine proofs as role models and helping
His Eminence through the tongue and being attached to them is from the
practice of *Awliya* of Allah, and this much is enough if one is willing
to pay attention to it.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 102, Pg. 129

[^2]: Text of the Hadith Thaqlayn – on the basis of one of the
traditional report is as follows: I leave among you two weighty things,
the book of Allah and my progeny. If you remain attached to them you
will not go astray after me till you reach me at the Pool. (The Author)

[^3]: Tafseer Furat, Pg. 147

[^4]: Maani al-Akhbaar, Pg. 108, Miraat al-Anwaar, Pg. 85

[^5]: Kafi; Vol. 1, Pg. 441

[^6]: Ihtijaaj; Vol. 2, Pg. 78

[^7]: Itiqaad Sadooq, Chapter 11, Pg. 105

[^8]: Mashaariq al-Anwaar, Pg. 112

[^9]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 180

[^10]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 182

[^11]: Kafi; Vol. 1, Pg. 401

[^12]: Mashaariq al-Anwaar, Pg. 193

[^13]: Kulaini (r.a.) has mentioned this tradition through good/near
authentic chain of narrators from Muawiyah bin Ammar in Usool Kafi, Vol.
1, Pg. 33, Chapter of Merits and Excellence of Knowledge that he said: I
asked His Eminence, Abi Abdullah Sadiq (as): “Between a man who narrates
your traditions and establishes them among the people, (as if)
inscribing them in the hearts of your followers, and a devout person
from among your followers who does not narrate these traditions‑which of
them is better?” The Imam (as) replied: “He who narrates our traditions
and thereby makes firm the hearts of our followers is better than a
thousand devotees.”

[^14]: Nahjul Balagha, Letters

[^15]: Ihtijaaj; Vol. 2, Pg. 278

[^16]: Al-Burhan, Vol. 3, Pg. 240

[^17]: Al-Burhan, Vol. 3, Pg. 240

[^18]: At-Tawheed, Pg. 152

[^19]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 6, Pg. 331

[^20]: Ihtijaaj; Vol. 2, Pg. 97

[^21]: Nahjul Balagha, Sermon 184. (Sermon 224, Pg. 742 Fayd)


