27. Spread Of The Effulgence Of His Eminence In The Supplicant’s Heart
======================================================================

This matter could be explained under three subheadings:

First: It is that without any doubt by conditions and different changes
as a result of actions that a man commits, his heart is affected. And
this can be perceived by us through our realization. Moreover, verses of
the Holy Qur’an and traditions of the family of infallibility (as) also
prove it. Allah, the Mighty and the High says, regarding the faithful
people:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الَّذِينَ إِذَا ذُكِرَ اللَّهُ وَجِلَتْ
قُلُوبُهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those only are believers whose hearts become full of fear when Allah
is mentioned.” (Qur’an, Surah Anfaal 8:2)***

And with regard to the infidels and transgressors He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ قَسَتْ قُلُوبُكُمْ مِنْ بَعْدِ ذَٰلِكَ فَهِيَ كَالْحِجَارَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then your hearts hardened after that, so that they were like rocks.”
(Qur’an, Surah Baqarah 2:74)***

There are other verses also.

It is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that he said:

“Meet each other and converse and discuss; as the mention of traditions
polishes the heart, indeed hearts blacken (rust) like swords.”

There are numerous traditions regarding this, some of which would be
presented to the readers.

Second: As much an action is valuable and great in the view of Allah,
its effect on the heart is as much profound and illuminating. Therefore
after the*Marefat* of Allah and the *Marefat* of His Prophet there is
nothing more significant than the *Wilayat* and love of Amirul Momineen
(as) and his purified progeny (as). And it is in this regard that our
master His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) told Abu Khalid Kabuli:

“By Allah, O Abu Khalid, the *Noor* of the Imam in the hearts of the
believers is more shining than the Sun during the day. And it
illuminates the hearts of the believers. And Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime prevents their *Noor* from the hearts of whosoever He likes,
leaving them in darkness. By Allah, O Abu Khalid, there is no man that
cultivates love and affinity for us but that the Almighty Allah purifies
his heart. Thus if he submits to us, the Almighty Allah saves him from a
severe accounting and secures him from the terrible horror of the
Judgment Day.”[^1]

The matters that prove this meaning include a tradition from *Kharaij*
that Abu Baseer said:

I went to the Masjid with His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as). People
were coming and going. His Eminence said to me: “Ask the people if they
can see me?” So I asked everyone that entered the mosque: “Have you seen
Abu Ja’far?” He said: “No.” While His Eminence was standing over there.
Till there came Abu Haroon Makfoof (blind). His Eminence said: “Ask him
also.” I asked him: “Have you not seen Abu Ja’far (as)?” He replied: “Is
it not he that stands?” I asked: “How did you know?” He said: “How could
I not know when he is a brilliant effulgence?”[^2]

Third: From whatever has been said so far and that which shall be
explained further we come to know the greatness and importance of this
noble act in the view of Allah; that is steadfastness and preparation in
praying for the Master who is hidden from the people, and by studying
the verses and traditions we have learnt about its benefits and effects,
such that after this, there remains no doubt for anyone that this
valuable deed is a cause of increase in the effulgence of Imam in the
heart of the supplicant due to the perfection of his faith under the
effect of this worship act and his favor to his master as per his
capacity. He would also become eligible of the attention of the rightful
Imam (as) *Insha Allah Taala*.

[^1]: Kafi; Vol. 1, Pg. 194

[^2]: Kharaij, Sciences of Muhammad bin Ali al-Baqir (as)


