28. Increase In Lifespan
========================

Yes, preparation and steadfastness in praying for His Eminence, Qaim
(aj) and for his early reappearance is a cause of increase in one
lifespan – and also it will earn all the benefits and effects of doing
good to ones relatives, *Insha Allah Taala*.

That which proves this matter especially, is the traditional report
about the particular supplication and it is that: In *Makarimul Akhlaq*
it is narrated that one who recites this supplication after every
obligatory Prayer regularly for such a long time that he is content with
it, would get the honor of seeing the Master of the Time (aj). The
supplication is as follows:

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad. O Allah, indeed
Your Messenger is truthful testifier, Your blessings be upon him and his
progeny. You indeed said: I do not hesitate in anything I do, like I
hesitate in capturing the soul of My believing servant who disliked
death and I dislike his dislike. O Allah, then bless Muhammad and Aale
Muhammad and hasten the reappearance, of Your *Wali* and help and
success and do not cause dislike to me and in so-and-so.

(In place of so-and-so one can mention any name one likes).”[^1]

I say: The reason for this has been explained in Part Four of the book
under the chapter of Letter ‘F’, that by the early reappearance of His
Eminence there will be deliverance for all the *Awliya* of Allah and
also that peace and help will be there for all of them in the time of
reappearance. In addition to this, in some traditional reports the words
are as follows:

“And hasten the reappearance of Your *Wali*…”

There is no doubt that for those who study the traditions narrated from
the Holy Imams (as) and supplications that are quoted from them, the
meaning of*Awliya* in the absolute sense is His Eminence, the Master of
the Time (aj). For further confirmation of this matter one may refer to
the supplication of our master Abul Hasan Ali bin Moosa ar-Reza (as) and
the supplication prescribed after the Midnight Prayer (*Shab*).

If it is said: It is possible that *Wali* in this instance denotes
believer as in some traditional reports it points to this.

I will say: There is remote possibility of this and it is a baseless
argument because what we mentioned can also be supported by the
following points:

1. Whatever has been reported about the excellence of this supplication
is such that it makes one eager to see the Master of the Affair (aj). As
will be clear to those who are familiar with the style of supplications,
its consisting of this effect is from the view that this prayer should
be in favor of the Master of the Time (aj).

2. From that which is derived from some supplications like the prayer of
the day of Arafah in *Sahifa Sajjadiya* and other traditional reports
that among the manners of supplication is that one should give in it
precedence to the Master of the Time (aj) after the praise and
glorification of the Almighty Allah and*Salawaat* on the Holy Prophet
(S) and his progeny (as). After that one should supplicate for His
Eminence and then for oneself, as this is the sequence of supplicating.

3. Mostly in all supplications recorded from the Holy Imams (as) there
is prayer for early reappearance, deliverance and well being of,
especially, the Master of the Time (aj). After this, all those who are
familiar with the words of the Holy Imams (as) would become assured,
rather certain, that here *Awliya*of Allah denotes only our Master of
the Time (aj). In addition to this is the supplication for His Eminence
(aj) by the Holy Imams (as) after every ritual prayer that also supports
the point that *Wali* denotes Imam Mahdi (aj).

All this discussion is centered on the words ‘For Your *Wali*’, and on
the basis of the tradition ‘For Your *Awliya*’ again the supplication is
for the early reappearance of His Eminence because by the reappearance
of His Eminence there will be real deliverance for all the *Awliya* of
Allah as we have explained before.

As for the interpretation of the words:

“I do not hesitate in anything I do.”

In the coming part of this book it will be explained *Insha Allah Taala*
and also the chain of narrators of this supplication will be
investigated and studied.

Proof of the topic of discussion: Generally if one is good to ones
family, his age will be prolonged. Secondly it has been proved that
being good to the family of the Holy Prophet (S) and Amirul Momineen
(as) is better than being good to ones relatives. Thus this is a greater
cause of prolonging of ones lifespan. Furthermore, of all the relatives
and near ones of the Holy Prophet (S) and Amirul Momineen (as) who is
worthier than the Master of the Time (aj)? On the basis of this, His
Eminence is the main object of this matter. Now here we shall also
discuss in brief some important points:

First: Being good to the relatives, increases lifespan.

Second: Being good to the Holy Prophet (S) and his family (as) is most
emphasized and best.

Three: Praying is a form of doing good and a sort of favor.

First Topic: Goodness To Relatives Causes Increase In Lifespan
--------------------------------------------------------------

To prove this matter we quote an authentic tradition from Muhammad bin
Ubaidullah that he said:

His Eminence, Abul Hasan ar-Reza said: “How often it is that a man who
has three years left in his lifespan does good to his relatives and the
Almighty Allah increases his age by thirty years, and Allah does what He
wants.”[^2]

Also it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) that he
said:

“Doing good to the kinsfolk purifies the deeds, increases wealth and
wards off calamities, eases the accounting and delays death.”[^3]

Again from the same Imam it is narrated that he said: “Doing good to the
kinsfolk improves manners, widens the hands, purifies the soul, widens
sustenance and delays death.”[^4]

Through another chain of narrators it is narrated from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (as) that he said:

“Doing good to the kinsfolk purifies the deeds, wards off calamities,
increases wealth, prolongs the lifespan, widens the sustenance and gives
him love in the family.”[^5]

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said:

“Doing good to the kinsfolk and behaving nicely with them inhabits the
cities and prolongs the lifespans.”[^6]

Through another chain of narrators it is narrated from His Eminence that
he said:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “One who wants to prolong his lifespan
and widen his sustenance should do good to the kinsfolk.”[^7]

Through another chain of narrators also from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) it
is mentioned that he said:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “How often it is that a community that
is sinful and evil doer, performs goodness to the kinsfolk and there is
increase in their wealth and their lifespans are prolonged so that
perhaps they may become good.”[^8]

Other numerous traditions have been narrated but quoting them further
would prolong this book unreasonably so our aim was only to clarify this
point.

Second Topic: Being Good To The Holy Prophet (S) And His Family (as) Is Most Emphasized And Best
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The evidence of this is: In *Kafi* it is narrated through an authentic
chain of narrators from Umar bin Zaid that he said:

I asked His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) about the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يَصِلُونَ مَا أَمَرَ اللَّهُ بِهِ أَنْ يُوصَلَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those who join that which Allah has bidden to be joined.”
(Qur’an, Surah Raad 13:21)***

That who are those with whom the Almighty Allah has ordered to join? He
said: “It is about the relatives of Aale Muhammad (S) and it is also
about your relatives.” Then he said: “Do not be of those who say about a
thing: It is only regarding one thing.”[^9]

In the same book it is narrated from Imam Ali Reza (as) that he said:

“Relatives of Aale Muhammad, the Imams (as) cling to the *Arsh* and say:
O Allah, join us with those who joined to us and take away those who
kept away from us, after that the same order is effective in the
relationships of the believers. At that point he recited the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ الَّذِي تَسَاءَلُونَ بِهِ وَالْأَرْحَامَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and be careful of (your duty to) Allah, by Whom you demand one of
another (your rights), and (to) the ties of relationship…”***
***(Qur’an,*** ***Surah Nisa 4:1)*** [^10]

In the *Tafseer Imam Hasan Askari (as)* it is mentioned that he said:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: To whosoever observes the rights of the
relatives and near kindred of the parents, Allah will give a thousand
levels in Paradise and the distance between each of the levels is such
that even a speedy horse will take a hundred years to cover the same.
One of the levels will be of silver, one of gold, one of pearls, one of
chrysolites, one of emeralds, one of musk, one of Amber and one of
Camphor, thus these levels will be made from different materials.”

“To one who observes the rights of the relatives and near kindred of
Muhammad and Ali, Allah will give such an increase in his rewards and
levels that it is like the superiority of Muhammad and Ali over his
relatives.”

Her Eminence, Fatima Zahra (s.a.) told a lady: “You must please your two
religious fathers, Muhammad and Ali, even if your biological fathers may
be displeased. And do not please your biological fathers by displeasing
your religious fathers. Because if your biological fathers become angry
with you, Muhammad and Ali will give them ten thousandth part of the
reward of their obedience of a moment and make them pleased. But if your
religious fathers become angry with you, your biological fathers would
not be capable of making them satisfied. The reward of the obedience of
the whole world cannot equal their anger.”

Imam Hasan Mujtaba (as) said: “It is incumbent on you to do good to the
relatives of your two religious fathers, Muhammad and Ali, even though
you may trespass the rights of the relatives of your worldly fathers.
And beware that in observing the rights of the relatives of your worldly
fathers you don’t trespass the rights of the relatives of your two
religious fathers because the thankfulness of this group for you before
your two religious fathers, Muhammad and Ali is more beneficial for you
than thankfulness of those relatives of yours before your biological
fathers.

This is so because when the near relatives of your religious fathers are
thankful to them, their little affectionate attention will erase all
your sins even if they are so numerous to fill up the space between the
earth and the sky. And if you ignore the rights of the relatives of your
two religious brothers and fulfill the rights of your worldly fathers’
relatives, their thankfulness would give you no benefit.”

Imam Zainul Aabideen (as) said: “It is preferable to fulfill the rights
of the relatives and friends of our religious fathers than to observe
the rights of the kindred of familial parents. Because your religious
fathers, Muhammad and Ali will make your familial parents satisfied
about us while your familial parents are not capable of making your two
religious fathers, Muhammad and Ali satisfied.”

Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) remarked: “One who considers his two religious
fathers, Muhammad and Ali more honorable and preferable than his own
familial parents and their relatives, the Almighty Allah addresses him
thus: O My servant, you have preferred the superior, so I will also make
you superior and you have chosen those whose selection was better, hence
it is deserving that I make you the neighbor and companion of My friends
in Paradise.”

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) said: “If one, for lack of economic means is
unable to fulfill the rights of the relative of both, his religious
fathers and the kindred of his familial fathers, it is necessary for him
to give priority to fulfillment of the rights of the relatives of the
religious fathers. On the Judgment Day the Almighty Allah will tell the
angels, that just as he had given priority to the relatives of his
religious fathers they must give him precedence among His folks of
Paradise. That everything that had been prepared for him before that,
must be increased a million times.”

Imam Moosa Kazim (as) has stated: “If a person is presented two business
deals and he has only one thousand dirhams, which are only sufficient
for one deal, he would inquire which of the deals is more profitable.
Now if the people tell him that this one is a thousand times more
profitable, is it not the demand of reason and logic that he should
choose that? Those who were present there said: Yes, indeed. His
Eminence (aj) said: In the same way the reward of choosing the two
religious fathers over ones familial parents is manifold.”

A person asked Imam Ali Reza (as): “O Imam, shall I not inform you about
the one who is in the greatest loss?” He replied: “Who is it?” He said:
“A man has given his ten thousand gold coins in exchange of ten thousand
silver coins.” The Imam asked: “If he sells the silver coins would he
not be in loss?” “Yes, he will be,” replied those who were present
there. The Imam asked, “Shall I not tell about the one who is in greater
loss than this?” “Yes, please do,” they replied. He said: “A person owns
a mountain of gold and he sells it for one thousand pieces of fake
silver. Would he not be in greater loss than the person mentioned
previously?”

“Indeed,” they replied. Then the Imam said: “Shall I inform you about a
greater loss than this?” Those present said: “Yes, please do.” He said:
“In a greater loss and regret is one who in doing good and favoring,
prefers the relatives of his familial parents over the kindred of his
two religious fathers, Muhammad and Ali (as). It is so because the near
kindred of his two religious fathers, Muhammad and Ali (as) are having
as much superiority over the relatives of familial parents as a thousand
mountains of gold have over a thousand pieces of silver.”

Imam Muhammad Taqi (as) has said: To one who prefers the kindred of his
two religious parents, Muhammad and Ali (as) over the relatives of his
familial parents, on the Judgment Day the Almighty Allah will make him
famous with His dresses of honor and give superiority over all His
servants. Except for the one who is equal to him in this excellence or
better than him.

Imam Ali Naqi (as) said: “Preferring the kindred of the two religious
fathers, Muhammad and Ali (as) over the relatives of ones familial
parents is included in paying respect to the majesty of the Almighty
Allah and preferring the relatives of ones familial parents over the
kindred of the two religious fathers, Muhammad and Ali (as) is included
in disrespect to the majesty of Allah, the Mighty and the High.”

Imam Hasan Askari (as) says: “There was a person whose family was in
need of food, so he left his house to earn something for them, and he
earned a dirham. He purchased food and was returning to his house when
he met a man and a woman from the relatives of Muhammad and Ali (as),
and they were hungry.

Thinking that they were more deserving of that food than his own family
members he gave them the food he had purchased. But after that he was
confounded: what explanation would he give to his family members? He was
taking slow steps in this worry when he met a messenger who was
searching for him. Upon knowing his identity the messenger gave him a
letter and a purse containing 500 gold coins.

And he said that it was from the inheritance of his cousin who has
expired in Egypt, and besides that some traders of Mecca and Medina owed
him a hundred thousand gold coins and he also left much landed property.
So the man took the gold coins, went home and procured the essentials
for his family members. When he went to sleep that night, he saw
Muhammad and Ali in dream who told him that since he had preferred their
relatives over his family members they had also made him so rich.

After that Muhammad and Ali appeared in the dream of those who owed
money to the deceased cousin. They warned the debtors that if they do
not return the debt by next morning they would be doomed to worldly and
other worldly perdition. So the next morning all of them returned the
loans and this man now had another hundred thousand dinars. Muhammad and
Ali (as) also appeared in the dreams of all those in Egypt who owed any
amount to the deceased cousin and told them to repay as soon as
possible.

After that the two (Muhammad and Ali) appeared in his dream and said:
“How did you find the divine decree about yourself? We have ordered all
Egyptians who owe you something to pay you back as soon as possible. If
you like we can tell the governor of Egypt to purchase your landed
property and send you cash to Medina so that you can invest it in real
estate here itself?”

He answered positively to this. So Muhammad and Ali appeared in the
dream of the governor of Egypt and told him to purchase the lands and
remit cash. The ruler bought all the landed property in three hundred
thousand dinars and sent him the money. That person became the richest
man of Medina. After that again the Messenger of Allah (S) appeared in
his dream and said: “This is your reward in the world for the preference
you showed to my relatives, but as for the hereafter, I will give you in
it for each piece of this a thousand palaces in Paradise, the smallest
of whom would be bigger than this world and a part of them as small as a
needlepoint would be better than the world and whatever is there in
it.”[^11]

Third Topic: Praying Is A Form Of Doing Good And A Sort Of Favor
----------------------------------------------------------------

Favor and blessing is obtained in two ways:

First: Getting benefit from someone else.

Second: Removing harm from others and both of them are obtained by
praying.

Since the best and most valuable benefit is honor, without any doubt,
this is accomplished by prayers because praying is a form of paying
respect. In the same way as we mentioned earlier, praying for early
reappearance of His Eminence, the Master of the Time (aj) according to
its prescribed conditions would be instrumental in making it happen
earlier and by it all types of goodness and blessings would be exposed
and all the harms would be removed and also among the effects of this
*Dua* is that the one for whom the prayer is recited would become happy
and elated. And the pleasure of His Eminence is itself a great benefit.

Secondly: We know that *Dua* for hastening the reappearance of Hazrat
Qaim (aj) is effective and by his reappearance will be removed his and
his Shias’ grief and sorrow and grief, hardships and problems will be
dispelled, rather the *Dua* itself removes all these things.

Among the proofs that help and respect with the tongue is a sort of
favor and goodness, is a tradition mentioned in the eleventh volume of
*Biharul Anwar* quoted from Jabir from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir
(as) that he said:

I went to His Eminence and complained to him about my need. His Eminence
said: “O Jabir, I don’t have a single dirham.” Not much time passed that
Kumayt came to the Holy Imam (as) and said: “May I be sacrificed on you,
if you permit, I want to recite a panegyric in your praise.” “Go ahead,”
said the Imam. His Eminence said: “Young man, bring out the bag of gold
from that room for Kumayt.”

Then Kumayt said: “May I be sacrificed on you, do you permit me recite
another panegyric for you?” He said: “Do it.” And when he recited
another*Qasida*, His Eminence said: “O young man, bring out the bag of
gold from that room and give it to Kumayl.”

Then Kumayt said: “May I be sacrificed on you, do you permit me to
recite a third panegyric?” He said: “Do it.” When he recited another
*Qasida*, His Eminence said: “O young man, bring out the bag of gold
from that room and give it to Kumayt.” Jabir says: So he brought out the
moneybag and gave to Kumayt.

Kumayt said: “May I be sacrificed on you, by Allah, I don’t love you for
the sake of the world. And through these couplets I don’t intend but to
do good to the Holy Prophet (S) and fulfill the rights Allah has made
obligatory on me.” Jabir says: Then His Eminence, Imam Muhammad Baqir
(as) prayed for him. Then he said: “O young man, return these moneybags
to their place.” Jabir said: I said to myself: He told me he didn’t have
a dirham but he gave 3000 dirhams to Kumayt!

He said: At that point Kumayt arose and went away. I said to His
Eminence: “You told me that you didn’t have a dirham but inspite of that
you gave 3000 dirhams to Kumayt?” The Imam said: “O Jabir, get up and go
into that room.” Jabir said: “I got up and went into that room but there
was no sign of those bags.”

I returned to the Imam. Imam said: “O Jabir, whatever I have concealed
from you is more than what I have revealed to you.” Then he arose, took
my hand and led me to that room and hit the ground with his feet.
Suddenly something resembling a camel’s neck came out of the earth, it
was made of gold. Then he said: “O Jabir, see this and do not tell about
this to anyone except to those you trust among your brothers – the
Almighty Allah has made us capable for whatever we desire.”[^12]

The proof of this tradition is that: Kumayt considered the verbal praise
to be a kind of doing good to the Holy Prophet (S) and Imam (as) also
considered it in that manner. *Dua* for Imam (as) is also such because
it is also a form of paying respect and doing a favor.

[^1]: Makarimul Akhlaq, Pg. 284

[^2]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 150

[^3]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 150

[^4]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 152, Tr. 12

[^5]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 152, Tr. 13

[^6]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 152, Tr. 14

[^7]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 152, Tr. 16

[^8]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 152, Tr. 21

[^9]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 156, Tr. 28

[^10]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 156, Tr. 26

[^11]: Tafseer Imam Hasan Askari (as), Pg. 113

[^12]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 46, Pg. 239


