30. Help Of Allah, The Mighty And The High
==========================================

This *Dua* earns the help and support of the Almighty Allah for one who
is supplicating and it makes him eligible for success and victory over
his enemies. That which proves this is the statement of Allah, the
Mighty and the High:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَيَنْصُرَنَّ اللَّهُ مَنْ يَنْصُرُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And surely Allah will help him who helps Him.” (Qur’an, Surah Hajj
22:40)***

And He has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ تَنْصُرُوا اللَّهَ يَنْصُرْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If you help Allah, He will help you.” (Qur’an, Surah Muhammad
47:7)***

The explanation of this is that: Without any doubt the Almighty Allah
has no need of any of His creatures; thus the help and support that is
commanded is to help the *Awliya* of Allah and since the supplication
for early reappearance of the Master of the Time (aj) is a kind of help
and support by tongue it is a consequence of this matter. And
traditional reports abound that prove that helping by the tongue is a
kind of help and support that is recommended. Such as:

1. In *Fawaid al-Mashahid* it is narrated from Imam Husain (as) that he
said on the eve of Aashura:

“My grandfather informed me: My son, Husain (as) will be slain in Taff
Kerbala as a homeless and lonely person. Thus whosoever helps him would
have helped me and would have helped his son, Qaim (aj) also. And one
who helps us verbally would be in our party on the Judgment Day.”

2. Imam Ali Reza (as) said to Dibil:

“Welcome! O our helper with words and actions.”[^1]

3. In the will and testament of our master, His Eminence, Abu Abdillah
Sadiq (as) to Abdullah bin Jundab, it is mentioned:

“O son of Jundab, the Almighty Allah has a castle of light covered with
emeralds and brocade. It is raised with silk and brocade. He has kept
this wall between His friends and His enemies. Thus when the brain boils
in the head, hearts come to the throats and bodies cook due to the
prolonged wait in *Qiyamat*, the *Awliya* of Allah would be admitted
behind that wall and they would remain in the refuge and protection of
the Almighty Allah. Inside that is something that pleases their heart
and gladdens their eyes. While the enemies of Allah would be immersed
till their necks in their sweat and they would be scattered all over.
They would behold what the Almighty Allah has prepared for them (as
punishment) and say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا لَنَا لَا نَرَىٰ رِجَالًا كُنَّا نَعُدُّهُمْ مِنَ الْأَشْرَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What is the matter with us that we do not see men whom we used to
count among the vicious?” (Qur’an, Surah Saad 38:62)***

Thus the *Awliya* of Allah would see them and laugh at them, and that is
the saying of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتَّخَذْنَاهُمْ سِخْرِيًّا أَمْ زَاغَتْ عَنْهُمُ الْأَبْصَارُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Was it that we (only) took them in scorn, or have our eyes (now)
turned aside from them?” (Qur’an, Surah Saad 38:63)***

He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالْيَوْمَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنَ الْكُفَّارِ يَضْحَكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So today those who believe shall laugh at the unbelievers; On
thrones, they will look.” (Qur’an, Surah Mutaffifeen 83:34)***

Thus there would not remain a believer who has helped our friends with a
single word but that they shall be admitted to Paradise in large
numbers.

The proof of the matter is in the last part of the tradition.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 45, Pg. 257


