31. Guidance By The Effulgence Of The Holy Qur’an
=================================================

As we have said: *Dua* for His Eminence, Qaim (aj) is a cause for
increase in the divine effulgence in the heart, and when the ground of
the heart is illuminated and filled with the effulgence of its Lord, man
is guided by the light of the Holy Qur’an in such a way that he does not
tread any other path and he understands from the Holy Qur’an things that
other could not and the Qur’an would be a cure for the pain of his heart
and a mercy for him.

Also: There is no doubt that as much as the faith is perfect and
complete as much that person would benefit from the Holy Qur’an and its
effects would be more and deeper on him. Just as one having a perfect
taste, relishes a delicious dish while those who have no taste cannot
enjoy that same food as much as they should. Rather it would seem
unpleasant to them till they have their condition cured till all the
traces of the disease are removed.

Thus one who is purer, his body would be affected more with good food
and its effects will be clearly seen on him. And in the same way is the
case of one who is clear of all impurities and evils, the effect of the
Holy Qur’an would be more profound on him. And the guidance of the Holy
Qur’an would be apparent in his words and actions. As much a person is
perfect in faith, his insight, knowledge and benefits and guidance would
be more. Allah, the Mighty and Sublime says regarding this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هُوَ لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا هُدًى وَشِفَاءٌ ۖ وَالَّذِينَ لَا
يُؤْمِنُونَ فِي آذَانِهِمْ وَقْرٌ وَهُوَ عَلَيْهِمْ عَمًى ٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: It is to those who believe a guidance and a healing; and (as
for) those who do not believe, there is a heaviness in their ears and it
is obscure to them.” (Qur’an, Surah Fussilat 41:44)***

As mentioned in the previous pages, praying for our Master of the Time
(aj) is a matter that brings perfection of faith, it would also lead to
the perfection in getting benefits from the Holy Qur’an. And that which
supports this theory is the saying of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَٰلِكَ الْكِتَابُ لَا رَيْبَ ۛ فِيهِ ۛ هُدًى لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“This Book, there is no doubt in it, is a guide to those who guard
(against evil).” (Qur’an, Surah Baqarah 2:2)***

In *Kamaluddin* it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) regarding the
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْغَيْبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who believe in the unseen.” (Qur’an, Surah Baqarah 2:3)***

That he said:

“It denotes those who believe in the reappearance of Qaim (aj).”

In another traditional report His Eminence said:

“*Ghaib* (unseen) is the *Ghaib* Hujjat (proof) and that which proves
this is the statement of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَقُولُونَ لَوْلَا أُنْزِلَ عَلَيْهِ آيَةٌ مِنْ رَبِّهِ ۖ فَقُلْ
إِنَّمَا الْغَيْبُ لِلَّهِ فَانْتَظِرُوا إِنِّي مَعَكُمْ مِنَ
الْمُنْتَظِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they say: Why is not a sign sent to him from his Lord? Say: The
unseen is only for Allah; therefore wait- surely I too, with you am of
those who wait.” (Qur’an, Surah Yunus 10:20)***

The conclusion derived thus is: Those who pray for the reappearance are
in fact those who really have faith in the reappearance of Qaim (aj) and
their praying proves this. And in the book of Abwaabul Jannah there is
discussion on this topic that would remove all doubts about it.


