35. Glad Tidings And Moderateness At Time Of Death
==================================================

There are some traditional reports that prove the above. For example
there is a tradition in the *Tafseer* of Imam Hasan Askari (as) that:

“When a believer who is a follower of Muhammad and his progeny and after
him he considers Ali as his Imam and follows him, considers him as his
master, testifies his words, considers his actions correct, obeys him
and those whom he has ordered to obey in the religious matters and in
politics, when death approaches this believer in such a way that it
cannot be delayed and stopped as it is the final decree of Allah, and
the angel of death and his companions come to him, they see Muhammad (S)
on one side and Ali, the chief of the successors on the other at the
head side of this believer.

And at his feet on one side stands Hasan, the grandson of the chief of
the prophets and on the other side is Husain the chief of the martyrs.
And surrounding him at the back would be their confidants and close
personages of this Ummah and they will stand one after the other in
order of their status behind their masters, Aale Muhammad.

Thus the ailing believer would look at them and address them thus in
such a way that the Almighty Allah would veil his voice from the people
present near him; in the same way they will also not be able to see us
Ahle Bayt so that their belief in that earns them more rewards due to
the severe hardship that befalls them.

The believer says: May my parents be sacrificed on you, O Messenger of
Allah, the Lord of might, May my parents be sacrificed on you, O
successor of the Prophet of mercy. May my parents be sacrificed on you,
O you brave sons of Muhammad (S), his grandsons and his sons. O two
chiefs of the youths of Paradise who are proximate to the mercy and
pleasure of the Almighty Allah. And welcome to you, O best of the
companions of Muhammad (S) and Ali and his sons. How eager was I to see
you all and now I am overcome with the joy of seeing you. O Messenger of
Allah, the angel of death is present at my bed-side and I have no doubt
that I am great in his estimation due to your presence and due to the
presence of your brother. Thus the Messenger of Allah (S) says: It is
so.

Then the Messenger of Allah (S) would glance at the angel of death and
say: “O angel of death, please take care to obey the request of the
Almighty Allah regarding our followers, servants and devotees.” The
angel of death says: “O Messenger of Allah, order him to look at what
Allah has prepared for him in Paradise.” The Messenger of Allah (S)
would tell him: “Look at the top.” So he will look at that which he had
never imagined and which has no limits.

At that moment, the angel of death will say: “How should I not take
gently one who is having such a reward and whose Muhammad and his
progeny are visitors? O Messenger of Allah (S), if the Almighty Allah
had not made death as a passage without passing through which none can
enter Paradise, I would not have captured his soul. However your servant
and friend would imitate you and the other prophets, messengers, saints
of Allah who tasted death by the order of Allah.”

After that Muhammad (S) would say: “O angel of death, take our brother
as we agree to you and accept our request for clemency regarding him.”

At that time, His Eminence and his companions would go up to the gardens
of Paradise in such a manner that veils and curtains would be removed
from the eyes of that ailing believer. Thus he would see them at their
own places and see those who are surrounding his bed and then say: “O
angel of death hurry up, take my soul and don’t leave me here as I
cannot bear separation from Muhammad and his progeny. Make me join
them.”

At that moment the angel of death would take his soul and like a strand
of hair is pulled through flour, his soul will be taken out of his body.
Though you see him in pain, there is no hardship for him, rather he is
in comfort and enjoyment and when they keep him in the grave he would
find our people there.

When Munkir and Nakeer come to interrogate him they would say to each
other: “Muhammad, Ali, Hasan, Husain and their righteous companions are
present near this man, we must pay respect to them.” After that they
would come and salute Muhammad and Ali separately. Then they would
salute Hasan and Husain together and then their companions.

After that they would say: “We know, O Messenger of Allah, that you
visit your servant and follower and if it had not been so that the
Almighty Allah wanted that his excellence should become clear to the
angels who are present and those who would hear about it later, we would
not have questioned him. But the command of Allah has to be carried
out.”

At that time they would ask him: “Who is your Lord? What is your
religion? Who is your Prophet? And who is your Imam? And what is your
*Qibla*? And who are your brothers?” He would reply: “Allah is my Lord,
and Muhammad (S) is my Prophet, and Ali is my Imam, the successor of
Muhammad (S) is my Imam, and the Kaaba is my *Qibla*, and the believing
followers of Muhammad and Ali and their progeny are my brothers, and
their enemies and haters are not my brothers, and I testify that that
except for the One God, I have no deity and Allah does not have a
partner and I witness that Muhammad is His servant and messenger.

And that his brother, Ali is the *Wali* of Allah and they are his
purified progeny, appointed for Imamate as the caliphs of the Ummah and
the true guardians and those who rise up with justice.” Thus (Nakeer and
Munkir say): “You lived with these beliefs and died on it and you shall
be raised up with the same belief if Allah wills and whosoever has his
*Wilayat* would be in a position of honor and the resting place of
divine mercy…”

I say: The main points derived from this noble traditional report is
that the believer would be able to get those honors and great bounties
due to four factors: Mastership and following of the Prophet and the
Holy Imams (as), service to them, love towards them and preferring them
over others. As is understood from the statement of His Eminence:

“Do favor to our devotees and servants, friends and followers.”

There is no doubt that these three qualities are present in one who is
praying for our master, the Master of the Time (aj) because *Dua* for
His Eminence is a type of *Tawalla*, service, love for the Imams and
also preferring them over other people in the *Dua*.

That which proves this matter is all that has come in the traditions
regarding glad tidings to the believer mentioned in large numbers
especially in *Furu Kafi* – in the chapter of companions of the believer
and disbeliever at the time of death – and the third volume of *Biharul
Anwar* etc. And we shall be content to relate just one tradition which
is sufficient for the spiritualist; and those who like may refer to the
books mentioned:

In *Kafi* it is narrated from Muhammad bin Yahya from Ibne Sinan[^1]
from Ammar bin Marwan that he said:

A person who heard it from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) told me
that: His Eminence said: “By Allah, He accepts from you and by Allah
forgives you, between each of you and the place where believers express
joy and happiness there no distance to it except when his soul reaches
here – and he pointed to his neck…”

Then he said: “When this happens, he is in the throes of death, the
Messenger of Allah (S), Ali (as), Jibraeel and the angel of death (as)
are present near him. At that time Ali (as) comes near him and says: O
Messenger of Allah, this man used to love us, Ahle Bayt, so please love
him. And the Messenger of Allah (S) would say to Jibraeel: This man
loved Allah, His Messenger and his family, so you also love him. And
Jibraeel would say to the angel of death: This is one who loved Allah,
His Messenger and his family, so you also love him and take him gently.
Then the angel of death would come near him and say: O servant of Allah,
have you freed you neck? Have you taken your release order? In the life
of the world were you attached to the great infallibility? He said: Then
the Almighty Allah allows him to say: Yes, He asks: Who is it? He
replies: The *Wilayat* of Ali Ibne Abi Talib.

The angel of death says: You are right. Allah has secured you from that
which terrifies you and you will get what you hope for. Glad tidings to
you and your righteous elders of the company of the Messenger of Allah
(S) and Ali (as) and Fatima (s.a.).

After that he takes his soul gently. And after that a shroud of Paradise
and *Hunoot* of musk and amber is brought for him. He is shrouded and
anointed with the *Hunoot* and dressed in a yellow dress of Paradise.
And when they place him in the grave a door to Paradise is opened for
him through which the gentle breeze of Paradise and its fragrances reach
him.

After that to his front, back, right and left, the grave is widened to a
distance of one month’s travel. Then he is told: Sleep comfortably like
a bride. Glad tidings to you for the comforts and luxuries of Paradise
and bounties and the Lord is not angry at you. At that time he would see
Aale Muhammad in the Gardens of Satisfaction. Thus he would eat from
their food and speak to them in their gatherings till the time our Qaim
(aj) arises.

When our Qaim (aj) arises, the Almighty Allah would raise them up, and
they would, chanting the slogans of *Labbaik Labbaik,* come to him in
groups. At that time the followers of falsehood would be in doubt and
those who trespass the divine sanctities will be scattered – as they
will be few – the haste makers will be destroyed, and those who knew the
reappearance to be near would be saved. It is from this aspect that the
Messenger of Allah (S) told Ali (as): You are my brother and your and my
promise will be in the valley of peace (*Wadius Salaam*)…[^2]

The main point made clear from this traditional report has already been
stated by us and we shall again mention it later. That *Dua* for His
Eminence, Qaim (aj) and his early reappearance is a factor of increase
in faith and its steadfastness till the time of death. Thus the cause is
indirect for becoming eligible for this excellence. Moreover, this *Dua*
itself is an attachment to the great infallibility – that is *Wilayat*
of Ali Ibne Abi Talib (as) – thus it is the cause of reaching this
position.

Also among the proofs of this matter is a tradition mentioned in *Usool
Kafi* through authentic chain of narrators from Ibne Abi Umair from
Hakam bin Miskeen from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) that he
said: “For one who causes a happiness to a believer, the Almighty Allah
creates a creature from that happiness that he sees at the time of his
death and it tells him: Glad tidings to you, O friend of Allah, about
His pleasure and mercy. It will remain with him till he enters the
grave. Then it repeats those words and when he is raised from the grave
again, it repeats those words. The believer asks it: Who are you, may
Allah have mercy on you? It will reply: I am that happiness and joy that
you gave to so-and-so person.”[^3]

I say: The point proved from this is: Without any doubt our master, the
Master of the Time (aj) and his venerable forefathers (as) become happy
by this*Dua*. Thus this reward implies to them perfectly.

[^1]: Ibne Sinan here is Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Sinan who has narrated
from Ammar bin Marwan.

[^2]: Furu Kafi, Companions of believers and infidels

[^3]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 191


