37. In The Same Level As That Of Amirul Momineen (as)
=====================================================

The evidence to support the fact that the supplicant for early
reappearance of the Master of the Time (aj) would be in the company of
Amirul Momineen (as) in his grade, is a tradition mentioned in
*Kamaluddin* from His Eminence that he said:

“For our Qaim there is an occultation, which shall be prolonged. As if I
can see the Shias resembling quadrupeds searching for pasture but being
unable to find it. Know that, whosoever from them remains firm on his
religion and whose heart is not hardened due to the prolonging of the
occultation, then he shall be with us in our rank on the Day of
Judgment.”

Then he said: “When our Qaim arises, he would not have the allegiance of
anyone upon his neck, therefore his birth shall be secret and he himself
shall be in occultation.”[^1]

The discussion on this is possible on two levels:

One: It is that *Dua* for early reappearance of our master, the Imam of
the time (as) is a sign of the solidity of faith and belief in religion.
So if – may Allah forbid – if one has doubt in this, he would not pray
with sincerity in this regard. On the basis of this the supplicants are
among those who have remained steadfast on their faith and Amirul
Momineen (as) has promised them that great reward.

Second: It is that this *Dua* is the cause of perfection of faith and
its firmness in man in such a way that he would be saved from the evils
of the last period of time as our master, Abu Muhammad Hasan al-Askari
(as) has told to Ahmad bin Ishaq Qummi:

“By Allah, he would have a prolonged occultation during which none would
be saved from destruction except those whom the Almighty Allah has made
firm on the confession in his Imamate and whom He gives the *Tawfeeq* to
pray for his early reappearance…”

The complete text of this tradition has been mentioned in Part Four.
Thus praying for His Eminence enables the supplicant to get into the
same grade as that of Amirul Momineen (as) since it is the cause of
remaining firm on faith during the period of the occultation of the
Master of the Time (aj).

That which supports the point that it is a cause of perfection of faith
is: This act is wishing the well being of Ahle Bayt of the Holy Prophet
(S) which is in fact a cause of perfection of faith. It is thus
mentioned by Shaykh Sadooq in his gatherings quoting from Imam Moosa
Kazim (as) through his forefathers from the Holy Prophet (S) that he
said:

One who does a perfect Wuzu (ablution) and recites his ritual prayer
properly, pays the *Zakat*, guards his tongue, controls his anger, seeks
forgiveness of sins, wishes the well being of the family of his Prophet
(S), he has fulfilled the rights of faith and the doors of Paradise are
open for him.”[^2]

[^1]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 1, Pg. 303

[^2]: Amali, Sadooq, Vol. 1, Pg. 274, Gathering no. 54, Beirut


