38. Best People In The View Of Almighty Allah
=============================================

One who supplicates in favor of our Master of the Time (aj) and who
prays for his early reappearance is among the best people in the view of
the Almighty Allah. Because he conveys benefit to all the people in
general and also imparts happiness and joy to the Purified Imams (as)
and the family of the Messenger of Allah (S).

The senior-most Shaykh, Thiqatul Islam Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini
(q.s.) in *Usool Kafi* through his own chain of narrators has reported
from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he quoted the Messenger of Allah (S)
saying:

“The creatures are kinsfolk of Allah, thus the favorite persons in the
view of the Almighty Allah are those that are beneficial to the kinsfolk
of the Almighty Allah and please the families.”[^1]

It is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) that he said:

The Messenger of Allah (S) was asked: “Who is the most beloved person by
Allah?” He replied: “One who is most beneficial to the people.”[^2]

I say: That happiness and joy of the Holy Prophet (S) and the Imams (as)
is effected through praying for His Eminence, Qaim (aj) is a matter that
is now absolutely clear. And as for the point that this *Dua* is for the
benefit of all the believers, rather all the people of the world, this
can be discussed under two subheadings:

First: As mentioned in Part Four in the chapter of the Letter ‘N’ all
creatures of the earth would benefit through the reappearance of His
Eminence. Thus *Dua* for his early reappearance is for the benefit of
all the creatures of the earth.

Second: In the forty-fourth benefit it would be mentioned that Allah,
the Mighty and the High through the *Barakat* of the supplicants for the
early reappearance of His Eminence would keep away divine chastisement
from the people of the earth, *Insha Allah Taala*.

[^1]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 164

[^2]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 164


