39. Most Respected Persons In View Of The Holy Prophet (S)
==========================================================

Since we have explained in Point Twenty-one that one who prays for the
Master of the Time (aj) is among the brothers of the Holy Prophet (S),
it would also imply that he is among the most respected persons in view
of the Holy Prophet (S) also because it is clear that the brothers of
the Holy Prophet (S) would be his favorite persons.

It is also supported by a tradition mentioned in *Biharul Anwar* through
his own chain of narrators from Rufaa bin Moosa and Muawiyah bin Wahab
from His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Sadiq (as) that he said:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Blessed be those who are fortunate to
live in the time of Qaim of my Ahle Bayt. Those who would believe in him
during his occultation and before his advent, who would love his friends
and remain aloof from his enemies. Such people would be my closest ones
and my friends on the Day of Judgment.” (According to the tradition of
Rufaa:) “And the most respected creatures of Allah in my view.”[^1]

Since *Dua* for reappearance of His Eminence is a type of following him,
as mentioned in the tradition regarding his birth that he himself prayed
for this matter and said:

“O Allah, fulfill my promise, complete my enterprise for me, strengthen
my position, and fill the earth through me with equity and justice.”[^2]

In *Kamaluddin* it is narrated from Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari that he
said:

I asked Muhammad bin Uthman Amari: “Have you the seen the master of this
affair?” He replied: “Yes, and the last time I saw him, he was besides
the Holy House of Allah and praying: O my Lord, fulfill the promise that
You made to me.”[^3]

In the same book it is narrated from Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari that he
said:

I heard Muhammad bin Uthman Amari (r.a.) say: “I saw His Eminence (aj)
holding the curtain of the Kaaba below the spout and praying: O my Lord,
take revenge from my enemies.”[^4]

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 129

[^2]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 51, Pg. 13

[^3]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 440

[^4]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 440


