43. Almighty Allah Helps In Worship
===================================

Regularity in praying for our master, the Master of the Time (aj) would
be a cause of being helped by Allah in worship. That which proves this
is a tradition mentioned in *Oddattud Dai* from the Messenger of Allah
(S) that he said:

Allah, the Mighty and the High said: “When I know that My servant is
mostly occupied with Me, I make him passionate in supplicating and
*Munajaat*, and when a servant is thus, if he wants to commit a mistake
I come between him and the error; truly they are my *Awliya* and indeed
they are warriors.”

The point derived from this tradition is: Just as verses of Qur’an and
traditional reports say, *Dua* is one of the most important worship acts
and there is no doubt that the most valuable and important type of *Dua*
is *Dua* for someone whose right the Almighty Allah has made obligatory
on all the creatures. And through the *Barakah* of whose being all the
things get blessings and benefits.

And also doubtlessly being busy with the Almighty Allah means being
occupied with His worship and it is this regularity in which is a cause
that the Almighty Allah helps man in worship and makes him among the
*Awliya* of Allah. The conclusion is that: Regularity and steadfastness
in *Dua* for our master, the Master of the Time (aj) and supplicating
the Almighty Allah for the early reappearance of His Eminence would be a
cause of receiving this great benefit.

On the basis of this, it is obligatory for the people of faith that in
every time and place they should make special arrangements for this. And
the matters that support this point are that my dear brother in faith
and the great scholar Mirza Muhammad Baqir Isfahani[^1] – may Allah
exalt his status and grant him whatever he wishes – recently narrated to
me that: One night in dream – in half sleep and half wakefulness – I saw
my master, Imam Hasan Mujtaba (as) that he said something like this: Say
to the people from the pulpit and order them that they should repent and
pray for the early reappearance of Hazrat Hujjat (as). And this *Dua* is
not like the funeral prayer (*Salaat Mayyit*) which is*Wajib Kifai* so
that if some do it, others are absolved. Rather it is like the Daily
Ritual Prayers which is obligatory on all who are able and all have to
perform it…”

[^1]: Faqih Yamani author of Fauz al-Akbar Feema Yatalluq Ba Imaam
al-Asr (as)


