Section Two : Regarding some miracles and faith healings of the Master of Age that are Mutawatir
================================================================================================

1. A tradition is narrated by Shaykh Sadooq from Muhammad bin Uthman
al-Amari in which he said:

“When the Mahdi was born a light shone from above his head to the sky.
After that he placed his forehead on the ground and began to praise the
Almighty in prostration. Then he raised his head saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَهِدَ اللَّـهُ أَنَّهُ لَا إِلَـٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ
وَأُولُو الْعِلْمِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah bears witness that there is no god but He, and (so do) the
angels and those possessed of knowledge…”(Surah Aale Imran 3:18)***[^1]

2. It is mentioned in a traditional report that:

“When His Eminence was born, white birds descended from the sky and
touched their wings to his head, face and other parts of his body. After
that they flew away to the sky again.”

Then His Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari (as) said: “They were angels who
had come down to seek blessings from this newborn child. And when this
boy reappears, they shall be his companions.”

Shaykh Sadooq has quoted this tradition in Ikmaluddin[^2]

3. It has come in a correct report from Muhammad bin Shazan bin Naseem
that in Nishapur he repeated that:

“An amount of 480 dirhams collected with me from the money that was
supposed to be paid to His Eminence, Qa’im (aj). So I did not like
sending it without rounding off the amount (to 500). Therefore I added
20 dirhams of my own and sent 500 dirhams to Muhammad bin Ja’far but I
did not mention that 20 dirhams were from my side. Thus Muhammad bin
Ja’far received acknowledgment from the Holy Hidden Imam (as) that he
sent to me in turn. It was written on the receipt: “Received 500 dirhams
of which 20 were your own.”

I say: The same tradition is mentioned with slight variation in Kafi
from ‘Ali bin Muhammad from Muhammad bin ‘Ali bin Shazan Nishapuri.[^3]

4. In the same way it is mentioned in an authentic narration from
Muhammad bin Haroon that he said:

“Five hundred dinars were payable upon me from the Imam’s share. One
night when I was in Baghdad and the night was also stormy and dark, I
was worried how I should make the payment of Imam’s money. I thought
that I was having some shops that I had purchased in 530 Dinars. I
should give them to the Holy Imam (as) in lieu of 500 Dinars. (so that
the Imam’s share is paid). I did not mention this to anyone neither did
I write to the Imam. But a person arrived from the Imam to take
possession of the shops.”[^4]

5. A tradition is related from ‘Ali bin Muhammad as-Saymoori that he
said:

“I wrote a letter to Qa’im (aj) requesting him for a burial shroud. The
reply came: You do not require the burial shroud at present. It will be
needed when you are eighty or eighty-one years of age.” Thus he died
only at the age predicted by His Eminence and a month prior to his
death, the Imam had sent the burial shroud for him.”

The above report is mentioned in Ikmaluddin.[^5]

I say: And among the clear miracles of His Eminence is the fulfillment
of the requests of the people when they write it (Areeza) and throw it
in a well or running water and this phenomenon is witnessed all the time
and it is proven effective, which we shall discuss in more detail in the
last portion of the book.

Dear readers, if you like you can read about the miracles of His
Eminence in books compiled on the topic. Like Ikmaluddin of Shaykh
Sadooq, Kharaij of Shaykh Saeed bin Hibtallah, Biharul Anwar of the
perfect scholar, the late Muhammad Baqir Majlisi and Najmus Thaqib of
Mirza Husain Noori.

Thanks be to the Almighty Allah for their contribution in this regard
and may Allah reward them greatly.

If I say more on this topic I would not be able to achieve the main
purpose. Therefore this much is enough for those who can understand.

[^1]: Kamaluddin; Shaykh Saduq; Vol. 2/433

[^2]: Kamaluddin; Shaykh Saduq; Vol. 2/431

[^3]: Kamaluddin; Shaykh Saduq; Vol. 2/485 & Usul al-Kafi; Muhammad bin
Yaqoob Kulaini; Vol. 1/523

[^4]: Kamaluddin; Shaykh Saduq; Vol. 2/492

[^5]: Kamaluddin; Shaykh Saduq; Vol. 2/501


