45. Rewards Of Helping And Supporting The Oppressed
===================================================

The point is that the Imam of the Age – may our souls be sacrificed on
him – is oppressed as is known to all.

As for the excellence of helping and supporting the oppressed, it is
proved by reason and logic as well as by Islamic texts. As mentioned in
*Biharul Anwar* and other books, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) is reported to
have said:

“Allah, the Mighty and Sublime is the companion of the believer as long
as the believer is busy in helping his believing brother.”[^1]

It is mentioned from His Eminence that he said:

“No believer helps an oppressed believer except that it is better than
fasting for a month spent in *Etekaf* in Masjidul Haraam. And every
believer that helps his brother while he is having the power to help
him, the Almighty Allah helps him in the world and the hereafter.”[^2]

It is narrated from His Eminence that he said:

“One who hears the call for help of his believing brother in trouble and
has the capability to help him, and he removes his sorrow and fulfills
his needs, due to this there would be seventy-two blessings for him from
the Almighty Allah; one of it would reach him earlier and help him in
his life, and seventy-one blessings would be stored for him in terrible
circumstances and conditions of *Qiyamat*.”[^3]

Other traditional reports are also there, but for the sake of brevity we
refrain from quoting them here and remain content with these much only
as they are sufficient for intelligent people.

As for *Dua* for His Eminence, the Master of the Time (aj) and early
reappearance of His Eminence being help and assistance to him, as we
have said previously: *Dua* for the Master of the Time (aj) is among the
types of help of His Eminence by the tongue. The explanation of this is
that helping means taking steps regarding something which would in
reality or in the view of the helped one remove harm from him or convey
some benefit to him by someone who is helping him. And this topic is
proved in the case of *Dua* for our master, the Master of the Time (aj)
because many traditions in all reliable books confirm this matter.

For example in the chapter of Excellence of *Dua* in *Kafi*, *Wasail*,
*Biharul Anwar* and other books. Thus when a believer makes effort in
his *Dua* to remove sorrow and grief from the heart of the great Imam
and supplicates Allah for his early reappearance fulfilling all the
conditions stated before, its effect would be the fulfillment of divine
promise.

It is known from the above discussion that *Dua* is help and support of
the Imam, in addition to it being commanded by His Eminence in his
blessed*Tawqee*:

“Pray more for the early reappearance as in it lies your
deliverance…”[^4]

His Eminence has made a request to his friends that they must as much as
possible pray for his early reappearance. In the twenty-first point we
have stated the relevant points about this and in the Point no. 49 it
will be explained further.

In a tradition mentioned in *Kafi* it is narrated from Isa bin Abi
Mansoor that he said:

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) said to Ibne Abi Ya’fur without any introduction:
O son of Abi Ya’fur, the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “One who possesses
six qualities would be with the Almighty Allah and on His right side.”
Ibne Abi Ya’fur asked: “May I be sacrificed on you, what are those?”

He replied: “A Muslim should like for his believing brother that which
he likes for his closest kin. And that he dislikes for his believing
brother that which he dislikes for his closest kin. And he has sincerity
in his friendship to him.”

Ibne Abi Ya’fur wept and asked: “How can he be sincere to him?” Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (as) said: “When he reaches that stage, he tells him what
he has in his heart, thus if the friend becomes happy he is also happy
and if the friend is aggrieved he is also sad, and if he can he removes
the distress of his friend, and if he can’t, he prays for him to the
Almighty Allah…”[^5]

In this tradition, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) has mentioned that praying for
someone is like helping him if you cannot help in the real sense. The
complete text of this tradition would given and explained in some other
section, *Insha Allah Taala*.

Evidence of the correctness of the matter under discussion and support
of this type is the prayer of His Eminence, Sayyid Sajjad (as) for the
frontier guards and soldiers. It is mentioned in that *Dua* as follows:

“O Lord, and whichever Muslim succeeds a warrior, guards his house,
looks after those left behind in his absence. Helps him with a portion
of his property. Or assists him with provisions. Or encourages him to
fight for faith. Or follows him in his undertaking by praying for him.
Or guards his honor in his absence. Then, be pleased to reward the
latter like the former, weight for weight, bulk for bulk…”[^6]

Thus you can see that Imam Sajjad (as) has compared praying for the
warriors to a type of help rendered to them and for those who pray thus,
the Imam has invoked for a similar reward.

It must be said that: Among the types of help and assistance through the
medium of *Dua,* is supplicating for the destruction of the enemies and
oppressors on His Eminence, as there is no doubt that *Dua* of the
believer for the destruction of the oppressors – in a way as per
conditions mentioned in the traditional reports of the purified Imams
(as) are joined together, it is effective. Thus when the believer is not
able to kill the enemy of his Imam with the help of real weapons, like
the sword and the lance etc, but he can do it by *Dua*, then it is
obligatory on him to so and get himself included in the helpers and
supporters of His Eminence. Therefore the Imams (as) have motivated to
curse their enemies and the prayers for their destruction reaches them
as mentioned in supplications mentioned by the Imams (as) – and in Part
Six and Seven this will be explained in further detail.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 75, Pg. 20

[^2]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 75, Pg. 20

[^3]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 75, Pg. 21

[^4]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 92; Kharaij, Pg. 187

[^5]: Kafi; Vol. 2, Pg. 172

[^6]: Sahifa Sajjadiya, Supplication no. 27


