50. His intercession for seventy thousand sinners
=================================================

This matter is proved by a traditional report mentioned in *Biharul
Anwar* through his own chain of narrators from His Eminence, Abu
Abdillah Sadiq (as) from his father from his grandfather from Amirul
Momineen (as) that he said:

“There are eight gates of Paradise. From one will enter the prophets and
truthful ones (*siddeeqeen*) and the from the next will enter the
martyrs and the righteous people. And from the remaining five will enter
our Shias and friends. We shall stand continuously at the Siraat Bridge,
praying and saying: O Lord, keep safe our Shias and friends and all
those who followed me in the world. Thus a voice will come out from
inside the *Arsh*: I have accepted your *Dua* and given intercession to
your Shias.

Thus every person from our Shias and those who followed and helped me
and fought alongside me – by word or deed – fought for the truth – each
of them would intercede for seventy thousand of their neighbors and
relatives and from other Muslims – who testified that: There is no god
except Allah – and in their heart there is not an iota of enmity for us,
Ahle Bayt – will also enter.”[^1]

I say: The point of evidence is that one who has the *Wilayat* of Amirul
Momineen (as) and helped His Eminence or fought alongside him – with
word or deed – his intercession will be accepted for seventy thousand
persons, and it is clear that praying for our master, the Master of the
Time (aj) and supplicating for his early reappearance is a type of help
and assistance of Amirul Momineen (as) by words. Because helping Hazrat
Hujjat (as) is helping his venerable father and since revenge is
effective it is included among the types of helps to His Eminence among
whom is *Dua* – according to the explanation given previously that *Dua*
is a cause of advancement of his reappearance and victory.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 8, Pg. 121


