Chapter 2: Baseless Traditions in Sahih Bukhari
===============================================

Now that we have shortly studied Bukhari’s life, it is time to study
Bukhari’s so-called Sahih in the light of the words of great scholars of
tradition. Here I will suffice to narrating the objections and
criticisms made [by scholars] against some of Bukhari’s traditions.

The tradition of ‘[Prophet’s] proposing to 'Aisha
-------------------------------------------------

Among the baseless traditions of Bukhari’s Sahih is its tradition about
the Holy Prophet’s proposing to Aisha. According to this tradition, when
the Holy Prophet (S) asked for the hand of Aisha in marriage, Abu Bakr
(Aisha’s father) said: I am your brother. Here is the full text of this
tradition:

Urwa says: The Holy Prophet (S) asked for the hand of Aisha in marriage.

Answering him Abu Bakr said: But I am your brother.

The Holy Prophet (S) said: You are my brother in religion and thus it is
permissible for me to marry Aisha.[^1]

In his Fath Al-Bari, Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalani has questioned the authenticity
of this tradition. He quotes Hafiz Mughaltai as saying: The authenticity
of this tradition is doubtful. This is because the friendship between
the Holy Prophet (S) and Abu Bakr happened in Medina whereas proposing
to Aisha was made in Mecca. Thus how is it logically possible for Abu
Bar to say: “I am your brother”?

Moreover, the Holy Prophet (S) did not personally embark on proposing to
Aisha. Ibn Abu ‘Asim narrates from Yahya Bin Abd Al-Rahman Bin Hatib,
from Aisha who says: The Holy Prophet sent Khula, daughter of Hakim, to
propose to me.

Addressing Khula, Abu Bakr said: Aisha is the Holy Prophet’s nephew. Can
she marry him?

Khula came back and related the story to the Holy Prophet (S).

The Holy Prophet (S) told him: Go back and tell Abu Bakr that you are my
brother in Islam and your daughter thus can marry me.

Khula went to Abu Bakr and talked to him about the issue. Abu Bakr said:
Invite the Messenger of Allah (S)! Thereupon the Holy Prophet (S) came
and Abu Bakr married Aisha to him.[^2]

The tradition of ‘intercession of Ibrahim for Azer’
---------------------------------------------------

Among the false traditions of Bukhari is a tradition according to which
Ibrahim (a.s) will intercede for Azer with Allah on the Day of Judgment.
As usual, he repeats this false tradition in many places in his Sahih.
As those who are aware of Islamic doctrines know, this tradition puts to
question the reputation and credibility of Ibrahim. This is because it
proves the following points:

1. Ibrahim (a.s) disobeyed Allah’s commandments.

2. He insisted on his disobedience and continued interceding for Azer
with Allah.

3. He resisted intellectual reasons that proclaim: it is impossible to
intercede with Allah for polytheists.

4. He mistakenly thought that the punishment of a disbeliever (like
Azer) will bring him the worst of meanness and disgrace.

What is meaner and more disgraceful than this? The stupidest people know
that this is wrong not to speak of an infallible Prophet who is
appointed to guide people.

5. He did not understand the meaning of Allah’s promise that He would
protect his dignity and honor.

Here is the text of this tradition from Bukhari’s chapter on prophetic
commentary.

Ismael narrates from his brother, from Ibn Abu Zaeb, from Sa’eed Maqbari
from Abu Huraira who quotes the Holy Prophet as saying: After meeting
his father, Ibrahim addressing Allah, says: O my Lord, You promised me
that You would not disgrace me on the Day of Judgment.

Addressing him Allah says: I do not allow disbelievers to enter into
Paradise.[^3]

Another tradition (available in this regard) says: Ibrahim (a.s) says: O
my Lord! You promised me that You would not disgrace me, but which
disgrace is worse than disgracing of my father?[^4]

### Fakhr Radi’s opinion

The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ اسْتِغْفَارُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لِأَبِيهِ إِلَّا عَن مَّوْعِدَةٍ
وَعَدَهَا إِيَّاهُ فَلَمَّا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُ أَنَّهُ عَدُوٌّ لِّلَّـهِ
تَبَرَّأَ مِنْهُ ۚإِنَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لَأَوَّاهٌ حَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Ibrahim asking forgiveness for his sire was only owing to a
promise which he had made to him; but when it became clear to him that
he was an enemy of Allah, he declared himself to be clear of him; most
surely Ibrahim was very tender- hearted forbearing.*** [^5]

Commenting on this verse, Fakhr Razi mentions the following points:

One: The relation of this verse to the previous verses can be studied
through the following angles:

• This verse intends to say that Prophet Muhammad (S) is permitted to do
what Prophet Ibrahim (a.s) was not allowed to do.

• This verse intends to say that what links this verse to previous
verses is the emphasis it lays on detaching oneself from disbelievers
whether they are alive or dead. The following verses say that the
ordinance of detachment from disbeliever is not confined to the religion
of Islam.

Thus the verse mentioned above indicates the ordinance of detaching from
disbelievers was available in Ibrahim’s religion. That is the reason why
the ordinance of detachment from disbelievers is so strong.

• Here Allah, the Exalted, introduces Ibrahim as ‘tender hearted’ and
‘forbearing’. Ibrahim being tender hearted tends profusely to ask
Allah’s forgiveness for his father, but, despite that, Allah forbids him
from asking forgiveness for his father. Others are thus more
emphatically told not ask for forgiveness for disbelievers.[^6]

Thus, according to Fakhr Razi Ibrahim was not allowed to ask Allah’s
forgiveness for his father and hence he abandoned his father. Thus it is
clear for every Muslim that Bukhari’s tradition is fake and fabricated!

Moreover, intellectual reasons also indicate that it is not permissible
to ask for Allah’s forgiveness for disbelievers.

Speaking concerning this issue, Fakhr Razi says: Elsewhere in another
verse, the Holy Quran mentions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا كَانَ لِلنَّبِيِّ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَن يَسْتَغْفِرُوا
لِلْمُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It is not fit for the Prophet and those who believe that they should
ask forgiveness for pagans.*** [^7]

This verse gives two meanings:

1. It is not fit for the Holy Prophet (S) and those who believe to ask
forgiveness for pagans and thus the verse is descriptive in meaning.

2. It is not permissible for the Holy Prophet (S) and believers to ask
forgiveness for pagans (and thus the verse is prescriptive in meaning).

According to the first point, prophecy and faith do not allow you to ask
forgiveness for pagans whereas according to the second point it is not
lawful to ask forgiveness for pagans.

It is, however, noteworthy that both these point are close to one
another in terms of meaning. Allah determines the cause of this
prohibition in the concluding part of this very verse, as He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من بعد ما تبين لهم انهم اصحاب الجحييم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***After it has become clear to them that they are the inmates of the
flaming fire…***[^8]

Elsewhere the Holy Qur’an mentions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّـهَ لَا يَغْفِرُ أَن يُشْرَكَ بِهِ وَيَغْفِرُ مَا دُونَ
ذَٰلِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah does not forgive that anything should be associated with him
and forgives what is beside that to whomsoever He pleases.*** [^9]

What is the meaning of these verses? Allah has informed (us) that pagans
are the inmates of the flaming fire. As a result, to ask forgiveness for
pagans is tantamount to asking Allah not to keep His promises – a thing
that is not acceptable.

In addition, Allah has made a decisive decision to punish the pagans.
Thus to ask forgiveness for them is not only useless but also results in
the decline of the position of a prophet.

Allah the Glorious says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ادعونى اسجب لکم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Call upon Me I will answer you.*** [^10]

On the other hand, He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انهم اصحاب الجحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They are surely the inmates of flaming fire.*** [^11]

Thus to ask forgiveness ends up in the rejection of the content of
either of the two verses mentioned above- a thing that is
impossible.[^12]

### Ibn Hajar Asqalani and justification of this tradition

In short, it must be declared that the tradition of the intercession of
Ibrahim for Azer is fabricated and false. One cannot justify it at all.
Perhaps it is because of this that some Sunni scholars have altered the
words of this tradition, putting in place of ‘Ibrahim’ the phrase ‘a
man’.

As an instance, in his Fath Al-Bari, Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalani narrates:

Ayyub’s tradition reads: On the Day of Judgment a man meets his father
and asks: How am I (as a son of you)?

Father says: You are the best (son of mine). Son says: Do you obey me
today?

Father says: Yes.

Son says: Now hold fast to my garment! Father does so.

Thereupon the son begins walking towards his Lord…[^13]

Nevertheless, based on what Hafiz Isma’eli, a tradition memorizer and
others have said one cannot but admit that the above mentioned tradition
is false.

Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalani says: Isma’eli has questioned this tradition casting
doubt on its authenticity. After narrating this tradition, he says: This
is not an authentic tradition. This is because Ibrahim knows that Allah
does not break His promise. Knowing this, how can one consider the
misery of his father as his own misery?

Another scholar says that the tradition mentioned above is in
contradiction with the Allah’s words. Allah mentions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و ما كان استغفار ابراهيم لابية الا عن موعده وعدها اياه فلما تبين له
انه عدو لله تأ تبرا منه
  </p>
</blockquote>

And Ibrahim asking forgiveness for his sire was only owing to a promise
which he had made to him; but when it became clear to him that he was an
enemy of Allah, he declared himself to be clear of him, most surely
Ibrahim was very tender- hearted, forbearing. [^14] &[^15]

Ibn Hajar tries to justify this tradition and gave it a new
interpretation. Thus he says: In reply it must be said that interpreters
differ on when Ibrahim declared himself to be clear of his father.

Some have pointed out that Ibrahim declared himself to be clear of Azer
when the later died as a pagan.

Tabari has narrated an authentic tradition from Habib Bin Abu Thabit,
from Sa’aeed Bin Jabir, from Ibn ‘Abass, which confirms this view. A
tradition declares that when Azer died Ibrahim (a.s) no longer asked
forgiveness for him. It is also narrated from Ali Bin Abu Talha, from
Ibn ‘Abass that Ibrahim (a.s) was asking forgiveness for Azer as long as
he was alive, but when he died he stopped asking forgiveness for him.
The same has been narrated from Mujahid, Qatada, and ‘Amr Bin Dinar.

Some others have however said that Ibrahim (a.s) will get disappointed
from Azer and will declare himself to be clear of him on the Day of
Judgment when Azer gets metamorphosed. This has been touched by a
tradition reported by Munzir. We mentioned this tradition before.

The same has been narrated by Tabari from Abd Al-Malik Bin Sulayman who
says: I heard Sa’aeed Bin Jubair say: On the Day of Judgment, Ibrahim
(a.s) will thrice say: O my Lord! My father! As he says this phrase for
the third time, he takes Azer’s hand (to go …) but Azer looks at him
angrily. It is at this moment that Ibrahim (a.s) declares himself to be
clear of him.

Tabari quotes ‘Ubaid Bin ‘Umair as saying: Addressing his father,
Ibrahim (a.s) says: When you were living in the (physical) world, you
did not obey me when I commanded you, but now I will not leave you. Hold
fast to my garment. Azer holds fast to somewhere in between Ibrahim’s
shoulders but it is now that he is changed into a hyena. As soon as
Ibrahim sees his metamorphosed face, he declares himself to be clear of
him.

Ibn Hajar says: We can accept both of these views. When Azer died as a
pagan Ibrahim declared himself to be clear of him and stopped asking
forgiveness for him any longer. As Ibrahim sees Azer on the Day of
Judgment he takes pity on him and begins asking forgiveness for him. But
when he saw the metamorphosed face of Azer he became disappointed and
declared himself to be clear of him.

Some scholars have mentioned: Ibrahim (a.s) was not sure that Azer died
as a disbeliever, for it was quite possible for Azer to have embraced
the faith of Ibrahim without letting him know about it. Thus Ibrahim
(a.s), as maintained by the tradition, declares himself to be clear of
him when came to know that he died before accepting his religion.

### Falsity of Ibn Hajar's view

All rational people not to speak of knowledgeable ones easily understand
that Ibn Hajar's view is false. This is because he first deals with the
scholars differing on when Ibrahim (a.s) declared himself to be clear of
Azer, which is not relevant to the objection in question.

It is, however, possible that Ibn Hajar wanted to solve the
inconsistency that exists between the above-mentioned verse and the holy
verse (it is not fit …) through introducing the Day of Judgment as the
time when Ibrahim declared himself clear of Azer. It can be, anyhow,
said that this argument is weak from different perspectives.

• Based on this justification, the verse (when it was clear to him that
he was Allah's enemy, he declared himself clear of him) must be taken to
be related to the Day of Judgment. This is while the verse in question
has introduced the past as the time when Ibrahim declared himself to be
clear of Azer. As we know, it is not permissible to overlook the
apparent meaning of a verse without a sound reason.

• Many traditions – some of which are accepted as authentic by Ibn Hajar
– indicate that Ibrahim (a.s) declared himself to be clear of Azer in
this world. As a result, the verse mentioned above will be in a clear
and inevitable contradiction with Ibrahim's asking forgiveness for Azer.

• If we agree supposedly that there is difference in regard with the
time of Ibrahim's declaring himself to be clear of Azer, and that the
second opinion is preferable to the first one, the objection raised by
some scholars will be answered, but the objection raised by Hafiz
Isma'eli will remain unanswered.

• The determination of the Day of Judgment as the time of 'clearing'
will cause divergence in the context of the verse mentioned above. This
is because the Holy Qur'an relates the story of Ibrahim (a.s) in order
to tell us that Ibrahim (a.s) was told not to ask forgiveness for pagans
and he declared himself to be clear of his father despite being
kind-hearted and highly forbearing. Other believers are thus by no means
allowed to ask forgiveness for pagans.

Fakhr Razi who also has such an understanding says: The reason why Allah
introduces Ibrahim in these verses as kind- hearted and forbearing is
that [Allah intends to tell us that though] his deep love and affection
for his father and his kind- heartedness towards him required him to be
more kind to his father and children, he declared himself to be clear of
his father when he came to know that his father was insisting on
disbelief.

Thus they must also follow the suit and declare themselves to be clear
of pagans. Allah has called Ibrahim as 'forbearing'. This is because
tender-heartedness and affection is one of the causes of being
'forbearing'. Being tender-hearted, man becomes more forbearing while
getting angry.[^16]

Thus if it is meant that Ibrahim (a.s) will declare himself to be clear
of his father on the Day of Judgment, how can one conclude that it is
more obligatory for Muslims to declare themselves to be clear of pagans?

It seems that Ibn Hajar 'Asqalani has also sensed the weakness of this
answer and that is why he feels obliged to say: It is not possible to
answer this… He is however not sure about his stance on the issue in
question.

Sufficing to this answer, in Al-Tawshih, Jalal Al-Din Suyuti says:
Ibrahim's demand for forgiveness of his father has been criticized. This
is because he was aware of Allah's promise that disbelievers were the
inmates of fire.

It has been said in reply that [Ibrahim (a.s) knew about Allah's promise
but] when he saw Azer was overwhelmed by love and affection and thus
could not but demand for his forgiveness. [^17]

The above-mentioned answer does not seem to solve the problem. It
instead solidifies it and accepts it. This is because it shows that the
motif behind Ibrahim’s action is affection and tender-heartedness. The
question however remains as to why Ibrahim shows affection [towards
Azer] whereas he knows that it is not permissible for him to ask
forgiveness for disbelievers.

One may say that affection and tenderheartedness make it permissible for
one to ask forgiveness but it has to be mentioned that such reasoning
sounds like a joke, having nothing to do with reality. No one can accept
such reasoning.

While presenting his justification, Ibn Hajar said: Some scholars say
that Ibrahim (a.s) was not sure that Azer had died as a disbeliever.

If he intends to show the weakness of the quotation made above by his
remark, then we do not need to criticize it… But if he intends to reject
the criticisms made against Ibrahim by this quotation, his view will be
in conflict with many authentic traditions that indicate that Ibrahim
(a.s) was aware that Azer had died as a disbeliever. Ibn Hajr himself
has narrated some of these traditions. Suyutii has also touched some of
these traditions in his Al-Durr Al-Manthur.

Commenting on,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...فلما تبيين له
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qutada as quoted by Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abu Hatam, says: As Azer was
dying, Ibrahim (a.s) learnt that it was no longer possible for him to
repent.

Abu Bakr Shafi’aee in his Fawaed and Maqdisi in his Al- Mukhtara,
Qurbani, Ibn Jarir, Ibn Munzir, Ibn Abu Hatam and Abu Al-Sheikh have
quoted Ibn Abbas as saying: Ibrahim (a.s) continued to ask forgiveness
for Azer until the later was dead. When Azer died as a disbeliever he
declared himself to be clear of him.[^18]

The tradition of Prophet's ‘praying on the corpse of Ibn Abu Sulul’
-------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the baseless traditions of Bukhari and Muslim as well – is the
tradition that has appeared in the commentary section of his Sahih.
Bukhari has quoted Umar as saying: After Abdullah Bin Ubai died his son,
named Abdullah, met the Holy Prophet (S) and asked him to give [him] his
shirt to shroud [his father] Abullah Bin Ubai.

The Apostle of Allah gave his shirt to him. Thereupon he asked the Holy
Prophet (a.s) to pray on his corpse as well.

The Apostle of Allah got ready to pray on the corpse of Abdullah Bin
Ubai.[Now] Umar stood up and snatched the Holy Prophet’s shirt [from the
hand of Abdullah] saying: O Apostle of Allah! Do you want to pray on his
corpse while Allah has forbidden you from doing it?

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انما اخبرنى الله فقال: "استغفر لهم او لا تستففر لهم سبعين مره " و
سأزيده على السبعين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah has allowed me to do or not to do it saying: “Ask forgiveness
for them or do not ask forgiveness for them. Even if you ask forgiveness
for them seventy times, Allah will not forgive them.” I will ask
forgiveness for him more than seventy times.*** [^19]

Umar said: But Abdullah Bin Ubai is a hypocrite!

Ibn Umar says that despite all these the Holy Prophet (S) prayed on the
corpse of Abdullah Bin Ubai and thus the following verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولاتصل على احد منهم مات ابدا ولا تقم على قبره
  </p>
</blockquote>

And never offer prayer for anyone of them who dies and do not stand by
his grave…[^20]

### Why this tradition was fabricated?

This tradition is fabricated in order to forge excellences for Umar Bin
Khattab. It is totally forged and fabricated. Many Sunni Imams, thanks
to Allah, have pointed that it is a fabricated tradition. For example,
Ghazzali, after quoting some traditions, points out: This is a false
tradition. This is because such reports do not bring us certainty. It is
not a match for numerous traditions enumerating the excellences of Hatam
(Taei) and Ali (a.s).

No doubt, the story related about the verse pertaining to asking
forgiveness is false. This is because Allah wants to show that Ibrahim
is utterly disappointed from receiving forgiveness (from Allah for his
father). Thus one must not think that the Apostle has forgotten all
about it.[^21]

As mentioned by the commentators of Sahih Bukhari, Baqilani and Imam
Al-Haramain have also touched this issue. Qastalani says: Many have
faced problems in understanding the liberty (given to Ibrahim) in this
verse. We mentioned previously the answer Zamakhshari has given to this
objection.

The author of Al-Intisaf states: Scholars have erred in understating
this verse to the extent that Baqilani questions the authenticity of
this tradition saying: We cannot confirm the authenticity of this
tradition and say that the Holy Prophet said it.

In his Al-Mukhtasar, Imam Al-Haramain says: This tradition is not an
authentic tradition. In his Al-Burhan, he again says that scholars of
traditions do not confirm the authenticity of this tradition. In his
Al-Mustasfa, Ghazali says: It is highly probable that this tradition is
not an authentic tradition. Commenting on his words, Dawudi says:
Strangely enough, scholars of tradition have not memorized this
tradition.[^22]

Concerning this issue, Ibn Hajar 'Asqalani says: Ibn Munir is of the
view that scholars have erred in understanding this tradition to the
extent that Qazi Abu Bakr has refuted the authenticity of this tradition
saying: We cannot confirm the authenticity of this tradition and say
that the Holy Prophet really said it.

In his Al-Taqrib, Baqilani says: This tradition is among the traditions
quoted by single individuals[^23] the authenticity of which we cannot
verify. In his Al-Mukhtasar, Imam Al- Haramain says: This tradition is
not an authentic tradition. In his Al-Burhan, he again says that
scholars of traditions do not confirm the authenticity of this
tradition.

In his Al-Mustasfa, Ghazali says: It is highly probable that this
tradition is not an authentic tradition. Commenting on his words, Dawudi
says: This is a strange tradition that needs further investigation.[^24]

The tradition of ‘three lies told by Prophet Ibrahim’
-----------------------------------------------------

One of the baseless traditions of Sahih Bukhari and Muslim is the
tradition that alludes to the three lies allegedly told by Prophet
Ibrahim (a.s).

The author of Al-Jam’a Bayn Al-Sahihain says: Muhammad narrates from Abu
Huraira who quotes the Apostle of Allah as saying: Ibrahim lied only
three times. He lied two times for the sake of Allah when he said: “I am
ill” and “Nay, the chief of them has done it” and once for the sake of
Sarah.

Accompanied by Sarah who was the most beautiful woman of her time,
Ibrahim (a.s) once went to a land that was ruled by an oppressive ruler.
When they reached there, he told Sarah to say that she was his sister on
religious bases for if the king came to know that she was his wife he
would snatch her from him.[^25]

### Fakhr Razi rejects this tradition

Fakhr Razi criticizes this tradition and rejects it saying those who
have narrated it are advocates of Hashviya school of thought. He says:
One of the advocates of Hashviya school of thought quoted for me the
Holy Prophet (S) as saying: Ibrahim (a.s) lied three times.

I said: We do not need to accept such traditions.

To reject my opinion he said: if we do not accept this tradition it will
imply that we have in fact considered the narrators as liars.

I said: Look! If we accept such traditions [it will imply that] we have
considered Prophet Ibrahim (a.s) as a liar and if we do not accept them
it will imply that we have regarded narrators as liars. No doubt, to
acquit Prophet Ibrahim (a.s) of lying is far better than acquitting a
handful of unknown narrators of lying.[^26]

It is worth mentioning that Umar Bin ‘Adil has recorded Fakhr Razi’s
words and praised him.[^27]

The tradition of ‘a prophet setting ant’s nest on fire’
-------------------------------------------------------

Another fabricated tradition narrated by Bukhari is the tradition that
says that one of the prophets being stung by an ant set the entire nest
of ants on fire. Bukhari says: Ismael narrates from Malik, from Abu
Zinad, from ‘Aaraj, from Abu Huraira who quotes the Holy Prophet as
saying: Once the prophet was resting under the shade of a tree when all
of a sudden an ant stung him. He got his things collected and then
ordered his men to set the entire nest of ants on fire!

Allah said through revelation: Why did you not kill the ant that stung
you?!

### Fakhr Razi rejects this tradition

To reject this tradition we will suffice to relating again Fakhr Razi’s
words. Shah Waliullah Dehlavi narrates Fakhr Razi’s words and then
praises him and accepts his words. He says: Here Fakhr Razi has said
something which reason accepts. He says: In my point of view, Shias are
more feeble-minded and weaker in understanding than the ants in the
story of Sulayman. This is because an ant, addressing, its companions
said:

**
**
ون

**
**
قالت نمله يا ايها النمل ادخلوا مساكنكم لا يخطمنكم سلیمان و جنوده و هم لا
یشعرون

***One of the ants said: “O you ants, get into your houses, lest
Sulayman and his hosts crush you while they do not know.*** [^28]

The ant knew that Sulayman’s hosts are so perfect morally that they do
not crush ants knowingly and intentionally and that they are not unjust
to the weak. This is whereas Shias do not know that being in the company
of the seal of the Prophets who is the most perfect of them leaves an
impact on those who always accompany him and thus does not allow them to
be disloyal and to do mischievous acts.

Shias accuse the companions of the Holy Prophet (S) of being unjust to
his daughter, son-in-law and their children and introducing them as the
ones responsible for setting [Imam Ali’s] house on fire, usurping his
possessions and treating his family unfairly.[^29]

In response it has to be said that Bukhari and other advocates of the
authenticity of this tradition are weaker in understanding than ants.
This is because they have, by approving off this tradition, accepted
that it is legal for an infallible prophet to be unjust and cruel!

The tradition of ‘eating forbidden meat’
----------------------------------------

The tradition that endorses eating the meat of an animal slaughtered
without mentioning Allah’s name is another forged tradition narrated by
Bukhari in his Sahih (The Book of Slaughtered).

Mu’alla Bin Asad narrates from Abd Al-Azir Bin Mukhtar, from Musa Bin
‘Aqaba, from Salim, from Abdullah who says: Before receiving revelation,
the Holy Prophet (S) met Zaid Bin ‘Amr Bin Nafil somewhere at
Baldakh[^30] and invited him to a meal full of meat.

Zaid Bin ‘Amr, rejecting the Holy Prophet’s invitation, said: I do not
eat the meat of animal slaughtered for an idol. I do not eat the meat of
an animal slaughtered without mentioning Allah’s name.[^31]

Which Muslim can hesitate that this tradition is false? Does the
inventor of this tradition not feel ashamed of himself when he says that
the Holy Prophet (S) invited Zaid to a meal made of the meat of an
animal slaughtered without mentioning the name of Allah and Zaid
rejected the invitation?

If we accept God forbidden this tradition, then we must regard Zaid Bin
‘Amr as better and more pious than the Holy Prophet (S)!

How can Sunni scholars believe that such traditions are true about the
Holy Prophet (S) whereas they do their best to acquit Abu Bakr of
drinking before drinking was forbidden and reject traditions related to
his drinking saying: Allah prevents the truthful ones from doing evil
deeds even before evil deeds are forbidden!

This has been mentioned in Nawadir Al-Usul by Tirmidhi. We will soon
relate it. But it has to be asked now if the Holy Prophet (S) was not a
truthful one.

### Distortion in a fabricated tradition

Ibn Ruzbehan has added a supplement to this forged tradition, which is
nothing but mere accusations and lies about Allama Hilli. In response,
to Allama’s words, he says: The way he (Allama Hilli) has narrated this
tradition shows that he is not credible and thus one cannot rely on the
traditions he has narrated from others. In order to attain his goal and
put to question the authenticity of the traditions of Sihah Sitta, he
has narrated a part of the afore-mentioned tradition and avoided to
mention its supplement which is as under:

After hearing the words of Zaid Bin ‘Amr Bin Nufail, the Holy Prophet
(S) said: We too do not eat the meat of an animal sacrificed by pagans
or slaughtered without the name of Allah being mentioned. Thus they both
avoided eating the meal.

In order to cast doubt on the authenticity of this tradition, he has
omitted its supplement. We ask Allah to save us from prejudice which is
a bad habit.[^32]

[In response to this objection], it has to be said that Ibn Ruzbehan’s
objection can be reversed back to himself and that he himself is not
credible. This is because this tradition has appeared as such in the
book of slaughtered in Sahih Bukhari and Allama Hilli has thus quoted it
exactly. Sahih Bukhari is now accessible to all. One can refer to it in
order to find out whether or not our words are correct.

Bukhari has also mentioned this tradition in his Kitab e Manaqib, but
not mentioning again the supplement mentioned by Ibn Ruzbehan. In a
chapter on the tradition of Zaid Bin ‘Amr Bin Nufail he says: Muhammad
Bin Abu Bakr narrates from Salim Bin Abdullah Bin Umar who said: Before
receiving revelation, the Holy Prophet (S) met Zaid Bin ‘Amr Bin Nufail
somewhere at Baldakh. They invited the Holy Prophet (S) to a table but
he did not accept to attend it.

At this moment, Zaid said: I do not eat the meat of an animal sacrificed
for idols. I eat only the meat those animals that are slaughtered with
the name of Allah.

Zaid Bin ‘Amr used to object the sacrifices made by Quraish saying:
Allah has created the sheep and provided it with water and fodder but
you deny it by slaughtering it for the sake of idols without mentioning
the name of Allah.[^33]

Thus it is clear that Allama Hilli has not been unfaithful in narrating
this tradition. He has not added anything to it nor has he omitted
anything from it. It is rather Ibn Ruzbehan who has lied by adding a
supplement to it. The addition of a supplement to this tradition is a
sign of the incredibility of Ibn Ruzbehan.

One can regard it as a platform for giving him a no-confidence vote.
This is because he invented these lies in order to defend Sihah Sitta by
rejecting the objections raised against them. We ask Allah to save us
from prejudice which is a bad habit.

It also became clear that Sunni scholars attempt to conceal the defects
and flaws of their traditions by distorting them whenever they find
themselves caught in a difficult situation.

As mentioned, Ibn Ruzbehan distorts this tradition when he claims that
this tradition has an additional part.

Muhammad Bin Yusuf Salihi has also distorted this tradition. In his
Subul Al-Huda, he writes:

Bukhari and Bayhaqi have narrated from Musa Bin ‘Aqba, from Salim Bin
Abdullah Bin Umar who has quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as saying: Before
receiving revelation, the Holy Prophet (S) met Zaid Bin ‘Amr somewhere
at Baldakh. Here the Holy Prophet (S) was invited to a table full of
[cooked] meat.

The Holy Prophet did not, however, accept the invitation and addressing
Zaid, he said: I do not eat the meat of an animal sacrificed for the
sake of idols. I eat only the meat of those animals that are slaughtered
with the name of Allah.

Zaid Bin ‘Amr used to object the sacrifices made by Quraish saying:
Allah has created the sheep and provided it with water and fodder but
you deny it by slaughtering it for the sake of idols without mentioning
the name of Allah.[^34]

Knowing that this tradition contains many repulsive and disgusting
words, Muhammad Bin Yusuf Salihi Demishqi has changed the phrase ‘Zaid
said’ in this tradition into ‘he said to Zaid’. He considers ‘the
Apostle of Allah’ as the subject of the verb ‘said’, indicating that it
was the Holy Prophet (S) who said “I do not eat”.

This is while the tradition in Sahih Bukhari does not agree with this
modification. It considers ‘Zaid’ as the subject of the sentence. Thus
according to Bukhari’s version of this tradition, ‘Zaid’ is the subject
for ‘said’ and it is ‘Zaid’ who said ‘I do not eat’.

It can be said that according to the tradition of ‘section on
excellences’ it was the Holy Prophet (S) who refrained from eating,
though this cannot be said on the basis of ‘section on slaughtered’.
This is because the tradition that has appeared in section on
slaughtered, and also the tradition that is reported by Jurjani and
Ismaeili with which we will deal later, contain the verb ‘invited’ and
thus it is Zaid who refrains from eating not the Holy Prophet (S).

Based on the quotations we will make later, Ahmad Bin Hanbal and other
Sunni Imams were of the view that the Holy Prophet (S) ate the meat of
the animal sacrificed for idols. Thus the subject for the verb ‘refrain
/ did not eat’ in the tradition in section on virtues is Zaid rather
than the Holy Prophet (S). This is because similar traditions explain
each other.

It is based on such understanding that Ibn Hajar ‘Asqali, Zarkashi,
Suhaili, Qastalani and other commentators of tradition do not consider
the Holy Prophet (S) as the subject of the verb ‘refrain / did not eat’.

On the whole, all these constitute one tradition having one subject
matter. Thus as the Holy Prophet (S) is not the subject of the verb
‘refrain did not eat’ in the tradition in section on slaughtered, he is
not the subject in the tradition in section on virtues. This is because
otherwise the tradition in section on virtues will refute the tradition
in section on slaughtered and thus a stronger objection will emerge to
face Sunni scholars.

### Justification of meaning of tradition

Some Sunni scholars have justified the meaning of the tradition in
question. How can one say that the Holy Prophet has refrained from
eating the meat of the animal sacrificed for idols whereas the tradition
in Sahih Bukhari does not indicate such a thing?

It is based on this objection, that Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalani has criticized
Ibn Battal who is of the view that the Holy Prophet (S) did not eat the
meat of the animal sacrificed for idols, stressing that no version of
this tradition contains such a thing.

Commenting on the tradition in section on virtues, Ibn Hajar says:

Most traditions indicate that pagans offered the meat of the animal
sacrificed for idols to the Holy Prophet (S). The tradition narrated by
Jurjani however indicates that it was the Holy Prophet (S) who placed
the meat of the sacrificed animal before Zaid.

‘Ayas says: The first tradition is authentic. I am however of the view
that the tradition narrated by Ismaeli is in harmony with the tradition
narrated by Jurjani. That is the reason why Zubair Bin Bakar, Fakihi and
others narrated the tradition narrated by Jurjani.

Ibn Battal says: The table of the meat of the sacrificed animal belonged
to Quraish and it was Quraish who placed it before the Holy Prophet (S).
The Holy Prophet himself refrained from eating the meat of the
sacrificed animal though he invited Zaid Bin ‘Amr Bin Nufail to eat it.

Refraining from eating the meat of the sacrificed animal, Zaid,
addressing Quraish, said: We do not eat the meat of an animal sacrificed
for idols.

Thus it is possible for the opinion of Ibn Battal to be correct, though
we do not know for sure how he has made such a conclusion. I did not
find any tradition that gives such a meaning.

Ibn Hajar says that Ibn Munir has also endorsed the opinion presented by
Ibn Battal.

It is worth mentioning that Ibn Hajar has aptly answered Ibn Battal,
though his view that Ibn Battal may be somewhat right is totally wrong.
Ibn Hajar, as you will see, quotes prominent Sunni scholars as saying
that the Holy Prophet (S) ate the meat of the animal sacrificed for
idols and invited Zaid to follow the suit, but Zaid did not do so. Thus,
Ibn Battal’s view does not seem to be correct in any case.

Ibn Battal’s words explicitly mention that the Apostle of Allah after
refraining from eating the said meat, asked Zaid to eat it. This is a
very embarrassing claim. How is it possible for the Holy Prophet (S) who
is the symbol of trusteeship, piety and moral virtues to refrain from
doing something and ask another person to do it without any
justification, and thus face an embarrassing response? No wise and
religious person can accept the possibility of such a happening?

### Some Sunni scholars accept this false tradition

Contrary to Ibn Ruzbehan and the author of Subul Al-Huda, most Sunni
scholars have accepted this fabricated tradition. Being fond of Bukhari,
they have endorsed his lies and accusations and surrendered to his
strange and forged traditions.

As an instance, Dawoodi is of the view that the Prophet (S) used to eat
the meat of the sacrificed animals of pagans. This is because he did not
know that it was forbidden, though Zaid knew about it and therefore he
refrained from eating it. Ibn Hajar Asqalani quotes Dawoodi as saying:

Before his prophetic mission, the Holy Prophet (S) did not do the
services done by the pagans, though he did not know anything about the
rules concerning the sacrifices the pagans were making. This is while
Zaid knew about it, for he had learnt about it from the People of Book
[Christians or Jews].[^35]

On this view, the Holy Prophet (S) used to eat the meat of the
sacrifices made by pagans because he did not know that it was forbidden.
The People of Book were however aware of it and therefore Zaid who had
met them before, did not eat it.

Do these words not imply that he is critical of the Holy Prophet (S) and
is trying to lower his position?

How can a believer consider the Holy Prophet – who receives support and
guidance from Allah – as [ignorant] not knowing about a particular legal
ruling and tell that he did forbidden things and asked others as well to
do them?

### Others are after solution

Some Sunni scholars [agree that] they cannot refute the tradition
reported by Bukhari but they are reluctant to endorse the explicit
meaning of this tradition. That is why they are faced with a naughty
problem and are trying to find a solution for it.

After narrating the tradition that has appeared in Bukhari (in section
on slaughtered), Suhaili says:

There is a simple question about this tradition. How did Allah prevent
Zaid from eating the meat of the animals sacrificed for idols and the
animals slaughtered without the observation of Islamic rituals but did
not prevent the Holy Prophet (S) who was infallible and was highly
deserving this merit at the time of ignorance?

One can answer this question from two perspectives:

• This tradition does not say that when the Holy Prophet (S) met Zaid at
Baldakh and when he was invited to the table he attended it. Instead it
says that Zaid said after being invited to the table that he did not eat
the meat of the animal killed without the mention of Allah’s name.

• Zaid refrained from eating the meat of the animal sacrificed for idols
not on the bases of previous religions but on account of his own
personal opinion. This is because the religion of Prophet Ibrahim (S)
had forbidden the meat of corpse but it did not say anything about the
animal killed not for Allah. Islam was the first religion that
introduced this ordinance.

Some of the scholars of the science of principles say: Everything is
permissible unless it is forbidden. Thus it was permissible for the Holy
Prophet(S) to eat the meat of the animal sacrificed for idols just as it
was permissible for him not to eat it.

It may be said that eating such a meat is neither permissible nor
forbidden. Such a theory seems to be correct, because previous religions
had permitted their followers to eat the meat of sacrificed animals
including sheep, camel etc. The innovations made by pagans did not
affect the lawfulness of eating the meat such animals – proposed by
previous religions until after the advent of Islam the following verse
was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و لا تأكلوا مما لم يذكر اسم الله عليه
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And do not eat of that on which Allah’s name has not been
mentioned.*** [^36]

As a result, the permissibility of eating of the meat of animals
sacrificed- which was introduced by previous religions - remains
unaffected and the innovations made by the People of Book do not have
any impact on this ordinance. Thus it was lawful to eat of the meat of
the animal sacrificed for idols on the basis of previous religions until
the Qur’an pronounced that this was unlawful.

### An evacuation of this solution

In my point of view the solution proposed above is very weak and poor.
This is because the objection did not focus on eating of the meat of the
animals sacrificed for idols. It instead, focused on the fact that it
seems very bad to consider eating of it lawful and to ask others to eat
of it.

Thus it is a sign of thoughtlessness and imprudence to think that the
objection is restricted to eating of the said meat. Do wise believers
accept that the Holy Prophet (S) is lower in status than Zaid in
reframing from doing acts of disobedience? This is while there is
consensus among all Muslims that he was infallible and no one was wiser
than him among people.

Qazi Ayad says: No doubt, the Holy Prophet’s ample intellect,
intelligence, strong senses, eloquent tongue, dignified acts and noble
character indicate that he was the wisest and the most intelligent
person of his time.

If one ponders on the way the Holy the Prophet managed people’s affairs
and successfully followed his policies and if one takes into
consideration his balanced character, his innovative methods and his
doctrines (which are not the product any previous learning) one does not
doubt that the Holy Prophet was superior to others in terms of reasoning
and understanding.

Wahab Bin Munabbih says: I studied seventy one books all of which had
introduced the Holy Prophet (S) as the wisest who always made the best
choice.

In accordance with another tradition, he says: All these books
maintained that compared to the intellect of the Holy Prophet (S) the
intellect Allah has given to all human beings from the beginning to the
end of creation is nothing but like a sand compared to all other sands
combined together.[^37]

How can one now not give the high position of the Holy Prophet (S) in
infallibility, reason and thought, except Suhaili’s words concerning
him?

Despite all these, great Sunni scholars explicitly mention that the Holy
Prophet (S) ate of the meat the animals sacrificed for idols.

Ibn Hajar Asqalani says: The tradition of Saeed Bin Zaid – which we
touched before – and the tradition of Ahmad contains: Zaid said: I
sought refuge to what Ibrahim had sought refuge to. Thereupon he laid in
prostration before Ka’aba.

Saeed Bin Zaid said: Zaid passed by the Holy Prophet (S) and Zaid Bin
Haritha who were eating of the table spread there. They invited him to
the table, but he said: My nephew! I do not eat of the meat of the
animal sacrificed for idols. From that day onward, no one saw the Holy
Prophet (S) eat of the meat of the animal sacrificed for idols.

Abu Ya’ala Bazzar and others have narrated this tradition as under: Zaid
Bin Haritha says: One day the Holy Prophet and I riding on the back of
the Holy Prophet’s camel – left Mecca. We slaughtered a sheep before an
idol and cooked its meat. Thereupon we met Zaid Bin Amr…

After relating the story in detail, Zaid Bin Haritha quotes Zaid Bin Amr
as saying: I do not eat of the meat of the animals killed without the
name of Allah.[^38]

This is the word of Ahmad and other great Sunni scholars. Given all
these, what is the use of Suhaili’s words? Suhaili has made a claim that
the religion of Prophet Ibrahim (a.s) does not forbid the meat of the
animals killed not for Allah. This claim is however wrong, fabricated by
Sunni scholars in order to defend their predecessors and their
superstitious beliefs.

It is a sign of God’s grace that Zarkashi rejects Suhaili’s claim saying
that Ibrahim’s religion did not permit eating the meat of animals killed
not for Allah. Commenting on this tradition in his Al-Tanqih, he says:
They spread a table-cloth before him but he refused to eat anything.

If someone says that the Holy Prophet deserves such a merit more than
anyone else, it must be said in response that this tradition does not
say that the Holy Prophet (S) did not eat anything. In reply to this
objection, Suhaili says: Zaid refused to eat of that meat not on account
of previous religions but on account of his own opinion.

This is because Ibrahim’s religion had not forbidden the meat of the
animals killed not for Allah. It has only forbidden the meat of corpse.
Islam is the first religion that has forbidden the meat of the animals
killed not for Allah. Suhaili’s words are weak. This is because Ibrahim
(a.s) was known to be an enemy of idols and his religion was forbidding
the meat of the animals killed not for Allah. Allah the Exalted says:

**
**
ثم اوحينا اليك ان اتبع مله ابراهيم حنيفا

***Then We revealed to you. Follow the faith of Ibrahim***[^39] &[^40]

We thank Allah that Zarkashi made such a rightful remark and thus it
became obvious that Suhaili made this lie in order to defend their
misled predecessors.

Khattabi has treated the issue in a different manner. Ibn Hajar Asqalani
says: The term ‘ansab’ the plural form of ‘nusub’ meaning idol, is used
to refer to stones around Ka’aba. Pagans used to sacrifice their animals
on these stones for idols.

Khattabi says: The Holy Prophet (S) did not eat of that which was
sacrificed for idols, though he used to eat of other kinds of meat even
that on which the name of Allah was not pronounced. This is because at
that time Islam was not revealed. It was forbidden years after the
prophetic mission began.[^41]

In my point of view, these words are very poetic and discursive. They do
not solve the problem the tradition of Bukhari is faced with.

This is because this tradition explicitly says that the Holy Prophet (S)
offered Zaid the meat of the animals sacrificed for idols. In response
Zaid said: I do not eat of the meat of the animal sacrificed for idols.
That is the reason why Bukhari has included this tradition in the book
of slaughtered in chapter ‘the animals that are slaughtered on the
stones surrounding Ka’ab’.

The tradition of Ahmad, Bazzar and Abu Ya’ala which is related by Ibn
Hajar Asqalani also mentions explicitly that the said meat was of the
animal slaughtered for idols.

Thus it is wrong to believe that the Holy Prophet (S) ate of the meat
the animal killed without the observation of Islamic rituals. This is
because – as mentioned before – Zarkashi believes that the ban on the
meat of animals slaughtered not for Allah is based on the faith of
Ibrahim (a.s). How can one thus attribute such things to the Holy
Prophet (S)?!

It is obvious that Khattabi’s struggles are in vain. They do not
contribute anything to the solution of the problem. No one who thinks
properly can believe that the Holy Prophet (S) who gives warning and
hope has eaten of the meat of an animal killed not for Allah. May Allah
keep us distant from obeying Satan.

The tradition ‘Prophets do not leave behind inheritance’
--------------------------------------------------------

Among the baseless traditions of Bukhari is the tradition that has
appeared in the book of obligation of Sahih Bukhari.

When the Holy Prophet (S) died his wives decided to send Uthman before
Abu Bakr to help them take their share of inheritance [left by the Holy
Prophet (S)]. But Aisha said: Did the Holy Prophet (S) not say: We (the
prophets) do not leave behind inheritance. What we leave behind is
charity.[^42]

Our great scholars have mentioned in their books that this tradition is
fabricated.[^43] The reason why they fabricated this tradition was that
they wanted to deprive Prophet’s daughter from the wealth he left
behind.[^44]

In a discussion with Abu Barkr, Imam Ali (a.s) rejected this tradition
and showed that it is in conflict with the Holy Qur’an. This
demonstrates it very well that it is not a valid tradition.

Ibn Sa’ad says: Muhammad Bin Umar narrates from Hisham Bin Sa’ad from
Abbas Bin Abdullah Bin Ma’abad, from Abu Ja’afar who says: In order to
take their share of inheritance, Fatima (a.s), Abbas Bin Abd Al-Mutallib
and Ali (a.s) visited Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as
saying: We do not leave behind inheritance. The wealth we leave behind
is charity. Thus the wealth he left behind is under my control.

[To prove his point of view], Imam Ali (a.s) appealed to two Qur’anic
verses which are:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ووررث سلیمان داوود
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Sulaiman is the heir of Dawood.*** [^45]

And Zakaria said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يرثنى و يرث من ال يعقوب
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(One that) will (truly) inherit me and inherit the posterity of
Jacob.*** [^46]

Abu Bakr said: That is what I said and you also know it.

Imam Ali said: This is Allah’s Book that speaks and then he, Fatima
(a.s) and Abbas went out.[^47]

The tradition of ‘Ali’s quarrel with Prophet over nightprayer’
--------------------------------------------------------------

Among other baseless traditions of Bukhari which is also narrated by
Dehlavi in his Tuhfai Al-Ithana’asharia is the following tradition.

In his Sahih, the most authentic tradition collection among Sunnis,
Bukhari narrates via various channels the following:

One night Allah's Apostle came to me and Fatima, the daughter of the
Prophet and asked, "Won't you pray (at night)?" I said, "By Allah I do
not offer any prayer other than compulsory prayer. O Allah's Apostle!
Our souls are in the hands of Allah and if He wants us to get up He will
make us get up." When I said that, he left us without saying anything
and I heard that he was hitting his thigh and saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و كان الانسان اكثر شىء جدلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But man is more quarrelsome than anything.*** [^48]& [^49]

Sunni scholars do not feel shy to appeal to such traditions. Can one
believe that Ali (a.s) who was a man of worship and servitude towards
Allah quarrels with the Prophet over offering night prayer?

Imam Ali (a.s) was fully obeying the Holy Prophet (S) in every matter.
Can one thus believe that he quarreled with the Holy Prophet (a.s) over
offering night prayer? How can one accept that Imam Ali (a.s) should
have argued like a fatalist against the Holy Prophet (S)?

This is a tradition that is fabricated by the enemies of the Holy
Prophet (S). It can be accepted only by those who are the enemies of the
Holy Prophet (S) and Imam Ali (a.s).

No believer can stand against offering prayer so insistently saying: By
Allah I do not offer any prayer other than compulsory prayer. This is so
bad, especially if it is the Holy Prophet (S) who asks you to offer
prayer.

This is because speaking in such a manner with the Holy Prophet
especially when he orders you to offer prayer is insulation to him. No
believer must do such a thing, not to speak of Imam Ali (a.s) who was
utterly following the Holy Prophet’s commands and was the worshiper.

### A glance at Imam Ali’s excellences

Speaking about Imam Ali’s worship, Ibn Abi Al-Hadid Mu’atazili says: Ali
was top in terms of worshiping and piety. His prayers and fasts
outnumbered those of all other people. People learnt from him how to
offer night prayer, remember Allah and offer supererogatory prayers. He
was so careful about supplication and prayer that he did his acts of
worship at Lilat Al-Harir in the battle of Siffin on a leather carpet
when enemies’ arrows were targeting him.

He was not afraid and thus he did not leave his worship until he
completed it. Due to long prostration, his forehead was patched like
camel’s feet. A brief assessment of Imam Ali’s prayers and supplications
which are full of praises for Allah’s glories shows how humble, sincere
and devoted he is towards Him. It shows what a mind has arranged these
words and what a tongue has uttered them.

When Ali Bin Hussain, an outstanding worshiper was asked how his worship
was compared to that of his forefather, he said:

**
**
عبادتی عند عباده جدی کعباده جدی عند عباده رسول الله

My worship compared to the worship of my forefather is like my
forefather’s worship compared to the worship of the Apostle of Allah
(S). [^50]

In chapter seven of his ‘Ali’s worship, piety and devotedness’, Sheikh
Muhammad Bin Talha says: In regard with his worship, it has to be said:
Obedience is the essence of worship. Anyone who worships Allah and is
careful about doing obligations and refraining from what is forbidden,
is a worshiper. The subject matters of Allah’s orders are various and
that is why worships are also of different kinds such as prayer,
charity, fasting etc.

Imam Ali (S) used to hasten to perform different worships. By doing so,
he attained lofty stages whereas others could not reach them. Imam Ali
(S) did two things simultaneously; while he was offering prayer he gave
charity as he was bowing. It was at this time that the following verse
from the Holy Qur’an was revealed.

**
**

**
**
إِنَّما وَلِيُّكُمُ اللَّهُ وَ رَسُولُهُ وَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا الَّذِينَ
يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلاةَ وَ يُؤْتُونَ الزَّكاةَ وَ هُمْ راكِعُونَ

***Only Allah is your Vali and His Apostle and those who believe, those
who keep up prayers and pay the poor-rate while they bow.*** [^51]

And there is another verse that says:

**
**
وَيُطْعِمُونَ الطَّعَامَ عَلَىٰ حُبِّهِ مِسْكِينًا وَيَتِيمًا وَأَسِيرً

**‌**

***And they give food out of love for Him to the poor and the orphan and
the captive.*** [^52]

Thereupon he says: Worship is of different kinds. Imam Ali (a.s)
performed all kinds of worships. He believed in the hereafter and its
great events. He knew that all human beings would face, after dying and
returning to Allah, certain questions in the hereafter. They all need to
bow down before their Creator and receive their suitable rewards by
entering Paradise or Hell.

Having reached the stage of certainty, Imam Ali (a.s) needed to fasten
his belt and spend all his time obeying Allah's commands. This is
because only those who are skeptic and impious shirk acts of worship.
Imam Ali (a.s) was at the top of certainty and that is why he openly
declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لو کشف الغطاء ما ازددت یقینا
  </p>
</blockquote>

If the all the veils are removed I will gain no more certainty.

Thus his worships were of high standards, because he had reached the
stage of certainty. After narrating some traditions, Sheikh Muhammad Bin
Talha says: These long stories … indicate that Ali (a.s) was known for
his worship and excelled all others in terms of performing all kinds of
worship.

He worshiped in the best possible way and believed in it theoretically
and practically. He worshiped to the extent that he reached the stage of
Imamate. Being known for his trusteeship, worship, love, piety,
devotion, knowledge, reliance (on Allah), fear (of Allah), hope (in
Allah), patience, thankfulness and satisfaction (with Allah), he assumed
the leadership of Muslim community.

Ali (a.s) was a man of humble character, thinking, worshipping,
contemplating, offering night prayer, remembering Allah, crying (out of
fear of Allah), litany and guiding people. He performed various
difficult worships which powerful and rich people cannot perform. He
went so far worshiping Allah that the Holy Qur'an praised him and
introduced him as a righteous person to all others.

In his commentary, Wahidi narrates a Marfu'a tradition, on his own
documentation, from Ibn Abbas who says: Ali Bin Abi Talib (a.s) had four
Dirhams. He donated one Dirham at night, one at daytime, the third
secretly and the fourth openly. It was due to this that the following
verse was revealed:

**
**
الَّذِينَ يُنفِقُونَ أَمْوَالَهُم بِاللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ‌ سِرًّ‌ا
وَعَلَانِيَةً فَلَهُمْ أَجْرُ‌هُمْ عِندَ رَ‌بِّهِمْ وَلَا خَوْفٌ
عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ

***(As for) those who spend their property by night and by day, secretly
and openly, they shall have their reward from their Lord and they shall
have no fear, nor shall they grieve.*** [^53]

Considering the stories related, it becomes clear that Imam Ali (a.s)
was a person who had attained all good qualities and attributes. It
suffices him as a privilege that Allah has praised him in different
verses of the Holy Qur'an, which is recited by all Muslims till the Day
of Judgment.

Thereupon he narrates the following poems about Imam Ali (a.s) [^54]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذى المزاما بعض ما حلى بها ---- و حبى من الخرات و البركات
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و له وظائف طاعه اورادها ---- معموره الاناء و الاوقات
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بعباده و زهاده و تورع ---- و تخشع و تدرع الاحبات
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و تقلل و توكل و تفكر ---- و تدبر و تذكر المثلاث
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و اذا الظلام سجى يناجى ربه ---- متضرعا بالذكر و الدعوات
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علم علت درجاته و فضائل ---- شرقت معارجها على الشرقات
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و مناقب نطقت بها اى الكتاب ---- و حسبها ان جاء شاهدها من الايات
  </p>
</blockquote>

These are some of the privileges that are bestowed on him.

He performed worships that were indicative of his piety, devotion,
humbleness, contentment, reliance (on Allah), thinking, contemplating
and remembering ideals.

When darkness prevailed everywhere, he would humbly begin to offer his
prayers.

He was down to earth, humble and submissive towards Allah.

He was highly knowledgeable and he had virtues others were envying.

Quranic verses have praised him and it suffices him that Qur'an
testifies to his virtues.

Elsewhere, Sheikh Muhammad Bin Talha mentions:

After Ali (a.s) died, Muawiyah Bin Abu Sufyan said to Dirar Bin Damrah,"
Describe Ali to me." "Will you not excuse me from answering you," said
Dirar. "No, describe him," insisted Muawiyah. "Please, excuse me from
doing so," said Dirar. "I will not," said Muawiyah.

"I will do so, then," said Dirar with a sigh. "By Allah, he was
(far-sighted) and very strong. He spoke with a truthful finality, so
that, through him, truth became distinguished from falsehood. He ruled
justly, and knowledge gushed forth from him, as did wisdom. He felt an
aversion to the world and its (pleasures). By Allah, he would cry
profusely (from the fear of Allah); long durations would he spend in
contemplation, during which time he would converse with his soul. "

"He showed a liking (for religious reasons, of course; to train his soul
to be patient and abstemious) to coarse garments and lower quality food.
By Allah, it was as if - in his humbleness - he was one of us: when we
asked him a question, he would answer us; when we would go to him, he
would initiate (the greetings of peace); and when we would invite him
(to our homes), he would come to us.

Yet, in spite of his closeness to us, we would not speak (freely) with
him, because of the dignity and honor that he exuded if he smiled, he
revealed the likes of straight and regular pearls (i.e. his teeth). He
honored religious people and loved the poor. The strong person could not
hope to gain favors from him through falsehood.

And the weak person never lost hope of his justness. I swear, by Allah,
that on certain occasions, I saw him in his place of prayer when the
night was dark and few stars could be seen; he would be holding his
beard and crying the way a very sad person cries; and I would hear him
saying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا دنيا! دنيا! أبى تعرضت ام إلى تشوقت؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هيهات ! هيهات ! غرى غيرى، قد بتتك ثلاثا لا رجعه لى فيك. فعمرك قصير و
عيشك حقير و خطرك كثير
  </p>
</blockquote>

"O world, O world, are you offering yourself to me? Do you desire me?
Never! Never! Deceive someone other than me. I have divorced you for the
third time, so that you cannot return to me. O world, your life is
short, the existence you offer is base, and your danger is great. Alas
for the paucity of sustenance (i.e. good deeds), the great distance of
the journey, and the loneliness of the road!"

Upon hearing this description, Muawiyah's eyes swelled with tears, and
not being able to hold them from gushing forth, he was forced to wipe
them with his cuffs; and the same can be said for those who were
present. Muawaiyah then said, "May Allah have mercy on the father of Al
Hassan, for he was, by Allah, just as you described him to be." He then
said, "O Dirar, describe your sadness at having lost him."

"My sadness," began Dirar, "is like the sadness of a woman who cannot
control her tears or allay her grief after her child, while in her lap,
has just been slaughtered." Dirar then stood up and left.[^55]

In short, it is not easy to describe Imam Ali’s piety and devotion. This
is something that is accepted by all including his enemies. How good it
was if the followers of Muawiyyah like Muawiyyah himself confessed to
the reality and did not accept this fabricated tradition.

Fabricated tradition and the objection of fatalism
--------------------------------------------------

The above-mentioned tradition implies that Imam Ali’s words contain a
kind of fatalism (determinism). Resisting against offering night prayer
is nothing compared to this accusation. This is because it is very bad
and awful to resort to fatalism and it is a sign of misguidance and
disbelief to attribute such things to the leader of believers.

### Falsity of fatalism from the viewpoint of Ibn Taymiyya

We will now mention Ibn Taymiyya’s words concerning the falsity of
fatalism.

All rational and religious persons agree that it is false to argue on
the basis of fatalism. Even the fatalists themselves agree that it is
wrong for a person who has committed oppression or violated someone’s
rights to appeal to fatalism. They demand for their rights and punish
him for what he has done.

Fatalism is something like sophism. It is very obvious that sophism is
wrong, though it has its own adherents who go skeptic (not only about
other things but also) about their own existence and essential sciences.

Fatalism badly affects practical life to the extent that it dismisses
truth and justice and allows falsehood and injustice. Everyone however
knows that such a theory is false and no one permits oneself to invoke
such theories except unknowingly. If a person knows the expediency and
necessity of his actions, he does not appeal to fatalism.

Likewise, if a person knows that his action does not involve any
expediency or necessity, again he will not appeal to fatalism.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سيقول الذين اشركوا لو شاء الله ما اشركنا و لا أباونا و لا حرمنا من شىء
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who are polytheists will say: If Allah had pleased we would not
have associated (aught with Him) nor our falterers, nor would we have
forbidden (to ourselves) anything.*** [^56]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قل هل عندكم من علم فتخرجوه لنا ان تتبعون الا الظن و ان انتم الا
تخرصون. قل فلله الحجه البلغه فلو شاء لهدئکم اجمعين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: have you any knowledge with you so you should bring it forth to
us? You only follow a conjecture and you only tell lies. Say: Then
Allah’s is the conclusive argument: so if He pleases, He would certainly
guide you all.*** [^57]

Polytheists naturally know that this argument is invalid. Suppose a
polytheist encroaches on another polytheist’s family or property,
killing his child or violating his rights. When he is criticized by
others he simply says that if Allah did not approve of his actions he
would not do them.

Other polytheists will not accept his reasoning. Nor does he himself
accept such an argument from others. He appeals to such an invalid
argument out of necessity with the aim to silencing others.

It is because of this that Allah reproaches them saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قل هل عندکم من علم فتخر جوه لنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Say: have you any knowledge with you so you should bring it forth to us?

Thereupon He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تتبعون الا الظن و ان انتم الا تخرصون ان
  </p>
</blockquote>

You only follow a conjecture and you only tell lies.

Thus it is their desire and tendencies (not divine fate) that shape
their actions. This is because divine fate is not the main cause behind
one’s actions and is not accepted as a proof against others justifying
your deed. All people are equal in the face of divine fate.

If fate were the main cause behind one’s action, then there would be no
difference between just and unjust, truthful and liar, knowledgeable and
ignorant, good doer and evil doer, well-behaved and mischievous,
advantageous and disadvantageous.

In order to justify their position of not following the prophets,
polytheists were appealing to the issue of fate. This is while if a
polytheist appeals to fate in order to justify his violation of another
polytheist’s rights or to disobey his orders his words will not be
heard.

Above all, all polytheists rebuke each other for acting wrongfully or
violating others’ rights.

But when the Holy Prophet (S) was sent to them and he began to call on
them to observe divine rights and to obey divine commands, they began to
appeal to fate (in order to shirk their duties). They did so while if a
person encroached upon the rights of a polytheist and justified this on
the bases of fate they were not ready to lend their ears to him and
accept his words.[^58]

### Ibn Taymiyya and appealing to a fabricated tradition

Elsewhere Ibn Taymiyya extensively criticizes appealing to fate. In the
end of his discussion, he accuses Imam Ali (a.s) out of animosity
towards him of being a fatalist. Referring to a tradition in this
connection, he says:

It is necessary to believe in fate, but no one given the clear dictate
of reason accepts appealing to fate. The fact that this argument is
invalid does not falsify the issue of fate. This is because man is
naturally inclined to seek his profits and avoid losses. The goodness of
his life in this world as well as in the hereafter depends on the
observation of this principle.

Man tries to get things that bring him profits and ward off losses no
matter whatever they are (be they believing in prophets or something
else). To know about advantages and disadvantages of something depends
on one’s reason and aims. The prophets have come to actualize or
increase human’s advantages and ward off or lessen his disadvantages.

It is on account of this that the followers of prophets are far better
than others in terms of following their interests and avoiding losses.
Those who reject prophets are lagging far behind from this perspective.
They do evil deeds and abandon good deeds. They need to be therefore
considered as the worst among human beings. Nevertheless the opponents
of the prophets also need to follow their interests by avoiding wrongful
acts and their likes.

When there is an encroachment on another person’s life, property or
family and the one oppressed demands for justice, no wise person accepts
appealing to fate (from the party that has committed the wrong).

If the evil doer says that he is innocent because he was obliged on the
basis of fate to do such an action, others will respond him by saying:
if you happen to be the one who is oppressed and the oppressor tries to
justify his unjust act through appealing to fate you will not accept his
words. This is because accepting fatalism will no doubt lead to
inevitable and lasting corruption.

Thus all people believe in the principle of fate, though no wise person
accepts arguing on the basis of fate. There is no contradiction between
accepting the principle of fate and rejecting arguments on its bases.
One must believe in fate and at the same time reject appealing to it….

Arguing on the basis of fate is regarded as quarrel that is a negative
thing. In his Sahih, the most authentic tradition collection among
Sunnis, Bukhari narrates via various channels the following:

One night Allah's Apostle came to me and Fatima, the daughter of the
Prophet and asked, "Won't you pray (at night)?" I said, "By Allah I do
not offer any prayer other than compulsory prayer. O Allah's Apostle!
Our souls are in the hands of Allah and if He wants us to get up He will
make us get up." When I said that, he left us without saying anything
and I heard that he was hitting his thigh and saying:

**
**

**
**
و كان الانسان اكثر شىء جدلا

***But man is more quarrelsome than anything.*** [^59] & [^60]

In response it must be said that if appealing to fate is so bad then
attributing it to Imam Ali, the commander of the faithful cannot be
justified except on the bases of animosity and hatred towards him. Not
to speak of believers, no man of understanding can approve of such a big
lie.

Moreover, elsewhere in his book, Ibn Taymiyya has termed those who
appeal to fate as worse than Jews and Christians. He says:

According to those who appeal to fate to justify their mistakes, the
prophets must keep silent in the face of disbelievers not responding
them…. Some mystics also hold such views. After reaching the stage of
annihilation, mystics believer their deeds cannot be described as good
or bad. Such beliefs are abundantly found among different groups
including sufis, fakirs, jurists and ordinary people.

No doubt, such people are worse than Shias and Mu’atazilites for the
latter two groups accept divine commands and deny fatalism.

Shias and Mu’atazilites on the other hand criticize Sunnis, because they
accept divine commands and prohibitions, promise and threat and they
admit that they are supposed to do what is made obligatory and to avoid
what is forbidden, accepting that thus Allah has not created their deeds
and intended their wrongs.

They no doubt glorify Allah, consider Him as pure of injustice and
accept divine argument, but they fail to reconcile between Allah’s
omnipotence, general will, inclusive creation, justice, wisdom, order
and prohibition, promise and threat. It is because of this that they say
all praise is due to Allah but they deny Him His kingdom.

In my point of view, those who accept Allah’s power, will and creation
and based on them they deny Allah’s order and prohibition, promise and
threat, are worse than Jews and Christians. This is because according to
their beliefs the prophets must keep silent (in the face of
disbelievers).

We criticizing those of their ideas that are false ideas, but as far as
their true ideas are concerned they are acceptable and true ideas must
be accepted no matter who the holder of the idea is. No one is entitled
to answer an innovation through an innovation and falsehood through
falsehood.

Though those who deny fate have fallen into the trap of innovation,
those who appeal to fate to resist divine orders have fallen into the
trap of a bigger innovation. Just as we can compare those who deny fate
to those who worship fire, we can compare those who appeal to fate to
those who associate other deities with Allah and oppose the prophets
saying:

**
**

**
**
سيقول الذين اشركوا لو شاء الله ما اشركنا و لا أباونا و لا حرمنا من شىء

***Those who are polytheists will say: If Allah had pleased we would not
have associated (aught with Him) nor our falterers, nor would we have
forbidden (to ourselves) anything.*** [^61]

It is worth mentioning that there emerged a group of fatalists in early
Islam, though no popular Islamic sect advocated such a belief.[^62]

The tradition of Ali's ‘proposing to Abu Jahl’s daughter’
---------------------------------------------------------

Among other baseless traditions of Bukhari is the fabricated tradition
of Imam Ali (a.s) asking for the hand of Abu Jahl’s daughter in
marriage. According to this tradition, during the time of the Holy
Prophet (S) when Fatima Al-Zahra was alive, the commander of the
faithful, proposed to Abu Jahl’s daughter. The details of this
fabricated story are a under:

Abu Al-Yaman has narrated from Shu’aib, from Zuhri, from Ali Bin Hussain
from Miswar Bin Makhrama who said:

'Ali demanded the hand of the daughter of Abu Jahl. Fatima heard of this
and went to Allah's Apostle saying, "Your people think that you do not
become angry for the sake of your daughters as 'Ali is now going to
marry the daughter of Abu Jahl. "On that Allah's Apostle got up and
after his recitation of Tashahhud.

I heard him saying, "Then after! I married one of my daughters to Abu
Al-'As Bin Al-Rabi' (the husband of Zainab, the daughter of the Prophet)
before Islam and he proved truthful in whatever he said to me.

No doubt, Fatima is a part of me, I hate to see her being troubled. By
Allah, the daughter of Allah's Apostle and the daughter of Allah's Enemy
cannot be the wives of one man." So 'Ali gave up that engagement.
'Al-Miswar further said: I heard the Prophet talking and he mentioned a
son-in-law of his belonging to the tribe of Bani 'Abd-Shams.

He highly praised him concerning that relationship and said (whenever)
he spoke to me, he spoke the truth, and whenever he promised me, he
fulfilled his promise."[^63]

This tradition contains reproaches about Imam Ali (a.s) as it also puts
to question his high status. It is because of this that believers cannot
accept such traditions. How is it possible for the Holy Prophet (S) to
reproach a person whom he praised and spoke about his merits among
people until his death. Some Sunni scholars have accepted that this
tradition contains reproach. As an instance, in his commentary on Sahih
Bukhari, Ibn Hajar Asqalani says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و لا ازال اتعجب من المسور كيف بالغ فى تعصبه لعلى بن الحسين عليهما
السلام حتى قال: انه اودع عنده السيف لا يمكن احدا منه حتى تن هق روحه
رعابه لكونه ابن فاطمه
  </p>
</blockquote>

I keep wondering how Miswar exaggerates about his love of Ali Bin
Hussain (a.s). He says he has deposited a sword with him. Nobody can
take it from him until he is killed. This is because he is the son of
Fatima…. It is very strange [that despite all this love] he does not
take into account Ali Bin Hussain's feelings and emotions.

This is because this tradition explicitly casts doubt on the personality
of Ali Bin Abi Talib (a.s), as it also distorts the image of his son,
Ali Bin Hussain (a.s). According to this tradition, after marrying
Fatima, Imam Ali (a.s) proposes to Abu Jahl's daughter. He continued his
move to the extent that the Holy Prophet (S) interferes, strongly
rejecting his action.[^64]

In his Tuhfa Ithan'ashriyya, Dihlavi has narrated the dialogue between
Abu Hanifa and 'Aamash concerning the above mentioned tradition. In the
course of dialogue, Abu Hanifa, addressing 'Aamash says that he who
relates such a tradition is rude and impolite.[^65]

How can one believe that Imam Sajjad is the narrator of such a tradition
(that is absolutely against him and his forefather)?[^66]

The tradition of 'the cause of the revelation of Quranic verse'

Among other invalid traditions of Bukhari is the tradition that contains
a story that is related to the companions of the Holy Prophet (S) and
the supporters of Abdullah Bin Ubai. Abdullah Bin Ubai apparently
accepted Islam but in fact he was not a Muslim. He was the leader of
hypocrites. Bukhari says the following verse was revealed in this
regard.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن طَائِفَتَانِ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ اقْتَتَلُوا فَأَصْلِحُوا
بَيْنَهُمَا ۖ فَإِن بَغَتْ إِحْدَاهُمَا عَلَى الْأُخْرَ‌ىٰ فَقَاتِلُوا
الَّتِي تَبْغِي حَتَّىٰ تَفِيءَ إِلَىٰ أَمْرِ‌ اللَّـهِ ۚ فَإِن
فَاءَتْ فَأَصْلِحُوا بَيْنَهُمَا بِالْعَدْلِ وَأَقْسِطُوا ۖ إِنَّ
اللَّـهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُقْسِطِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And if two parties of the believers quarrel, make peace between them;
but if one of them acts wrongfully towards the other, fight that which
acts wrongfully until it returns to Allah's command; then if it returns,
make peace between them with justice and act equitably; surely Allah
loves those who act equitably.*** [^67]

Musaddad narrates from Mu'atamir from his father from Anas who says:

It was said to the Prophet "Would you see Abdullah Bin Ubai." So, the
Prophet went to him, riding a donkey, and the Muslims accompanied him,
walking on salty barren land. When the Prophet reached 'Abdullah Bin
Ubai, the latter said, "Keep away from me! By Allah, the bad smell of
your donkey has harmed me." On that an Ansari man said (to 'Abdullah),
"By Allah! The smell of the donkey of Allah's Apostle is better than
your smell."

On that a man from 'Abdullah's tribe got angry for 'Abdullah's sake, and
the two men abused each other which caused the friends of the two men to
get angry, and the two groups started fighting with sticks, shoes and
hands. We were informed that the following Divine Verse was revealed (in
this concern):--

"And if two groups of Believers fall to fighting then, make peace
between them."[^68]

This story is absolutely false and cannot be thus accepted as the cause
of the revelation of the verse mentioned above. This is because this
happened before Abdullah Bin Ubai apparently accepted Islam. If it
happened after his apparent acceptance of Islam it would certainly
indicate his disbelief and his followers' disbelief. If it were he who
addressing the Holy Prophet said, "keep away from me! By Allah, the bad
smell of your donkey has harmed me", then it would not be possible for
Allah to call them believers.

It is exactly on account of this that based on Zarkashi's tradition, Ibn
Battal says: The cause of the revelation of this verse does not have
anything to do with the story of Abdullah Bin Ubai.

Commenting on this tradition in his Al-Tanqih, he says: By then we came
to know that the verse (if two believing groups…) had been revealed. Ibn
Battal says: The cause of the revelation of this verse does not have
anything to do with the story of Abdullah Bin Ubai. This is because
Abdullah Bin Ubai and his companions were not believers. Even after
outward acceptance of Islam, they strongly supported Abdullah Bin Ubai
in the event of 'Ifk'.

In his Sahih (book of Istizan) Bukhari quotes Usama Bin Zaid as saying:
The Holy Prophet attended a meeting that included polytheists, Muslims,
idol worshipers, Jews and Abdullah Bin Ubai… This tradition shows that
the verse (if two believing groups) does not have anything to do with
Abdullah Bin Ubai. The revelation of this verse is related to a group of
Uwaisis and Khazrajis, who fell in fight with each other using rod and
shoes.[^69]

It is very strange that Ibn Hajar tries to answer Ibn Battal saying: Ibn
Battal does not accept that the revelation of this verse is related
Abdullah Bin Ubai and his companions. He believes that the companions of
the Holy Prophet (S) fell in fight with the companions of Abdullah Bin
Ubai when the later had not yet embraced Islam.

Keeping this in mind, how one can say that this verse was revealed about
Abdullah Bin Ubai and his companions. Moreover, the story of Anas Bin
Malik and that of Usama Bin Zaid are alike. The tradition narrated by
Usama says that Muslims and polytheist were abusing each other.

Answering this objection Ibn Hajar says: We can solve this problem by
making appeal to Taghlib (if there are two names for example A and B and
you use one to represent both you use the technique of Taghlib, a thing
that is common in Arabic language), though this may give rise to another
objection.

The tradition narrated by Usama openly says that the story mentioned
above happened before the battle of Badr and after the acceptance of
Islam by Abdullah Bin Ubai and his companions. This is while the verse
in question was revealed later when a mission was meeting (the Holy
Prophet (S)). It is however probable that this verse was revealed
earlier. If it were revealed earlier then the objection would be
answered.[^70]

In my point of view it is wrong to make use of Taghlib here without
relying on Allah's Book and His Prophet's tradition. Perhaps Ibn Hajar
is also aware of the weakness of his argument. That is why he says, "it
is possible … to solve the problem on the basis of Taghlib.

The tradition 'Ali is not superior to the Prophet's companions'
---------------------------------------------------------------

One of the baseless traditions narrated by Bukhari is the tradition that
says that Ali (a.s) is not superior to the companions of the Holy
Prophet (S).

In a section devoted to the virtues of Uthman, he quotes Ibn Umar as
saying: During the time of the Holy Prophet (S), we did not regard
anyone of the companions of the Holy Prophet (S) as superior to Abu
Bakr, Umar and Uthman. No one else other than these three people was
superior to the companions of the Holy Prophet (S).[^71]

In response to this fabricated tradition, it has to be said that there
are numerous solid proofs that demonstrate Ali's superiority over Abu
Bakr and Umar not to speak of Uthman. The baseness and inferiority of
those who have fabricated such traditions have nevertheless caused them
to regard Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman as superior to Ali (a.s) and compare
Ali (a.s) with Mu'awwiya, Amr As and their likes.

There are several traditions narrated by Shias as well as Sunnis that
reject this lie. That is the reason why Ibn Abd Al-Barr has rejected it
categorically. He quotes Ibn Mu'aeen as saying: Muhammad Bin Zakariya,
Yahya Bin Abd Al-Rahman and Abd Al-Rahman Bin Yahya narrated from Ahmad
Bin Sa'eed Bin Hazm, from Ahmad Bin Khalid from Marwan Bin Abd Al-Malik
who said: From among Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and Ali, Ali is known for
his virtues and glorious past.

Thus he is the holder of a prominent tradition. When somebody told him
that according to some people only Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman were
superior to others not mentioning the name of Ali (a.s), he rebuked him
saying that Yahya Bin Mu'aeen mentioned Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and Ali
(a.s).

Abu Amr says: Relying on a tradition narrated by Ibn Umar some are of
the view that during the time of the Holy Prophet only Abu Bakr, Umar
and Uthman were regarded as superior to other companions of the Holy
Prophet (S) and no one else other than these three people was considered
as superior.

Ibn Mu'aeen rejects this tradition very strongly saying: The advocates
of this tradition disagree with the practical approach of Sunni jurists
and scholars of tradition from the beginning until now.

All these jurists and scholars of tradition regard Ali, after Uthman, as
superior to others. No one disagrees with this issue. If they differ at
all they differ on whether Uthman is superior to Ali or vise-versa.

Moreover, some previous scholars differed on whether Ali (a.s) was
superior to Abu Bakr or vise-versa. This consensus shows that the
tradition narrated by Ibn Umar is not but a big illusion, having no
correct meaning even if its chain of transmission is authentic.

The advocates of this tradition need to accept the tradition reported by
Jabir and Abu Saeed which says: …. They do not accept the tradition
reported by Jabir and Abu Saeed and that is the reason why their
approach suffers from inconsistency.

The tradition that allows taking wage for reciting from the Holy Quran
----------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the fake traditions narrated by Bukhari is the tradition that
permits taking wage for reciting verses from the Holy Quran.

Abu Muhammad Sayyidan Bin Mudarib Bahli narrated from Abu Ma'ashar Yusuf
Bin Yazid Barra from Abu Malik Ubaidullah Bin Akhnas from Ibn Abu Malika
from Ibn Abbas who said: Some of the companions of the Prophet passed by
some people staying at a place where there was water, and one of those
people had been stung by a scorpion.

A man from those staying near the water, came and said to the companions
of the Prophet, "Is there anyone among you who can do Ruqya as near the
water there is a person who has been stung by a scorpion."

So one of the Prophet's companions went to him and recited
Surat-Al-Fatiha for a sheep as his fees. The patient got cured and the
man brought the sheep to his companions who disliked that and said, "You
have taken wages for reciting Allah's Book." When they arrived at
Medina, they said, ' O Allah's Apostle! (This person) has taken wages
for reciting Allah's Book" On that Allah's Apostle said;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
” ان احق ما افذتم عليه اجرا".
  </p>
</blockquote>

"You are most entitled to take wages for doing a Ruqya with Allah's
Book."[^72]

It is worth mentioning that Ibn Jawzi has reported this tradition in his
Al-Mawduat from Aisha.

The tradition of 'asking for rain' narrated by Asbat
----------------------------------------------------

One of the traditions that is utterly baseless is the tradition that
says the disbelievers ask for rain. Ibn Masruq says: One day I went to
Ibn Masud who said, "When Quraish delayed in embracing Islam, the
Prophet I invoked Allah to curse them, so they were afflicted with a
(famine) year because of which many of them died and they ate the
carcasses and Abu Sufyan came to the Prophet and said, 'O Muhammad! You
came to order people to keep good relation with kith and kin and your
nation is being destroyed, so invoke Allah.

So the Prophet recited the Holy verses of Surat-Ad-Dukhan:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَارْ‌تَقِبْ يَوْمَ تَأْتِي السَّمَاءُ بِدُخَانٍ مُّبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***'Then watch you for the day that the sky will Bring forth a kind of
smoke plainly visible.*** [^73]

When the famine was taken off, the people renegade once again as
nonbelievers. The statement of Allah, (in Sura "Ad-Dukhan"-44) refers to
that: ***'On the day when We shall seize you with a mighty grasp.'
(44.16)*** And that was what happened on the day of the battle of Badr."

Asbath added on the authority of Mansur, "Allah's Apostle prayed for
them and it rained heavily for seven days. So the people complained of
the excessive rain. The Prophet said, 'O Allah! (Let it rain) around us
and not on us.' So the clouds dispersed over his head and it rained over
the surroundings."[^74]
Sunni scholars have criticized the portion added by Asbat. Isa says:
The quotation by Bukhari of the portion added by Asbat has raised
criticisms against him. Dawoodi says: The attachment is not related to
Quraish; it is related to the people of Medina.

Abu Abd Al-Malik says: The portion added by Asbat is suffering from
illusion and confusion. This is because he has mixed up the text of
tradition reported by Abdullah Bin Masud with the tradition reported by
Anas Bin Malik where it says: "Allah's Apostle prayed for them and it
rained heavily for seven days".

Furthermore, Isa quotes Hafiz, Sharaf Al-Din Damyati as saying: The
tradition reported by Abdullah Bin Masud relates the story of Quraish in
Mecca which does not contain anything as the said additional part. It is
very surprising that Bukhari has related this additional part which
contradicts with the tradition of authentic reporters.

Aiming at supporting Bukhari, some have said: It is not impossible for
this event to have occurred twice. It goes without saying that such
justifications do not work. Kermani says: If It is said that the story
of Abu Sufayn asking for rain happened in Mecca we must say in response
that the story of Abu Sufayan asking for rain happened in Mecca but the
part added by Asbat is related to what happened in Medina.[^75]

The tradition 'traditions will increase after me'
-------------------------------------------------

One of the false traditions found in Sahih Bukhari is the tradition in
which the Holy Prophet (S) talks about false traditions that are
attributed to him. Taftazani said that it is only Bukhari that mentions
this tradition in his Sahih. Other scholars of traditions have
criticized this tradition. Yayha Bin Mu'aeen says that this tradition is
fabricated by hypocrites. According to this tradition, the Holy Prophet
(S) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تكثر لكه الاحاديث من بعدى فاذا روى لكم حديث فاعرضو ه على كتاب الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

Traditions will increase after me. If someone narrated you a tradition,
measure it against Allah's Book (to find out whether or not it is in
harmony with it).

In his Al-Talwih, Sharh Al-Tawdih, Taftazani explains everything related
to this issue saying: It is said that a tradition reported by a single
person is rejected when it is in contradiction with Allah's Book. This
is because Allah's Book has priority over a single individual's report,
for the former is not doubtful in terms of its text and chain of
transmission.

The general concepts of the Holy Quran and its outward meanings are
however matters of controversy. If the general concepts of the Holy
Quran and its outward meanings are uncertain and indefinite the
tradition transmitted by a single reporter will be accepted (as both
have the same status of not being certain and definite).

If on the other hand, the general concepts of the Holy Quran and its
outward meanings are taken to be certain and definite, then the
tradition transmitted by a single reporter will be of no value. It will
be rejected when it happens to contract Allah's Book. This is because
wherever there is a possibility for attaining certainty there will be no
room for accepting something that does not bring about certainty.

In order to prove his point of view, he has appealed to the following
tradition by the Holy Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تكثر لكه الاحاديث من بعدى فاذا روى لكم حديث فاعرضو ه على كتاب الله فما
وافق كتاب الله فاقبلو ه و ما خالفه فردوه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Traditions will increase after me. If someone narrated you a tradition,
measure it against Allah's Book (to find out whether or not it is in
harmony with it). Accept whatever that agrees with Allah's Book and
reject whatever that disagrees with it.

In response to this argument it has to be said that the tradition
mentioned above is a tradition by a single reporter. The scope of the
meaning of this tradition has been limited by other well-known and
successively narrated traditions. Thus this tradition does not bring
about certainty and as a result it cannot prove an issue pertaining to
faith.

Moreover the meaning of this tradition is in contradiction with the
general meaning of the following verse of the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و ما اتاكم الرسول فخذوه
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Take whatever Allah's Apostle gives you.*** [^76]

Scholars of tradition have also criticized this tradition on the ground
that its chain includes an unknown reporter named Yazid Bin Rabi'a. It
also contains some name in between Ash'as and Thawban. Thus this
tradition has been regarded as a Munqati'a (broken) tradition.

According to Yahya Bin Mu'aeen this tradition is the work of
disbelievers. Taftazani further points out that Bukhari's narrating of
this tradition does not solve the problems (of being unknown and
Mutaqati'a) this traditions is faced with.[^77]

The tradition that prohibits (playing) musical instruments
----------------------------------------------------------

One of the baseless traditions Bukhari has reported is the tradition
that has been criticized by Ibn Hazm. Ibn Hazm has rejected this
tradition as a fabricated one. In his Sahih, Bukhari quotes Hisham Bin
Ammar from Sadaqa Bin Khalid from Abd Al- Rahman Bin Yazid Bin Jabir
from Atiyya Bin Qais Kilabi from Abd Al-Rahman Bin Ghanam Ash'ari from
Abu Amir or Abu Malik Ash'ari, from the Holy Prophet (S) who says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ليكونن من امتى قوم يستحلون الخز و الحرير و الخمر و المعازف
  </p>
</blockquote>

No doubt, there will emerge people in my community, who will allow
wearing clothes made of wool and silk (or purely of silk), drinking wine
and playing musical instruments.

This is a Munqati'a (broken) tradition, for there is no link between
Bukhari and Sadqa Bin Khalid (whom the chain of this tradition
includes). Thus this tradition is no doubt incorrect and it is totally
fabricated.[^78]

The tradition 'a believing adulterer does not in fact commit adultery'
----------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the incorrect traditions that have appeared in Sahih Bukhari is
the tradition that is found in the book of drinks. Bukhari narrates from
Ahmad Bin Salh from Ibn Wahab from Yunus from Ibn Shahab from Abu Salma
from Abd Al-Rahman and Ibn Musayyib from Abu Huraira who quote the Holy
Prophet (S) as saying: If a believer is in the state of belief while
committing adultery he does not in fact commit adultery.[^79]

After rejecting this tradition in his Al-Alim Wa Al-Mut'allim,[^80] Abu
Hanifa says:

Some people say when a believer commits adultery he leaves his belief
like a person who takes off his clothes. If he however repents Allah
will help him to regain his faith. Do you believe in their tradition? If
you accept their tradition then it will imply you have accepted the
theories developed by Khawarij and if you are skeptic about it then you
are skeptic about Khawarij's theories and as a matter of fact give up
the principle of justice which you propagate.

If you reject their words then you have in fact rejected the words of
the Holy Prophet (S). This is because they have narrated the said
tradition from different narrators and eventually from the Holy Prophet
(S).

Teacher said: They lie. My refutation of their words is not tantamount
to the refutation of the words of the Holy Prophet (S). You refute the
Holy Prophet (S) when you refute the Holy Prophet himself. If a person
however believes in whatever the Holy Prophet (S) says but meanwhile
rejects what is unjust and contrary to the teachings of the Holy Quran
as the words of the Prophet then he really certifies the Holy Quran and
clears the Prophet from uttering anti-Quranic words.

If the Holy Prophet begins to oppose the Holy Quran and attribute lies
to Allah, Allah shall instantly put an end to his life, cutting off his
jugular vein. Thus the Holy Prophet (S) does not oppose the Holy Quran
for a person who opposes Allah's Book is not His apostle. The tradition
they have reported is counter to the spirit of the Holy Quran, for
Allah, the Exalted, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزَّانِيَةُ وَالزَّانِي فَاجْلِدُوا كُلَّ وَاحِدٍ مِّنْهُمَا مِائَةَ
جَلْدَةٍ ۖ وَلَا تَأْخُذْكُم بِهِمَا رَ‌أْفَةٌ فِي دِينِ اللَّـهِ إِن
كُنتُمْ تُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّـهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ‌ ۖ وَلْيَشْهَدْ
عَذَابَهُمَا طَائِفَةٌ مِّنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(As for) the fornicatress and the fornicator, flog each of them,
(giving) a hundred stripes, and let not pity for them detain you in the
matter of obedience to Allah, if you believe in Allah and the last day,
and let a party of believers witness their chastisement.*** [^81]

In another verse, it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّذَانِ يَأْتِيَانِهَا مِنكُمْ فَآذُوهُمَا ۖ فَإِن تَابَا
وَأَصْلَحَا فَأَعْرِ‌ضُوا عَنْهُمَا ۗ إِنَّ اللَّـهَ كَانَ تَوَّابًا
رَّ‌حِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And as for the two who are guilty of indecency from among you, give
them both a punishment; then if they repent and amend, turn aside from
them; surely Allah is Oft-returning (to mercy), the Merciful.*** [^82]

These verses address not Jews and Christians but Muslims. I thus reject
the words of those who narrate traditions from the Holy Prophet (S) that
are contrary to the Holy Quran. This does not mean that I reject the
Holy Prophet (S). I reject those who narrate false words from the Holy
Prophet (S). We accuse not the Holy Prophet (S) but reporters (who
report false traditions).

As a result, we wholeheartedly accept all [real] traditions reported
from the Holy Prophet- whether those which we have heard or those who
have not heard.

We believe in all these traditions and testify that all of them are
correct. We meanwhile however testify that the Holy Prophet, does not,
contrary to divine order, legalize what is forbidden, break the ties
Allah has made or praise what Allah has not praised. We stand witness
that the Holy Prophet (S) always obeyed Allah, did not bring about
innovation or attribute lie to Allah. He was very friendly.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّن يُطِعِ الرَّ‌سُولَ فَقَدْ أَطَاعَ اللَّـهَ ۖ وَمَن تَوَلَّىٰ
فَمَا أَرْ‌سَلْنَاكَ عَلَيْهِمْ حَفِيظًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whoever obeys the Apostle, he indeed obeys Allah, and whoever turns
back, so We have not sent you as a keeper over them.*** [^83]

Three persons take Prophet to Mi'raj
------------------------------------

There is a tradition in Bukhari concerning the Mi'raj journey of the
Holy Prophet, which is reported by a person called Sharik. This
tradition which is utterly baseless is as below:

Abd Al-Aziz Bin Abdullah narrates from Sulayman from Sharik Bin Abdullah
who quotes Anas Bin Malik as saying:

The night Allah's Apostle was taken for a journey from the sacred mosque
(of Mecca) Al-Ka'ba: Three persons came to him (in a dreamy while he was
sleeping in the Sacred Mosque before the Divine Inspiration was revealed
to Him. One of them said, "Which of them is he?" The middle (second)
angel said, "He is the best of them." The last (third) angle said, "Take
the best of them."

Only that much happened on that night and he did not see them till they
came on another night, i.e. after The Divine Inspiration was revealed to
him. His eyes were asleep but his heart was not and so is the case with
the prophets: their eyes sleep while their hearts do not sleep. So those
angels did not talk to him till they carried him and placed him beside
the well of Zam-Zam.

From among them Gabriel took charge of him. Gabriel cut open (the part
of his body) between his throat and the middle of his chest (heart) and
took all the material out of his chest and abdomen and then washed it
with Zam-Zam water with his own hands till he cleansed the inside of his
body, and then a gold tray containing a gold bowl full of belief and
wisdom was brought and then Gabriel stuffed his chest and throat blood
vessels with it and then closed it (the chest).

He then ascended with him to the heaven of the world and knocked at one
of its doors. The dwellers of the Heaven asked, 'Who is it?' He said,
"Gabriel." They said, "Who is accompanying you?" He said, "Muhammad."
They said, "Has he been called?" He said, "Yes" They said, "He is
welcomed." So the dwellers of the Heaven became pleased with his
arrival, and they did not know what Allah would do to the Prophet on
earth unless Allah informed them…[^84]

Muslim Nayshaburi has related this tradition in a different way. He
narrates from Harun Bin Sa'eed Abali from Ibn Wahab from Sulayman- i.e.
Bilal from Sharik Bin Abdullah Bin Abu Namr from Anas Bin Malik who
relates Mi'araj tradition from the Holy Mosque as under:

Before the Holy Prophet (S) receives any revelation, three persons met
him while he was asleep in the Holy Mosque….[^85]

He has related this tradition in the way Thabit Banani has reported,
thus altering it considerably.

The occurrence of Mi'araj (ascension) before any revelation was received
by the Holy Prophet (S) is incorrect, not accepted by anyone. This is
because according to scholars ascension took place at least 15 months
after the Prophet mission began.

According to Harbi, ascension happened one year before Hijra on 27th
night of Rabi'a Al-Thani, whereas on Zuhri's point of view it took place
five years after prophetic mission started.

Based on Ibn Ishaq's opinion ascension occurred at a time when Islam had
spread in Mecca as well as in neighboring places among Arab tribes. The
closest to reality are the words uttered by Zuhri and Ibn Ishaq. This is
because all agrees that Khadija (a.s) offered prayer with the Holy
Prophet after prayer was made compulsory and similarly all accepts that
she died three to five years before migration.

When all agrees that prayer was made compulsory on ascension night how
can one accept that ascension happed before any revelation was received
by the Holy Prophet (S)?

According to Nawavi Sharik reports that [the Holy Prophet (S) was
transferred while] he was asleep whereas on the basis of another
tradition [it is said that this happened when] he was beside Ka'aba in a
state between being awake and asleep.

Those advocate the occurrence of ascension as a night dream can make use
of the said two traditions as their arguments, but such arguments are
flawed, for if the Holy Prophet might have been asleep in the beginning
when the angels arrived but later on he was awake and there is no
evidence in these traditions that shows that he was asleep throughout
all the stages. This has been said by Qazi concerning Sharik's tradition
but others have also followed the suit, rejecting thus Sharik's
tradition.

Bukhari has narrated Sharik's tradition in detail in his Sahih in a
chapter devoted to monotheism. After relating this tradition in his
Al-Jam'a Bayn Al-Sahihayn, Hafiz Abd Al-Khaliq says that this tradition
is fabricated by Sharik Bin Abu Namr who introduced some unknown phrases
into it.

Some prominent memorizers and Imams such as Ibn Shahab, Thabit Banani
and Qutada have mentioned this tradition whereas they have not made any
mention of Sharik's words. All these aside, Sharik is known among the
people of tradition as a memorizer. Rejecting his tradition, Hafiz Abd
Al-Haq says that the only traditions he relies on in this connection are
those mentioned previously [having nothing to do with Sharik's
account].[^86]

Commenting on Sharik's tradition, Kirmani says that it contains
illusions that are totally rejected by scholars. As an instance, Sharik
claims that ascension happened before revelation was sent down, whereas
this is wrong and nobody has approved of it. Similarly when all agrees
that prayer was made obligatory on accession night how can one admit
that ascension happed before revelation was sent down?

When the gatekeeper addressing Gabriel said: Has he been sent for? He
said: Yes. The answer given by Gabriel to the gatekeeper according to me
clearly shows that ascension happed after revelation was sent down.[^87]

Commenting on this tradition somewhere in his book, Ibn Qayyim Jawziyya
quotes Zuhri as saying: The soul of the Holy Prophet (S) was taken to
Bayt Al-Maqdis and Heaven one year before he migrated to Medina.
According to Ibn Abd Al-Barr and others accession happened 14 months
before the Holy Prophet migrated to Medina. Though accession happened
once, some believe it happened twice; once when he was awake and once
when he was asleep.

It seems that the advocates of this opinion try to reconcile between
Sharik's tradition and other traditions available here. That is why some
of them claim that ascension happened twice; once before revelation was
sent down as suggested by Sharik's tradition and once after revelation
was sent down as suggested by other traditions. Yet others have claimed
that ascension happened thrice; once before revelation and two times
after it.

All these commentaries show that how confused they are. The problem is
that they are literalists and that is why whenever they face any
variation in a tradition they take it to mean that the event has taken
place more than once. The correct opinion in this regard is that
ascension has occurred once and that has happened after revelation was
received by the Prophet (S).

It is very surprising that some have wrongly assumed that ascension has
happened more than once and though each time fifty prayers were made
obligatory upon the Prophet he was able to reduce them to five prayers
after going back and forth several time between Allah and Moses. How is
it possible that Allah makes a concession during the first ascension but
ignores it in the second ascension?

Memorizers believe that Sharik is mistaken in terms of using certain
terms in this tradition. After relating this tradition in his Musnad,
Muslim says that Sharik has altered this tradition, not relating it in a
suitable manner.[^88]

Monkey stoned to death for fornication
--------------------------------------

Another fabricated tradition reported by Bukhari is the tradition
according to which a monkey is stoned to death for committing
fornication. Na'aim Bin Hamad narrates from Hashim from Hussain from Amr
Bin Maymoon who [quotes the Holy Prophet as saying]:

During the era of ignorance I saw people gathering around an adulterous
monkey and stoning it to death. I joined them in stoning it.[^89]

Hamidi and Ibn Abd Al-Barr
--------------------------

Whereas Ibn Abd Al-Barr has rejected this tradition, Abu Abdullah
Hamidi, commenting on it, says: Since the original copies of Bukhar's
Sahih do not contain this tradition, it is very likely that it is among
traditions added by others to his book. Ibn Abd Al-Barr expresses the
same opinion in regard with it. Commenting on it, Ibn Hajar Asqalani
says: Having rejected Amr Ibn Maymoon's tale, Ibn Abd Al-Barr says that
it attributes fornication and punishment to beasts that are not
according to scholars under obligation.

According to Ibn Abd Al-Barr, if the chain of this tradition is
authentic then it is likely that the people involved in stoning are
Jinns, for they are among those under obligation. Ibn Maymoon has
reported it only through the chain used by Ismaeli.

In response, it has been said that here fornication and stoning are not
to be taken with their literal meanings. Fornication and stoning are
used here because the story in question contains elements that are
similar to them. Thus the said story does not imply that beasts are
under obligation.

In his Al-Jam'a bayn Al-Sahihayn, Hamidi regards this tradition as
incorrect, adding that only some copies of Bukhari's copies contain it.
Abu Mas'ud is the only figure who has touched this point. According to
Hamidi, Bukhar's book does not contain such tradition and thus it is
probable that others have added it to his book.

Commenting on his words, Ibn Hajar says that his words that it is likely
that some have added certain traditions to Bukhari's book, are not
acceptable as they run counter to what scholars hold. Scholars believe
that all the traditions included in Bukhari's Sahih are authentic
belonging altogether to Bukhari.

Hamidi's words are a false illusion, undermining all traditions in
Bukhari's book. If one accepts Hamdi's point of view one may then say
that this may be the case with all traditions reported by Bukhari. It
thus causes people to lose their faith in the entire traditions reported
by Bukhari.[^90]

Bukhari and three other fabricated traditions
---------------------------------------------

Bukhari has reported three tradition ending up to Ibn Abbas from 'Ata.
From these traditions, two traditions have appeared in divorce book
whereas one is available in prophetic commentaries. The traditions in
divorce book are as under:

Ibrahim Bin Musa narrates from Hisham from Ibn Jarih from 'Ata who
quotes Ibn Abbas as saying: The pagans were of two kinds as regards
their relationship to the Prophet and the Believers. Some of them were
those with whom the Prophet was at war and used to fight against, and
they used to fight him; the others were those with whom the Prophet made
a treaty, and neither did the Prophet fight them, nor did they fight
him.

If a lady from the first group of pagans emigrated towards the Muslims,
her hand would not be asked in marriage unless she got the menses and
then became clean. When she became clean, it would be lawful for her to
get married, and if her husband emigrated too before she got married,
then she would be returned to him.

If any slave or female slave emigrated from them to the Muslims, then
they would be considered free persons (not slaves) and they would have
the same rights as given to other emigrants. The narrator then mentioned
about the pagans involved with the Muslims in a treaty, the same as
occurs in Mujahid's tradition. If a male slave or a female slave
emigrated from such pagans as had made a treaty with the Muslims, they
would not be returned, but their prices would be paid (to the
pagans).[^91]

Concerning pagans who had covenant [with Muslims], Ibn Abbas reports a
tradition that is similar in content to the tradition reported by
Mujahid, according to which if a slave or a female slave embraces Islam
he or she will not be returned to pagans. Instead, Muslims pay their
prices to pagans.

Quoting Ibn Abbas Qatiba says: Qariba, the daughter of Abi Umaiyya, was
the wife of 'Umar Bin Al-Khattab. 'Umar divorced her and then Mu'awiyya
Bin Abi Sufyan married her. Similarly, Um Al-Hakam, the daughter of Abi
Sufyan was the wife of 'Iyad Bin Ghanm Al-Fihri. He divorced her and
then 'Abdullah Bin 'Uthman Al-Thaqafi married her.[^92]

The third tradition found in prophetic commentaries is as below:

Ibrahim Bin Musa narrates from Hisham from Ibn Jarih from 'Ata who
quotes Ibn Abbas as saying

All the idols which were worshipped by the people of Noah were
worshipped by the Arabs later on. As for the idol Wadd, it was
worshipped by the tribe of Kalb at Daumat-Al-Jandal; Suwa' was the idol
of (the tribe of) Murad and then by Ban, Ghutaif at Al-Jurf near Saba;
Yauq was the idol of Hamdan, and Nasr was the idol of Himyr, the branch
of Dhi-Al-Kala.'

The names (of the idols) formerly belonged to some pious men of the
people of Noah, and when they died Satan inspired their people to
(prepare and place idols at the places where they used to sit, and to
call those idols by their names. The people did so, but the idols were
not worshipped till those people (who initiated them) had died and the
origin of the idols had become obscure, whereupon people began
worshipping them.[^93]

Great Sunni leaders and these fabricated traditions
---------------------------------------------------

Bukhari has mentioned these three traditions in his Sahih. He has
narrated from 'Ata from Ibn Abbas, but it has to be noted that great
Sunni scholars have put to question the traditions reported by 'Ata in
prophetic commentaries, undermining thus their authenticity.

Albeit Ibn Hajar frequently assists Bukhari and defends his positions,
here he confesses that Bukhari is faced with a problem that is not easy
to solve. According to Ibn Hajar, man is prone to error, implying that
Bukhari has erred in recording such weak traditions in his book. He
explicitly mentions:

Abu Ali Ghasaei quotes Bukhari as saying: Ibrahim Bin Musa narrates from
Hisham (Ibn Yusuf), from Ibn Jarih, from Ata from Ibn Abbas who quotes
the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

The pagans were of two kinds as regards their relationship to the
Prophet and the believers. Some of them were those with whom the Prophet
was at war and used to fight against, and they used to fight him; the
others were those with whom the Prophet made a treaty, and neither did
the Prophet fight them, nor did they fight him.

If a lady from the first group of pagans emigrated towards the Muslims,
her hand would not be asked in marriage unless she got the menses and
then became clean. When she became clean, it would be lawful for her to
get married, and if her husband emigrated too before she got married,
then she would be returned to him. If any slave or female slave
emigrated from them to the Muslims, then they would be considered free
persons (not slaves) and they would have the same rights as given to
other emigrants.

The narrator then mentioned about the pagans involved with the Muslims
in a treaty, the same as occurs in Mujahid's tradition. If a male slave
or a female slave emigrated from such pagans as had made a treaty with
the Muslims, they would not be returned, but their prices would be paid
(to the pagans).

The remaining pat of this tradition includes that Umar divorced Qariba,
the daughter of Abu Umayya. It also includes other stories.

As the commentary goes on Abu Mas'ud from Damascus writes: This and
previous tradition is narrated by Ibn Jarih from 'Ata Khurasani from Ibn
Abbas in his commentary. Ibn Jarih did not attend 'Ata's commentary
class. As a result the commentary he wrote is not his. He took it from
Uthman, son of 'Ata and studied it.

According to Abu Ali Abu Mas'ud's words reflect an important point, for
according to Salih Bin Ahmad Bin Hanbal Ali Bin Madini says that he has
heard Hisham Bin Yusuf say: Ibn Jarih told me that had asked 'Ata (Abu
Rabbah) to comment on some of the verses of Baqara and 'Al Imran
chapters, but he had asked him to excuse him, not making such a request
from him.

According to Hisham after this happening whenever Ibn Jarih narrated a
tradition from 'Ata from Ibn Abbas he would add the term 'Khurasani'
after At'a's name. We were tired writing Khurasani so many times and
there was no need for using it.

Ali Bin Madini says that he wrote this story for Muhammad Bin Noor
reported this tradition from 'Ata from Ibn Abbas. Thus the traditionists
who reported this tradition from Muhammad Bin Noor were thinking that
the one from whom they were reporting was 'Ata Bin Abu Rabah.

As the discussion goes on, he asks about Yaya Bin Qatan's point of view
concerning the tradition narrated by Jarih from 'Ata Khurasani, but
Yahya said that his tradition is weak. When he says that it was
something Ibn Jarih told him, Yahya said that the tradition was weak for
Ibn Jarih was acquainted with 'Ata through his book.

Thereupon Ibn Hajar says that according to him tis tradition is not
broken and that is why Ibn Jarih makes use of the phrase 'he told me'.
This is while Bukhari has narrated this tradition from 'Ata Bin Abu Rabh
and Khurasani is out of question for he has heard no tradition from Ibn
Abbas.

It may be said that that above-mentioned question does not necessarily
show that the said 'Ata is 'Ata Khurasani, for this does not mean that
Ata Bin Abu Rabah who has recorded it in his commentary was not aware of
it. Thus it can be said that both 'Ata Khurasani and 'Ata Bin Abu Rabah
were aware of the said two traditions.

Ibn Hajar further says: This answer is not convincing for I believe that
it is not possible to give it a definite answer. Man is prone to error
and thus one must always invoke Allah's help. The footnote added by Abu
Masud is presented by Ismaeli too.

In his Al-Jam'a, Hamidi narrates from Burqani from Ismaeli who says that
he has narrated it from Ali Bin Madini. Ismaeli, in this quotation,
alludes to the story mentioned by Ghassani.[^94]

### A critique of Asqalani's point of view

It is amazing that Ibn Hajar has mentioned this unconvincing answer in
his commentary, though not mentioning that there is no correct answer to
this question and man is prone to error. In his commentary on the Holy
Quran, he says: Ibn Jariha has reportedly said that the said tradition
is somewhat modified and altered. Fakihi also quotes Ibn Jarih, though
in a different way, as saying: Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا لَا تَذَرُ‌نَّ آلِهَتَكُمْ وَلَا تَذَرُ‌نَّ وَدًّا وَلَا
سُوَاعًا وَلَا يَغُوثَ وَيَعُوقَ وَنَسْرً‌ا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they say: By no means leave your gods, nor leave Wadd, nor Suwa;
nor Yaghus, and*** ***Yauq and Nasr.*** [^95]

They were the idols the people of Noah were worshiping and 'Ata quotes
Ibn Abbas as having said: Some are of the view that the chain of the
transmitters of this tradition is broken, for the said 'Ata is from
Khurasan who did not meet Ibn Abbas.

After narrating the above-mentioned tradition from Ibn Jarih, Abd
Al-Razzaq in his commentary says that 'Ata Khurasani narrated this
tradition from Ibn Abbas.

According to Ibn Mas'ud Ibn Jarih in his commentary said that 'Ata
Khurasani narrated this tradition from Ibn Abbas, though he adds that
Ibn Jarih did not attend 'Ata's commentary class. Instead, he got his
commentary book from his son Uthman Bin 'Ata and went through it.

Quoting Ali Madini in his Al-Khalal, Salih Bin Ahmad Bin Hanbal says:
Once I asked Yaya Bin Qattan about his view concerning the tradition Ibn
Jarih reported from 'Ata Khurasani, he said his tradition is weak. I
said he uses the phrase "I was told", he said it is not correct, for he
got acquainted with 'Ata and his tradition through his book (which
borrowed from his son).

Ibn Jarih did not see any harm in using the phrase 'I was told', in what
is called 'Munawala[^96]' and 'Mukataba[^97]'.

Ismaeli says that he was informed that Ali Bin Madyani had the following
opinion concerning Ibn Jarih's commentary: This tradition was narrated
by 'Ata Khurasani from Ibn Abass, but those who were recording
traditions omitted the later part 'Khurasin' from his full name in order
to make it shorter. Later transmitters not knowing this, took it for
'Ata Bin Abu Rabbah. Ismaeli here mentions a story which Salih Bin Ahmad
quotes from Ali Bin Madyani. Ghassani has also mentioned it in his
Tamheed Al-Muhmal.

Ibn Madini says that heard Hisham Bin Yusuf says: when I asked about the
commentary of some of the verses of Baqara and Al Imran, he asked me to
excuse him for not answering. Quoting Hisham Ibn Madyani says: After
this happening whenever Ibn Jarih narrated a tradition from Ibn Abbas he
would add the term 'Khurasani' after it. Hisham said that it was very
boring to follow such a pattern and thus abandoned doing this.

Ibn Madini says that he related this story because Muhammad Bin Thawr
who used in accordance with one tradition to narrate this tradition from
Ibn Jarih from 'Ata from Ibn Abbas, thinking that the said 'Ata was 'Ata
Bin Abu Rabbah. Fakihi however narrates this tradition from Muhammad Bin
Thawr from Ibn Jarih from 'Ata from Ibn Abbas not making use of the term
'Khurasani'.

Abd Al-Razzaq also narrates this tradition in the same manner though
with the difference that he makes use of the term 'Khurasani'.

Ibn Hajar says that it is very amazing that Bukhari did not note this.
He believes that Ibn Jarih has heard this tradition from 'Ata Khurasani
as well as 'Ata Abu Rabbah. The fact that 'Ata Bin Abu Rabbah did not
narrate commentary traditions does not imply that he has not mentioned
it elsewhere in other chapter or in his dialogues with others.

How did it happen for Bukhari that he did not see this whereas he was
very strict in terms of fulfilling the condition of 'connection' and was
dependent on his master, Ali Bin Madini who has narrated this story?

Concluding his discussion, Ibn Hajar adds one more reason to prove his
point of view saying that it is a good reason to prove his opinion that
Bukhari has not frequently mentioned this tradition. He has sufficed to
quoting it thrice using the above-mentioned chain. If Bukhari did not
notice the problem, he would mention it several times. This is because
the literal meaning of this tradition is in compliance with his
procedural rules.[^98]

What we want to demonstrate here is that memorizers and jurists did not
take the traditions reported by Bukhari and Muslim for granted. They
were critical of them. It is not understandable why Ibn Hajar defends
Bukhari whereas he knows here Bukhari is not right. We leave passing any
judgments in regards with his defenses to our dear readers.

The Tradition Masruq Narrates from Um Ruman
-------------------------------------------

The Tradition Masruq Narrates from Um Ruman is another forged tradition
reported by Bukhari in his Sahih, book expedition.

Musa Bin Ismael narrates from Abu Awana from Hussain from Abu Wael from
Masruq Bin Ajda'a from Um Ruman, which is as under: Um Ruman, the mother
of 'Aisha said that while 'Aisha and she were sitting, an Ansari woman
came and said, "May Allah harm such and such a person!" Um Ruman said to
her: What is the matter?" She replied, "My son was amongst those who
talked of the story (of the Slander)." Um Ruman said, "What is that?"
She said, "So-and-so...." and narrated the whole story.

On that 'Aisha said, "Did Allah's Apostle hear about that?" She replies,
"yes." 'Aisha further said, "And Abu Bakr too?" She replied, "Yes." On
that, 'Aisha fell down fainting, and when she came to her senses, she
had got fever with rigors. I put her clothes over her and covered her.

The Prophet came and asked, "What is wrong with this (lady)?" Um Ruman
replied, "O Allah's Apostle! She (i.e. 'Aisha) has got temperature with
rigors." He said, "Perhaps it is because of the story that has been
talked about?" She said, "Yes." 'Aisha sat up and said, "By Allah, if I
took an oath (that I am innocent), you would not believe me, and if I
said (that I am not innocent), you would not excuse me.

My and your example is like that of Jacob and his sons (as Jacob said):
'It is Allah (Alone) Whose Help can be sought against that you assert.'
Um Ruman said, "The Prophet then went out saying nothing. Then Allah
declared her innocence. On that, 'Aisha said (to the Prophet), "I thank
Allah only; thank neither anybody else nor you."[^99]

### Great memorizers and this fabricated tradition

According to this tradition, Masruq in Ajda'a has heard the said story
from Um Ruman, mother of Aisha. This is while great Sunni memorizers and
scholars have taken this tradition to be wrong, saying that Masruq did
not live at a time Um Ruman was living. Among these memorizers are the
following names:

Abu Bakr Khatib Baghdadi, Abu Umar Bin Abd Al-Barr Qurtubi, Abu Al-Fazl
Qazi Ayaz Yahsibi, Ibrahim Bin Yusuf, author of Matali'a Al-Anwar 'Ala
Sihah Al-Athar, Abu Al-Qasim Suhaili, commentator on Al-Sira, Abu
Al-Fath Bin Sayyid Al-Nas from Spain, Jamal Al-Din Mazi, Shams Al-Din
Dahabi and Abu Saeed Salah Al-Din Ulaei.

Here are the words of these great memorizers concerning this tradition.
Commenting on this tradition, Ibn Abd Al-Barr says: The tradition
reported by Masruq is mursal (its chain is broken) and thus he might
hear it from 'Aisha.[^100] After relating this tradition, Mazi quotes
Khatib as saying: This is a strange tradition reported by Abu Wael
Masruq. No one has reported if from Masruq other than Hussain Bin Abd
Al-Rahman.

This tradition is mursal for Um Ruman died at the time of the Holy
Prophet (S) and Masruq did not live at her time. Masruq used to report
it from Um Masruq in a mursal form saying: 'Um Masruq was asked'.
Hussain made a mistake as he took Masruq for the person who raised this
question. It is possible that some of the reporters of this tradition
may have recorded the passive voice of the verb,

**
**
سئلت

as its active voice as some record both voices in the same form.

If this probability holds it implies that Hussain is not mistaken in
regard with this tradition and that is why some have narrated this
tradition from Hussain in the form of a correct format. According to Abu
Bakr Khatib, Bukhari has reported this tradition from Masruq using the
active voice (I asked Um Ruman), not grasping the problem existing. He
says that he has dealt with this issue in detail in his Al-Marasil and
thus there is no need to repeat it again.[^101]

Elaborating on Um Ruman's life account, Suhaili, a memorizer, says:
Bukhari narrates a tradition from Masruq, which says: I asked Um Ruman,
mother of Aisha, about the accusations people leveled against Aisha….
This is while Masruq was born according to all scholars after the demise
of the Holy Prophet (S) and thus he never saw Um Ruman.

Some are of the view that he did not understand the problem properly.
Whereas others are of the view that the tradition in question is
correct, and thus preferable to the opinion that Um Ruman died during
the lifetime of the Holy Prophet (S). Abu Bakr Ibn Arabi objected to
this tradition and thus he ignored it.[^102]

According to Ibn Sayyid Al-Nas, the tradition Masruq reported from Um
Ruman has appeared in Bukhari in 'An'ana (observing the order of
reporters) and other formats, whereas Musruq did not live at the time of
Um Ruman. The summery of Khatib's response is that Masruq may have used
the passive voice of,

**
**
سئلت

and the recorder may have also used the same format, but later recorders
may have recorded it as active voice, thus introducing a change in it.
Thus all the problems that emerged later originate in the way this word
was written.[^103]

After quoting Khatib's words, Ibn Hajar attempts to answer it and defend
Bukhari thus saying: The author of Mashariq and Matali'a, Suhaili and
Ibn Sayyid Al-Nas have accepted Khatib's point of view. Following
Dahabi, Mazzi in his Mukhtasar, 'Alaei in his Marasil and also other
have also agreed with Khatib has pointed out, though the author of
Al-Huda has tried to resist the opinion cherished by the said
scholars.[^104]

### A glance at the life account of some the [said] memorizers

Qazi Ayaz, a memorizer, is the author of Mashariq Al-Anwar Ala Sihah
Al-Akhbar, a well-known and reliable book. In this book of his, he deals
with distortions, misspellings and other errors of books like
Al-Muwatta, Sahih Bukhari and Sahih Muslim.

Matali'ah Al-Anwar Ala Sihah Al-Athar is also an important book that is
authored by Ibrahim Bin Yusuf, a memorizer of tradition. Describing it,
Chalabi says: It treats the problems faced by Al-Muwatta, Sahih
Muslimand Sahih Bukhari, explaining the difficult terms and strange
traditions in these books. This book is authored by Ibn Qaraqul Ibrahim
Bin Yusuf who died in 569 AH. He wrote his book in a way Qazi Ayaz wrote
his Mashariq Al-Anwar. Shams Al-Din Muhammd Bin Muhammad Musili (d. 774
AH) presented it in the form poems.

The book begins with these words: Thanks to Allah who made His religion
dominant. This work is abstracted from reliable commentaries and
explanations made by Abu Al-Fazl Ayaz Bin Musa Bin Ayaz Basti in his
MashriqAl-Anwar, with this difference that Abu Ishaq Bin Qaraqul, a
jurist, summarized, edited and explained it.[^105]

### An account of the life of 'Alai, a memorizer

His full name is Khalil Bin Kalidi Salah Al-Adin Abu Sa'ed Demishqi. In
his Al-Tabaqat, Qazi Shuhba presents his life account as under:

He was a prominent scholar, researcher and memorizer. He was born in 694
AH in Damascus but settled in Bayt Al-Maqdis. He heard numerous
traditions from traditionists. He travelled to different countries
hearing traditions from around 700 scholars. He learnt the science of
tradition from Mazzi and others and the science of jurisprudence from
Sheikh Burhan Fazeri and Sheikh Kamal Al-Din Ibn Zamalkani.

He accompanied Sheikh Burhan Farazi and wrote a Mashikha for him. He
topped jurisprudence under Ibn Zamalkani recording plenty of his words
and instructions. Though he was allowed to practice Ijtihad, he
continued learning and memorizing until he excelled others in this area.
He taught at Asadiyya School and Sahib Hams' Circle until he was
appointed as a professor at Salahiyya School in Quds.

He lived till the end of his life, teaching, issuing religious decrees,
narrating traditions and compiling books. In his Mu'aja, Dahabi mentions
the name of 'Alai and praises him. Commenting on him, Hussain in his
Mu'ajam (and its supplement), says: He was a pioneer in jurisprudence,
syntax, science of principles, sciences of tradition and Rijal.

He was expert in understanding texts and documents. He was heir to the
memorizers who preceded him. His works show that he was a leading figure
in different sciences. He taught, issued religious decrees and debated
(with others on religious issues). No one filled in the vacuum that was
created after his death.

Focusing on him, Asnawi in his Al-Tabaqat, says: He was a memorizer and
a leading jurist of his time. He was intelligent, careful, eloquent,
benevolent and magnificent. He wrote good books on tradition as well as
on jurisprudence. He taught at Salahiyya School, spending also part of
his time to working, issuing religious decrees and compiling books.

In his Al-Tabaqat Al-Kubra Subki says: He was a famous and reliable
memorizer. He was aware of the names of reporters, their weaknesses and
also the texts (of traditions). He was also expert in jurisprudence,
theology, prose and poems. He was a practicing Muslim. He was an
orthodox Ash'arite.

No body replaced him after his death… No one among his contemporaries
could reach him in the science of tradition. He was good at other
sciences such as jurisprudence, syntax, exegesis and theology. He died
in Muharram 761 AH in Quds… He wrote several books …[^106]

### Ibn Sikkin and the said fabricated tradition

Abu Ali Bin Sikkin[^107], a memorizer and author of Al-Huruf Fi
Al-Sahaba which is one of the sources of Al-Isti'ab is another scholar
who regards this tradition as wrong and incorrect. Commenting on it, Ibn
Hajar says: Prior to Khatib, others also said that this tradition was
wrong. Elaborating on Um Ruman's life, Ibn Sikkin in his Sahaba says
that Um Ruman died during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet (S).
According to the said tradition, Hussain narrates from Abu Wael from
Masruq who says that he asked Um Ruman…

According to Ibn Sikkin this is wrong for according to this tradition
Masruq reports from Um Ruman. He says Hussain is the only reporter who
has reported this tradition. Some are of the view that Masruq did not
hear any tradition from Um Ruman. This is because Um Ruman died during
the lifetime of the Holy Prophet (S).[^108]

### An evaluation of the opinion of author of Al-Huda

As mentioned by Ibn Hajar, the author of Al-Huda is opposed to other
scholars in this regard. The author of Al-Huda is Ibn Qayyim Jawziyya,
author of Zad Al-Ma'ad Fi Huda Khair Al-Ibad. It seems as if Ibn Hajar's
opinion is wrong.

This is because in his book Ibn Qayyim first treats the opinions of
those who reject the said tradition. Later on, he deals with the views
of those who try to regard it as correct through justifying it. He does
not prefer anyone of these two opinions. Thus Ibn Hajar's opinion that
Ibn Qayyim is opposed to other scholars who reject this tradition is
wrong.

In addition, commenting on the wives of the Holy Prophet (S), Ibn Qayyim
says that anyone who is a little bit aware of the history (of Islam)
does not dear reject all historians just because of a single tradition.
[The tradition Musruq reports from Um Ruman is against what all
historians say. This is because according to historians she died during
the lifetime of the Holy Prophet (S). Thus the acceptance of this
tradition is tantamount to the rejection of the words of historians].

Commenting on this tradition he narrates from 'Akrama Bin Ammar from Abu
Zamil from Ibn Abbas who says: Abu Sufyan addressing the Holy Prophet
(S) that he had three requests from the Holy Prophet (S). The Holy
Prophet (S) fulfilled his requests. One of his requests was that he
asked the Holy Prophet (S) to marry Um Habiba, the most beautiful Arab
woman who lived in his house.

No doubt, this tradition is wrong. According to Abu Ahmad Ibn Hazm this
tradition was no doubt fabricated by 'Akrama Bin 'Ammar whereas on Ibn
Jawzi's view it was the result of an illusion which some reporters had.
It was because of this tradition that 'Akrama was sharply criticized.

This is because historians are unanimous that Um Habiba was the wife of
Ubaidullah Bin Jahsh and she bore a child from him. Ubaidullah and Um
Habiba both embraced Islam and migrated to Ethiopia, though later
Ubaidullah became a Christian and Um Habiba remained a Muslim.

It was at this time that the Holy Prophet sent someone to Ethiopia to
ask for the hand of Um Habiba. Najjashi, the king of Ethiopia married Um
Habiba to the Holy Prophet (S) and determined a dowry for her on behalf
of the Apostle of Allah.

This happening occurred in the year 8 AH. After the conquest of Mecca,
Abu Sufyan went to Medina and visited his daughter there in her house.
Um Habiba folded Prophet's bed lest Ubu Sufyan should not sit on it.

All agrees that Abu Sufyan and Mu'awiya embraced Islam in the year 8 AH
after the conquest of Mecca. This tradition also contains that Abu
Sufyan also asked the Prophet to appoint him as a commander to fight
against disbelievers just as he fought against Muslims. The Holy Prophet
(S) according to this tradition answered him in the affirmative.

The appointment of Abu Sufyan as a commander by the Holy Prophet (S) is
not confirmed [by any historians] but there is too much fuss on the
meaning of this tradition with the scholars following different courses.
Some have even said that according to this tradition the Holy Prophet
(S) married Um Habiba after the conquest of Mecca whereas others are of
the view that since historians did not mention it, the claim made by
those unaware of history is not acceptable…[^109]

In short, historians are unanimous that Um Ruman died at the time of the
Holy Prophet (S) and thus Masruq did not see him. It is not thus
acceptable to refute the consensus made by scholars through a single
tradition related by Bukhari in his Sahih.

As mentioned before, like Khatib and others, Ibn Qayyim rejected this
tradition of Bukhari and thus Ibn Hajar is wrong when he says that Ibn
Qayyim is opposed to Khatib and others.

I suppose Ibn Hajar criticizes Khatib and his followers for endorsing
Waqidi's opinion that Um Ruman died during the lifetime of the Holy
Prophet (S) with the aim to defend the tradition reported by Bukhari in
his book. The explanations presented by Ibn Qayyim are a suitable answer
to what Ibn Hajar said.

As pointed out before, the aim of this study is to prove that great
Sunni scholars have criticized some of the traditions reported by
Bukhari putting to question their credibility.

Moreover, as Ibn Hajar rejected Waqid's point of view concerning the
death of Um Ruman refuting all the objections against it, we also
criticize him for his refraining to mention the tradition of Ghadir Khum
and state that its authenticity is beyond any doubt. Thus Fakhr Radi's
reference to Waqidi's not mentioning the tradition of Ghadir Khum is
invalid.

Temporary Marriage forbidden in Khaibar year
--------------------------------------------

Among other invalid traditions reported by Bukhari is the tradition of
the prohibition of temporary marriage in the battle of Khaibar.

In his Sahih (book on expedition), Bukhari narrates from Yahya Bin Qaz'a
from Malik Bin Ismael from Ibn Shahb from Hassan Bin Muhammad Bin Ali
and his brother Abdullah from their father who quotes Ali Bin Abi Talib
as saying, "The Holy Prophet (S) prohibited temporary marriage and the
flesh of domestic asses in the battle of Khaibar".[^110]

The same tradition has also appeared in chapter 'slaughtered animals' in
his Sahih. He narrates from Abdullah Bin Yusuf, from Malik from Ibn
Shahab from Abdullah and Hassan from their father who quotes Ali Bin Abi
Talib as saying, "The Holy Prophet (S) prohibited temporary marriage and
the flesh of domestic asses in the battle of Khaibar".[^111]

Muslim also narrated this tradition in his book, using different chains
saying:

Yahya Bin Yahya narrated Ibn Shihab, from Abdullah and Hassan, children
of Muhammad Bin 'Ali from their father who quoted Imam Ali as saying,
"Allah's Apostle (may peace be upon him) on the Day of Khaibar
prohibited forever the contracting of temporary marriage and eating of
the flesh of the domestic asses."

• Abdullah Bin Muhammad bn Asma Zab'ai narrated from Juwariyya from
Malik (as in the previous chain) who said that he heard Ali addressing
somebody say, "You are forgetful…. This is because the Messenger of
Allah had prohibited us from contracting temporary marriage with women
…"

• Abu Bakr Bin Abi Shaiba and Ibn Numair and Zuhair Bin Harb from Ibn
Ayyina from Zuhair, from Zuhri from Hassan and Abdullah children of
Muhammad Bin Ali from their father who quotes 'Ali (Allah be pleased
with him) as saying, "The Holy Prophet (S) on the Day of Khaibar forbade
forever the contracting of temporary marriage and the eating of the
flesh of domestic asses".

• Muhammad Bin Abdullah Bin Numair narrated from his father, from
Ubaidullah from Ibn Shahab from Hassan and Abdullah children of Muhammad
Bin Ali from their father who said, "Ali (Allah be pleased with him)
heard that Ibn Abbas gave some relaxation in connection with the
contracting of temporary marriage, whereupon he said: Don't be hasty (in
your religious verdict), Ibn 'Abbas, for Allah's Messenger (may peace be
upon him) on the Day of Khaibar prohibited forever the doing of it and
eating of the flesh of domestic asses".

• Abu Tahir and Harmala Bin Yahya narrated from Wahab from Yunus from
Ibn Shahab from Hassan and Abdullah children of Muhammad Bin Ali from
their father from an a person who heard Ali (S) addressing Ibn Abbas
say, "The Messenger of Allah (S) forbade contracting temporary marriage
with women and flesh of domestic assess on the day of Khaibar."[^112]

### Great Sunni scholars and this fake tradition

This tradition that has appeared in Sahih Bukhari and Sahih Muslim with
various chains explicitly mentions that temporary marriage was forbidden
in the battle of Khaibar. This is while great Sunni scholars and
traditionists do not accept this story and take it to be a mere
illusion. Here are the words of some of great Sunni scholars in this
regard.

Commenting on this story, Suhaili, a memorizer says the tradition Malik
reports from Abu Shihab, is flawed. This is because according to this
tradition the Holy Prophet (S) prohibits temporary marriage in the
battle of Khaibar.

This is while no historiographer has accepted that temporary marriage
was prohibited in the battle of Khaibar. Quoting this tradition from Abu
Shihab from Abdullah Bin Muhammad, Abu Ainiyya says: Allah's Apostle
prohibited eating the flesh of domestic asses and temporary marriage in
the battle of Khaibar. This tradition implies that he prohibited it soon
after the battle of Khaibar was over. This shows that the words used by
Abu Shihab not Malik are altered. This is because some of the reporters
of Abu Shihab have stated the very words stated by Malik.[^113]

Somewhere in his Zad Al-Ma'ad, Ibn Qayyim Jawziyya says: The truth is
that temporary marriage was prohibited not in the battle of Khaibar but
in the year of the conquest of Mecca. This is while some scholars
relying on the tradition reported from Ali Bin Abi Talib (a.s) in Sahih
Bukhari and Sahih Muslim have thought that temporary marriage was
prohibited in the battle of Khaibar…[^114]

Elsewhere in his book, he says: The truth is that temporary marriage was
prohibited in the year of the conquest of Mecca. This is because
authentic traditions signify that Muslims were practicing temporary
marriage with the permission of the Holy Prophet (S) in the year of the
conquest of Mecca.

If temporary marriage was prohibited in the battle of Khaibar it would
imply that the same ruling was abrogated twice a thing that has never
happened in Islamic laws. On the other hand, those who dwelled in
Khaibar fortress were Jewish not Muslim women and it was not yet
permissible for Muslims to marry the People of Book.[^115]

He also mentions elsewhere in his book that it is reported that the Holy
Prophet (S) legalized temporary marriage in the year of the conquest of
Mecca, whereas elsewhere it is reported that he prohibited it in the
same year.

In addition, the scholars are divided on whether or not temporary
marriage was prohibited in the battle of Khaibar. Thus the truth is thus
that temporary marriage was prohibited in the year of the conquest of
Mecca and what was prohibited in the battle of Khaibar was only the
eating of the flesh of domestic asses…[^116]

In his Al-Maghazi, Badr Al-Din Aiyni quotes Ibn Abd Al-Barr as saying:
It is incorrect to say that temporary marriage was forbidden in the
battle of Khaibar. According to Suhaili no historiographer has said that
temporary marriage was prohibited in the battle of Khaibar.[^117]

In Sahih Bukhari (chapter on marriage), Shihab Al-Din Qastalani reports
this tradition as under: Malik Bin Ismael narrates from Ibn Ainiyya who
heard Zuhri say: Hassan Bin Muhammad Bin Ali and his brother Abdullah
quoting their father informed me that Ali (a.s) addressing Ibn Abbas
said: Prophet prohibited temporary marriage and eating the flesh of
domestic asses in the battle of Khaibar.

Commenting on this tradition he says: The phrase 'in the battle of
Khaibar' shows that both of them (temporary marriage and eating the
flesh of domestic asses) were prohibited [in the same year]. In his
Al-Maghazi, commenting on the battle of Khaibar, he says:

Allah's Apostle prohibited temporary marriage and eating the flesh of
domestic asses in the battle of Khaibar. Despite all these, in his
Al-Ma'arifa, Bayhaqi says: Ibn Ainiyya thought Ali's tradition was
related to the prohibition of eating the flesh of domestic asses in the
battle of Khaibar not to the prohibition of temporary marriage.

According to Bayhaqi it seems that Ibn Ainiyya intends to say the
Prophet – based on the existing traditions legalized temporary marriage
after the battle of Khaibar though he prohibited it again. When Ali
(a.s) talked about the prohibition of temporary marriage to Ibn Abbas he
referred to the ultimate prohibition.

According to Suhaili the prohibition of temporary marriage in the battle
of Khaibar is something that is not approved by historiographers…[^118]

Commenting on the tradition in the book of expedition, Qastalani quotes
Ibn Abd Al-Bar as saying that it is wrong to say that temporary marriage
was prohibited in the battle of Khaibar. According to Bayhaqi no
historiographer has agreed with it.[^119]

### Ibn Hajar 'Asqalani

Commenting on this tradition, he said: It is said that this tradition is
altered, but the truth is that Prophet (S) prohibited eating the flesh
of domestic asses and temporary marriage in the battle of Khaibar.

Temporary marriage was not legalized in the battle of Khaibar. We will
throw light on it elsewhere in the book of marriage.

Quoting related traditions and presenting in detail the opinions
expressed by Bayhaqi, Suhaili, Ibn Abd Al-Barr and others in the book of
marriage, he says: The problem can be solved in this way that Ali (a.s)
was not aware of the permissibility of temporary marriage on the day of
the conquest of Mecca. This is because as we will explain temporary
marriage was prohibited at night as they were starting their journey.

Abu Awana has reported a tradition from Salim Bin Abdullah in this
regard, considering it as authentic. This tradition confirms the outward
meaning of the said tradition. According to this tradition, when a man
told Ibn Umar that such and such person puts to question the
permissibility of temporary marriage, the latter said that by Allah he
knew that Allah's Apostle (S) prohibited temporary marriage in the
battle of Khaibar and since then "we did not practice temporary
marriage".[^120]

According to me the desire to defend Bukhari has caused Ibn Hajar to
accuse on the basis of Sunni traditions Imam Ali (a.s), the gate of
knowledge of committing error and suffering from ignorance. We must take
refuge to Allah from the prejudices that may bring one's downfall.

### Dehlavi

The words uttered by Dehlavi and his father Shah Waliullah in Qurra
Al-'Ainain, tell us that Ibn Hajar's opinion is wrong. In his book,
Dehlwi addresses the objections raised against Umar Bin Khattab.
Commenting on the eleventh objection he says: Though temporary marriage
and Mut'a Hajj were lawful during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet (S),
Umar prohibited both of them, abrogating thus divine laws and
prohibiting lawful things.

As mentioned in Sunni books, Umar himself confesses that he has done
such a thing, saying: Two pleasures were lawful during the time of the
Holy Prophet (S) but I prohibited them.

In response it has to be said that Sahih Bukhari is the most authentic
Sunni source. Here Bukhari narrates a tradition from Salma Bin Akwa'a
and Sabra Bin Ma'abad Juhani from Abu Huraira. This tradition has also
appeared in other authentic sources.

According to this tradition, Prophet (S) permitted temporary marriage in
the battle of Awtas for three days but after the expiration of these
three days he prohibited it forever.

Imam Ali's tradition is very popular in this regard, with everybody
knowing it to the extent that even his grandchildren narrated this
tradition from him. Al-Muwatta, Sahih Muslim and other famous sources
have recorded this tradition, using various chains of transmitters.

Some Shias have cast this doubt that temporary marriage was prohibited
in the battle of Khaibar, but it was legalized again in the battle of
Awtas.

In reply it has to be said that this doubt originates in
misunderstanding and confusing concepts. This is because Ali's tradition
of the battle of Khaibar tells us that eating the flesh of domestic
asses is forbidden not temporary marriage. Despite all these, his words
imply the doubt that both were prohibited in the battle of Khaibar.

Some have dealt with this misunderstanding as truth, considering thus it
was in the battle of Khaibar that temporary marriage was forbidden. If
Ali (a.s) really believed that it was in the battle of Khaibar that
temporary marriage was forbidden how could he refute Ibn Abbas' point of
view convincing him (that this was not the case)?

This is while Imam Ali (a.s) referred to this tradition while making
attempts to convince Ibn Abbas. He strongly prevented Ibn Abbas from
permitting temporary marriage accusing him of being forgetful.

On the other hand, those who think that temporary marriage was forbidden
in the battle of Khaibar actually refute the argument presented by Ali
(a.s). This kind of approach shows their ignorance and stupidity.[^121]

In my point of view, these comments show that the traditions concerning
the prohibition of temporary marriage in the battle of Khaibar are wrong
and scholars like Bukhari, Muslim and others who rely on such traditions
are ignorant. This is because the correctness of these traditions
implies that the argument present by Imam Ali (a.s) is not sound.

This shows that Ibn Hajar and those who followed his line of thinking
are not prudent enough, because they accuse Imam Ali (a.s) of not
knowing about the prohibition of temporary marriage.

It has to be noted that here Dehlavi has related some objections
concerning Shias. [We cannot due to lack of space, deal with them here].
To know about the flaws of his objections, dear readers can refer to
Tasheed Al-Mataeen.

### Imam Shaf'ai

He believes that the traditions reported from Ali (a.s) concerning the
prohibition of the flesh of domestic asses, wrongly contains the term
'temporary marriage'. According to Aini Shafi'ai narrates from Malik
(using his chain) from Ali (a.s) who said that Prophet (S) prohibited
eating the flesh of domestic asses in the battle of Khaibar.

Shafi'ai did not comment on this tradition, refraining from touching the
issue of temporary marriage due to the difference existing about
it.[^122]

Thus it is crystal clear that Shafi'ai is also critical of these so
called authentic traditions!

### Abstract

Great Sunni scholars, tradition memorizers and critics of traditions do
not accept many of the traditions reported by Bukhari and Muslim. To
explain it further distances us from what is our real aim. Thus we
suffice to what we have thus far said.

Now that we learnt that great Sunni scholars questioned many of the
traditions reported by Bukhari and Muslim, how can we accept Fakhr
Razi's argument that Ghadir tradition is false when he says to prove his
point of view that Bukhari and Muslim have not mentioned it? How can we
say that the Holy Prophet (S) did not say it, for Bukhari and Muslim
have not paid attention to it?

[^1]: Sahih e Bukhari, vol. 7, p. 8.

[^2]: Fah Al-Bari, vol. 9, p. 31.

[^3]: Sahih e Bukhari, vol. 6, p. 202.

[^4]: Ibid, vol. 4, pp. 277 and 278.

[^5]: Qur’an, Tawba, 114.

[^6]: Radi’s Tafsir, vol. 16, p. 210.

[^7]: Qur’an, Tawba, 113.

[^8]: Qur’an, Ibid.

[^9]: Qur’an, Nisa, 48.

[^10]: Qur’an, Ghafir, 60.

[^11]: Qur’an, Tawba, 113.

[^12]: Razi’s Tafsir, vol. 16, p. 209.

[^13]: Fath Al-Bari, vol. 8, p. 405.

[^14]: Qur’an, Tawba, 114.

[^15]: Fath Al-Bari, vol. 8, p. 406.

[^16]: Razi, Tafsir, vol. 14, p. 211.

[^17]: Al-Tawshih fi Sharh Al-Sahih, vol. 4, p. 250.

[^18]: Al-Durr Al-Manthur, vol. 4, p. 300.

[^19]: Qur’an, Tawba, 8.

[^20]: Sahih e Bukhari, vol. 6, p. 131.

[^21]: Al-Manhul fi Ilm Al-Usul, p. 212.

[^22]: Irshad Al-Sari ila Sahih Al-Bukhari, vol. 7, p. 155.

[^23]: Akhbar Ahad are traditions that do not satisfy the concisions of
successively narrated traditions.

[^24]: Fath Al-Bari, vo. 8, p. 273.

[^25]: Al-Jam’a bayn Al-Sahihain, vol. 3, p. 184 Tradition no. 2415.

[^26]: Tafsir e Razi, vol. 26, p. 148.

[^27]: Al-Lubab fi Ulum Al-Kitab, vol. 16, p. 324.

[^28]: Qur’an, Naml, 18.

[^29]: Sahih e Bukhari, vol. 4, p. 262.

[^30]: A place in Mecca.

[^31]: Sahih e Bukhari, vol. 7, p. 165.

[^32]: Ibtal Al-Batil, manuscript.

[^33]: Sahih e Bukhari, vol. 5, p. 124.

[^34]: Subul Al-Huda Wa Al-Rashad fi Sira Khair Al-Ibad, vol. 2, p. 182.

[^35]: Fath Al-Bari, vol. 7, 113.

[^36]: Quran, An’am, 121.

[^37]: Al-Rawd Al-Anf, vol. 2, pp. 360 – 363.

[^38]: Al-Shifa be Ta’arif Huquq Al-Mustafa, vol. 1, pp. 161 and 162.

[^39]: Quran, Nahl, 123.

[^40]: Al-Tanqih li alfaza Al-Jami’a Al-Sahih, vol. 3, p. 797.

[^41]: Fath Al-Bari, vol. 7, pp. 112-113.

[^42]: Sahih Bukhari, vol. 8, p. 266.

[^43]: Allah, the Exalted has caused Hafiz Bin Kharash (283), a great
Sunni scholar to admit this reality. In his Tadkira Al-Huffaz (vol. 2,
p. 682, narrator no. 705).

[^44]: For further information see Tasheed Al-Mataeen and other reliable
books.

[^45]: Qur'an, Naml, 16.

[^46]: Qur'an, Maryam, 6.

[^47]: Al-Tabaqat Al-Kubra, vol. 2, p. 315.

[^48]: Qura'n, Kahf, 54.

[^49]: Mukhtarsari Tuhfa Ithna Ashariyya, p. 281, See Tuhfa Ithna
Ashariyya, p. 286.

[^50]: Sharh Nahj Al-Balagha, vol. 1, p. 27.

[^51]: Qur'an, Ma’ida, 55.

[^52]: Qur'an, Insan, 8.

[^53]: Qura'n, Baqara, 274.

[^54]: Matalib Al-Sauel, p. 137.

[^55]: Matalib Al-Sauel, pp. 131-132.

[^56]: Quran, An’am, 148.

[^57]: Qur’an, 148-149.

[^58]: Minhaj Al-Sunna, vol. 2, pp. 3-5.

[^59]: Qura'n, Kahf, 54.

[^60]: Mukhtarsari Tuhfa Ithna Ashariyya, p. 281, See Tuhfa Ithna
Ashariyya, p. 286

[^61]: Quran, An’am, 148.

[^62]: Minhaj Al-Sunna, vol. 2, pp. 11-12.

[^63]: Sahih Bukhari, vol. 5, p. 95 and vol. 4, p. 185.

[^64]: Fath Al-Bari, vol. 7, p. 69, vol. 6, p. 162, vol. 9, pp. 268 and
269.

[^65]: Tuhfa Ithan'ashriyya, p. 355.

[^66]: For further information in this regard see Fabricated Marriage
proposal, a Critical Assessment of the story of Ali's asking for the
hand of Abu Jahl's daughter in marriage. This book is also compiled by
Ayatollah Milani.

[^67]: Quran, Hujurat, 9.

[^68]: Sahih Bukhari, vol. 4, p. 19.

[^69]: Al-Tanqih Li-Alfaz Al-Jami'a Al-Sahih, vol. 2, p. 596.

[^70]: Fath Al-Bari, vol. 5, p. 228.

[^71]: Sahih, Bukhari, vol. 5, p. 82.

[^72]: Sahih Bukhari, vol. 7, p. 401.

[^73]: Qur’an, Ad Dukan, 10

[^74]: Sahih Bukhari vol. 2, pp. 74-75.

[^75]: Umda Al-Qari fi Sharh Al-Bukhari, vol. 7, pp. 27-29.

[^76]: Quran, Hashar, 7.

[^77]: Al-Tanwih fi Sharh Al-Tawdih, vol. 2, p. 21.

[^78]: Sahih Bukhari, vol. 7, p. 193, Al-Muhalla, vol. 9, p. 59.

[^79]: Sahih Bukhari, vol. 7, p. 190.

[^80]: This book written by Abu Hanifa arranged in the form of dialogue.
The term alim in the title of this book refers to Abu Hanifa and the
term Al-muta'allim to Abu Muti'a Balkhi, his pupil.

[^81]: Quran, Noor, 2.

[^82]: Quran, Nisa, 16.

[^83]: Quran, Nisa, 80.

[^84]: Sahih Bukhari, vol. 9, p. 265.

[^85]: Sahih Muslim, vol. 1, pp. 148 and 262.

[^86]: Al-Minhaj fi Sharh Sahih Muslim Bin Hajjaj, vol. 1, pp. 209 and
210.

[^87]: Al-Kawkib Al-Darari fi Sharh Sahih Al-Bukhari, vol. 25, p. 204.

[^88]: Zad Al-MI'ad fi Huda Khair Al-Ibad, vol. 3, pp. 41 and 42.

[^89]: Sahih Bukhari, vol. 5, p. 56.

[^90]: Fath Al-Bari, vol. 7. P. 127.

[^91]: Sahih Bukhari, vol. 7, pp. 62-63.

[^92]: Ibid.

[^93]: Sahih Bukhari, vol. 6, p. 199.

[^94]: Hady Al-Sardi, Muqaddima Fath Al-Bari, vol. 2, pp. 135-6.

[^95]: Quran, Noah, 23.

[^96]: in the process of 'munawala', a tradition master lends his book
to his disciple, but the latter without taking permission, uses the
traditions it contains applying the phrase 'he told me' or 'he informed
me'.

[^97]: In the process of 'mukataba', a tradition master writes tradition
his disciple at his request. Here the disciple is not allowed to use
phrases such as 'he told me or 'he informed me'. Instead, he needs to
say "he wrote me saying. For further information, see Ilm Al-Hadith, pp.
198-9.

[^98]: Fath Al-Bari, vol. 8, p. 541.

[^99]: Sahih Bukhari, vol. 5, p. 154.

[^100]: Al-Isti'ab, vol. 4, p. 1937.

[^101]: Tahdib Al-Kamal fi Ma'arifat Al-Rijal, vol. 35, p. 361.

[^102]: Al-Rawz Al-Anf, vol. 6, p. 440.

[^103]: Uyun Al-Athar, vol. 2, p. 101.

[^104]: Fath Al-Bari, vol. 7, p. 353.

[^105]: Kashf Al-Dunun, vol. 2, p. 1715.

[^106]: Tabaqat Al-Shafi'ayya, Manuscript.

[^107]: He is Saed Bin Uthman Baghadadi. He died in 353 AH. Fro further
information seeTadkira Al-Huffaz, vol. 3, p. 937. Al-Nujum Al-Dahira,
vol. 3, p. 338, ShAzerat Al- Dahab, vol. 7, p. 142 and Tabaqat
Al-Huffaz, p. 378.

[^108]: Al-Isaba, vol. 4, p. 434.

[^109]: Zad Al-Ma'ad fi Huda Khair Al-Ibad, vol. 1, p. 27.

[^110]: Sahih Bukhari, vol. 5, p. 172.

[^111]: Ibid, vol. 7, p. 123.

[^112]: Sahih Muslim, vol. 4, pp. 134 and 135.

[^113]: Al-Rawz Al-Anf, vol. 6, p. 557.

[^114]: Zad Al-Ma'ad fi Huda Khair Al-Ibad, vol. 2, p. 142.

[^115]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 183.

[^116]: Zad Al-Ma'ad, vol. 4, p. 6.

[^117]: Umda Al-Qari fi Sharh Sahih Al-Bukhari, vol. 17, pp. 246-7.

[^118]: Irshad Al-Sari ila Sahih Al-Bukhari, vol. 8, p. 41.

[^119]: Ibid, vol. 6, p. 536.

[^120]: Fath Al-Bari, vol. 9, p. 138.

[^121]: Tuhfa Ithna Ashariyya, chapter on mataeen.

[^122]: Umda la-Qari, vol. 17, p. 247.


