Obligation to perform Hajj
==========================

It is clear from the Holy Qur'an and the traditions that performance of
Hajj (Pilgrimage) is obligatory on every person who has attained puberty
and has the means mentioned below.

Hajj is one of the basic principles of Islam; its performance is one of
its essentials, and its non-performance is a grave sin. Denial of the
obligatory nature of Hajj is blasphemy (kufr). Allah states in the Holy
Qur'an,

***“.. and pilgrimage to the House is incumbent upon men for the sake of
Allah, (upon) every one who is able to undertake the journey to it; and
whoever disbelieves, surely Allah is Self-sufficient, above any need of
the worlds”. (3/97).***

Sheikh Kulayni has reported that Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) has said,
*“Whoever dies without having performed obligatory pilgrimage when he
was not prevented by lack of means, illness, or force, dies a Jew or a
Christian”.* Indeed, there are many hadiths (traditions) on pilgrimage
being obligatory and on its importance, but the brevity of this work
does not permit setting them all out.

In religion the performance of pilgrimage is obligatory on a person once
only; it is known as ‘Hajjatul Islam’.

**Rule 1:** Performance of pilgrimage becomes obligatory immediately in
the year in when its conditions are realised. If one fails to perform
it, deliberately or for an excuse, it must be fulfilled in the ensuing
year, and so on. Postponing it without valid reason is a grave sin.

**Rule 2:** When performing pilgrimage becomes obligatory, one must make
all the arrangements for the journey to ensure the performance of the
ceremonies in time. If there are several groups one could join, by any
means of travel, so much so that one is confident to reach in time, it
is permissible to join any one of them or take any route; yet it is
preferable to choose the one that would definitely get you there in
time.

**Rule 3:** If it was possible for a person to make the journey in the
same year, pilgrimage becomes obligatory, even if leaving it to the last
minute, in the hope that they would reach in time. However, if the
person was not able to get there in time for pilgrimage, the obligation
to perform it, most evidently, does not become obligatory on them, even
though their delay was excusable.


