Irregularities in Tawaf
=======================

**Rule 307:** It is permissible to deliberately cut short optional
tawaf. It is permissible too to interrupt obligatory tawaf for a
pressing need or for any reason for that matter.

**Rule 308:** If, without good reason, the pilgrim steps out of the
course of tawaf, completing the fourth round, the tawaf is invalid and
has to be repeated. If it was after the fourth round, tawaf, as a matter
of precaution, must be completed and then repeated. However, if the
tawaf was optional, he may complete the remaining rounds, provided that
he does not break the sequence.

**Rule 309:** If menstruation of a lady commences in the course of
tawaf, it is obligatory on her to abandon it and leave the
Masjid-ul-Haraam immediately. The rule governing such a case has already
been discussed in the preceding 'Conditions for Tawaf'.

**Rule 310:** A pilgrim, performing tawaf, may find it necessary to
interrupt it, due to sickness, carrying out an errand for a fellow
believer, or attending to his own business.

If tawaf was obligatory, and he had completed the fourth round, his
tawaf is valid. However, if he abandons it before completing the fourth
round, his tawaf is invalidated. If tawaf was a recommended one, he can
continue from where he stopped, even though he had not completed four
rounds.

**Rule 311:** It is permissible to sit down to rest, in the course of
tawaf, but it must not be prolonged so much so that the sequence, as is
widely held, be broken; in that event, the tawaf becomes invalid and has
to be performed again.

**Rule 312:** If a pilgrim interrupts tawaf in order to obtain the merit
of praying at the earliest time, or join congregational prayer, or
perform a mustahab prayer, he must complete the tawaf from where he
interrupted it after completing his prayer.

He should, as a matter of precaution, repeat tawaf after completing it,
if the interruption was in the course of an obligatory tawaf and had
occurred before completing the fourth round.

**Rule 313:** During tawaf, a pilgrim may inadvertently omit parts
thereof, yet becomes aware of the lapse before the chain of continuity
is broken. If this is the case, he must complete his tawaf, which will
then be deemed valid.

He may become aware of it after the sequence has been interrupted. He
may as well has forgotten to perform either one, two or three rounds;
thus, he should perform same; the tawaf will then be considered valid.
If he cannot perform it personally, even though he may have remembered
after returning home, he may hire an agent to perform it for him.

If he has forgotten more than three rounds, he should return and perform
the missed ones. It is better, though, that having done so, he should,
as a matter of precaution, perform another full tawaf,


