Ihram for Hajj
==============

As has already been stated, there are thirteen obligations in Hajj.
These will now be dealt with in some detail:

The best time for wearing ihram for Hajj is the day of Tarwiyah which is
the eighth of Thil Hijjah at zawaal. It is permissible for old and sick
people who are fearful of overcrowding, to wear ihram, three days before
then. They can wear ihram and leave Makkah before other people. Indeed,
if need be, they can leave immediately after completing
Umrat-ut-Tamatu'.

Similarly, it is permissible for those permitted to perform tawaf of
Hajj before wuquf at Arafat and Muzdalifah, to wear ihram earlier, such
as a lady fearing the onset of haydh. As has already been discussed, it
is permissible to wear ihram for Hajj and leave Makkah, for a legitimate
business, at any time, after completing Umrat-u-Tamatu'.

Evidently, it is also permissible to wear ihram, three days earlier than
should be the case, and even earlier than that in certain circumstances.

**Rule 358:** As has already been discussed, it is not permissible for a
pilgrim performing Umrat-ut-Tamatu' to wear ihram for Hajj before
taqseer. So is the case in Umrat-ul-Mufradah before completing the
ceremonies of Hajj. However, it can be worn after completion of all the
ceremonies, but before Tawaf-un-Nisa.

**Rule 359:** Whoever can make the wuquf at Arafat on the specific day
and time, it is not permissible for them to delay putting the ihram on
until such a time when it becomes untenable.

**Rule 360:** The rules governing the procedures, obligations and
prohibitions of a state of ihram apply just as those governing both
ihram for Umrah and Hajj. The only difference between them is in the
niyyah

**Rule 361:** It is obligatory to wear ihram from Makkah as mentioned
above. The best place for it is the Holy Mosque. It is recommended to
wear the ihram after performing two raka'as of prayer at Maqam Ibrahim
(a.s.) or Hijr Ismail (a.s.).

**Rule 362:** A pilgrim may forget to wear ihram, either inadvertently
or because of ignorance of the rules, until he has left Makkah. If he
remembers or becomes aware of the rules at a later time, it is
obligatory on him to return to Makkah, even if he is in Arafat; he
should wear ihram from there.

If because of limited time, or for another reason, it is not possible to
return to Makkah, he should wear ihram wherever he is. Similarly, if he
remembers or becomes aware after the wuquf at Arafat, he should proceed
to Makkah, where possible, and wear ihram there. However, if he does not
remember or acquire the knowledge until after completing Hajj, his Hajj
is valid.

**Rule 363:** If a pilgrim knowingly and deliberately fails to wear
ihram, it is obligatory on him to rectify it. Should it not be possible
to do so before the stay at Arafat, his Hajj is invalidated and he is
obligated to repeat it in the following year.

**Rule 364:** One must, as a matter of precaution, one make an optional
tawaf after wearing ihram for Hajj and before departing from Makkah. If
one does so, one must, as a matter of precaution, renew the talbiyah
after tawaf.


