Conditions which make Hajjatul Islam obligatory
===============================================

1. Adulthood
------------

Pilgrimage is not obligatory on any person who has not attained
adulthood, even if they were approaching it. A pilgrimage, performed by
a child will, most evidently, not be counted as Hajjatul Islam, even if
it was performed properly.

Rule 4: If a boy, who has the means to make the journey, leaves for
pilgrimage and attains puberty before assuming ihram at the appropriate
Meqat, his pilgrimage is valid as Hajjatul Islam. However, if he attains
adulthood after wearing ihram and before the stay at Muzdalifah, he
should complete the pilgrimage; it would be valid as Hajjatul Islam.

**Rule 5:** A person may perform an optional pilgrimage in the belief
that they have not attained puberty. Yet, they discover, during
pilgrimage time or after its completion, that they had already attained
puberty. Such pilgrimage will counted as an obligatory one.

**Rule 6:** It is recommended for a discerning child to perform
pilgrimage but, as is widely believed, it is conditional on the consent
of his guardian.

**Rule 7:** The consent of parents is not a prerequisite for the
validity of a pilgrimage of an adult. However, if the journey to perform
a recommended pilgrimage displeases either or both of them, for fear,
for example, of the dangers arising from the journey, it is not
permitted to embark on it.

**Rule 8:** It is recommended that the guardian of a child, male or
female, who is not capable of rational action, should help him or her
assume ihram. That is, help them wear ihram and coach them in the
recitation of the talbiyyah, if they are capable of comprehension.

Conversely, he should recite it for them. He must also restrain him from
all matters which a pilgrim in a state of ihram must avoid. It is
permissible to delay removing the clothes of a child till reaching Fakh
if that route is taken. The child must then be instructed to perform all
such acts of pilgrimage that he can.

The guardian should perform on his behalf that which he is unable to do.
The guardian should make the child perform tawaf, sa'y, between Safa and
Marwah, wuquf at Arafat and Mash'ar; rami of jamarat, if they are able;
otherwise, the guardian should throw them on his behalf. This is also
true of tawaf prayer, taqseer, especially get their head shaved, and the
remaining acts.

**Rule 9:** There is no objection to a guardian assisting a child to
wear ihram, although the guardian is not in a state of ihram himself.

**Rule 10:** It is recommended that the person who takes a child, who is
not capable of rational action, on a pilgrimage as his guardian must be
the person who has the right of custody of the child as detailed in the
law of marriages.

**Rule 11:** If the expenses of pilgrimage of the child exceed the usual
amount, the excess amount should be borne by the guardian and not the
child. However. And if the protection of the child was contingent on
making the journey for Hajj, or if the journey was in the child's
interest, it is permissible to meet the expenses of the child from his
own money.

**Rule 12:** The cost of the sacrifice for the undiscerning child should
be borne by the guardian and so should the expiation (kaffarah) for
hunting. As for kaffarahs which are attracted as a result of deliberate
acts, they would naturally not fall on the child, even if he is a
discerning one, or the guardian, nor would they be payable from the
child's money.

2. Reason
---------

There is no obligation on an insane person to perform pilgrimage, even
if their insanity is periodic. However, if they recover during the
pilgrimage period, are of means and able to perform the rituals thereof,
it is obligatory on them to perform pilgrimage, even if they remain
insane during the other periods. However, should they know that bouts of
insanity coincide with pilgrimage days, they should deputies a person as
soon as they recover.

3. and 4. Freedom and Financial Ability
---------------------------------------

There are few rules that need considering under this heading.

### A- Time

There must be enough time for making the journey to Makkah and staying
throughout the obligatory periods. In other words, it is not obligatory
to perform pilgrimage, even if you can afford it, if you do not have
ample time for the journey, stay, and performing the obligatory rituals.
This should also be the case, even if there was time, yet it entails
enduring great difficulties.

In such circumstances, it is obligatory to set aside the funds for the
journey in the ensuing year, and doing one's best not to dispense with
them until the following year. However, matters relating to dispensing
with the funds set aside for performing pilgrimage is outlined in Rule
39 below.

### B- Physical Health and Strength

If a person is unable to travel to the holy places due to ill health,
old age, or they are unable to stay there for the required periods
because of extreme heat, it is not obligatory on them to set out for
pilgrimage personally. However, they must send an agent to perform it
for him.

### C- No Obstruction

The route must be open and safe, i.e. there must be no barrier to
reaching the Meqat and no danger to the pilgrim's life, his property or
honour. Otherwise, pilgrimage is not obligatory. That is the rule
regarding the outbound journey. As for the ruling on the return journey,
it is discussed in Rule 22 below.

However, if after wearing ihram an eventuality, such as illness, arises,
or a danger posed by an enemy, the special rules relating to such
circumstances will be discussed.

**Rule 13:** If there are two routes available for the journey to
pilgrimage, one safe and the other not, the obligation to perform
pilgrimage remains; that is, the safe route must be taken, even if it is
longer. However, if taking the longer route involves travelling through
many countries, such a situation would constitute an obstruction on the
same lines of the preceding rule, i.e. pilgrimage ceases to become
obligatory.

**Rule 14:** If a person has property in his country which could perish
or be lost if they went on pilgrimage, it is not obligatory on them to
do so. Similarly, it is not obligatory to make the journey of
pilgrimage, if it was in response to a more urgent and more important
act, called for by religious dictate, such as rescuing a person from
drowning, or fire; or if the journey is dependant on committing a sin,
the avoidance of which is more important than performing pilgrimage, or
of equal importance.

**Rule 15:** If performing pilgrimage will result in a sin, either by an
omission to do what is obligatory in religion, or the commission of a
forbidden act, a sin will have been committed which will have to be
answered. Such will remain unconnected with the pilgrimage which will be
valid as a Hajjatul Islam, provided that all the other conditions for
its validity are observed. There is no difference in this regard whether
the pilgrim was already duty-bound to perform pilgrimage or it became
obligatory on them in that particular year.

**Rule 16:** If there is an enemy on the way to pilgrimage and there is
no defence against them except by paying of one's property as to be
unfair to the pilgrim, it is not necessary to lose the property.
Accordingly, the obligation to perform pilgrimage ceases. Otherwise, the
obligation remains. Even so, it is not necessary to bribe the enemy to
facilitate the opening of the road.

**Rule 17:** If the route to the pilgrimage sites was by sea alone, the
obligation does not cease, except if there was a reasonable risk of
drowning, illness, or the like. If, however, pilgrimage was performed
despite the risk, it should be deemed valid.

### D- Expenses for the Journey

There must be sufficient funds to meet the expenses, arising from the
journey, such as those for eating, drinking and other necessities. The
provision must be adequate for the return journey including
transportation. The amount necessary would depend on the financial
position of the pilgrim.

**Rule 18:** Provision of expenses and transport is not merely to meet
the necessities. They are an unqualified condition for the pilgrimage,
even if the provision is not required by the pilgrim who, for instance,
is capable of making the journey walking without any difficulty, and
doing so would not be derogatory to his dignity.

**Rule 19:** The measure of the expenses for the journey is what the
pilgrim physically has with him. It is not obligatory for a person to
raise funds to meet the expenses through his business or other sources.
There is no difference in this regard between a close and a distant
journey.

**Rule 20:** The starting point of incurring expenses for the journey is
the residence of the pilgrim and not his country of origin. For example,
if the person had moved to another town for business or other purposes
and when they were there, they acquired the means for the journey, it is
obligatory on them to perform pilgrimage, even though they would not be
in a position to make it from their country.

**Rule 21:** If a person has property for which they are unable to find
a buyer at its real value and, as a result, they have to postpone
pilgrimage in order to sell it for its real worth, they are not obliged
to sell it immediately.

However, if , for example, in the year they acquired the means to
perform pilgrimage, the expenses have already risen, and that they could
even be higher the following year, it is not permissible to postpone
pilgrimage.

**Rule 22:** The provision of the expenses for the return journey is a
condition for pilgrimage, only if there had intend to return home. If
this was not the case and the person had plans to reside in another
country, it is enough to have provisions sufficient to get them there.

However, if the country to which they intend to go is more distant than
theirs, it is not necessary to have sufficient provisions to get them
there, and make the pilgrimage obligatory; they only need to have
sufficient funds to enable them to return home, unless they have no
alternative but to proceed to the more distant country.

### E- Availability of Means on Return

The person must be in a position to maintain themselves and their family
on returning home. It is necessary that, on their return, they should be
solvent enough as to insulate themselves and their family against
poverty. In other words, the expenditure that arose from the journey to
pilgrimage should not encroach on their maintenance money..

It is not obligatory on a person to embark on pilgrimage if in so doing
they would need to bear the cost of the journey from their property
which could be the source of maintenance for themselves and their
family. If they do not have alternative means of livelihood on a par
with their social status, clearly it is not obligatory on them to sell
their property which they would need as a necessity of life, nor is it
obligatory to sell their home, personal and household effects, tools of
trade needed for livelihood, such as books required by a scholar for
study. Generally, disposal of necessities is not necessary, if doing so
would cause distress and hardship. However, if there were surplus items
at the person's disposal, it is obligatory to sell same in order to
provide the expenses for pilgrimage.

For example, if one owns a house of the value of eighty thousand pounds
and it is possible to sell it and purchase another one for a lesser
price without causing any hardship, it is obligatory to do so and use
the extra amount generated for performing pilgrimage and spending on
family needs.

**Rule 23:** If a person has property which they need, it is not
obligatory on them to sell it in order to embark on pilgrimage. However,
if they subsequently be able to do without it, it becomes obligatory on
them to sell it to perform pilgrimage.

For example, a lady who has a piece of jewellery which she needs and
cannot do without. Yet if she reaches a point where she is able to
dispense with it, either because of old age or otherwise, it is
obligatory on her to sell it and perform pilgrimage.

**Rule 24:** If a person owns a house and there is another house in
which it is possible to reside without undue hardship, such as a waqf
property, adequate to their needs, it is obligatory to sell the property
they own and perform pilgrimage, even if the sale price may need to be
supplemented from their other sources of income. This rule also applies
to books of learning and other means of living.

**Rule 25:** If a person has sufficient funds to embark on pilgrimage,
but needs to marry, or purchase a house for residence, or satisfy any
other need, it is not obligatory on them to perform pilgrimage, provided
that bearing the expenses thereof is not going to pose undue difficulty
to them.

**Rule 26:** A person owes some money and they need it for the expenses
of pilgrimage or part thereof. Repayment of the debt has already become
due. It is, therefore, obligatory on them to demand it. The debtor may
forestall settling the debt and the creditor is in a position to force
him to force him to pay, even by way of taking him to court. There may
be a case for a possible settling the sum against other payments due to
the debtor. It is, therefore, obligatory on the creditor to resort to
such measures.

Similarly, even if the repayment is not due, a demand should be made,
especially, if payment would be forthcoming on demand. However, the
debtor may be impoverished or may defer payment; it may not be possible
to enforce settling the debt, or resorting to such an action may result
in distress; the debt could be premature and the debtor is unwilling to
settle it before the appointed term, and it is possible to assign the
debt without causing harm or distress. In such cases, one should do so
and, from the proceeds, meet the expenses of pilgrimage or supplement
them from other sources if need be.

**Rule 27:** It is obligatory on those making a living of a profession
or a vocation like blacksmiths, builders, and carpenters, whose earnings
are usually sufficient for maintaining themselves and their family, to
perform pilgrimage, should they receive property, by way of inheritance
or any other means that would be sufficient to meet the expenditure of
pilgrimage and maintenance of their family during their absence.

**Rule 28:** A person's livelihood may be derived from religious dues
like khums and zakat, and such regular income is assured without
difficulty. It is obligatory on them to perform pilgrimage, should they
acquire sufficient funds for the journey and maintenance of their
family. The same rule applies to the person who is in receipt of
lifetime help, or the person whose lifestyle is not going to change, if
they undertook the journey to pilgrimage.

**Rule 29:** If a person receives sufficient funds to cover the expenses
of pilgrimage by obtaining conditional ownership of property, it is
apparent that pilgrimage becomes obligatory on them. That is, if they
can prevent the withdrawal of the ownership by selling the article
subject of a revocable gift, for example. Otherwise, whether pilgrimage
becomes obligatory depends on the decision of the donor or the person
vested with the right to exercise the condition which could result in
withdrawing the ownership. If such person effects the withdrawal before
the completing pilgrimage, it will, evidently, be deemed as though it
was not obligatory on them.

**Rule 30:** It is not necessary that, in order to embark on pilgrimage,
the means be acquired from the person's own property. It can be acquired
by way of gift, or be provided by another person. However, if the cloths
for ihram during tawaf and its prayer were acquired unlawfully,
pilgrimage shall not be valid, as a matter of precaution. If the money
paid for the hady (sacrifice) was acquired by unlawful means, the
pilgrimage is not acceptable, unless it was bought on credit and was
settled from the unlawful money.

**Rule 31:** It is not obligatory that the means be acquired by earning
a living or other means. If a gift is made to a person which would
provide them with the means for pilgrimage, they are not obliged to
accept it. Similarly if a person is offered employment which is
compatible with their status and the remuneration thereof would provide
them with the means for pilgrimage, they are not under any obligation to
accept it. However, if a person renders services during the journey to
pilgrimage and thereby acquires the means, performing pilgrimage becomes
obligatory.

**Rule 32:** A person could undertake to perform pilgrimage for another
person for a remuneration. Thus, they acquire sufficient means for
themselves to perform pilgrimage. However, it was made conditional that
they performed pilgrimage for the other person in that year. In such a
case, they must do so in that year. If, at the time of pilgrimage in the
following year, they still have enough funds to make the journey, it
becomes obligatory on them to perform it in the ensuing year. However,
if there was no condition that they perform pilgrimage for their
mandator in the same year, it becomes obligatory on them to perform it
for themselves in that year, unless they are confident that they can do
so for themselves in the following year.

**Rule 33:** If a person borrows money sufficient to cover the expenses
of pilgrimage, it does not become obligatory on them even though they
would have the means to repay it on return from the journey. However, if
the loan is for a very long period for which debtors do not usually
provide, it becomes obligatory.

**Rule 34:** If a person has incurred debts to the value of his entire
property, it is not obligatory on them to perform pilgrimage. There is
no difference in this respect between prompt and deferred debts, or
whether it was incurred prior or subsequent to the acquisition of the
means. The exception, though, is when the debt is not repayable for a
very long period, for example of fifty years, for which debtors do not
usually provide.

**Rule 35:** If khums or zakah was due on a person and they have funds
which would not be sufficient for pilgrimage, and if they settled such
dues, it becomes obligatory on them to settle those liabilities. Thus
pilgrimage is not obligatory on them. It is immaterial whether the
liability is on the funds intended for pilgrimage or on arrears.

**Rule 36:** If pilgrimage has become obligatory on a person and there
is a liability on them of khums or zakah or other obligatory dues, they
must first settle those liabilities; it is not permissible for them to
embark on pilgrimage without having settled them. If the clothes of
ihram and what is paid for the sacrifice are from money bearing such
liability, the ruling thereof has been discussed in Rule 30.

**Rule 37:** If a person has some means, yet they are uncertain whether
such will be sufficient to meet the expenses of pilgrimage, they must
make ascertain that it will be sufficient, as a matter of precaution

**Rule 38:** If a person has property sufficient to meet the expenses of
the pilgrimage but is not available in cash or would be sufficient if it
supplemented the available cash but there is no possibility of spending
from the property or to sell it through an agent, then it is not
obligatory to proceed on pilgrimage, or else the pilgrimage becomes
obligatory.

**Rule 39:** If a person has sufficient funds to cater for pilgrimage,
it is obligatory on them to perform it if they are able to travel. If
they dispose of the funds in such a way that they can no longer be
described as having adequate means, and thus unable to accomplish
pilgrimage, it remains an obligation on him, provided they are certain
that they could embark on the journey in good time. However, in the case
of disposing of a property for a low price, or by way of gift, without
due consideration, the transaction itself is sound, but they in error
for missing the opportunity of having the means that would have enabled
them to perform pilgrimage.

**Rule 40:** It is apparent that it is not necessary for the pilgrim to
own the means of the expenditure. If he has funds at his disposal,
performing pilgrimage becomes obligatory on him, provided that such
funds are adequate for the journey, and that the other conditions for
pilgrimage are satisfied. However, he should not set out on the journey,
unless he was certain that the right of disposing with the funds is
binding, or that he was certain that such right is not going to be
withdrawn from him.

**Rule 41:** Just as it is necessary that there should be sufficient
means to make the journey, so is it that there should be funds available
for the completion of pilgrimage rituals. If the property of a person is
destroyed in his country or during the journey, pilgrimage is not
obligatory on them, as it is a manifestation that they are not
financially able from the beginning. The same applies to the payment of
a debt that becomes due, such as for, inadvertently, destroying the
property of another person, and that it would not be possible to
compensate the victim if the available funds were to be used for
performing pilgrimage.

However, if a person deliberately destroys the property of another, the
obligation to perform pilgrimage is not annulled. It remains a duty on
their shoulders to be discharged. If they had a property which rendered
them of those who have the means, and it was destroyed in their country,
this will not be considered as a manifestation that they are not of
means from the out set. The pilgrimage they performed will, therefore,
count as an obligatory one..

**Rule 42:** A person who has enough means was unaware of such fact;
they may not be aware that it was obligatory on them to perform. Yet
they realized that after the money had been disposed of, in that they
were no longer able to perform pilgrimage. If they had a reasonable
excuse for their ignorance or unawareness, pilgrimage is not obligatory
on them. Otherwise, it is apparent that it is, provided that the other
conditions of pilgrimage are met.

**Rule 43:** Means sufficient for pilgrimage are established not only by
their acquisition, but also if a sufficient amount is given away by way
of gift to a person. It matters not in this regard whether the gift is
from one person or a group of people, provided that it is adequate in
total for the expenses of pilgrimage and maintaining the family. There
is no difference in this respect between the donor making the property
lawful for use, or settling it for the pilgrimage, and between making an
outright gift of property or a provision to meet the expenses.

**Rule 44:** If a person inherits property, designated to be spent for
obligatory pilgrimage, it is mandatory on them to do so after the death
of the testator, provided that the bequest is sufficient for the
expenses of pilgrimage and maintaining the family, as explained in the
preceding Rule. Similarly, if a person creates a waqf, makes a nadhr
(vow), or a bequest for performing pilgrimage and the trustee, the
person fulfilling the nadhr, or the executor makes the funds available
to the beneficiary to perform an obligatory pilgrimage, it is mandatory
on them to do so.

**Rule 45:** It is not obligatory, for a person who acquires the means
to perform pilgrimage by way of a gift, to be able to return from the
journey still enjoying a healthy financial situation. However, if they
worked during pilgrimage time and the earnings made thereof provide for
their expenses for the entire year or part thereof, to the extent that
they would not be able to meet the expenses necessary for their
livelihood - should they accept the gift and depart for pilgrimage -
they are not obliged to accept it, only if the gift covers their
expenses.

If, however, the person has some means, which was subsidized by way of
gift, to enable them to embark on pilgrimage, it is apparent that the
criterion 'of means' - according to the definition discussed earlier -
should be applied, in that performing pilgrimage becomes obligatory.

**Rule 46:** If a person makes a gift to another so that the latter
makes the journey to perform an obligatory pilgrimage, it is incumbent
on the recipient to accept the gift. However, if the donor gives the
recipient the option of performing an obligatory pilgrimage or not, or
makes the gift without mentioning the obligatory pilgrimage, expressly
or implicitly, the recipient shall not be bound to accept the gift.

**Rule 47:** The existence of a debt is not incompatible with having
sufficient means acquired by way of a gift. However, if embarking on
pilgrimage was contrary to settling the debt on time, be it prompt or on
a later date, it is not obligatory to perform pilgrimage.

**Rule 48:** If a person donates property to a group of people so that
one of them could perform pilgrimage and one of them comes forward to
accept the gift, the remaining ones are absolved of the obligation.
However, if all of them shun the proposed gift with the knowledge that
any one of them could have taken possession of it, it is apparent that
the obligation to perform pilgrimage is not binding on any one of them.

**Rule 49:** It is not obligatory to accept a gift to make an obligatory
pilgrimage unless it can meet the expenses of the journey. If the
payment is for Hajj-ut-Tamatu'' but the gift is for Hajj-ul-Qiraan or
Hajj-ul-Ifraad, it is not incumbent on the would-be recipient to accept
it and vice versa. Similar is the position if the gift is for an
obligatory pilgrimage and the beneficiary has already performed
obligatory pilgrimage.

However, if he did not perform it when it was obligatory on him and his
circumstances changed, in that he was offered a gift to perform an
obligatory pilgrimage, he is duty-bound to accept the gift. Likewise, if
there was a liability on him to perform a pilgrimage to fulfil a nadhr
or like, but did not have the means to do so and was offered the gift to
perform an obligatory pilgrimage, it is mandatory on him to accept it.

**Rule 50:** If a gift is made to a person to cover the expenditure of
performing an obligatory pilgrimage and it gets destroyed on the way to
pilgrimage, the obligation lapses. However, if it is possible to
continue with the journey with his own sources, it is obligatory on him
to perform the pilgrimage which will be counted as part of Hajjatul
Islam. The obligation, though, is conditional on the fulfilment of the
criterion of 'being of means' right from the out bound journey.

**Rule 51:** If a person authorises another to obtain a loan to go to
pilgrimage, it is not obligatory on the latter to seek one. However, if
the would-be pilgrim received such a loan, it becomes obligatory on him
to perform pilgrimage.

**Rule 52:** Apparently, the cost of the sacrifice should be borne by
the donor. Yet, there is ishkal (problem) in deciding whether it is
obligatory on the recipient to perform the pilgrimage, if the donor does
not pay for it, yet bearing the remainder of the expenses. The only
exception can be if the beneficiary can afford to pay the price of the
sacrifice with his own money.

However, if the purchase of the sacrificial animal by the beneficiary
would cause him undue hardship, it is not obligatory to accept the gift.
Obviously, any kaffarah that may be incurred in the course of pilgrimage
is the exclusive responsibility of the beneficiary.

**Rule 53:** An obligatory pilgrimage performed with a gift given to the
pilgrim is valid to constitute Hajjatul Islam and even if he acquires
the means thereafter, he is not obliged to perform pilgrimage again.

**Rule 54:** It is possible for a donor to withdraw his gift before or
after the beneficiary assumes ihram. However, if the donor withdraws it
after the beneficiary enters into the state of ihram, it is ,most
evidently, obligatory on the beneficiary to complete the pilgrimage,
only without undue hardship; that is, even though he actually did not
have the means. The donor should reimburse him with the expenses
incurred.

And if the donor withdraws the gift while the beneficiary is en route to
pilgrimage, he is responsible for bearing the expenses of the return
journey.

**Rule 55:** If Zakah money, out of the portion of Sabeellilah (the way
of Allah), is given to a person, that the public interest be served, and
the Mujtahid permits it, it shall, as a matter of precaution, be
mandatory on the recipient to go to pilgrimage. If he was given the
money from the share of Sadaat (descendants of the Prophet 's.a.w.') or
Zakah money from the share of the poor, on the condition that he should
spend it on an obligatory pilgrimage, the condition is invalid, as it
does not constitute availability of funds (istita'a) by way of gift..

**Rule 56:** If a person is given a gift to perform Hajjatul Islam and
it later becomes known to him that it was unlawfully obtained by the
donor, the pilgrimage is not valid and the real owner is entitled to
reclaim it from the donor or the beneficiary. If he claims it from the
beneficiary and the latter was unaware as to the true ownership, he
should revert to the donor; otherwise, he has no right to revert to him.

**Rule 57:** If a person, who does not satisfy the criterion of
“availability of funds”, performs an optional pilgrimage for himself or
for another person, either gratuitously or for a reward, it shall not
count as a Hajjatul Islam; it is, therefore, incumbent on him to perform
it when he acquires the means.

**Rule 58:** If a person believes that he does not have the means for
pilgrimage to be obligatory on him but performs it in obedience to the
command of Allah intending it to be accepted and later learns that he
was of means, his pilgrimage shall count as a valid one, i.e. there will
be no need for a second pilgrimage.

**Rule 59:** If a married woman can afford the journey to perform
Hajjatul Islam, she does not need to obtain the consent of her husband.
By the same token, it is not permissible for the husband to prevent her
from performing other types of obligatory pilgrimage. However, he can
prevent her from leaving sooner than necessary, if there is sufficient
time for pilgrimage. The same rule applies to a lady who has been
granted a revocable divorce, if she is in iddah (waiting period).

**Rule 60:** It is not a condition for a lady, performing an obligatory
pilgrimage, to be accompanied by a male, among her mahaarim, provided
her safety is secured. If not, she must be accompanied by a trusted male
even for a fee, should she afford it. Otherwise, pilgrimage is not
obligatory on her.

**Rule 61:** If , for example, a person makes a nadhr to visit the
shrine of Imam Hussain (a.s.) each year on the day of Arafat and
subsequently acquires the means to make the journey to pilgrimage, the
nadhr lapses and he must perform the obligatory pilgrimage. This rule
applies to every other vow that may hinder one from performing
obligatory pilgrimage.

**Rule 62:** A person of means must perform obligatory pilgrimage
personally, if it is possible for him to do so. Someone else performing
it for him, gratuitously or for payment, cannot be considered as a
recompense.

**Rule 63:** If a person is liable to perform an obligatory pilgrimage
but is unable to do so on health grounds, senility, infirmity, and other
constraints, or performing it would cause him undue difficulty - beside
the fact that there is no hope he would be able to perform it himself
without pain - it is obligatory on him to appoint someone to perform it
on his behalf. Such is the rule if he is wealthy, yet unable to embark
on pilgrimage personally, or that to do so would cause him great
difficulty. Once it becomes obligatory to appoint another person to
perform pilgrimage for him, it must be done immediately, just as
performing pilgrimage itself must not be delayed.

**Rule 64:** If a person sets out on a pilgrimage as on behalf of
another who cannot do it himself for ill health and the mandator dies
while the agent is performing the pilgrimage, the pilgrimage of the
agent will be valid, although the pilgrimage had become obligatory on
the mandator. If, per chance, the illness ceases before death, it is
preferable that the pilgrimage be performed personally, as a matter of
precaution. If the illness ceases after the agent has assumed ihram, it
is obligatory on the mandator to perform the pilgrimage himself even
though the agent must complete the ceremonies, as a matter of
precaution.

**Rule 65:** If it is not possible for a person with a valid reason,
preventing him from making the journey to pilgrimage, to appoint an
agent to perform it on his behalf, the obligation to perform the
pilgrimage lapses. However, if the pilgrimage had become obligatory on
him, it is mandatory to have it performed after his death. Moreover, if
it was possible to appoint an agent and he did not do so until his
death, it is obligatory to have the pilgrimage performed after his
death.

**Rule 66:** If it becomes obligatory to appoint an agent but one does
not, the gratuitous performance, by another person, of a pilgrimage on
his behalf does not discharge the obligation; it remains obligatory on
him to send an agent, as a matter of precaution.

**Rule 67:** It is sufficient to appoint an agent from the Meqat; it is
not necessary that he be sent from the home country.

**Rule 68:** If the pilgrimage becomes obligatory on a person and he
dies after wearing ihram in Haram (the precinct of the Grand Mosque,
Ka'ba) he will be deemed to have accomplished his pilgrimage. If he dies
in the course of Umrat-ut-Tamatu', he will be treated likewise i.e.
there is no obligation to have it performed after his death.

However, if he dies before entering the Haram, it is obligatory to have
the pilgrimage performed again in lieu qadha, even if the death occurs
after his having worn ihram but before entry into the Haram, or even
after the entry, if he did so without ihram. This rule is confined to
Hajjatul Islam and does not apply to other types of pilgrimage which
have become obligatory, by virtue of, for example, a vow or for
deliberately invalidating an obligatory pilgrimage (ifsad). Nor has it
any application to Umrat-ul-Mufradah.

Whoever dies after wearing ihram in the Haram, as is required for
performing pilgrimage, there is no doubt that he will be deemed to have
performed Hajjatul Islam. If, however, he dies before then, it is clear
that pilgrimage would have to be performed again for him by way of
qadha.

**Rule 69:** It is obligatory on a non-believer, who has the means, to
perform a pilgrimage, even though it will not be accepted from him so
long as he remains a non-believer. However, if he loses the means before
he converts to Islam, pilgrimage is not obligatory on him.

**Rule 70:** Pilgrimage is obligatory on a Muslim who becomes apostate,
but its performance, in apostasy, is not in order. However, if he
repents, it becomes valid, albeit the apostasy is innate, as a matter of
preferred judgement (alal aqwa).

**Rule 71:** If a non-Shia Muslim performs an obligatory pilgrimage and
then becomes a Shia, it is not obligatory on him to perform pilgrimage
afresh. This being so, provided he had performed it in accordance with
the rules of the faith he then held, or it was performed in accordance
with our faith, and closeness to Allah in performing pilgrimage was
paramount in his mind.

**Rule 72:** If pilgrimage becomes obligatory on a person, but he
deliberately delayed performing it, so much so that he can no longer
afford the journey, it is obligatory on him to perform it by any means
possible. However, if he dies, pilgrimage has to be performed by way of
qadha, from his estate. Should someone performs it for him gratuitously,
after his death, it is in order.


