Wuquf at Arafat
===============

The second obligation in Hajj-ut-Tamatu' is the stay at Arafat. The
objective of performing this act of worship has to be the niyyah of
qurbah (attainment of closes to Allah. The requirement is the presence
in Arafat, regardless of whether the pilgrim is riding, walking, sitting
or moving.

**Rule 365:** The boundaries of Arafat are from Oranah, Thowayeh,
Namerah to Thil Mijaz and Maazamein. Obviously, these boundaries are
outside the places of wuquf for the pilgrims.

**Rule 366:** Apparently, Mount Rahmah is within the part of the place
for wuquf. However, it is recommended to stay on the flat land to the
left of the mountain.

**Rule 367:** What is important in wuquf is the niyyah. If a pilgrim had
set out with such an intention, right from the start of time, and fell
asleep or became unconscious throughout the remaining period, it
suffices.

However, if his sleep or unconsciousness took place throughout the
period, i.e. prior to the niyyah, wuquf will not count as valid. In
contrast, if the same situation happens, but with the niyyah, there is
not a clear-cut ruling (ishkal).

**Rule 365:** Wuquf at Arafat should, as a matter of precaution, be from
the beginning of zawaal on the ninth of Thil Hijjah till sunset.
Apparently, a delay caused by performing ghusl or praying Dhuhr and Asr
jointly is permissible. The wuquf there for this period is obligatory
and whoever fails to do so, by choice, commits a sin.

However, it is not one of the fundamentals of Hajj, i.e. if one fails to
do it there for a portion of the required time, one's Hajj is not
invalidated. Yet, if one deliberately fails to do there altogether, the
Hajj is invalidated. Presence there is one of the requirements, not
wuquf throughout the period.

**Rule 369:** If a pilgrim forgets to perform wuquf at Arafat or fails
to do so out of ignorance, or other reasons, it is obligatory on him to
perform it there for part of the Eid eve; his Hajj will then be
considered valid. If he fails to do it there at all, his Hajj will be
invalidated.

This rule applies when the pilgrim can catch up with the wuquf at
Muzdalifah before sunrise; however, if he was unsure about reaching
Muzdalifah before sunrise, he must confine his wuquf to Muzdalifah only;
his Hajj will therefore be valid.

**Rule 370:** It is forbidden to depart from Arafat knowingly and
deliberately before sunset. However, doing so does not invalidate the
Hajj. There is no kaffarah incurred, if the pilgrim returns to Arafat.
Otherwise, he must, as a matter of precaution, sacrifice a camel in
Mina, not Makkah. Should this not be possible, he must observe fast for
eighteen consecutive days in Makkah or on his way home.

The same rule applies to one who does it prematurely due to
forgetfulness or is ignorant of the rule. It is obligatory on him to
return there on remembering or becoming aware of the rule. Otherwise, he
must, as a matter of precaution, pay the kaffarah in question.

**Rule 371:** Since performing Hajj rituals, such as wuquf at Arafat and
Muzdalifah, stoning the Jamarat, and staying at Mina, is obligatory on
certain days and nights of the month of Thil Hijjah, it is the duty of
the pilgrim to investigate the sighting of the moon for that month, so
that he can perform the ceremonies at the correct times.

If the Qadhi (Religious Authority) of the Holy Places proclaims the
sighting of the moon, albeit not according to the shar'i criteria, it
may be said to be acceptable for those convinced that the proclamation
was correct. They must abide by it; their pilgrimage is valid; otherwise
it will be invalidated.

Furthermore, it may be said that to follow the proclamation of such a
Qadhi is sufficient, even though a pilgrim is not convinced of its
validity, especially when taqiyyah requires such a practice. However,
both the views are extremely problematic, i.e. not clear-cut.
Accordingly, if it was possible for a pilgrim to perform all the
ceremonies on the appointed times, pursuant to the accepted procedure
for ascertaining the sighting of the moon, his pilgrimage is evidently
valid.

Otherwise, if he ignores the opinion of the Qadhi regarding the two
wuqufs [at Arafat and Muzdalifah] his pilgrimage is invalidated; if,
however, he follows the opinion of the Qadhi, without making
investigations, the validity of his pilgrimage is arguable (ishkal).


