Wuquf at Muzdalifah
===================

The third obligation in Hajj-ut-Tamatu' is wuquf at Muzdalifah which is
also known as Mash'aril-Haraam. The limits, within which the wuquf is
obligatory, are from Ma'zmein to Hiyadh and Wadi Muhassar. If, because
of overcrowding and time constraints, it is not possible to be within
the limits, one can climb Ma'zmein.

**Rule 372:** When a pilgrim leaves Arafat, he must spend part of the
night in Muzdalifah. He should, as a matter of precaution, stay till
sunrise. That said, apparently he can depart from there, for Wadi
Muhassar, before sunrise. However, he is not permitted to cross the Wadi
and enter Mina before sunrise.

**Rule 373:** It is obligatory to stay at Muzdalifah from dawn till
sunrise on the day of Eid. Nevertheless, wuquf throughout the period is
not one of the fundamentals of Hajj. Thus, if a pilgrim stopped there
for a period of the Eid eve, then left before dawn, his Hajj is valid.
Yet, if he did so deliberately, he incurs a kaffarah of a sheep. If he
did so out of ignorance, there should be no penalty on him.

**Rule 374:** If a person does not hold wuquf between dawn and sunrise
at all, his Hajj is invalid. Women, children, the fearful, the weak, the
aged, the sick, and those caring for them are exempt. It is permissible
for them to spend the night (Eid eve) at Muzdalifah and proceed to Mina
before dawn.

**Rule 375:** The wuquf at Muzdalifah must be with the intention of
attaining nearness to Allah alone, as is the case for wuquf at Arafat.

**Rule 376:** If a person forgets to hold wuquf at Muzdalifah or is, for
another reason, unable to remain there between dawn and sunrise, he must
do so for a period between sunrise and zawaal on the day of Eid. If he
fails to do so altogether, his Hajj is invalidated.

Accomplishing both the Wuqufs or one of them
--------------------------------------------

It has already been stated that there are appointed and alternative
periods of stay at Arafat and Muzdalifah. If a pilgrim manages to hold
wuquf during the definite periods in both the places, there is no
problem in that. If not, the following situations could arise:

1. if a pilgrim did not manage to hold wuquf at either of the places at
all, his pilgrimage is invalid. It is obligatory on him to change to
Umrat-ul-Mufradah in the ihram of Hajj itself.

2. It is then obligatory on him to perform Hajj in the following year,
if his obligation was Hajjatul Islam, and that he still can afford it
and remained obligated to discharge it.

3. He manages to hold wuquf at Arafat during the appointed period and
the alternative period in Muzdalifah

4. He manages to hold wuquf at Arafat during the alternative period and
at Muzdalifah during the appointed period. In these two circumstances
his Hajj is undoubtedly valid.

5. If he stays at both the places during the alternative period, clearly
his Hajj is valid. However, he must, as a matter of precaution, repeat
it in the following year, as is the case in First above.

6. If he manages only the wuquf at Muzdalifah during the appointed
period, his Hajj is still valid.

7. If he manages only the wuquf at Muzdalifah during the alternative
period, his Hajj is apparently invalid, and that it should be switched
to Umrat-ul-Mufradah.

8. If he manages only the wuquf at Arafat during the appointed period,
apparently his Hajj is invalid, and that he must change to
Umrat-ul-Mufradah. The exception to the rule is if, on his way to Mina,
he passes through Muzdalifah during the appointed period and does not
stay there because of ignorance of the rule.

9. In such a case, it is not far from correct to say that the Hajj will
be valid, particularly when passing through Muzdalifah, the pilgrim was
engrossed in the remembrance of Allah.

10. If he manages only the wuquf at Arafat in the alternative period,
his Hajj is invalid and he must change to Umrat-ul-Mufradah.


