Wuquf at Mina
=============

The twelfth obligation in Hajj is to spend the nights of the eleventh
and twelfth [of Thil Hijjah] in Mina. It is necessary to form the niyyah
of alqurbah.

If, on the Eid day the pilgrim leaves for Makkah to perform tawaf and
sa'y, it is obligatory on him to return to Mina to spend the night
there. He who has not refrained from hunting, while in a state of ihram,
must also spend the night of the thirteenth in Mina. As a matter of
precaution, so must one who has not abstained from sex while in a state
of ihram.

Apart from these two categories, the remaining pilgrims can leave Mina
after Dhuhr of the twelfth; if, however, they delay their departure till
night falls, they must spend the eve of the thirteenth in Mina till
dawn.

**Rule 426:** The pilgrim may embark on leaving Mina and actually leaves
the premises he occupies there, but, due to the traffic or any other
reason, he gets held up. It then follows that, if it is possible for him
to spend the night there, it is obligatory to do so. If, however, it was
not feasible, he is permitted to leave Mina. He should, as a matter of
precaution, sacrifice a sheep as a kaffarah.

**Rule 427:** If it becomes obligatory on a person to spend the night in
Mina, it is not necessary for him to spend the whole of the following
day there also. He needs to stay just long enough to perform rami of the
three Jamarat.

Nor is it obligatory to spend the entire night there; it is enough to
remain there from the beginning of the night till a little after
midnight, or from a little before midnight till dawn.

It is preferable that he should spend the first half of the night there
but must not enter Makkah before sunrise, as a matter of preferred
precaution.

**Rule 428:** The exceptions to the rule of staying in Mina are the
following categories:

A person who finds it difficult to stay for fear of endangering their
life or property;

those spending the whole night in worship in Makkah, except for the time
needed to meet necessities like food, drink, etc.;

those who, having performed the tawaf, remain in prayer, then leave
Makkah, and get beyond Aqabatil Madaniyyeen. They can sleep en route
before getting to Mina, and

people who supply the pilgrims with water.

**Rule 429:** One who fails to spend the nights in Mina must pay a
kaffarah of a sheep for every night, except for the groups in (2), (3)
and (4) above.

As a matter of precaution, even those who fail to do so inadvertently or
out of ignorance of the rule, or are excused from spending the nights
there, must sacrifice a sheep by way of kaffarah.

**Rule 430:** A person who leaves Mina, then re-enters at night on the
eve of the thirteenth for some business, does not need to spend the
night there.


