Types of Hajj
=============

**Rule 143:** There are three types of pilgrimage: Tamatu', Ifraad and
Qiraan. The first is the obligation on those who reside more than 48
miles from Makkah and the other two are prescribed for those who reside
within 48 miles of Makkah.

**Rule 144:** There is no objection to those residing afar to perform
Ifraad or Qiraan pilgrimages as an optional pilgrimage, just as there is
no objection to those residing in the vicinity performing the Tamatu' as
a provisional pilgrimage but this course is not permissible to either of
them in an obligatory pilgrimage.

So performance of a Hajj-ut-Tamatu' for those whose duty is to perform
the Ifraad or Qiraan or vice versa is not permissible. However, the
obligation of those who have to perform Tamatu' can, in certain
circumstances, change to Ifraad as will be explained.

**Rule 145:** If a person residing afar, takes residence in Makkah, his
obligation will change to Hajjul Ifraad or Qiraan after commencement of
the third year of his taking residence there. However, before that his
obligation is to perform Hajj-ut-Tamatu'. There is no difference as to
the availability of funds to perform pilgrimage being materialized
before taking such residence or during the period of the residence.

There is also no difference whether or not he intended to take residence
permanently. The same rule applies to those living in cities other than
Makkah, provided that the distance between the those places and Makkah
is less than 48 miles.

**Rule 146:** When a person resides in Makkah and wishes to perform
Hajj-ut-Tamatu' before the change of his obligation to Hajj-ul-Ifraad or
Qiraan, it has been said that he can wear ihram for Umrat-ut Tamatu'
from Adnal Hil (nearest Meqats to Makkah, such Hudaibiyyah, Ja'ranah,
and at-Tan'eem Mosque).

However, it is arguable (ishkal) that, as a matter of precaution, he
must wear it at one of the Meqats. Indeed, as a matter of precaution he
should wear ihram at the Meqat used by the people of his own country. It
is apparent (alal adhhar) that this rule applies to those residing in
Makkah and wishing to perform Hajj-ut- Tamatu', albeit a recommended
one.

Hajj-ut-Tamatu
--------------

**Rule 147:** This pilgrimage consists of two parts; the first is called
Umrah and the second HajjThe Hajj-ut-Tamatu' applies to the second part;
however, it is obligatory to perform the Umrah before the Hajj.

**Rule 148:** Five matters must be observed in Umrat-ut-Tamatu':

1. ihram must be worn at one of the Meqats which will be discussed
later;

2. tawaf round the Ka'ba;

3. prayer (salah) after the tawaf;

4. sa'y between Safa and Marwah;

5. taqseer, that is, to remove some hair of the head, beard or
moustache. On completion of these five acts, one is out of the state of
ihram and all that which is forbidden during ihram becomes lawful.

**Rule 149:** It is obligatory on the pilgrim to be prepared to
undertake the requirements of the pilgrimage on approaching the ninth of
Thil Hijjah. There are thirteen compulsory acts of worship in obligatory
pilgrimage:

1. wearing ihram in Makkah, details of which will follow;

2. staying in Arafat from noon on the ninth of Thil Hijjah, after
adequate time has elapsed after zawaal to carry out ghusl and say Dhuhr
and Asr prayers jointly (jam'an), till sunset. Arafat is situated about
twelve miles from Makkah;

3. staying in Muzdalifah part of the eve of Eid-ul-Adhha till sunrise on
the day of the Eid. Muzdalifah is situated between Arafat and Makkah;

4. stoning (rami) Jamrat-ul-Aqabah in Mina on the day of the Eid. Mina
is situated about three miles from Makkah;

5. slaughtering an animal in Mina on the day of Eid;

6. shaving the head or removing some hair in Mina. On completion of
these acts, matters forbidden during ihram become lawful except [having
sexual intercourse with one's] woman, perfume and hunting;

7. tawaf (tawaf-uz-ziyarah) on returning to Makkah;

8. prayers after tawaf;

9. sa'y between Safa and Marwah. At this stage wearing perfume becomes
lawful;

10. Tawafun Nisa;

11. prayers after Tawafun Nisa;

12. remaining in Mina during the eve of the eleventh and twelfth and, in
certain circumstances which will be explained below, the eve of the
thirteenth [Thil Hijjah] also;

13. stoning all the three jamarat on the eleventh and twelfth and,
evidently (al adhhar), if the pilgrim is there on the thirteenth.

**Rule 150:** There are certain conditions that should be observed in
Hajj-ut-Tamatu':

1. Niyyah, that is, one must form the intention of performing
Hajj-ut-Tamatu'. If one sets his mind on performing another kind of
pilgrimage, or wavers in his intention, the pilgrimage is invalidated.

2. The Umrah and Hajj must be performed during the season of Hajj (see
Rule 139 '2' above). If any part of the Umrah is performed before
commencement of the month of Shawwal, the Umrah is invalid.

3. The Umrah and Hajj must be performed in the same year. If the Umrah
is performed and then the Hajj is postponed to the next year, the
Tamatu' is invalid. It makes no difference whether the pilgrim remains
in Makkah to the following year or goes back to his country for the
return journey to Makkah. Similarly, it makes no difference whether he
removes the ihram or remains in it to the following year.

4. As a matter of choice, the ihram for Hajj must be worn in Makkah
itself and the best place for it is the Holy Mosque; however, if it is
not possible to wear ihram in Makkah, it may be worn wherever possible.

5. The Umrah and Hajj must both be performed by the same person as an
agent for one particular person. It is not permissible to engage two
agents, for a living or dead person, for Hajj-ut-Tamatu', one to perform
the Umrah and the other the Hajj. Similarly, it is not permissible that
one person performs the Umrah on behalf of one person and the Hajj for
another.

**Rule 151:** If a pilgrim completes the rituals for Umrat-ut-Tamatu',
it is obligatory on him to perform the Hajj. As a matter of precaution,
it is not permissible for him to leave Makkah without performing Hajj.
However, if he wishes to do so, even if it is not necessary, and there
is no fear of missing the Hajj, and if he is sure he can return to
Makkah to wear ihram in time, it is evident that he can depart from
Makkah without ihram.

And if he is not so sure, it is obligatory on him to wear the ihram for
Hajj in Makkah. Only then can he depart and head for Arafat in the same
ihram. It is not permissible for a person who has performed
Umrat-ut-Tamatu' to leave Hajj out of choice, even though it is a
recommended one. However, if it was not possible to perform Hajj, he
should consider it Umrah Mufradah; accordingly, he should perform
Tawafun Nisa.

**Rule 152:** It is permissible for a pilgrim whose obligation is
Hajj-ut-Tamatu' to depart from Makkah before the completion of his
Umrah; that is, evidently, if he is able to return to Makkah; otherwise,
as a matter of precaution, he should not do so.

**Rule 153:** The prohibition against leaving Makkah on completion of
Umrah arises if one is to depart from the city for another place.
However, the new streets and suburbs, that have sprung around the Holy
City, are considered part of it. Thus, the pilgrim can visit them after
completing Umrah, whether or not it was necessary to do so.

**Rule 154:** If the pilgrim has departed from Makkah after completing
Umrah without ihram and goes beyond the Meqat, two situations could
arise:

1. if he returns to Makkah within the same month of completing Umrah, he
must enter Makkah without ihram, wear it in Makkah for Hajj and depart
for Arafat;

2. if he returns to Makkah after the expiry of the month in which he
performed the Umrah, he must repeat it.

**Rule 155:** If the obligation of a person is to perform
Hajj-ut-Tamatu', he cannot change it to Ifraad or Qiraan. There can be
an exception, if a pilgrim embarks on Umrat-ut-Tamatu', then finds the
time too limited to complete the Umrah and commence the Hajj, he can
change his intention (niyyah) to Hajj-ul-Ifraad and perform
Umrat-ul-Mufradah after the Hajj.

The test as to how much time would be considered too limited to complete
the Umrah is a matter of difference between the scholars. However, it is
apparent that he must change his intention, if he cannot complete the
Umrah before midday of the staying (wuquf) in Arafat, i.e. the 9th of
Thil Hijjah.

**Rule 156:** If before embarking on Umrah, the pilgrim for Tamatu' is
aware that his time is too limited to complete the Umrah, before the
zawaal of wuquf at Arafat, changing his intention to Hajjul Ifraad or
Qiraan shall not be sufficient. He must, though, perform Hajj-ut-Tamatu'
after the Umrah, if the pilgrimage was obligatory on him.

**Rule 157:** If a pilgrim wears the ihram for Umrat-ut-Tamatu' in good
time, but deliberately delays tawaf and sa'y till the noon of the 9th of
Thil Hijjah, his Umrah is invalid. It is apparent that he is not
permitted to change his intention to Ifraad. However, as a matter of
caution, he must perform tawaf and say the prayers after it, perform the
sa'y and shave or do taqseer with the intention of acceptance as
Hajj-ul-Ifraad or Umrat-ul-Mufradah.

Hajj-ul-Ifraad
--------------

Hajj-ut-Tamatu' consists of two parts: Umrat-ut-Tamatu' and Hajj. The
first part is connected to the second, and Umrah precedes Hajj.

Hajj-ul-Ifraad is a distinct kind of pilgrimage. It is the obligation of
those who live in or within 48 miles of Makkah. If it is possible for
such a person to perform Umrat-ul-Mufradah, it is obligatory on him to
do so separately. If it is possible for him to perform only one of them,
his obligation will be to perform that only. If it is possible for him
to perform one of them at one time and the other at another time, he
must perform each of them at the time possible. If he can manage both
together, he must perform them at the same time. In this situation, it
is the common view among the scholars that as a matter of caution, he
must give precedence to the Hajj over the Umrat-ul-Mufradah.

**Rule 158:** All the rituals are common to Hajj-ul-Ifraad and
Hajj-ut-Tamatu'. However, there are certain differences:

1. For Hajj-ut-Tamatu', it is obligatory that Umrat-ut-Tamatu' must come
first and both be performed in the same year, as already stated; but
that is not necessary for Hajj-ul-Ifraad.

2. In Hajj-ut-Tamatu', slaughtering of an animal is obligatory, as
discussed earlier on; but that is not necessary for Hajj-ul-Ifraad.

3. In Hajj-ut-Tamatu', it is not permissible to give precedence by
choice to tawaf or sa'y over the two stops. it is permissible, though,
to do so in Hajj-ul-Ifraad.

4. In Hajj-ut-Tamatu', the ihram for the Hajj is worn in Makkah. For
Hajj-ul-Ifraad, it depends upon whether the pilgrim lives in Makkah or
not. This will be set out below.

5. Umrat-ut-Tamatu' must precede the Hajj; but that is not necessary for
Hajj-ul-Ifraad.

6. As a matter of obligatory caution, in Hajj-ut-Tamatu', it is not
permitted to make an optional tawaf after wearing the ihram for it but
that is permitted in Hajj-ul-Ifraad.

**Rule 159:** If a person wears ihram for an optional Hajj-ul-Ifraad, he
is permitted to change his intention to Umrat-ut-Tamatu' by carrying out
taqseer, and thus coming out of ihram, unless he has recited Talbiyah
after sa'y, in which case the change is not permitted.

**Rule 160:** If a person wears ihram for Hajj-ul-Ifraad and enters
Makkah, he is permitted to perform an optional tawaf. However, as a
matter of gratuitous precaution (al ahwatil awla), it is obligatory on
him to repeat the talbiyah after the prayers for the tawaf if he did not
change his intention to Hajj-ut-Tamatu' while it was permissible to do
so. This precautionary measure also applies to obligatory tawaf.


