Meqats for wearing Ihram
========================

There are special places designated by the sacred rules of Islam for
wearing ihram. It is incumbent on the pilgrim to wear ihram there. There
are nine such places, each of which is called Meqat :

1. Thul Hulaifah which is situated near Madinah. It is the Meqat for the
people of Madinah and all those who wish to perform the pilgrimage
travelling from Madinah. As a matter of caution, it is preferred that
ihram be worn, if possible, in the local mosque known as
Masjid-ush-Shajarah. It is insufficient, though, to wear it outside,
except for ladies in menstruation or the like.

**Rule 162:** It is not permissible to delay wearing ihram from Dhul
Hulaifah and wearing it at Johfa instead, except for a valid reason,
such as sickness or due to weakness.

2. Wadil-Aqeeq which is the Meqat for the people of Iraq and Najd and
those passing through there. It has three parts: Maslakh, Ghamrah and
Thati Irq. The preferred view (al ahwatil awla), is for a pilgrim to
wear his ihram before reaching Thati Irq, if there is no case for
dissimulation (taqiyyah) or illness.

**Rule 163:** It has been said d that in dissimulation, it is permitted
to wear ihram secretly before Thati Irq without removing all clothes. On
getting there, the clothes may be removed and ihram worn without
incurring any kaffarah (penalty). However, this opinion is not free from
ishkal.

3. Johfa which is the Meqat for the people of Syria, Egypt and the West
and those who pass from there if they have not worn ihram earlier at
Thul Hulaifa either with or without excuse.

4. Yalamlam which is the Meqat for the people of Yemen and those who
pass from there. It is the name of a mountain.

5. Qarn-ul-Manaazil which is the Meqat for the people of Ta'if and all
those who pass through that route.

6. Insofar as the last four Meqats, i.e. numbers (2) to (5) are
concerned, the Meqats are not confined to the mosques only. but all that
which comes under the banner of these places is so considered. If the
pilgrim is unable to specify the exact place, he can wear ihram by
making a vow (nadhr) before reaching the Meqat.

7. The proximity of any of the above quoted Meqats: If a person takes a
route which does not cross any of the said Meqats, he must wear ihram
from any place which is parallel to the Meqat, that is to say, a place
at which, when he faces the Holy Ka'ba, one of the Meqats would be to
his right or left, and when he proceeds from that point to Makkah, the
Meqat would be behind him.

8. It is sufficient to use common sense to determine if one has reached
such point; it is not necessary to take exact measurements. If a person
takes a route on which he reaches a place which becomes parallel to two
Meqats , it, as a matter of preferential precaution, is recommended that
he should wear ihram on reaching the first of such two places.

9. Makkah which is the Meqat for Hajj-ut-Tamatu', as well as
Hajj-ul-Qiraan and Ifraad for the residents of Makkah, and its
neighbourhood - irrespective of whether or not their obligation shifted
to that of the residents of Makkah - as they are not required to proceed
to the rest of the Meqats. However, it is preferable for all, except
women, to proceed to some other Meqats, such as Ja'ranah to wear their
ihram.

10. As a matter of precaution, one should wear ihram at a place within
the area considered as part of the ancient Makkah at the time of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), although it is permissible to wear it at one of
the new places recently built, except those which would fall outside the
Haram.

11. The pilgrim's home is the Meqat for those who are nearer to Makkah
than the Meqat as it is permissible for them to wear ihram from their
homes and are not obliged to return to a Meqat .

12. Adnal Hil like Hudaybiyyah, Ja'ranah, or Tan'eem: It is the Meqat
for Umrat-ul-Mufradah after the Hajj-ul-Qiraan or Ifraad and all
Umrat-ul-Mufradah by those in Makkah. There is only one exception which
was explained earlier under Rule 140.

Rules of Meqats
---------------

**Rule 164:** It is not permissible to wear ihram before reaching Meqat
nor is it enough just to pass from there in ihram. There is no
alternative to wearing the ihram at the Meqat itself. However, there are
two exceptions:

1. If a pilgrim has made a vow (nadhr) to wear ihram before the Meqat,
it is valid to do so, it is not it necessary to renew it at the Meqat,
or pass through it. Indeed, it is permissible to proceed straight to
Makkah without passing through any Meqat. In this regard there is no
difference between an obligatory and an optional pilgrimage or
Umrat-ul-Mufradah.

2. However, if the ihram is for an obligatory pilgrimage, then it is
necessary that he should wear ihram in the season of the pilgrimage, as
has already been discussed.

3. If a pilgrim wishes to perform Umrat-ul-Mufradah in the month of
Rajab, and fears that the month will elapse before he proceeded to the
Meqat, it is permissible to wear the ihram before the Meqat and it will
count as the Umrah of Rajab, even if the remaining ceremonies were
performed in Sha'ban. In this regard, it does not matter whether the
Umrah is obligatory or optional.

**Rule 165:** It is obligatory on the pilgrim to be certain that he
reaches the Meqat and wears ihram there. He must be satisfied or have
shari'i proof that the place is the Meqat. It is not permissible to wear
the ihram, if there is doubt whether the Meqat has been reached.

**Rule 166:** If a pilgrim had made a vow to wear ihram before Meqat and
contrary to it wears ihram at the Meqat, his ihram is not invalidated.
However, he must pay kaffarah for infringing the vow, if he did so
deliberately.

**Rule 167:** Just as it is not permissible to wear ihram before
reaching Meqat, so is it not permissible to delay wearing it. It is not
permissible for a person who intends to perform a pilgrimage or Umrah or
to enter the Haram or Makkah to pass by the Meqat, by choice, without
wearing ihram there, even if there is another Meqat ahead. If a pilgrim
passes by a Meqat, he must, if possible, return to it to wear the ihram.
There is one exception for those who pass Thul Hulaifah to Johfa,
without excuse. In such a case, it is evident that wearing ihram from
Johfa is sufficient, albeit he is sinful.

As a matter of precaution, it is not permissible to pass any place which
is parallel to one of the Meqats without wearing ihram, although one can
ignore this precaution because there is another Meqat ahead or parallel.
If a passenger does not intend to perform a pilgrimage or enter Makkah
changes his mind after passing Meqat, he can wear ihram for
Umrat-ul-Mufradah from adnal hil

**Rule 168:** If a pilgrim passes by a Meqat deliberately without
wearing ihram , without prejudice to the previous rule, there are two
possible avenues:

• if it is possible to return to the Meqat, it is obligatory to do so
and wear ihram there; it makes no difference whether he returns after
having entered the Haram or from outside it; if he does so, his
pilgrimage is valid;

• if the pilgrim is not able to return to the Meqat, whether he is
inside or outside the Haram, his pilgrimage is invalidated and wearing
ihram from any place beyond the Meqat is not sufficient. He must perform
the pilgrimage in the ensuing year, if he has the means.

**Rule 169:** If a pilgrim abandons wearing ihram due to oversight,
unconsciousness, and the like, or ignorance of the rule or Meqat, four
situations would arise:

• if it is possible to return to the Meqat, it is obligatory to do so
and wear ihram there;

• if he is in the Haram and it is not possible to return to the Meqat,
and it is possible to come out of the Haram, he must go outside and wear
ihram there; it is preferable that, having made his exit from the Haram,
he must proceed as far away from it as possible to wear ihram;

• if he is in the Haram and it is not possible to come out, he must wear
ihram wherever he is, even if he has entered Makkah;

• if he is outside the Haram but it is not possible to return to the
Meqat, as a matter of precaution, he must return as far as possible
towards the Meqat and wear ihram. In all these four situations, the
pilgrimage is valid, if the pilgrim acts in accordance with what is
stated above. The same rule applies to a person who wears ihram before
reaching Meqat, or after leaving it out of ignorance, or due to an
oversight of the rule.

**Rule 170:** If a woman pilgrim, who is in haydh, does not wear ihram
at Meqat out of ignorance of the rule and enters the Haram, as a matter
of precaution, she must go out and wear ihram, if it is not possible for
her to return to the Meqat. In such a situation, it is preferable that
she should go as far away from the Haram as possible and wear ihram, if
in so doing there is no risk of missing the pilgrimage. If there is no
possibility of moving out of the Haram, like the others, he should wear
ihram inside the Haram.

**Rule 171:** If the umrah becomes void, including by reason of the
invalidity of the ihram, it is obligatory to repeat it, if possible and
if, for lack of time, it is not possible to repeat it, obligatory
pilgrimage becomes invalid and it is necessary to perform it again in
the succeeding year.

**Rule 172:** A group of scholars have stated that if a pilgrim performs
an Umrah without ihram, it is valid if he did so out of ignorance or due
to an oversight. However, this is debatable (ishkal). In this situation,
as a matter of precaution, if it is possible, it be repeated in the
manner we have stated.

**Rule 173:** If a person travels from far for a pilgrimage, it is
obligatory on him to wear ihram for Umrah at one of the first five
Meqats. If his route passes through one of them, no problem arises. If
not, as is the case in modern times, when pilgrims first land in Jeddah,
which is not one of the Meqats, it is not permissible to wear ihram
there as it has not been established that it is parallel to any Meqat.
In such a case, he has three options:

1. He can make a vow (nadhr) to wear ihram from his town or on the way,
just before passing over any of the Meqats and before landing in Jeddah,
and wear the ihram at the place stipulated in the vow. There is no
problem in this, provided it does not entail protecting oneself from the
sun (istidhlal) - such as by flying during night time - or sheltering
from the rain.

2. If he lands in Jeddah without ihram, he can proceed to one of the
Meqats, or to a point which is parallel to it, to wear his ihram from
there. He also can go to any of the places, situated behind the Meqat,
such as Rabigh which is on the way to Madinah, and wear ihram there by
making a vow (nadhr), as it is situated before Johfa which may not be
easy to get to.

3. He must make a vow to wear ihram in Jeddah and do so. This is only
permissible, if it is known, albeit generally, that there is a place
between Jeddah and Haram, parallel to one of the Meqats, not far away
from Johfa. If there was a probability that such a place is parallel to
Johfa, and he could not achieve it, ihram by virtue of nadhr is not
permissible.

4. However, if the pilgrim arrives in Jeddah with the intention to
proceed to one of the Meqats, or the like, and he could not make it, he
is permitted to wear his ihram with a nadhr there and then. In such a
case, he, evidently, is not required to renew his ihram outside the
Haram before entering.

**Rule 174:** It has already been stated that, for Hajj-ut-Tamatu', it
is obligatory to wear ihram in Makkah. If a pilgrim deliberately wears
it elsewhere, his ihram is invalid, if he enters Makkah having worn it.
Indeed, it is obligatory on him, if possible, to wear it again in
Makkah; otherwise, his Hajj is invalid.

**Rule 175:** If during Hajj-ut-Tamatu' a pilgrim forgets to wear ihram
for Hajj in Makkah, it is obligatory for him, if possible, to return to
Makkah. Otherwise, he must wear the ihram wherever he remembers to do
so, even if he has reached Arafat, and his Hajj is valid. The same is
the rule for one ignorant of the rule.

**Rule 176:** If a pilgrim forgets to wear the ihram for Hajj and does
not remember to do so until the completion of all the rituals, his Hajj
is valid. The same rule applies to one who is ignorant of the rule.


