Account N. 11 : Khalifa B. Khayyat
==================================

Khalifa b. Khayyat is writing annalistic history, and therefore has to
mention the death of the Imam al-Husayn. He does so in the briefest form
possible and gives a list of the members of the Imam's family who were
killed. He devotes much more space to Yazld's request of his governor,
al-Walid, that the oath of allegiance should be taken from Ibn al-Zubayr
and the Imam al-Husayn[^46].

Before discussing his account, it will be necessary to look at the
accounts that we have from Abu Mikhnaf. Ibn al-Kalbis version has
unified two separate reports from Abu Mikhnaf; they are given separately
by al-Baladhuri. In the first, al-Waqidi's messenger comes to Ibn Zubayr
and the Imam al-Husayn, and they make excuses for not attending.
Al-Walid concentrates his pressure on Ibn al-Zubayr by sending him
messengers, and Ibn al-Zubayr escapes to Mecca. The report adds that
al-Husayn arrives there later, but there is no mention of any actual
meeting with al-Walid. It suggests that when both men are in Mecca, Ibn
al-Zubayr wants the Imam al-Husayn to go to Kufa to get him out of the
way because he is jealous of his influence[^47].

In the second report, Abu Mikhnaf speaks of a meeting between al-Walid
and the Imam al-Husayn in the presence of Marwan b. al-Hakam in which
the Imam puts of pledging allegiance to Yazid and gets angry with Marwan
for threatening to kill him[^48] .

The Uthmaniyya view of this event is somewhat different. Khalifa b.
Khayyat gives an account from Wahb b. Jarir on the authority of Abu Bakr
Juwayriyya b. Asma' al-Hudhali, who says that he heard from so many
scholars of Medina that he cannot count them. According to this, Yazid's
letter comes to al-Walid. He sends for Marwan who advises him to make
Ibn al-Zubayr and the Imam al-Husayn pledge allegiance to Yazid
immediately. Ibn al-Zubayr arrives first and there follows a
conversation which is almost identical with the one Abu Mikhnaf reported
to have taken place with the Imam al-Husayn.

Al-Walid orders them both to leave. The Imam al-Husayn arrives, but
nothing is said to him until both men return. The narrative is
interrupted at this point by the omission of something, and then goes on
with Marwan advising al-Walid to appoint spies to watch Ibn al-Zubayr.
Ibn al-Zubayr then makes his escape to Mecca and is followed later by
the Imam al-Husayn. In Mecca, he asks the Imam al-Husayn why he has not
gone to his supporters, adding that if he had such supporters, he would
go to them[^49] .

Al-Baladhuri has another report from Wahb b. Jarir which purports to
come from a servant of Mu'awiya[^50].

Khalifa b. Khayyat reports the first half of it but prefers Abu Bakr
al-Hudhalis account of the actual meeting with al-Walid[^51].

In this report, Zurayq, the servant of Mu\`awiya, brings the message to
al-Walid from Yazid. It is a very colourful account which gives details
of the clothes all the main characters are wearing. Al-Walid is full of
bitter grief at the death of Mu\`awiya and sends for Marwan. Marwan
advises that the men should be sent for.

The Imam al-Husayn arrives first, followed by Ibn al-Zubayr; then a new
character arrives, Abd Allah b. Muti\`, who is a supporter of Ibn
al-Zubayr. Al-Walid announces the death of Mu\`awiya and calls upon them
to pledge alliegance. It is Ibn al-Zubayr who takes it on himself to
answer and he persuades al-Walid to let them delay it until the morning.
Al-Walid does so and they all escape.

Clearly these two \`Uthmaniyya accounts are meant to build up the
reputation of Ibn al-Zubayr at the expense of the Imam al-Husayn. They
seem like propaganda. Abu Bakr al-Hudhali gives us as his authority
countless scholars of Medina but does not name one of them. When
compared with Abu Mikhnafs tradition, it is obvious that one of them is
based on the other and it seems probable that Abu Mikhnaf's account is
the earlier. The second account is full of such great detail with regard
to the clothes people were wearing as to suggest that it was written by
a fashion critic. Clearly, these details are meant to establish its
authenticity, but they rather tend to suggest that it is a
fabrication.

**Notes:**

[^46] Khalifa b. Khayyat, Ta'rikh (2nd ed., Beirut, 1977), pp. 231-6
[^47] Al-Baladhuri, Ansab al-Ashraf (Beirut, 1979), IV/2, 299-301
[^48] Ibid., pp. 302-3; cf. al-Tabari, op. cit., pp. 216-19.
[^49] Khalifa b. Khayyat, op. cit., pp. 232-3.
[^50] Al-Baladhuri, op. cit., pp. 309-10.
[^51] Khalifa b. Khayyat, op. cit., pp. 232.


