Question 8: Who is the Mahdi of Muhammad’s Progeny {Al Muhammad} and why are you waiting for his advent?
========================================================================================================

**Reply:** Among the issues on which the heavenly religions have
consensus of opinion is the “Global Reformer” who shall appear at the
end of time. Not only the Muslims but also the Jews and Christians are
waiting for the advent of this man who will spread justice in the world.
A survey of the Old and New Testaments will make this fact clear.[^1]

In this regard, *muhaddithun* narrate that the Holy Prophet (S) has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لو لم يبق من الدهر إلا يوم لبعث الله رجلاً من أهل بيتي يملأها عدلاً
كما مُلئت جوراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Even if only one day is to remain in this world, God will surely send a
man from my *Ahl al-Bayt* who shall fill the world with justice and
equity just as it has been filled with oppression.[^2]

Therefore, as it has been mentioned earlier, the belief in the coming of
such a reformer is commonly acknowledged by the authorities of the
heavenly religions, and by many traditions regarding the Promised Mahdi
presented in the *Sahih* and *Musnad* books of the Ahl as-Sunnah. The
*muhaddithun* and scholars of the two Islamic sects (Shi‘ah and Sunni)
have written a good many books regarding him (*‘a*).[^3]

The compendium of these traditions have specified his characteristics
and salient features in such a manner that they are exactly applicable
to the direct son of Imam Hasan al-‘Askari (*‘a*),[^4] the 11th Imam
followed by the Shi‘ah. According to these traditions, his name is the
same as that of the Holy Prophet (S);[^5] he is the twelfth Imam,[^6]
and he is from the progeny of Husayn ibn ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (*‘a*).[^7]

By Divine Command, the Promised Mahdi was born in 255 AH and he is now
living like other people, though in a state of occultation {*ghaybah*}.

It is necessary to note that such a long life is incongruent neither
with science and learning, nor with the logic of revelation. Today
science is at the threshold of increasing man’s longevity, believing
that man has the ability to live for ages and ages, and if one remains
safe from defects and vulnerabilities, the prospect for a long life will
be brighter. History has also recorded the names of those who had lived
to a very great age.

Concerning Prophet Nuh (Noah) (*‘a*), the Glorious Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلبث فيهم ألف سنة إلا خمسين عاماً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And he remained with them (his people) for a thousand-less-fifty
years.”***[^8]

And regarding Hadrat Yunus (Jonah) (*‘a*), it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلولا أنه كان من المسبحين للبث في بطنه إلى يوم يُبعثون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And had he not been one of those who celebrate Allah’s glory, he
would have surely remained in its belly till the day they will be
resurrected.”***[^9]

Similarly, from a Qur’anic viewpoint and in the view of all Muslims of
the world, Hadrat Khidr (*‘a*) and Hadrat ‘Isa (Jesus) (*‘a*) are still
alive and they will continue to live.

[^1]: Psalms of David, Songs 96-97; Book of Daniel, chap. 12 of the Old
Testament; Gospel of Matthew, chap. 24; Gospel of Mark, chap. 13; Gospel
of Luke, chap. 21 of the New Testament are narrating about the Promised
One for whose advent the world is waiting.

[^2]: Sunan Abu Dawud (Egypt: Taziyyah Press, n.d.), vol. 2, p. 207;
Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 432; Nur al-Absar, bab 2, p. 154.

[^3]: See, for example, Muhammad ibn Yusuf ibn al-Kanji ash-Shafi‘i,
Al-Bayan fi Akhbar Sahib az-Zaman; ‘Ali ibn Husam ad-Din known as
Muttaqi al-Hindi, Al-Burhan fi ‘Alamat Mahdi Akhir az-Zaman; Ahmad Amin
Misri, Al-Mahdi wa’l-Mahdawiyyah. The Shi‘ah ‘ulama’ have written a lot
of books in this regard which are too many to enumerate such as
Al-Malahim wa’l-Fitan, etc.

[^4]: Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, part 76, on “virtues”, from Jabir ibn ‘Abd
Allah al-Ansari.

[^5]: Sahih Tirmidhi (New Delhi, 1342 AH), vol. 2, p. 46; Musnad Ahmad
ibn Hanbal (Egypt, 1313 AH), vol. 1, p. 376.

[^6]: Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 443.

[^7]: Ibid., p. 432.

[^8]: Surah al-‘Ankabut 29:14.

[^9]: Surah as-Saffat 37:143-144.


