Question 11: What is shafa‘ah {intercession}, which you believe in?
===================================================================

**Reply:** *Shafa‘ah* {intercession} is one of the principles confirmed
by Islam which has been acknowledged by all Muslim sects and schools of
thought which abide by the Qur’an and *Sunnah* regardless of their
different views about the outcome of *shafa‘ah*. *Shafa‘ah* means that
an honorable person who enjoys special station and proximity to God can
plead with God, the Exalted, for the forgiveness of the sins of sinners,
or elevation of the station of others.

The Holy Prophet (S) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"أعطيت خمساً وأعطيت الشفاعة فأدخرتها لأمتي."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I have been granted five things… and I have been granted intercession
which I have reserved for my *ummah*.”[^1]

The extent of shafa‘ah
----------------------

The Qur’an rejects the idea of absolute and unconditional intercession.
Intercession cannot be effective without the following conditions:

**First:** The intercessor must be authorized by God to intercede. The
only group that can intercede are those who, apart from having spiritual
proximity to God, are authorized by Him (to intercede). In this regard,
the Glorious Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لا يملكون الشفعة إلا من إتخذ عند الرحمن عهداً."
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“No one will have the power to intercede {with Allah}, except for him
who has taken a covenant with the All-beneficent.”***[^2]

Also, it states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"يومئذٍ لا تنفع الشفعة إلا من أذن له الرحمن ورضى له قولاً."
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Intercession will not avail that day except from him whom the
All-beneficent allows and approves of his word.”***[^3]

**Second:** Also, the person to be interceded for should also be worthy
of attaining the divine grace through the intercessor. That is, his
faith in God and his spiritual ties with the intercessor should not be
broken. As such, the unbelievers who have no faith in God and some of
the sinful Muslims, such as murderers and those who do not offer
prayers, who are not spiritually attached to the intercessor, will not
be interceded for.  
 Concerning those who do not offer prayers and deny the Day of
Resurrection, the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"فما تنفعهم شفعة الشفعين."
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them.”***[^4]

And regarding the wrongdoers, it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ما للظالمين من حميم ولا شفيع يُطاع."
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The wrongdoers will have no sympathizer, nor any intercessor who
might be heard.”***[^5]

The philosophy of shafa‘ah
--------------------------

*Shafa‘ah* {intercession}, like *tawbah* {repentance}, is a gleam source
of hope for those who can abandon their sins in the midway of deviation
and sin, and spend the rest of their life in obedience to God; for,
whenever a sinful person feels that he or she can, under limited
circumstances (not any circumstances), attain the intercession of the
intercessor, he or she will try to keep to this limit and not go any
further.

The outcome of shafa‘ah
-----------------------

Different views are shown by exegetes on whether the outcome of
intercession is forgiveness of sins or elevation of one’s station, but
the following saying of the Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"إن شفاعتي يوم القيامة لأهل الكبائر من أمتي."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“My intercession on the Day of Resurrection is granted to those from my
*ummah* who have committed major sins”[^6]  
 highlights the first view.

[^1]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, vol. 1, p. 301; Sahih al-Bukhari (Egypt),
vol. 1, p. 91.

[^2]: Surah Maryam 19:87.

[^3]: Surah Ta Ha 20:109.

[^4]: Surah al-Muddaththir 74:48.

[^5]: Surah al-Ghafir (or al-Mu’min) 40:18.

[^6]: Sunan Ibn Majah, vol. 2, p. 583; Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, vol. 3,
p. 213; Sunan Ibn Dawud, vol. 2, p. 537; Sunan at-Tirmidhi, vol. 4, p.
45.


