Question 12: Is asking the rightful intercessors for intercession {shafa‘ah} tantamount to polytheism {shirk}?
==============================================================================================================

While discussing this question, it is assumed that intercession
{*shafa‘ah*} exclusively rests with God as it is stated in the Holy
Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"قل لله الشفعة جميعاً."
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say, ‘All intercession rests with Allah’.”***[^1]

Therefore, turning for intercession to any other than God means asking
for God’s absolute right from His servant and seeking such a need is, in
reality, worshipping other than God which is inconsistent with
“monotheism in worship” {*tawhid fi’l ‘ibadah*}.

**Reply:** Here, *shirk* {polytheism} does not mean polytheism in
essence, creative power or in design (governing); it actually means
polytheism in worshipping Him.

Obviously, elucidating this point depends on the correct interpretation
of worship and devotion, and we all know that in interpreting the word
“worship” we have not been authorized to consider as “worship” any form
of submission to a creator or any type of request from a servant (of
God).  
 According to the Glorious Qur’an, the angels prostrated to Adam (Adam)
(*‘a*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَإِذَا سَوَّيْتُهُ وَنَفَخْتُ فِيهِ مِن رُّوحِي فَقَعُوا لَهُ
سَاجِدِينَ ٭ فَسَجَدَ الْمَلَائِكَةُ كُلُّهُمْ أَجْمَعُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“‘So when I have proportioned him and breathed into him of My spirit,
then fall down in prostration before him.’ Thereat the angels prostrated
all of them together.”***[^2]

This prostration, though decreed by God, it was not meant to worship
Adam (*‘a*), otherwise God would not have ordered it.

Similarly, the sons of Ya‘qub (Jacob) (*‘a*) as well as Ya‘qub himself
prostrated before Yusuf (Joseph) (*‘a*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ورفع أبويه على العرش وخرُّوا له سجداً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And he seated his parents high upon the throne, and they fell down
prostrate before him.”***[^3]

If we consider this humility as equivalent to worshipping Yusuf (*‘a*),
then Prophet Ya‘qub (*‘a*) who has a station of infallibility {*‘ismah*}
must not have done it nor must he have been pleased with his sons’ act.
Meanwhile, there is no way of expressing humility that is loftier than
prostration.

Consequently, we must distinguish between the concept of “humility” or
“asking from other than God” and that of “worshipping God”. The true
meaning of worship is to think of a creature as a god and worship
it/him, or to regard a phenomenon as one of God’s creatures and assume
that it has been commissioned to perform divine actions, such as
governing the world and forgiving sins.

But when showing humility to someone and we do not regard that one as a
god and we do not think that he or she has been commissioned to perform
divine actions, such humility will mean nothing but an expression of
respect to that one as in the case of the angels’ reverence to Adam
(*‘a*) or the honor paid by the sons of Ya‘qub to Yusuf (*‘a*).

Regarding this question, it must also be stated that to assume that the
right of intercession has been granted to the rightful intercessors and
that they can unconditionally intercede for people or forgive their sins
will entail polytheism {*shirk*}, for this means seeking what is with
God from other than Him.

But when we think that a group of pure servants of God are authorized
within a certain context to intercede on behalf of the sinners without
assuming that they possess the station of *shafa‘ah* and we think that
the most important requisite is God’s permission and good pleasure, it
is clear that resorting to a righteous servant (of God) for intercession
does not mean recognizing him as a god nor does it mean that the
responsibility of the divine affairs has been entrusted to him; rather,
it means asking someone who is worthy of it.

In the lifetime of the Prophet (S) sinners would come to him and ask him
for forgiveness (of the sins) and he would not accuse them of
polytheism. In the *Sunan* of Ibn Majah, the Prophet (S) is reported to
have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"أتدرون ما خيّرني ربي الليلة؟ قلنا: الله ورسوله أعلم. قال: فإنه خيّرني
بين أن يدخل نصف امتي والجنة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وبين الشفاعة فاخترت الشفاعة قلنا يا رسول الله أدعُ الله أن يجعلنا من
أهلها قال هى لكل مسلم."
  </p>
</blockquote>

Do you know what God has granted me this night?” We said: “God and His
Prophet know better.” He added: “He has granted me the favor of choosing
one of two things: the first is that half of my *ummah* shall enter
paradise and the second is the authority to intercede. So I chose the
second.” We said: “O Messenger of Allah! Ask God that we will be worthy
of it (intercession).” He said: “It will be for all Muslims.[^4]

In this *hadith*, it is clearly shown that the Companions of the Prophet
(S) are asking him for intercession, saying, “Ask God that…”  
 The Holy Qur’an also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ إِذ ظَّلَمُواْ أَنفُسَهُمْ جَآؤُوكَ
فَاسْتَغْفَرُواْ اللّهَ وَاسْتَغْفَرَ لَهُمُ الرَّسُولُ لَوَجَدُواْ
اللّهَ تَوَّابًا رَّحِيمًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Had they, when they wronged themselves, come to you and pleaded
Allah for forgiveness, and the Apostle had pleaded for forgiveness for
them, they would have surely found Allah all-clement,
all-merciful.”***[^5]

Elsewhere, the Qur’an quotes the sons of Ya‘qub (*‘a*) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"قالوا يأبانا استغفر لنا ذنوبنا إنا كُنا خطئين."
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They said, ‘Father! Plead {with Allah} for forgiveness of our sins!
We have indeed been erring’.”***[^6]

So, Hadrat Ya‘qub (*‘a*) promised them to plead with Allah to forgive
them without accusing them of polytheism (for asking him to plead for
forgiveness):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال سوف أستغفر لكم ربي إنه هو الغفور الرحيم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He said, ‘I shall plead with my Lord to forgive you; indeed He is
the All-forgiving, the All-merciful’.”***[^7]

[^1]: Surah az-Zumar 39:44.

[^2]: Surah Sad 38:72-73.

[^3]: Surah Yusuf 12:100.

[^4]: Sunan Ibn Majah, vol. 2, “Bab Dhikr ash-Shafa‘ah,” p. 586.

[^5]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:64.

[^6]: Surah Yusuf 12:97.

[^7]: Surah Yusuf 12:98.


