Introduction
============

**In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful**

Those who are aware of the circumstances prevailing in the Muslim world
know well that nowadays the Muslim *ummah*[^1] has become “*ummah*s” and
every “*ummah*” has its own way and customs and the life of its subjects
has fallen into the grasp of individuals who regard their hegemony and
survival as depending on kindling flame of differences.

Consequently, these individuals have made investment in various forms
and are able to make use of every possible means.

This situation has left no room for dialogue among the Islamic sects and
there has been a lot of dispute over many questions. Most of these
questions are scholastic {*masa’il-e kalami*} originated by Muslim
scholastic theologians {*mutakallimun*} and many Muslims are unaware of
those differences.

However, there are common axes which form a good ground for unity among
them. In fact, the common points of the various Muslim sects are more
than the points of difference; yet, the sponsors of discord have dwelt
on those differences and so they mention nothing but the common issues
related to the roots and branches of religion.

In one of the conferences on “Proximity among the Islamic Schools of
Thought”, I was assigned to expound on the topic, “The Schools of
Jurisprudence Regarding Personal Statuses” (marriage, divorce,
inheritance, etc.).

I presented to the conference the writer’s paper which surprised the
Sunni participants. Prior to reading the paper, they rejected the idea
that in most issues pertaining to these three questions the Shi‘ah
jurisprudence has identical view with that of the present four Sunni
schools of thought.

From a distance a grudge is nursed and the Shi‘ah is regarded as apart
from the Muslim sects. Day and night they speak in the mass media
against this group which has been wronged by history. This act can only
render service to the common enemy.

This unwary group is invited to lift the veils of ignorance from their
views and establish better ties with the Shi‘ah,[^2] strengthen their
connection with their *‘ulama’* and scholars, and recognize the Shi‘ah
as their own brothers—an aim which the Shi‘ah has for centuries been
looking for, and thus, realizing the purport of the verse that follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ هَٰذِهِ أُمَّتُكُمْ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً وَأَنَا رَبُّكُمْ
فَاعْبُدُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed this community of yours is one community, and I am your Lord.
So worship Me.*****”**[^3]

One of the old plots hatched by imperialism in the Muslim nations is to
create skepticisms and to intensify problems and then to strike a blow
for the glorious Islamic Revolution, and various forms of this old
method was common in the Middle East and other regions in recent
centuries.

On meeting Iranian pilgrims during the *Hajj* season, many pilgrims who
have familiarity with the Islamic Revolution and whose minds are
poisoned with the enemy’s sinister propaganda, ask questions and want to
know the answers.

In response to this demand, the eminent and honorable scholar, Sayyid
Rida Husayni Nasab, compiled the answers (to those questions) under my
supervision and according to the permission given to him, he was to
observe brevity in answering the questions and to put detailed
explanations to a later time.

It is hoped that this little service would be accepted by the Imam of
the Time (may our souls be his ransom).

**Ja‘far Subhani**  
**The Islamic Seminary, Qum**  
***Adhar 1, 1374 AHS***  
***(December 22, 1995)***

[^1]: Ummah: the entire Islamic community which knows no territorial or
ethnic distinction. {Trans.}

[^2]: In this volume, I have maintained the word “Shi‘ah” to refer to
both the group (single collective unit) and the individuals constituting
the group (plural). {Trans.}

[^3]: Surah al-Anbiya’ 21:92. A similar verse is Surah al-Mu’minun
23:52: “Indeed this community of yours is one community, and I am your
Lord, so be wary of Me.” In this volume, the translation of Qur’anic
passages is adapted from Sayyid ‘Ali Quli Qara’i, The Qur’an with a
Phrase-by-Phrase English Translation (London: Islamic College for
Advanced Studies Press, 2004). {Trans.}


