Question 18: What is meant by “temporary marriage” {mut‘ah} and why do the Shi‘ah regard it as lawful?
======================================================================================================

**Reply:** Marriage {*nikah*} is an agreement between a man and a woman.
Sometimes this bond has a permanent effect and the contract {*‘aqd*}
does not have time limit, and sometimes its effect is temporary and its
time limit is fixed. Both kinds are recognized as legal and the only
difference between them is that one is “permanent” and the other is
“temporary”. In other aspects they are the same. The conditions below
render valid both *mut‘ah* “temporary” marriage and “permanent”
marriage:

1. There should be no such religious prohibitions like consanguineous
and affinitive relationships or the like which render the contract null
and void.

2. The dowry {*mahr*} agreed upon by both sides has to be stipulated in
the contract.

3. The duration of marriage has to be fixed.

4. The contract must be performed.

5. The child that they will beget is considered their legitimate child.
Just as a birth certificate that is granted to a child born out of
permanent marriage, a child that is born due to a temporary marriage has
to be granted a birth certificate. So, there is no difference between
permanent and temporary contracts in this regard.

6. The expenditure on the child or children is one of the duties of the
father, and the child or children are to inherit from the father and
from the mother.

7. When the marriage contract expires, the woman who has not reached
menopause has to observe a waiting period {*‘iddah*}. If during the
waiting period she is found pregnant, she has to refrain from any type
of marriage during pregnancy.

Also, the other laws of permanent marriage have to be observed in
*mut‘ah*. The only difference between the two is that since *mut‘ah* has
been ordained to fulfill man’s needs, the expenses of the woman is not
incumbent on man. If, during signing of the contract, the woman did not
make it a condition that she can have a share from the inheritance, she
shall not inherit from her husband. It is clear that these two
differences have no effect on the nature of marriage.

We all know that the Islamic creed is the eternal and final law, which
can satisfy all needs. Nowadays, we see the situation of the youth, who
have to spend many years of study in a foreign country or city. On
account of the limited resources, they cannot afford permanent marriage,
and have one of these three alternatives to choose:

a. to endure the mentioned condition;

b. to fall in the quagmire of corruption and perdition;

c. to marry a woman with whom it is permissible for a man to make a
temporary marriage contract for a certain period.

Regarding the first alternative, in most cases, it ends in failure.
Although a few individuals can abstain from any type of sex and exercise
patience and fortitude, this method is not applicable to all.

The second option also ends in corruption and desperation, and according
to Islam it is forbidden {*haram*} and to prescribe it under the pretext
of necessity is but a kind of mental deviation and perversion.

Therefore, the third alternative is the only practical way recommended
by Islam and it was practiced in the lifetime of the Prophet (S) and the
dispute over this issue started after that.

At this juncture, we have to point to something and that is, those who
have a sense of anxiety about *mut‘ah* and regard it as illegitimate
should know that all Muslim jurists {*fuqaha*} and scholars have
accepted something which is similar to that of a permanent (marriage)
contract. They agree on the idea that the two sides can conclude a
permanent contract with the intention that they separate through divorce
after one year, or more or less.

It is clear that such an agreement is apparently “permanent” but in
reality it is temporary. The difference between this type of “permanent”
marriage and that of *mut‘ah* is that the latter is, exoterically and
esoterically, limited and temporary while the former is exoterically
“permanent” but esoterically temporary.

Why do those who declare as permissible this type of permanent marriage,
on which all Muslim jurists agree, entertain fear and anxiety when it
comes to prescribing and recommending *mut‘ah*?

Now that we have understood what *mut‘ah* is, let us see why *mut‘ah* is
regarded as religiously lawful and why it has been decreed. It is
appropriate that the discussion will be at two levels:

1. The legitimacy of *mut‘ah* during the early period of Islam, and

2. The non-abrogation of this religious law in the lifetime of the
Messenger of Allah (S).

The following verse is an explicit proof of the legitimacy of *mut‘ah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"فما استمتعتم به منهم فئاتوهنّ أجورهنّ فريضة."
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“For the enjoyment you have had from them thereby, give them their
dowries, by way of settlement.”***[^1]

The wording {*alfaz*} of this verse testifies that something has been
revealed about *mut‘ah* because:

**First:** The word “*istimta‘*”apparently refers to “temporary
marriage”. If it meant permanent marriage, there would be a need for
analogy {*qarinah*}.

**Second:** The word “*ujurahunna*” which means “their dowries” is a
clear proof that it is about *mut‘ah* because in the case of permanent
marriage, such words as “*mahr*” or “*sadaq*” is used.

**Third:** The Shi‘ah and Sunni exegetes {*mufassirun*} are of the
opinion that the said verse is about *mut‘ah*.

Jalal ad-Din as-Suyuti, in his exegesis {*tafsir*}, *Ad-Durr
al-Manthur*, narrates on the authority of Ibn Jarir and Saddi that the
abovementioned verse is pertaining to *mut‘ah*.[^2]

Also, Abu Ja‘far Muhammad ibn Jarir at-Tabari, in his exegesis, narrates
on the authority of Saddi, Mujahid and Ibn al-‘Abbas, that this verse is
related to temporary marriage.[^3]

**Fourth:** The compilers of *Sahih*, *Musnad* and *Jami‘* books of
*hadith* have also accepted this fact. For example, Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj
in his *Sahih* narrates on the authority of Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah and
Salmah ibn Aku‘ that they have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"خرج علينا منادي رسول الله رسول أنّ فقال الله قد أذن لكم أن تستمعوا
يعني متعة النساء."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The harbinger of the Messenger of Allah came to us and said: The
Messenger of Allah has granted you permission to have “*istimta‘*”; that
is, temporary marriage.”[^4]

The traditions in *Sahih* and *Musnad* books are too many to be
mentioned in this (concise) book. Therefore, Muslim scholars and
exegetes agree on the idea that *mut‘ah* was decreed in the early period
of Islam and in the lifetime of the Holy Prophet (S).[^5]

The question which is worth considering here is: Has the purport of the
verse on *mut‘ah* been abrogated {*mansukh*}?

Perhaps, those who have doubt about the principle of legitimacy of
*mut‘ah* in the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah are very few. This
indicates this law has not been abrogated.

The traditions and history of Islam is replete with evidence that till
the caliphate of the second caliph this law had been prevalent among
Muslims but the second caliph prohibited it out of expediency.

In his *Sahih*, Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj narrates that Ibn al-‘Abbas and Ibn
az-Zubayr opposed the prohibition of *mut‘ah* on women and *mut‘ah* on
*Hajj*. Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"فعلنا هما مع رسول الله ثم نهانا عنهما عُمر فلم نعد لهما."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“In the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah, we used to perform both the
two (*mut‘ah*s). Then, ‘Umar prohibited us from doing them and since
then we have not practiced them.”[^6]

In his book of exegesis, Jalal ad-Din as-Suyuti narrates on the
authority of ‘Abd ar-Razzaq, Abu Dawud and Ibn Jarir, and they narrate
the decree when he was asked, “Has the verse on *mut‘ah* been
abrogated?” He replied, “No,” and ‘Ali (*‘a*) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لولا أن عمر نهى عن المتعة ما زنى إلا شقيّ."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Had ‘Umar not prohibited *mut‘ah*, no one would have ever committed
adultery and fornication {*zina*} except a wretched person.”[^7]

Also, ‘Ali ibn Muhammad Qawshchi says: “‘Umar ibn al-Khattab announced
from the pulpit:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"أيها الناس ثلاث كنّ على عهد رسول الله أنا أنهي عنهنّ و أحرمهنّ وأعاقب
عليهنّ وهى متعة النساء ومتعة الحج وحيّ على خير العمل."
  </p>
</blockquote>

O people! Three things were prevalent in the time of the Messenger of
Allah and now I prohibit them, and punish those who practice them. They
are *mut‘ah* on women, *mut‘ah* on *Hajj* and saying “*hayya ‘ala
khayri’l-‘amal*” {come to the best of deeds} (in *adhan*).[^8]

It is worth noticing that there are so many traditions in this regard
that they cannot be covered in this (concise) book.[^9]

It must be stated that *mut‘ah* is one of the types of marriage because
marriage is categorized into two kinds: permanent and temporary. A woman
who concludes a temporary marriage is ruled as a man’s wife and he as
her husband. Naturally, such a marriage is referred to in the Qur’anic
verses on marriage.

Since the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"والذين هُم لفُروجهم حفظون إلا على أزواجهم أو ما ملكت أيمنهم."
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(Certainly, the faithful have attained salvation—those) who guard
their private parts except from their spouses or their slave
women,”***[^10]

a woman who has entered a temporary marriage contract with the stated
conditions is considered among the individuals referred to by **﴾**
**أَزْوَاجِهِمْ** **عَلَىٰ** **إِلاَّ** **﴿** **“*****except for their
spouses*****”** and is not excluded from it. Accordingly, the woman who
is married to a man by making a *mut‘ah* contract becomes his spouse and
wife and she becomes one of those who are included in the term
“*azwajihim*”.

And if according to the stated verse (in *Surah al-Mu’minun*) both
groups of women (spouses and slave women) are allowed to have marital
relations, the woman who has entered a temporary marriage contract is
included in the first group (spouses).

It is surprising that some regard the stated verse in *Surah
al-Mu’minun* as the abrogator {*nasikh*} of the verse on *mut‘ah* in
*Surah an-Nisa’*. This is while we all know that the revelation of the
abrogator verse {*ayat an-nasikh*} should be after the abrogated verse
{*ayat al-mansukh*}, but in the mentioned case, it is otherwise. *Surah
al-Mu’minun*, which some assume to be the “abrogator”, is a *Makki*
*surah* (that is, it was revealed in the Holy City of Mecca prior to the
Holy Prophet’s emigration {*hijrah*} to Medina) and *Surah an-Nisa’*,
which contains the verse on *mut‘ah* is a *Madani* *surah* (that is, it
was revealed in the city of Medina after the *hijrah* of the Prophet
(S)).

Now, how could a verse in a *Makki* *surah* abrogate another verse in a
*Madani* *surah*?

The other vivid proof that refutes the claim of abrogation of the verse
on *mut‘ah* in the lifetime of the Prophet (S) are the many traditions
that deny the abrogation of that verse in the time of the Messenger of
Allah (S). The tradition narrated and explained by Jalal ad-Din
as-Suyuti in *Ad-Durr al-Manthur* is an example.[^11]

In conclusion, it should be noted that the Imams from the *Ahl al-Bayt*
who, according to the *Hadith ath-Thaqalayn*, are the source of guidance
of the *ummah* and the intimate peer of the Qur’an, emphasize the
legitimacy of *mut‘ah* marriage and reject the idea of abrogation.[^12]

The fact that Islam is capable of solving the problems of mankind in
every epoch confirms the legitimacy of such a marriage with the
conditions stipulated earlier; for, one of the ways of saving the youth
from the quagmires of corruption and perversion today is this fixed-time
marriage which has to be performed within the framework of certain
conditions.

[^1]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:24.

[^2]: Ad-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 2, p. 140, on the commentary of the said
verse.

[^3]: Jami‘ al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, vol. 5, p. 9.

[^4]: Sahih Muslim (Egypt), vol. 4, p. 130.

[^5]: For instance, let us consider the following evidence: Sahih
al-Bukhari, “Bab Tamattu‘;” Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, vol. 3, p. 356;
vol. 4, p. 436; Malik, Al-Muwatta’, vol. 2, p. 30; Sunan al-Bayhaqi,
vol. 7, p. 306; Tafsir at-Tabari, vol. 5, p. 9; Nihayah Ibn al-Athir,
vol. 2, p. 249; Tafsir ar-Razi, vol. 3, p. 201; Tarikh Ibn Khalikan,
vol. 1, p. 359; Al-Jisas, Ahkam al-Qur’an, vol. 2, p. 178; Muhadarat
ar-Raghib, vol. 2, p. 94; Jalal ad-Din as-Suyuti, Al-Jami‘ al-Kabir,
vol. 8, p. 293; Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Barri, vol. 9, p. 141.

[^6]: Sahih Muslim, vol. 1, p. 395; Sunan al-Bayhaqi, vol. 7, p. 206.

[^7]: Durr al-Manthur, vol. 2, p. 140, on the commentary of the verse on
mut‘ah.

[^8]: Sharh Tajrid al-Qawshchi, “Mabhath al-Imamah,” p. 484.

[^9]: For further information, see the following references: Musnad
Ahmad ibn Hanbal, vol. 3, pp. 356, 363; Al-Jahiz, Al-Bayan wa’t-Tabyin,
vol. 2, p. 223; Al-Jassas, Ahkam al-Qur’an, vol. 1, p. 342; Tafsir
al-Qurtubi, vol. 2, p. 370; Sarkhasi al-Hanafi, Al-Mabsut, “Kitab
al-Hajj,” “Bab al-Qur’an;” Ibn al-Qayyim, Zad al-Ma‘ad, vol. 1, p. 444;
Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 8, p. 293; Musnad Abu Dawud at-Tayalisi, p. 247;
Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. 5, p. 32; Tabari, Al-Mustabin; Tafsir ar-Razi,
vol. 3, p. 202; Tafsir Abu Hayyan, vol. 3, p. 218.

[^10]: Surah al-Mu’minun 23:5-6.

[^11]: Ad-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 2, pp. 140-141, the commentary of the
verse on mut‘ah.

[^12]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 14, “Kitab an-Nikah,” the first section
on mut‘ah, p. 436.


