Question 19: Why do the Shi‘ah prostrate on turbah {dried clay}?
================================================================

**Reply:** Some think that prostration on the earth or *turbah* taken
from the burial site of martyrs is tantamount to worshipping it and
consider it a form of polytheism {*shirk*}.

In reply to this question, it must be noted that there is a great
difference between the phrase, “*as-sujud lillah*” {prostration *for*
Allah}, and “*as-sujud ‘ala’l-ard*” {prostration *on* earth}. The
problem of the mentioned people is that they fail to distinguish between
the meanings of the two phrases.

It is clear that the meaning of “*as-sujud lillah*” is “prostration for
the sake of Allah” while “*as-sujud ‘ala’l-ard*” means “prostration on
the earth”. In other words, by prostrating on earth we prostrate for the
sake of God, and in principle, all Muslims of the world prostrate on
something for the sake of God. All pilgrims to the House of God
prostrate on the stones of Masjid al-Haram in the same way but their aim
is prostrating for the sake of God.

Given this, it becomes clear that prostration on earth, plant byproduct,
etc. does not mean worshipping them but it means prostrating for the
sake of God and worshipping Him by lowering oneself and getting close to
earth. Similarly, it becomes clear that prostration *on* *turbah* is
different from prostration *for* *turbah*.

On one hand, the Holy Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ولله يسجد من في السموات والأرض."
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“To Allah prostrates whoever there is in the heavens and the
earth.”***[^1]

Also, the Holy Prophet (S) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
”جُعِلَتْ لِيَ الأَرْضُ مَسْجِداً وَ طَهُوْراً.“
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The (pure) earth has been made for me as a place of prostration and an
agent of purification.”  
 Therefore, “prostration *for* God” and “prostration *on* earth or
*turbah*” are not only far from being inconsistent but they agree with
each other completely. This is because prostration on earth or plant
byproduct represents the highest form of meekness and humbleness before
the One and Only God.  
 In order to clarify the Shi‘ah view, it is worth pointing to part of a
speech by our great leader—Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن هشام ابن الحكم قال: قلت لأبي عبد الله: أخبرني عما يجوز السجود عليه
وعمّا لا يجوز؟ قال: السجود لا يجوز إلا على الأرض أو ما أنبتت الأرض إلا
ما أكل أو لبس. فقلت له جعلت فداك ما العلّة في ذلك؟ قال لأن السجود هو
الخضوع لله عز وجلّ فلا ينبغي أن يكون على ما يؤكل و يلبس لأن أبناء
الدنيا عبيد ما يأكلون ويلبسون. الساجد في سجوده في عبادة الله عز وجلّ
فلا ينبغي أن يضع جبهته في سجوده على معبود أبناء الدنيا الذين اغتروا
بغرورها. والسجود على الأرض أفضل لأنه أبلغ في التواضع والخضوع لله عز
وجلّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hisham ibn al-Hakam says: “I asked Abu Abd Allah (Imam as-Sadiq) (*‘a*)
regarding the things on which one is allowed to prostrate and the things
on which one is not allowed to prostrate.” The Imam said: “Prostration
is permissible only on earth and whatever grows in it excluding the
edible and wearable.” I asked: “May I be your ransom! What is the
reason?”

He replied: “In prostration one shows humility and obeisance to God, the
Honorable and Glorious, and so it is not proper to perform it on
anything edible or wearable because materialists are slaves to things
which they eat and wear while in prostration man is in a state of
worshipping God, the Honorable and Glorious.

Thus, it is not appropriate for one to place his forehead on something
which stubborn materialists worship. Prostration on earth is the best
way of prostration because it is the most appropriate way of showing
humility and meekness to God, the Honorable and Glorious.[^2]

This lucid statement clearly testifies that prostration on earth is
performed as the most suitable way of expressing humility and meekness
to the One and Only God.

\* \* \*

Also, this question may be posed: Why do the Shi‘ah prostrate only on
earth or some plant byproducts and why do they not prostrate on other
things?

The reply is: Just as the act of worship should emanate from the sacred
law of Islam, its conditions, parts and ways of performance should be
explained in the light of the Holy Prophet’s (S) words and actions; for,
the Messenger of Allah (S), according to the Holy Qur’an, is an exemplar
of excellence for the entire humanity.

Now, we shall state some Islamic traditions {*ahadith*} that elucidate
the conduct and lifestyle of the Prophet (S)—all of which indicate that
the Prophet (S) used to prostrate on pure earth and on things that grow
from it including straw mat, which is exactly the same method which the
Shi‘ah follow:

**1.** A group of *hadith* scholars {*muhaddithun*} recount the
statement of the Prophet (S) in which he defines the earth as the place
of his prostration, when he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
”جُعِلَتْ لِيَ الأَرْضُ مَسْجِداً وَ طَهُوْراً.“
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The (pure) earth has been made for me as a place of prostration and an
agent of purification.”[^3]  
 From the word “*ja‘ala*” {“made”} which is used here to have a legal
and legislative sense, meaning (“ordained”), we understand that this
issue is a decree ordained by the Divine for the followers of Islam to
abide by. This proves the legitimacy of prostration on earth, stone, and
some other parts of the ground.

**2.** A group of narrations verify the fact that the Holy Prophet (S)
used to order the Muslims to place their forehead on (pure) earth while
prostrating. Umm Salamah, a spouse of the Prophet (S), narrates that the
Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"تراب وجهك لله."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Place your face for the sake of Allah on earth.”[^4]

And from the word “*tarrib*” in the statement of the Prophet (S), two
points can be inferred; one is that at the time of prostration one
should place his forehead on “*turab*”, i.e. dust; and the other is that
this act is a binding order because the word “*tarrib*” which comes from
“*turab*” meaning “dust” has been expressed in the form of command.

**3.** The conduct of the Holy Prophet (S) in this respect is another
vivid proof and a good guide for the Muslims. Wa’il ibn Hajar says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"رأيت النبيّ صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم – إذا سجدا وضع جبهته وأنفه على
الأرض."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I noticed that whenever the Prophet (S) prostrated, he would place his
forehead and nose on the earth.”[^5]  
 Anas ibn Malik, Ibn al-‘Abbas, some spouses of the Prophet (S) such as
‘A’ishah and Umm Salamah and a large group of *muhaddithun* thus
narrate:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"كان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم يُصلّي على الخمرة."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Messenger of Allah (S) used to prostrate on *khumrah* (a mat made
from palm fibers).”[^6]  
 Abu Sa‘id al-Khudri, a Companion of the Messenger of the Allah (S),
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"دخلت على رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم وهو يصلّي على حصير."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Once I came to the Messenger of Allah (S) and saw him praying on a
straw mat.”[^7]  
 This statement is another proof which supports the Shi‘ah view that
prostration on whatever grows in the earth other than what is eaten or
worn is permissible.

**4.** The sayings and actions of the Companions and the Followers
{*tabi‘un*} of the Prophet (S) also affirm this *Sunnah*:  
 Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"كنت أصلي الظهر مع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم فأخذ قبضة من
الحصاء لتبرد في كفّي اضعها لجبهتي أسجد عليها لشدة الحرّ."
  </p>
</blockquote>

I used to perform noon {*zuhr*} prayer with the Messenger of Allah (S).
Because it was very hot I used to take a handful of small gravel, keep
it in my hand till it got cool, and place my forehead on it for
prostration.[^8]

Then, the narrator adds: “If prostration on the garment worn by someone
were permissible, it would be easier than keeping a gravel (in one’s
hand).

Ibn Sa‘d (d. 209 AH), in his book, *At-Tabaqat al-Kubra*, thus writes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"كان مسروق إذا خرج يخرج بلبنة يسجد عليها في السفينة."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whenever Masruq (ibn Ajda‘) traveled, he used to keep a mud-brick with
him on which to prostrate while onboard the ship.”[^9]

It is necessary to note that Masruq ibn Ajda‘ was one of the Followers
and a companion of Ibn Mas‘ud, and the author of *At-Tabaqat al-Kubra*
considers him among those in the first class of the Kufans after the
Prophet (S) and among those who narrated from Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, Uthman,
‘Ali, and ‘Abd Allah ibn Mas‘ud.

This explicit statement establishes the groundlessness of the claim that
bringing along a piece of *turbah* {dried clay} is an act of polytheism
and innovation in religion {*bid‘ah*} and makes clear that the
forerunners in the history of Islam used to prostrate like that
also.[^10]  
 Nafi‘ says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"إن ابن عمر كان إذا سجد وعليه العمامة يرفعها حتَّى يضع جبهته بالأرض."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whenever (‘Abd Allah) ibn ‘Umar prostrated, he removed his turban so as
to place his forehead on the ground.”[^11]  
 Rizin says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"كتب إليّ عليّ بن عبد الله بن عباس رضى الله عليه أن ابعث إليّ بلوح من
أحجار المروة أسجد عليه."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“‘Ali ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) wrote to
me: ‘Send me a tablet of the stones of Mount Marwah so that I may
prostrate on it.”[^12]

**5.** Also, *hadith* scholars narrate that the Holy Prophet (S) has
prohibited people from placing part of their turbans between their
forehead and the ground while prostrating.  
 Salih as-Saba’i says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"إن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم رأى رجلاً يسجد بجنبه قد أعتم على
جبهته فسحر رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم عن جبهته."
  </p>
</blockquote>

Once the Messenger of Allah (S) saw a person prostrating beside him,
with his turban covering his forehead. The Messenger of Allah (S)
removed the turban from the person’s forehead.[^13]  
 ‘Ayyad ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Qarashi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"رأى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم رجلاً يسجد على كور عمامته فأوما
بيده: إرفع عمامتك وأومأ إلى جبهته."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Messenger of Allah (S) saw a person prostrating on part of his
turban, so he gestured to him to remove (that part of) the turban,
pointing to his forehead.”[^14]

From these traditions it becomes clear that in the time of the Holy
Prophet (S) the need to prostrate on earth was beyond dispute and it was
such that if one of the Muslims put part of his turban between his
forehead and the ground, he would be prohibited by the Prophet (S) from
doing so.

**6.** The infallible Imams followed by the Shi‘ah who, according to the
*Hadith ath-Thaqalayn*, are the inseparable peer of the Qur’an, as well
as members of the Prophet’s Household {*Ahl al-Bayt*}, emphasize this
fact in their speeches:  
 Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"السجود على الأرض فريضة وعلى الخمرة سنة."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Prostration on the earth is obligatory while prostrating on a straw mat
is a *sunnah*.”[^15]  
 He (*‘a*) also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"السجود لا يجوز على الأرض أو على ما أنبتت الأرض إلا ما أكل أو لبس."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“It is not permissible to prostrate on anything except the earth or what
grows in it excluding that which is eaten or worn.”[^16]

Conclusion
----------

From the aggregate of the stated proofs, it becomes very clear that not
only the traditions of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) but also the *Sunnah* of
the Messenger of Allah (S) and the actions of his Companions and
Followers {*Tabi‘un*} testify to the necessity of prostrating on the
earth and what grows in it (excluding that which is worn and eaten).

In addition, the permissibility of prostration on the mentioned things
is definite whereas the permissibility of prostration on other things is
doubtful and disputable. Therefore, by precaution—which is the way to
attain deliverance and uprightness—it is appropriate to prostrate on the
mentioned things only.

Finally, it should be noted that this discussion is a *fiqhi* question
and differences among Muslim jurists concerning such minor issues are
very common, but such differences should not be a source of concern
because these differences are also common among the four Sunni *fiqhi*
schools. For example, the Malikis say that placing the nose on the place
of prostration is recommended {*mustahabb*} while the Hanbalis consider
it obligatory {*wajib*} and say that ignoring it renders the prayer
invalid {*batil*}.[^17]

[^1]: Surah ar-Ra‘d 13:15.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 58, 147 as in ‘Ilal ash-Sharayi‘.

[^3]: Sunan al-Bayhaqi, “Bab at-Tayammum bi-s-Sa‘id at-Tayyib,” vol. 1,
p. 212; Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 1, “Kitab as-Salah,” p. 91; Ibn
Taymiyyah, Iqtida’ as-Sirat al-Mustaqim, p. 332.

[^4]: Kanz al-‘Ummal (Halab), vol. 7, p. 465, hadith 19809, “Kitab
as-Salah, as-Sujud wa ma Yata‘allaq bih.”

[^5]: Jassas al-Hanafi, Ahkam al-Qur’an (Beirut), vol. 3, “Bab as-Sujud
‘ala’l-Wajah,” p. 209.

[^6]: Sunan Bayhaqi, vol. 2, “Kitab as-Salah,” “Bab as-Salah
‘ala’l-Khumrah,” p. 421.

[^7]: Sunan al-Bayhaqi, vol. 2, “Kitab as-Salah,” “Bab as-Salah
‘ala’l-Hasir,” p. 421.

[^8]: Sunan al-Bayhaqi, vol. 1, “Kitab as-Salah,” “Bab ma Ruwiya
fi’t-Ta‘jil biha fi Shiddat al-Harr,” p. 439.

[^9]: At-Tabaqat al-Kubra (Beirut), vol. 6, p. 79, the biography of
Masruq ibn Ajda‘.

[^10]: For further information, refer to the book, Siratuna, written by
‘Allamah Amini.

[^11]: Sunan al-Bayhaqi (Hyderabad), vol. 2, “Kitab as-Salah,” “Bab
al-Kashf ‘an as-Sajadah fi’s-Sujud,” p. 105.

[^12]: Azraqi, Akhbar Makkah, vol. 3, p. 151.

[^13]: Sunan al-Bayhaqi, vol. 2, p. 105.

[^14]: Ibid.

[^15]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 3, “Kitab as-Salah,” “Abwab ma Yusjad
‘Alayh,” p. 593, hadith 7.

[^16]: Ibid., p. 591, hadith 1.

[^17]: Al-Fiqh ‘ala’l-Madhhab al-Arba‘ah (Egypt), “Kitab as-Salah,”
“Mabhath as-Sujud,” vol. 1, p. 161.


