Question 20: During ziyarah, why do the Shi‘ah kiss the doors and walls of the shrines of awliya’ and seek blessings {tabarruk} whereby?
========================================================================================================================================

**Reply:** Seeking blessings {*tabarruk*} through the remnants (and
symbols) of the saints {*awliya’*} of God is not a new phenomenon among
Muslims; rather, this behavior can be traced back to the Prophet’s life
account and to the life of his Companions.

Not only the Holy Prophet (S) and his Companions did this act but also
past prophets (*‘a*) used to do it. Below are the proofs provided by the
Qur’an and *Sunnah* concerning the legitimacy of seeking blessings
through the remnants (and symbols) of the *awliya’*.

**1.** In the Holy Qur’an we read that when Yusuf (Joseph) the Truthful
(*‘a*) introduced himself to his brothers and forgave them, he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اذهبوا بقميصي هذا فألقوه على وجه أبي يأتي بصيراً."
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Take this shirt of mine, and cast it upon my father’s face; he will
regain his sight.”***[^1]

Then, the Qur’an recounts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"فلما أن جاء البشير ألقه على وجهه فارتدّ بصيراً."
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When the bearer of good news arrived, he cast it on his face, and he
regained his sight.”***[^2]

The expressive content of these Qur’anic words proves clearly how a
prophet of God (Hadrat Ya‘qub (*‘a*)) seeks blessings through the shirt
of another prophet (Hadrat Yusuf (*‘a*)). Furthermore, it indicates that
the said shirt caused Hadrat Ya‘qub (*‘a*) to regain his sight.

Now, can we say that this act of the two holy prophets (*‘a*) is not
within the ambit of monotheism and worship of God?!

**2.** No one doubts that while circumambulating the House of God
{*tawaf*}, the Holy Prophet of Islam (S) used to touch or kiss the Black
Stone {*Hajar al-Aswad*}.  
 Bukhari in his *Sahih* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"رأيت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم يستلمه ويقبّله."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I saw the Messenger of Allah (S) touch and kiss it (*Hajar
al-Aswad*).”[^3]  
 So, if touching or kissing a stone was an act of associating partner
with God, how would the Prophet who called for monotheism do it?

**3.** In the *Sahih*s, *Musnad*s and books of history and traditions,
there are plentiful *hadith*s regarding the Prophet’s Companions’
seeking blessings through the Prophet’s (S) belongings such as garment,
water of *wudu’* {ablution}, water vessel, etc. These *hadith*s remove
any doubt about the legitimacy and wholesomeness of this practice.

We cannot cite all the *hadith*s related to this issue in this volume,
and we shall mention only some of them:

**a.** In his *Sahih*, Bukhari narrates a long tradition which contains
a description of some of the features of the Prophet (S) and his
Companions, and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وإذا كادوا توضأ يقتتلون على وضوئه."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“When he (Prophet) performed *wudu’*, they (Muslims) would seemingly
fight with one another (in order to get some of the water the Prophet
(S) used in *wudu’*).”[^4]

**b.** Ibn Hajar says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"إن النبيّ صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم كان يؤتي بالصبيان فيبرك عليهم."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“They brought children to the Prophet (S) and he blessed them.”[^5]

**c.** Muhammad Tahir al-Makki says:  
 “Umm Thabit is reported to have said: ‘Once the Messenger of Allah (S)
called on me and while standing drank water from the mouth of a
waterskin, which was suspended. So I rose up and cut off the mouth of
the waterskin’.”

He then adds:  
 “Tirmidhi narrates this *hadith*, too and says: ‘It is an authentic
{*sahih*} and sound {*hasan*} *hadith*’, and the commentator of this
*hadith* says in the book, *Riyad* *as-Salihin*: ‘Umm Thabit cut off the
mouth of the waterskin so as to keep for herself the place of the
Prophet’s mouth whereby she sought blessing {*tabarruk*}. Similarly, the
Companions would drink water from where the Prophet used to drink’.”[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"كان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم إذا صلى الغداة جاء خدم المدينة
بأنيتهم فيها الماء فما يؤتي بإناء إلا غمس يده فيه فربما جاؤوه في
الغداة الباردة فيغمس يده فيها."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The servants of Medina used to go to the Messenger of Allah (S) after
morning {*subh*} prayer with vessels full of water and he would place
his hand into each vessel. Sometimes they would go to him in cold
mornings and he would place his hand into them (vessels).”[^7]

This shows clearly that seeking blessings through the belongings of
*awliya’* of God is not a problem. It also shows that those who accuse
the Shi‘ah of polytheism and associating partners with Allah on account
of this practice have no clear idea of the meaning of monotheism
{*tawhid*}.

Polytheism or worshipping other than Allah means to have one of the
creatures as a god along with Allah or to attribute to that creature
some divine acts by considering him as independent and needless of God
in the essence of creation or power. This is while the Shi‘ah regard the
belongings of *awliya’* of God, just like theirs owners, as things that
are made by God and these things are in need of Him both in the essence
of existence and in power.

The Shi‘ah seek blessings through these symbols only to show respect to
their leaders and forerunners of the religion of God and to express
their sincere love for them.

When the Shi‘ah kiss part of the shrine or its doors or walls during
their visitation to the holy shrine of the Prophet (S) and his *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*‘a*), it is only because they love the Holy Prophet (S) and
his progeny, and this is an issue of human emotion, which manifests
itself in the person in love. A sweet-tongued man of letter says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"أمر على الديار ديار سلمى أقبل ذا الجدار و ذا الجدار و ما حب الديار
شغفن قلبي ولكن حب من سكن الديار.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*By Layla’s residence I pass; I kiss this wall and that wall.*  
*It is not the love of residence that gladdens my heart; rather, the
love of its dweller.*

[^1]: Surah Yusuf 12:93.

[^2]: Surah Yusuf 12:96.

[^3]: Sahih al-Bukhari (Egypt), vol. 2, “Kitab al-Hajj,” “Bab Taqbil
al-Hajar,” pp. 151-152.

[^4]: Sahih al-Bukhari (Egypt), vol. 3, “Kitab ma Yajuz min ash-Shurut
fi’l-Islam,” “Bab ash-Shurut fi’l-Jihad wa’l-Masalahah,” p. 195.

[^5]: Al-Isabah (Egypt), vol. 1, “Khutbah al-Kitab,” p. 7.

[^6]: Muhammad Tahir al-Makki, Tabarruk as-Sahabah, trans. Ansari, chap.
1, p. 29.

[^7]: Sahih Muslim, vol. 7, “Kitab al-Fada’il,” “Bab Qurb an-Nabi (S)
min an-Nas wa Tabarrukihim bihi,” p. 79. For more information, refer to
the following references: Sahih al-Bukhari, “Kitab al-Ashribah”; Malik,
Al-Muwatta’, vol. 1, the section on invoking blessings to the Prophet
(S), p. 138; Asad al-Ghabah, vol. 5, p. 90; Musnab Ahmad ibn Hanbal,
vol. 4, p. 32; Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 3, at the margin of “al-Isabah,” p. 631;
Fath al-Bari, vol. 1, pp. 281-282.


