Question 22: Why do the Shi‘ah regard the sons of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (‘a) (Hasan and Husayn (‘a)) as the sons of the Messenger of Allah (S)?
============================================================================================================================================

**Reply:** A study of the exegesis {*tafsir*}, history and *hadith*
books will show that this idea is not accepted only by the Shi‘ah but by
almost all Muslim researchers from all Islamic groups.

Now, let us consider this issue by citing evidences from the Glorious
Qur’an, *hadith*s and statements of renowned commetators {*mufassirun*}:

In essence, the Holy Qur’an regards a person’s consanguineous children
as his children. Also, it deems as his children (both male and female)
those who are born from his children.

In the Qur’an and the *Sunnah*, there are plenty of proofs
substantiating this fact. Here are some of them:

**1.** In the verse below, the Holy Qur’an considers Hadrat ‘Isa (Jesus)
(*‘a*) among the children of Ibrahim al-Khalil (Abraham the Friend {of
Allah}) (*‘a*) whereas ‘Isa, the child of Maryam (Mary) (*‘a*), can be
traced back to Hadrat Ibrahim (*‘a*) through his mother:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَوَهَبْنَا لَهُ إِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ كُلاًّ هَدَيْنَا وَنُوحًا
هَدَيْنَا مِن قَبْلُ وَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِهِ دَاوُودَ وَسُلَيْمَانَ
وَأَيُّوبَ وَيُوسُفَ وَمُوسَىٰ وَهَارُونَ وَكَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي
الْمُحْسِنِينَ ٭ وَزَكَرِيَّا وَيَحْيَىٰ وَعِيسَىٰ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We gave him (Abraham) Isaac and Jacob and guided each of them.
And Noah We had guided before, and from his (Abraham’s) offspring, David
and Solomon, and Job, Joseph, Moses and Aaron—thus do We reward the
virtuous—and Zechariah, John and Jesus.”***[^1]

Muslim scholars regard the stated verse as a clear proof that Imam
al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) are children of the Messenger of
Allah (S) as well as his offspring.  
 Below is one of the instances:  
 Jalal ad-Din as-Suyuti narrates:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"أرسل الحجّاج إلى يحيى بن يعمر فقال: بلغني أنك تزعم أن الحسن والحسين
من ذرية النبيّ صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم – تجده في كتاب الله وقد قرأته
من أوّله إلى أخره فلم أجده. قال: ألست تقرأ سورة الأنعام: ومِن ذريته
داوود وسليمن حتى بلغ ويحيى؟ وعيسى قال: بلى. قال: أليس عيسى من ذرية
إبراهيم وليس له أب؟ قال: صدقت."
  </p>
</blockquote>

One day, Hajjaj (ibn Yusuf) ordered that Yahya ibn Ya‘mur should be
brought and when he saw him he said to him: “I have been told that you
opine that al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the children and offspring of the
Prophet (S) and you say that you have found this in the Book of Allah
whereas I have read the Qur’an from the beginning to the end but I have
not found such a thing.”

Yahya asked: “Have you not read this verse in *Surah al-An‘am*: ‘*and
from his (Abraham’s) offspring, David and Solomon*’ and continued up to,
*‘and John and Jesus’*?” He replied: “Yes, I have.”

Yahya asked: “In this Qur’anic verse, has Jesus not been considered
among the offspring of Abraham eventhough Abraham was not his father
{and Jesus can be traced back to Abraham through his mother (Mary)}?”
Hajjaj said: “You are correct.”[^2]

From the aggregate of the quoted verses and the words of Qur’an
exegetes, it becomes obvious that not only the Shi‘ah but in fact all
Muslim scholars regard Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) as the
children and offspring of the Messenger of Allah (S).

**2.** One of the explicit verses of the Qur’an which testifies to the
truthfulness of the said view is the verse of imprecation {*ayah
al-mubahilah*} in *Surah* *Al ‘Imran*. Below is the verse along with the
exegetes’ notes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَمَنْ حَآجَّكَ فِيهِ مِن بَعْدِ مَا جَاءكَ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ فَقُلْ
تَعَالَوْاْ نَدْعُ أَبْنَاءنَا وَأَبْنَاءكُمْ وَنِسَاءنَا وَنِسَاءكُمْ
وَأَنفُسَنَا وأَنفُسَكُمْ ثُمَّ نَبْتَهِلْ فَنَجْعَل لَّعْنَةُ اللّهِ
عَلَى الْكَاذِبِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Should anyone argue with you concerning him, after the knowledge
that has come to you, say,*** ***‘Come! Let us call our sons and your
sons, our women and your women, our selves and your selves, then let us
pray earnestly and call down Allah’s curse upon the liars’.”***[^3]

Exegetes say: The stated verse which is known as the verse of
*mubahilah* tells about the debate of the Holy Prophet (S) with the
chiefs of the Christians of Najran after their expression of obstinacy.
By a Divine command, the Prophet went out along with ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib,
Fatimah az-Zahra, and Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) with the
aim of imprecation.

When the chiefs of the Christians noticed the behavior of the Prophet
and the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), fear struck in their hearts and they asked
the Messenger of Allah (S) to reconsider his decision to imprecate and
curse them. The Prophet (*‘a*) accepted their suggestion and at the end
they agreed to forge a pact.

Since both the Shi‘ah and Sunni scholars have consensus of opinion on
the fact that on the day of *mubahilah*, the Commander of the Faithful
(‘Ali) (*‘a*), Fatimah az-Zahra, and Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn
(*‘a*) were with the Prophet (S), it becomes very clear that when the
Mesenger of Allah (S) said “*abna’ana*” {our sons} he meant Imam
al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*). And as such, it becomes clear that
in this verse al-Hasan and al-Husayn are considered the Holy Prophet’s
(S) sons.

It is necessary to note that after narrating many *hadith*s pertaining
to the verse of *mubahilah*, exegetes testify to the validity of this
view. Here are some examples:

**a.** Jalal ad-Din as-Suyuti narrates on the authority of Hakim, Ibn
Marudiyyah and Abu Na‘im from Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah (al-Ansari):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"أنفسنا رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم "وعليّ وأبناءنا والحسن
والحسين نساءنا فاطمة."
  </p>
</blockquote>

““*Anfusana*” {our selves} means the Messenger of Allah (S) and ‘Ali ibn
Abi Talib, “*abna’na*” {our sons} means al-Hasan and al-Husayn, and
“*nisa’na*” {our women} refers to Fatimah.”[^4]

**b.** In his exegesis {*tafsir*}, Fakhr ad-Din ar-Razi mentions the
said verse and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"واعلم أن هذه الرواية كالمتفق على صحتها بين أهل التفسير والحديث."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Know that this tradition is an example of *hadith* on whose
authenticity the *mufassirun* and *muhaddithun* have consensus of
opinion.”[^5]  
 Then, he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"المسألة الرابعة: هذه الأية دالة على أن الحسن والحسين كانا إبنيّ رسول
الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم – وعد أن يدعوا أبناءه فدعا الحسن والحسين
فوجب أن يكون إبنيّه."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The fourth issue: The said verse testifies to the fact that al-Hasan
and al-Husayn (*‘a*) were sons of the Messenger of Allah (S) because
when he was asked to call his “sons”, he called al-Hasan and al-Husayn
(*‘a*).”[^6]

**c.**In his exegesis, Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Qurtubi states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"أبناءنا دليل على أن ابناء البنات يسمّون أبناءا."
  </p>
</blockquote>

““*Abna’na*” {our sons} (in the stated verse) testifies to the fact that
the sons of one’s daughter are considered that one’s sons.”[^7]

**3.** The Messenger of Allah’s (S) words are a vivid proof that Imam
al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) are sons of the Prophet (S).  
 Here are two examples of his sayings:

**a.** The Messenger of Allah (S) thus says concerning al-Hasan and
al-Husayn (*‘a*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"هذان إبناؤ من أحبّهما فقد أحبّني."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“These two are my sons. He who loves them loves me.”[^8]

**b.** Pointing to Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*), the Holy
Prophet (S) also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"إن أبنيّ هذين ريحانتى من الدنيا."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Verily, these two sons of mine are my bunch of sweet basil in this
world.”[^9]

[^1]: Surah al-An‘am 6:84-85.

[^2]: Ad-Durr al-Manthur (Beirut), vol. 3, p. 28, the commentary of the
said verse in Surah al-An‘am.

[^3]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:61.

[^4]: Ad-Durr al-Manthur (Beirut), vol. 2, p. 39, the end of the
commentary of the verse under discussion.

[^5]: Tafsir Mafatih al-Ghayb (Egypt, 1308 AH), vol. 2, p. 488.

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Al-Jami‘ Li Ahkam al-Qur’an (Beirut), vol. 4, p. 104.

[^8]: Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh Madinah Dimashq (Beirut, 1400 AH), p. 59,
hadith 106.

[^9]: Ibid., p. 62, hadith 112.


