Question 24: Is to swear by other than God regarded as a kind of polytheism?
============================================================================

**Reply:** The interpretation of the words “monotheism” {*tawhid*} and
“polytheism” {*shirk*} must be in consistency with the Qur’an and the
*Sunnah* of the Prophet (S) because the Glorious Qur’an and the conduct
of the Messenger of Allah (S) are the most valuable criteria for
distinguishing the truth from falsehood as well as monotheism from
polytheism.

Given this, every thought and behavior approved by the awakened and
unbiased conscience should be assessed according to the touchstone of
the logic of revelation and conduct of the Holy Prophet (S).

The following are solid proofs which the Qur’an and the *Sunnah*
introduced about the permissibility of swearing by other than God:

**1.** In the eternal verses of the Glorious Qur’an we find examples of
swearing by prolific creatures such as the “life of the Prophet”, “soul
of man”, “pen” which are manifestations of writing, “sun”, “moon”,
“star”, “day and night”, “heaven and earth”, “time”, and “mountains and
sea”. We shall cite some of these verses:

**a.**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لعمرك إنهم لفي شكرتهم يعمهون."
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“By your life, they were bewildered in their drunkenness.”***[^1]

**b.**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَالشَّمْسِ وَضُحَاهَا ٭ وَالْقَمَرِ إِذَا تَلَاهَا ٭ وَالنَّهَارِ
إِذَا جَلَّاهَا ٭ وَاللَّيْلِ إِذَا يَغْشَاهَا ٭ وَالسَّمَاء وَمَا
بَنَاهَا ٭ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا طَحَاهَا ٭ وَنَفْسٍ وَمَا سَوَّاهَا ٭
فَأَلْهَمَهَا فُجُورَهَا وَتَقْوَاهَا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“By the sun and her forenoon splendor, by the moon when he follows
her, by the day when it reveals her, by the night when it covers her, by
the sky and Him who built it, by the earth and Him who spread it, by the
soul and Him who fashioned it, and inspired it with {discernment
between} its virtues and vices.”***[^2]

**c.**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالنَّجْمِ إِذَا هَوَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“By the star when it sets.”***[^3]

**d.**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ن وَالْقَلَمِ وَمَا يَسْطُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nun. By the Pen and what they write.”***[^4]

**e.**

> وَالْعَصْرِ {1}

> إِنَّ الْإِنْسَانَ لَفِي خُسْرٍ {2}

***“By Time! Indeed man is at a loss.”***[^5]

**f.**

> وَالْفَجْرِ {1}

> وَلَيَالٍ عَشْرٍ {2}

***“By the Dawn, by the ten nights.”***[^6]

**g.**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَالطُّورِ ٭ وَكِتَابٍ مَّسْطُورٍ ٭ فِي رَقٍّ مَّنشُورٍ ٭
وَالْبَيْتِ الْمَعْمُورِ ٭ وَالسَّقْفِ الْمَرْفُوعِ ٭ وَالْبَحْرِ
الْمَسْجُورِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“By the Mount {Sinai}, by the Book inscribed on an unrolled
parchment; by the House greatly frequented; by the vault raised high, by
the surging sea.”***[^7]

Similarly, swearing by the manifestations of the world of creation can
also be noticed in *Surah*s *Mursalat* (77), *an-Nazi‘at* (79),
*al-Buruj* (85), *at-Tariq* (86), *al-Balad* (90), *ad-Duha* (93), and
*at-Tin* (95).

There is no doubt that if swearing by other than God is tantamount to
polytheism and associating partners to God, the Holy Qur’an which is the
charter of monotheism and unity of God would not have resorted to it,
and if such a way of swearing is exclusive to God, the verses of the
Qur’an would have warned people from doing so lest they should commit
mistakes.

**2.** All Muslims of the world regard the Holy Prophet (S) as their
model and consider his conduct and behavior as the criterion for
distinguishing right from wrong.

Muslim scholars and compilers of *Sahih*s and *Musnad*s have mentioned
so many instances of the Holy Prophet’s (S) swearing by other than God.

In his *Musnad*, Ahmad ibn Hanbal, the chief of the Hanbalis, thus
narrates from the Messenger of Allah (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"فلعمري لأن تتكلم بمعروف تنهى عن منكر خير من أن تسكت."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“By my life! If you would enjoin good and forbid evil, it will be better
than keeping silent.”[^8]  
 In his *Sahih*, which the Ahl as-Sunnah consider one of the six
authentic compilations of *hadith*, Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"جاء رجل إلى النبيّ صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم فقال: يا رسول الله أيّ
الصدقة أعظم أجراً؟ فقال: أما وأبيك لتنبانه أن تصدق وأنت صحيح شحيح تخشى
الفقر وتأمل البقاء."
  </p>
</blockquote>

There came a person to the Prophet (S) and asked the Messenger of Allah:
“Which charity is the most rewarding?” He said: “By your father, it is
the charity which you give in a state when you are healthy and
close-fisted, haunted by fear of poverty, and hoping to live (as
rich).”[^9]

How can those who consider a great part of global Muslims as polytheists
because they believe that it is permissible to swear by other than God
justify this explicit act of the Prophet (S) (i.e., swearing by a
person’s father)?

**3.** Apart from the Book of God and the *Sunnah* of the Prophet (S),
the conduct of the close Companions of the Messenger of Allah (S) also
proves the permissibility of swearing by other than God.

In many parts of his sublime speeches, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (*‘a*) swear
by his life when he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ولعمري ليضعفن لكم التّيه من بعدي أضعافأً."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“By my life! After me your wandering about shall be multiplied.”[^10]  
 In another place, he (*‘a*) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ولعمري لإن لم تنزع غيّك وشقاقك لتعرفنّهم عن قليل يطلبونك."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“By my life, if you do not refrain from hypocrisy, avarice and your
rebellious activities, they will soon be known to you.”[^11]

All these traditions and reports show clearly that no *ijtihad* or
exigency can be valid, and no other argument can denigrate the position
of God in the Glorious Qur’an, the conduct of the Holy Prophet (S) or
the conduct his close companions like the Commander of the Faithful
(‘Ali) (*‘a*) if it accuses them of polytheism and associating partners
with God.

Conclusion
----------

From the aggregate of the stated proofs, it is evident that from the
perspective of the Book of God, the *Sunnah* of the Prophet (*‘a*) and
conduct of the believers the legitimacy of swearing by other than God is
an indisputable principle, and it has no contradiction with monotheism
and the unity of God.

Therefore, if the outward meaning of the traditions opposes that which
has been confirmed by decisive proofs, it must be justified and
interpreted according to this indisputable principle which is derived
from the Qur’an and traditions.

Some people cite an ambiguous tradition which is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن رسول الله سمع عمر وهو يقول: وأبي فقال إن الله ينهاكم أن تحلفنا
بأبائكم ومن كان حالفاً فليحلف بالله أو يسكت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, the Messenger of Allah (S) heard ‘Umar swearing by his father.
Upon hearing this he said: “Verily, God has prohibited you from swearing
by your father, and when one wants to swear one should either swear to
God or keep silent.”[^12]

Although this *hadith* cannot challenge the Qur’anic verses and explicit
traditions that consider swearing by other than God as permissible, it
must, for the sake of reconciling it and the mentioned verses and
tradition, be said that the Prophet’s prohibition of ‘Umar’s swearing by
his father and forbidding similar people from swearing by their fathers
is attributed to the fact that their fathers were idolaters and
polytheists. And an infidel or idol-worshipping person is too unworthy
to be an object of swearing.

[^1]: Surah al-Hijr 15:72.

[^2]: Surah ash-Shams 91:1-8.

[^3]: Surah an-Najm 53:1.

[^4]: Surah al-Qalam 68:1.

[^5]: Surah al-‘Asr 103:1-2.

[^6]: Surah al-Fajr 89:1-2.

[^7]: Surah at-Tur 52:1-6.

[^8]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, vol. 5, pp. 224-225, a hadith by Bashir
ibn Khasasiyyah as-Sadusi.

[^9]: Sahih Muslim (Egypt), part 3, “Kitab az-Zakah,” “Bab Bayan an
Afdal as-Sadaqah, Sadaqah as-Sahih ash-Shahih,” pp. 93-94. Abdul-Hamid
Siddiqui (trans.), Sahih Muslim (English Translation), vol. 1, chap. 29,
hadith 2251.

[^10]: Nahj al-Balaghah (Muhammad ‘Abduh), Sermon 161.

[^11]: Nahj al-Balaghah (Muhammad ‘Abduh), Letter 9. For more
information about other cases, see Sermons 168, 182 and 187, and Letters
6 and 54.

[^12]: Sunan al-Kubra, vol. 10, p. 29; Sunan an-Nisa’i, vol. 7, pp. 4-5.


