Question 27 : Why do the Shi‘ah perform the five daily prayers in three periods?
================================================================================

**Reply:** In order to clarify this point, we had better examine the
views of jurists {*fuqaha*} in this regard first:

**1.** All Muslim groups agree that in ‘Arafah[^1] one may perform both
noon {*zuhr*} and afternoon {*asr*} prayers successively without any
interval between them, and in Muzdalifah[^2] it is also permissible to
say sunset {*maghrib*} and night {*‘isha’*} prayers at the time of
*‘isha’* prayer.

**2.** The Hanafis say: Performing *zuhr* and *‘asr* prayers
successively with no interval between them and performing *‘isha’* soon
after *maghrib* are permissible only in ‘Arafah and Muzdalifah. That is,
one is not allowed to do so except in these two occasions.

**3.** The Hanbalis, Malikis and Shafi‘is say: It is permissible to
perform *zuhr* and *‘asr* prayers successively or *maghrib* and *‘isha’*
prayers one after another with no interval between them while traveling
in addition to the two stated cases (i.e., in ‘Arafah and Muzdalifah).
Some of these groups also say that it is permissible to perform two
prayers successively at emergency cases such as rain, sickness, or fear
of enemy.[^3]

**4.** The Shi‘ah are of the opinion that each of *zuhr* and *‘asr*
prayers, and *maghrib* and *‘isha’* prayers has a specific time and a
common time:

**a.** The specific time for *zuhr* prayer extends from the beginning of
the religiously prescribed noon {*zuhr ash-shar‘i*} (i.e. time of
decline from the meridian {*waqt az-zuwal*}) up to the time when one
completes the four *rak‘ah*s of *zuhr* prayer. During this limited
period of time, only *zuhr* prayer can be performed.

**b.** The specific time for *‘asr* prayer is a limited period of time
preceding *maghrib*. It extends from the first *rak‘ah* until the end of
the fourth *rak‘ah* of *‘asr* prayer.

**c.** The common time for *zuhr* and *‘asr* prayers is the period
between the end of the specific time for *zuhr* prayer and the beginning
of the specific time for *‘asr* prayer.

The Shi‘ah position is that during this common time, one can perform
*zuhr* and *‘asr* prayers one after the other with no interval between
them. The Ahl as-Sunnah, however, believe that the period allotted
exclusively to *zuhr* extends from the beginning of *zuhr ash-shar‘i*
{*waqt az-zuwal*} up to the time when the shadow of an object becomes as
long as itself and in this period performing *‘asr* prayer is not
permissible. They add that the period between the end of *zuhr* prayer
and the beginning of *maghrib* is allotted exclusively to *‘asr* prayer
in which performing *zuhr* prayer is not permissible.

**d.** The time allotted exclusively to *maghrib* prayer extends from
the commencement of the religiously prescribed sunset (*maghrib
ash-shar‘i*) up to the time when one completes the three *rak‘ah*s of
*maghrib* prayer and in this period, performing other than *maghrib*
prayer is not permissible.

**e.** The time allotted exclusively to *‘isha’* prayer is a limited
time which precedes the religiously prescribed “midnight” which
encompasses only the time for the four *rak‘ah*s of *‘isha’* prayer, and
in this period, performing other than *‘isha’* prayer is not
permissible.

**f.** The common time for *maghrib* and *‘isha’* prayers extends from
the moment which marks the end of the time allotted exclusively to
*maghrib* prayer up to the beginning of the time allotted exclusively to
*‘isha’* prayer.

According to the Shi‘ah, in the common time one is allowed to perform
*maghrib* and *‘isha’* prayers one after the other with no interval
between them. The Ahl as-Sunnah, however, say that the period which
extends from the beginning of *maghrib* to the declension of aurora
{*zuwal ash-shafaq*} is the time allotted exclusively to *maghrib*
prayer and in this period performing *‘isha*’ prayer is not permissible.
And they say that the period between the declension of aurora and the
religiously prescribed “midnight” is allotted exclusively to *‘isha’*
prayer in which performing *maghrib* prayer is not permissible.

The conclusion is that according to the Shi‘ah view, when the
religiously prescribed noon {*zuhr ash-shar‘i*} begins, we may perform
*zuhr* prayer and perform *‘asr* prayer immediately afterward. We may
also delay *zuhr* prayer and perform it before the time allotted
exclusively to *‘asr* prayer provided that our performing of *zuhr*
prayer ends before the beginning of the time allotted exclusively to
*‘asr* prayer and we can perform *‘asr* prayer afterward.

As such, we can perform *zuhr* and *‘asr* prayers successively though it
is recommended to perform *zuhr* prayer after the declension (from the
meridian) and *‘asr* prayer when the shadow of every object becomes
equal to itself in length.

Also, we may perform *maghrib* prayer as soon as the religiously
prescribed sunset {*maghrib ash-shar‘i*} begins and perform *‘isha’*
prayer immediately afterward. We may also delay the performance of
*maghrib* prayer till before the beginning of the time allotted
exclusively to *‘isha’* prayer provided that we finish performing
*maghrib* prayer before the arrival of the time allotted exclusively to
*‘isha’* prayer and we can perform *‘isha’* prayer afterward.

As such, we can perform *maghrib* and *‘isha’* prayers successively
though it is recommended to perform *maghrib* prayer after the
religiously prescribed sunset and *‘isha’* prayer after the declension
of the aurora from the west.

This is the Shi‘ah’s view. As for Ahl as-Sunnah, they say it is not
permissible to successively perform *zuhr* and *‘asr* prayers or the
*maghrib* and *‘isha’* prayers at any place or time. The bone of
contention, therefore, is the performance of two prayers at all times
and places so that both prayers are performed in the time of one of them
just like performing two prayers successively in ‘Arafah and Muzdalifah.

**5.** All Muslims agree that the Holy Prophet (S) had offered these two
prayers in succession, but this tradition is interpreted in two ways:

**a.** The Shi‘ah say that what is meant by this tradition is that one
is allowed to perform *zuhr* prayer at its appointed time and perform
*‘asr* prayer immediately after *zuhr* prayer. Similarly, one is allowed
to perform *maghrib* prayer at its appointed time and perform *‘isha’*
prayer immediately after *maghrib* prayer. And this ruling is applicable
without such restrictions like time, place or condition; rather, it is
permissible at any time and place.

**b.** The others say that what is meant by this is that one can wait
for a while and perform *zuhr* prayer at the end of the period of the
time allotted exclusively to it and offer *‘asr* prayer at its initial
period. Also, one can wait for a while and perform the *maghrib* prayer
at the end of the period allotted exclusively to it and offer *‘isha’*
prayer at its initial period.

In order to clarify this point, we shall examine the pertinent
traditions to prove that what the traditions say about offering two
prayers in succession {*jam‘*} is consistent with what the Shi‘ah say.
That is, one can offer the two prayers at the time of the other, and not
in the end of the period of the time allotted exclusively to it and the
other one at its initial period.

A glance at the traditions
--------------------------

**1.** In his *Musnad*, Ahmad ibn Hanbal, the founder of the Hanbali
school of jurisprudence, thus narrates on the authority of Jabir ibn
Zayd:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرني جابر بن زيد أنه سمع ابن عباس يقول: صليت مع رسول الله صلى الله
عليه وأله وسلم ثمانياً وجميعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سبعاً جميعاً. قال: قلت: له يا أبا الشعثاء أظنه أخر الظهر وعجّل العصر
وأخّر المغرب وعجل العشاء. قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأنا أظن ذلك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jabir ibn Zayd reports: I heard Ibn ‘Abbas say: I prayed behind the
Apostle of Allah (S) eight (*rak‘ah*s) in combination, and seven
*rak‘ah*s in combination. I (one of the narrators) said: O Abu Sha‘tha’,
I think that he (the Holy Prophet) had delayed *zuhr* prayer and offered
*‘asr* prayer soon afterward, and he delayed *magrib* prayer and offered
*‘isha’* prayer soon afterward. He said: I also think so.[^4]

It is evident from this tradition that the Holy Prophet (S) performed
*‘asr* immediately after *zuhr*, and *‘isha’* immediately after
*maghrib* without any interval in between.

**2.** Ahmad ibn Hanbal narrates the following on the authority of ‘Abd
Allah ibn Shaqiq:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خطبنا ابن عباس يوماً بعد العصر حتى غربت الشمس وبدت النجوم و علق الناس
ينادونه الصلوة وفي القوم رجل من بني تميم ، فجعل يقول: الصلوة الصلوة
قال: فغضب و قال أتعلمني ؟ بالسنة شهدت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله
وسلم – جمع بين الظهر والعصر والمغرب والعشاء. قال عبد الله فوجدت في
نفسي من ذلك شيئاً فلقيت أبا هريرة فسألته فوفقه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn al-‘Abbas one day delivered us a speech in the late afternoon (after
the afternoon prayer) till the sun disappeared and the stars appeared.
The people began to say: Prayer! Prayer! Among the people who were
present was a man from Banu Tamim. He started crying: Prayer! Prayer!
Ibn ‘Abbas became angry and said: Do you want to teach me the *Sunnah*?

And he added: I saw the Messenger of Allah (S) perform afternoon prayer
immediately after noon prayer and *‘isha’* prayer immediately after
*maghrib* prayer. ‘Abd Allah ibn Shaqiq said: I felt I was not quite
satisfied, so when I saw Abu Hurayrah and asked him, he confirmed
‘Abbas’ words.[^5]  
 In this *hadith*, two of the Companions, ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Abbas and Abu
Hurayrah, testify to the fact that the Holy Prophet (S) performed *‘asr*
immediately after *zuhr*, and *‘isha’* immediately after *maghrib* and
Ibn ‘Abbas imitated this act of the Prophet (S).

**3.** Malik ibn Anas, the founder of the Maliki school of
jurisprudence, thus writes in his book, *Al-Muwatta’*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم الظهر والعصر جميعاً والمغرب
والعشاء جميعاً في غير خوف ول سفر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Messenger of Allah (S) performed noon and afternoon prayers
immediately one after the other, and performed *maghrib* and *‘isha’*
prayers immediately one after the other though he was neither in a state
of fear nor on travels.[^6]

**4.** Malik ibn Anas thus narrates on the authority of Mu‘adh ibn
Jabal:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فكان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم يجمع بين الظهر والعصر والمغرب
والعشاء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Messenger of Allah (S) (on the Tabuk expedition) performed
afternoon prayer immediately after noon prayer and *‘isha’* prayer
immediately after *maghrib* prayer.”[^7]

**5.** Malik ibn Anas thus narrates on the authority of Nafi‘, from ‘Abd
Allah ibn ‘Umar:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم إذا عجّل به السير يجمع بين
المغرب والعشاء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whenever the Messenger of Allah (S) was in a hurry, he would perform
*‘isha’* prayer immediately after *maghrib* prayer.”[^8]

**6.** Malik ibn Anas thus narrates on the authority of Abu Hurayrah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم كان يجمع بين الظهر والعصر في سفره
إلى تبوك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Verily, the Messenger of Allah (S) combined *maghrib* and *‘isha’*
prayers together when he travelled to Tabuk.”[^9]

**7.** Malik ibn Anas thus narrates on the authority of Nafi‘:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن عبد الله بن عمر كان إذا جمع الأمراء بين المغرب والعشاء في المظر جمع
معهم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Verily, whenever the emirs combined *maghrib* and *‘isha’* prayers
while raining, ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umar would also combine the two
prayers.”[^10]

**8.** Malik ibn Anas thus narrates on the authority of ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم إذا أراد أن يسير يومه جمع بين
الظهر والعصر ، إذا أراد أن يسير ليله جمع بين المغرب والعشاء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whenever the Messenger of Allah (S) wanted to travel during the day, he
would combine *zuhr* and *‘asr* prayers, and whenever he wanted to
travel during the night, he would combine *maghrib* and *‘isha’*
prayers.[^11]

**9.** In his *Sharh* *al-Muwatta’*, Muhammad az-Zarqani thus narrates
on the authority of Abu ash-Sha‘tha’:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن بن عباس صلى بالبصرة الظهر والعصر ليس بينهما شئ والمغرب والعشاء ليس
بينهما شئ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, (‘Abd Allah) ibn ‘Abbas performed in Basrah *zuhr* and *‘asr*
prayers together without any interval in between, and performed
*maghrib* and *‘isha’* prayers together without any interval in
between.[^12]

**10.** Zarqani narrates on the authority of Tabrani, from Ibn Mas‘ud:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جمع النبيّ صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم بين الظهر والعصر وبين المغرب
والعشاء. فقيل له في ذلك ، فقال: صنعت هذا لئلا تحرج أمتي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet (S) performed *zuhr* and *‘asr* prayers together, and the
*maghrib* and *‘isha’* prayers together. When he was asked about the
reason for that, he said: I wanted that my *ummah* would not be put to
(unnecessary) difficulty.[^13]

**11.** Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj narrates on the authority of Abu Zubayr
from Sa‘id ibn Jubayr from Ibn ‘Abbas:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم الظهر والعصر جميعاً بالمدينة في
غير خوف ولا سفر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Messenger of Allah (S) performed noon and afternoon prayers
together in Medina though he was neither in a state of fear nor on
travels.”[^14]

Abu Zubayr said: I asked Sa‘id (one of the narrators) why the Prophet
did that. He said: I asked Ibn ‘Abbas about it, and he replied that he
(the Holy Prophet) wanted that no one among his *ummah* should be put to
(unnecessary) hardship.[^15]

**12.** In his *Sahih*, Muslim thus narrates on the authority of Abu
Zubayr from Sa‘id ibn Jubayr from Ibn al-‘Abbas:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جمع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم بين الظهر والعصر والمغرب والعئاء
في المدينة من غير خوف ولا مظر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Messenger of Allah (S) combined the noon prayer with the afternoon
prayer and the sunset prayer with the *‘isha’* prayer in Medina without
being in a state of danger or rainfall.[^16]

Then Sa‘id ibn Jubayr says: I asked Ibn al-‘Abbas: “Why did the Prophet
do it?” Ibn al-‘Abbas replied: “He (the Holy Prophet) wanted that no one
among his *ummah* should be put to (unnecessary) hardship”.[^17]

**13.** In his *Sahih*, Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Bukhari has allocated a
special section for this issue under the heading, “Section: Delaying of
*Ẓuhr* Prayer till *‘Asr* Prayer” {*bab ta’khir az-zuhr
ila’l-‘asr*},[^18] which is itself a solid proof that one may delay
performing the *zuhr* prayer and observe it along with the *‘asr* prayer
at the time of the latter. Then, in that section Bukhari narrates a
tradition, which we shall quote below:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن النبيّ صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم صلى بالمدينة سبعاً وثمانياً والظهر
والعصر والمغرب والعشاء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Verily, the Prophet (S) prayed eight *rak‘ah*s for the *zuhr* and
*‘asr*, and seven for the *maghrib* and *‘isha’* prayers in
Medina.”[^19]

It is so evident from this tradition that not only that one may delay
performing the *zuhr* prayer and observe it along with the *‘asr* prayer
at the time of the latter, but it can also be inferred, based on
contextual analogy, that in following the Holy Prophet (S) one may delay
performing the *maghrib* prayer and observe it along with the *‘isha’*
prayer at the time of the latter.

**14.** And thus, elsewhere in his *Sahih*, Bukhari says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابن عمر وأبو أيوب ابن عباس رضى الله عنهم: صلى النبيّ صلى الله عليه
وأله وسلم – المغرب والعشاء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“(‘Abd Allah) ibn ‘Umar, Abu Ayyub and Ibn al-‘Abbas (may Allah be
pleased with them) said: The Prophet (S) observed the *maghrib* and
*‘isha’* prayers (together without any interval).”[^20]

Bukhari seemingly wants to deduce from this tradition that the Holy
Prophet (S) combined the *maghrib* and *‘isha’* prayers. Otherwise, it
is obvious that the Prophet (S) never neglected prayer.

**15.** In his *Sahih*, Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj thus writes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رجل لأبن عباس الصلوة فسكت ثم قال الصلوة فسكت ثم قال الصلوة فسكت ،
قال: لا أم لك أتعلمنا بالصلوة وكنا نجمع بين الصلاتين على عهد رسول الله
صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A person said to Ibn al-‘Abbas (as he delayed the prayer): Prayer. He
kept silence. He again said: Prayer. He again kept silence, and he again
cried: Prayer. He again kept silence and said: May you be deprived of
your mother, do you teach us about prayer? We used to combine two
prayers during the life of the Messenger of Allah (S).[^21]

**16.** Muslim narrates:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم جمع بين الصلاة سفرة سافرها في
غزوة تبوك فجمع بين الظهر والعصر والمغرب والعشاء. قال سعيد: فقلت لإبن
عباس: ما حمله على ذلك؟ قال: أراد أن لا يحرج امته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn al-‘Abbas reported that the Messenger of Allah (S) combined the
prayers as he set on a journey in the expedition to Tabuk. He combined
the noon prayer with the afternoon prayer and the sunset prayer with the
*‘isha’* prayer. Sa‘id (one of the narrators) said to Ibn al-‘Abbas:
What prompted him to do this? He said: He wanted that his *ummah* should
not be put to (unnecessary) hardship.[^22]

**17.** Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj thus narrates on the authority of Mu‘adh
ibn Jabal:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خرجنا مع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم في غزوة تبوك فكان يصلي
الظهر والعصر جميعاً والمغرب والعشاء جميعاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mu‘adh reported: We set out with the Messenger of Allah (S) on the Tabuk
expedition, and he observed the noon and afternoon prayers together and
the sunset and *‘isha’* prayers together.[^23]

**18.** Malik ibn Anas writes in the book, *Al-Muwatta’*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابن شهاب أنه سأله سالم بن عبد الله: هل يجمع بين الظهر والعصر في
السفر؟ فقال: نعم لا بأس بذلك ، ألم تر إلى صلاة الناس يعرفه؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn Shahab asked Salim ibn ‘Abd Allah: “Do you combine the *zuhr* and
*‘asr* prayers while in travel?” He replied: “Yes, there is no problem
for that. Can you not see how the people pray on the Day of ‘Arafah (in
the plain of ‘Arafah)?”[^24]

It is necessary to note that the Muslims regard it as permissible on the
Day of ‘Arafah in the plain of ‘Arafah to combine the *zuhr* and *‘asr*
prayers by observing them together at the time of *zuhr* prayer without
any interval in between. Here, Salim ibn ‘Abd Allah is saying that just
as the people is performing together the two prayers in ‘Arafah, they
can also do the same elsewhere.

**19.** Muttaqi Hindi thus stated in his book, *Kanz al-‘Ummal*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال عبد الله: جمع لنا رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم مقيماً غير
مسافر بين الظهر والعصر والمغرب والعشاء. فقال رجل لإبن عمر: لم ترى
النبيّ صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم فعل ذلك؟ قال: لأن لا يحرج امته إن جمع
رجل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (ibn ‘Umar) said: “The Messenger of Allah (S) combined the
*zuhr* and *‘asr* prayers and the *maghrib* and *‘isha’* prayers
together while resident and not in travel.” A man asked Ibn ‘Umar: “Why
did the Prophet (S) do that?” He replied: “So that his *ummah* would not
be put to (unnecessary) difficulty should one prefer to do so”.[^25]

**20.** We can also read the following in *Kanz al-‘Ummal*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن جابر أن النبيّ صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم جمع بين الظهر والعصر وبأذان
وإقامتين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jabir (ibn ‘Abd Allah) says: “Verily, the Prophet (S) combined together
the *zuhr* and *‘asr* prayers with one *adhan* and two *iqamah*s.”[^26]

**21.** In *Kanz al-‘Ummal*, one can read the tradition below:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن جابر أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم: غربت له الشمس بمكة فجمع
بينهما بسفر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jabir (ibn ‘Abd Allah) says: “While the Messenger of Allah (S) was in
Mecca the sun had set. Upon reaching Sarf,[^27] he combined the two
prayers (*maghrib* and *‘isha’*).”[^28]

**22.** In *Kanz al-‘Ummal*, it is thus narrated from Ibn al-‘Abbas:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جمع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم بين الظهر والعصر والمغرب والعشاء
بالمدينة في غير سفر ولا مطر ، قال: قلت لإبن عباس: لم تراه فعل ذلك؟
قال: أراد التوسعة على امته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Messenger of Allah (S) combined together the *zuhr* and *‘asr*
prayers as well as the *maghrib* and *‘isha’* prayers in Medina while
not in a state of journey or rainfall. A narrator says: I asked Ibn
al-‘Abbas: Why did he (the Holy Prophet) do so? He replied: He wanted
easiness for his *ummah*.[^29]

### Conclusion

Now, in the light of the quoted traditions, we shall sum up the clear
proofs that testify to the validity of the interpretation of combining
prayers from the viewpoint of the Shi‘ah:

1. Combining two prayers together is meant to facilitate the conduct of affairs and avoid difficulty.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Many of the traditions testify to the fact that if combining together
the *zuhr* and *‘asr* prayers or the *maghrib* and *‘isha’* prayers is
not permissible, it will cause difficulty and trouble in the activities
of Muslims. As such, in a bid to create a sort of improvement and
facility in the affairs of Muslims, the Prophet (S) declared as
permissible the observance of both prayers (*zuhr* and *‘asr* prayers,
and the *maghrib* and *‘isha’* prayers) at one time. In this respect,
refer to 10th, 16th, 19th, and 22nd *hadith*s.

It is clear that if the purport of the quoted traditions is that one may
delay performing the *zuhr* prayer at its latter period (near the time
when the size of any object is equal in size with itself) for the Ahl
as-Sunnah and observe the *‘asr* prayer at its initial period in such a
manner that both prayers are performed together at a certain limited
time, such a decree not only fails to give comfort but also causes more
difficulty and trouble, whereas the purpose behind combining two prayers
is comfort in the conduct of affairs.

Having said this, it is evident that the purport of this decree is that
one may observe the two prayers throughout their common time such as the
initial time of one or the latter part the other’s period, and not that
we may perform one of these prayers at its latter period and the other
one at its initial time.

2. Combining the two prayers together in ‘Arafah is an expression of its general applicability
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

All Islamic schools of thought have regarded as permissible to combine
together the *zuhr* and *‘asr* prayers in ‘Arafah.[^30] Meanwhile, some
of these quoted traditions testify to the fact that combining the two
prayers in other places is also like combining the same in ‘Arafah, and
for this reason, there is no difference between the Day of ‘Arafah and
other days, or the plain of ‘Arafah and other places. In this regard,
refer to the 18th *hadith*.

Therefore, just as one may observe the *zuhr* and *‘asr* prayers at the
time of *zuhr* as all Muslims have consensus of opinion in this respect,
the said combination of prayers is also permissible in other places.

3. The manner of combining the two prayers while traveling is an expression of its general applicability
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

On one hand, the Hanbali, Maliki and Shafi‘i jurists {*fuqaha*} have
considered permissible to combine the two prayers while one is in
travel. On the other hand, the quoted traditions stipulate that there is
no difference between the state of traveling and residence and the Holy
Prophet (S) used to combine the two prayers both in travel and at home.

In this connection, refer to the third, 11th, 13th, 19th, and 22nd
traditions. Based on this, just as observing the two prayers together
while traveling (as the Shi‘ah are saying) is permissible, it is also
permissible when one is resident.

4. The manner of combining the two prayers together in the state of emergency is an expression of its general applicability at usual circumstances
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Plenty of traditions recorded in *Sahih* and *Musnad* books testify to
the fact that the Holy Prophet (S) and his Companions used to perform
the two prayers together, just as the Shi‘ah are saying, during
emergency cases such rainfall, state of fear (against the enemy) or
sickness.

As such, many jurists of the diverse Islamic schools of jurisprudence
have issued religious edicts {*fatawa*} on its permissibility on some
emergency cases, whereas the quoted traditions stipulate that in this
respect also, there is no difference between the state of emergency or
usual condition, and the Holy Prophet (S) combined the two prayers while
not in a state of fear or rainfall. In this context, refer to the third,
11th, 12th, and 22nd traditions.

5. The practice of the Companions of the Prophet (S) is an expression of its general applicability
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We may notice in the quoted traditions that many Companions of the
Prophet (S) used to perform the two prayers together in that ‘Abd Allah
ibn ‘Abbas would so delay the performance of *maghrib* prayer that it
would become dark and the stars appear in the sky and that no matter
others were saying, “Prayer, prayer” he would not pay attention to them
and finally observe the *maghrib* and *‘isha’* prayers together after
the passage of a part of the night and said in reply to the protesters,
“I was a witness that the Prophet (S) used to observe such a way of
praying, too” and Abu Hurayrah also confirmed that statement of Ibn
al-‘Abbas. Concerning this case, refer to the second, seventh, ninth,
and 15th traditions.

In the light of these quoted traditions, there is no more doubt that Ibn
al-‘Abbas combined together the two prayers in the manner observed by
the Shi‘ah now.

6. The conduct of the Prophet (S) is an expression of the manner of combining the two prayers
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is so evident from the 21st *hadith* that the Prophet (S) was once
still in Mecca when the time for *maghrib* prayer arrived but he delayed
performing it until he reached the district of Sarf, which is nine miles
away from Mecca, where he performed the *maghrib* and *‘isha’* prayers
together without any time interval in between.

This is while it is clear that even if the Prophet (S) would have set
off from Mecca at the beginning of the *maghrib* time, in view of the
slow and antiquated means of transportation, a part of the night would
have naturally passed before reaching the district of Sarf, and thus,
the Holy Prophet (S) had performed both the *maghrib* and *‘isha’*
prayers at the time of *‘isha’* prayer.

From the quoted traditions, which are all taken from the *Sahih* and
*Musnad* references of the Ahl as-Sunnah, the validity of the Shi‘ah
view on the permissibility of combining the *zuhr* and *‘asr* prayers,
or the *maghrib* and *‘isha’* prayers together under conditions
discussed earlier and with general applicability at all circumstances,
places and moments is hereby proved.

[^1]: ‘Arafat: a plain about 21 kilometers north of Mecca where pilgrims
have to stay from noon to sunset on the 9th day of Dhu’l-Hijjah (Day of
‘Arafat) as one of the hajj rites. {Trans.}

[^2]: Muzdalifah: a place where pilgrims {hujjaj} have to stop to pick
up 70 pebbles which are to be thrown on the symbols of Satan in Mina.
{Trans.}

[^3]: Adapted from Al-Fiqh ‘ala’l-Madhahib al-Arba‘ah, “Kitab as-Salah,
al-Jam‘ bayn as-Salatayn Taqdiman wa Ta’khiran.”

[^4]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, vol. 1, p. 221. The same tradition is
also reported in Abdul Hamid Siddiqui (trans.), Sahih Muslim (English
Translation), vol. 1, chap. 100, “Combination of Prayers, When One is
Resident,” Book 4, hadith 1521. {Trans.}

[^5]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, vol. 1, p. 251. The same tradition is
also reported in Abdul Hamid Siddiqui (trans.), Sahih Muslim (English
Translation), vol. 1, chap. 100, “Combination of Prayers, When One is
Resident,” Book 4, hadith 1523. {Trans.}

[^6]: Malik ibn Anas, Al-Muwatta’ (Beirut, 3rd Edition 1403 AH), “Kitab
as-Salah,” p. 125, hadith 178; Sahih Muslim (Beirut), vol. 2, “Kitab
as-Salah,” “Bab al-Jam‘ bayn as-Salatayn fi’l-Hadr,” p. 151. Abdul Hamid
Siddiqui (trans.), Sahih Muslim (English Translation), vol. 1, chap.
100, “Combination of Prayers, When One is Resident,” Book 4, hadith
1515. {Trans.}

[^7]: Malik ibn Anas, Al-Muwatta’ (Beirut, 3rd Edition 1403 AH), “Kitab
as-Salah,” p. 134, hadith 176; Sahih Muslim (Egypt), vol. 2, “Kitab
as-Salah,” “Bab al-Jam‘ bayn as-Salatayn fi’l-Hadr,” p. 152. Abdul Hamid
Siddiqui (trans.), Sahih Muslim (English Translation), vol. 1, chap.
100, “Combination of Prayers, When One is Resident,” Book 4, hadith
1518. {Trans.}

[^8]: Malik ibn Anas, Al-Muwatta’ (Beirut, 3rd Edition 1403 AH), “Kitab
as-Salah,” p. 125, hadith 177.

[^9]: Ibid., p. 124, hadith 175.

[^10]: Ibid., p. 125, hadith 179.

[^11]: Ibid., hadith 181.

[^12]: Muhammad az-Zarqani, Sharh Muwatta’ Malik (Egypt), vol. 1, “Bab
al-Jam‘ bayn as-Salatayn fi’l-Hadr wa’s-Safar,” p. 294.

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: Sahih Muslim (Egypt), vol. 2, “Kitab as-Salah,” “Bab al-Jam‘ bayn
as-Salatayn fi’l-Hadr,” p. 151. Abdul Hamid Siddiqui (trans.), Sahih
Muslim (English Translation), vol. 1, chap. 100, “Combination of
Prayers, When One is Resident,” Book 4, hadith 1516. {Trans.}

[^15]: Ibid., under the mentioned hadith.

[^16]: Ibid., 152. Abdul Hamid Siddiqui (trans.), Sahih Muslim (English
Translation), vol. 1, chap. 100, “Combination of Prayers, When One is
Resident,” Book 4, hadith 1520. {Trans.}

[^17]: Ibid., under the mentioned hadith.

[^18]: Sahih al-Bukhari (Egypt: Amiriyyah, 1314 AH), “Kitab as-Salah,”
“Bab Ta’khir az-Ẓuhr ila’l-‘Asr,” vol. 1, p. 110.

[^19]: Ibid. Muhammad Muhsin Khan (trans.), Sahih al-Bukhari (English
Translation), vol. 1, book 10, hadith 518. {Trans.}

[^20]: Ibid., “Bab Dhikr al-‘Isha’,” vol. 1, p. 113.

[^21]: Sahih Muslim (Beirut), vol. 2, “Kitab as-Salah,” “Bab al-Jam‘
bayn as-Salatayn fi’l-Hadr,” vol. 2, p. 153. Abdul Hamid Siddiqui
(trans.), Sahih Muslim (English Translation), vol. 1, chap. 100,
“Combination of Prayers, When One is Resident,” Book 4, hadith 1524.
{Trans.}

[^22]: Ibid., p. 151. Abdul Hamid Siddiqui (trans.), Sahih Muslim
(English Translation), vol. 1, chap. 100, “Combination of Prayers, When
One is Resident,” Book 4, hadith 1517. {Trans.}

[^23]: Ibid., p. 152. Abdul Hamid Siddiqui (trans.), Sahih Muslim
(English Translation), vol. 1, chap. 100, “Combination of Prayers, When
One is Resident,” Book 4, hadith 1518. {Trans.}

[^24]: Malik ibn Anas, Al-Muwatta’ (Beirut, 3rd Edition 1403 AH), “Kitab
as-Salah,” p. 125, hadith 180.

[^25]: Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal (Halab, 1391 AH), vol. 8, “Kitab
as-Salah,” “Al-Bab ar-Rabi‘ fi’s-Salah al-Musafir, Bab Jam‘,” p. 246.

[^26]: Ibid., p. 247.

[^27]: Sarf: a district 9 miles away from Mecca. See Kanz al-‘Ummal
under the quoted hadith.

[^28]: Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal (Halab, 1391 AH), vol. 8, “Kitab
as-Salah,” “Al-Bab ar-Rabi‘ fi’s-Salah al-Musafir, Bab Jam‘,” p. 247.

[^29]: Ibid.

[^30]: Al-Fiqh ‘ala’l-Madhahib al-Arba‘ah, “Kitab as-Salah,” “Al-Jam‘
bayn as-Salatayn Taqdiman wa Ta’khiran”.


