Question 30 : Do the Shi‘ah think that Jibra’il (Archangel Gabriel) has committed treachery when he conveyed the message {risalah} to Muhammad instead of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib?
=============================================================================================================================================================================

**Reply:** Before proving the groundlessness of this loathsome
accusation made against the Shi‘ah by some ignorant or spiteful people,
it is appropriate to trace its origin.

The origin of this accusation
-----------------------------

The noble verses of the Qur’an and some relevant *hadith*s show that
Jews were of the opinion that Jibra’il (*‘a*) has committed treachery
while conveying the message {*risalah*} claiming that God had ordered
him to entrust the prophethood {*nubuwwah*} to the progeny of Isra’il
(Ya‘qub or Jacob) from the line of Ishaq (Isaac), but he did not comply
with that divine order by entrusting it to the offspring of Isma‘il
(Ishmael)!

Thus, a group of Jews regard Jibra’il (*‘a*) as an enemy[^1] and assume
that “The truthful {*al-amin*} (Jibra’il) has betrayed!” Therefore, in
reproaching them and proving the groundlessness of their claim, the
Qur’an refers to Jibra’il (*‘a*) in the verse below as truthful
{*al-amin*} and honest angel:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نزل به الروح الأمين على قلبك لتكون من المنذرين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“{It (Qur’an) was} brought down by the Trustworthy Spirit, upon your
heart, so that you may be one of the warners.”***[^2]

In another verse, the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مَنْ كانَ عَدُوًّا لِجِبْريلَ فَإِنَّهُ نَزَّلَهُ عَلى‏ قَلْبِكَ
بِإِذْنِ اللّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say, ‘Whoever is an enemy of Gabriel {should know that} it is he who
has brought it down on your heart with the will of Allah.”***[^3]

From the quoted verses and their commentaries, we realize that a group
of Jews were hostile to Jibra’il (*‘a*) for some reasons, branding him
as the “angel of tribulation” {*mala’ikah al-‘adhab*} and accusing him
of treachery in conveying the message {*risalah*}.

Therefore, the slogan, “The truthful (Jibra’il) has betrayed” originates
from the superstitions of the Jews. Some ignorant writers who have
ancient enmity toward the Shi‘ah make use of the Jews’ statement to
dastardly attribute it to the Shi‘ah.

Prophethood {nubuwwah} from the Shi‘ah viewpoint
------------------------------------------------

Following the Book (the Qur’an) and the *Sunnah*, and relying on the
explicit traditions of the Prophet’s *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), the Shi‘ah
not only consider Muhammad ibn ‘Abd Allah (S) as a prophet in truth
appointed by God as a universal messenger, but also regard him as the
Seal of the Prophets {*khatam al-anbiya’*} and the greatest divine
envoy.

‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (*‘a*), the great leader who is followed by the
Shi‘ah testifies to this truth in these eloquent words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وأشهد أن لا إله إلا الله وحده لا شريك له وأشهد أن محمد عبده ورسوله
خاتم النبيّين حجة الله على العالمين."
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I bear witness that there is no god but Allah, the One and Only, Who
has no partner, and I bear witness that Muhammad is His servant and
Messenger, the Seal of the Prophets and the Proof of Allah to the
worlds.[^4]  
 Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لم يبعث الله عز وجل من العرب إلا خمسة أنبياء: هوداً وصالحاً وإسماعيل
وشعيب ومحمد خاتم النبيّين."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“From among the Arabs, God appointed only five prophets: Hud, Salih,
Isma‘il, Shu‘ayb, and Muhammad as the Seal of the Prophets (S).”[^5]

This noble *hadith* which proves the groundlessness of this repulsive
accusation against the Shi‘ah refers to Hadrat[^6] Muhammad ibn ‘Abd
Allah (S) as the last and final Prophet of God.[^7]

Accordingly, the Shi‘ah all over the world think that Jibra’il (*‘a*)
was truthful and honest in conveying the message, Muhammad ibn ‘Abd
Allah (S) is the Prophet in truth and the last and final Messenger of
Allah, and ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (*‘a*) is the Prophet’s successor and
executor of his will.

Here, it is appropriate to quote a tradition on whose authenticity all
the Sunnis and the Shi‘ah agree and which can be found in their reliable
books. In this tradition known as the *Hadith al-Manzilah*, after
announcing his being the Seal of the Prophets, the Holy Prophet (*‘a*)
introduces ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (*‘a*) as his successor and the executor
of his will when he says to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أما ترضى أن تكون منّي بمنزلة هارون من موسى إلا أنه لا نبيّ بعدي؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Are you not satisfied that you are to me as Harun (Aaron) is to Musa
(Moses) except that there shall be no prophet after me?”[^8]

This tradition whose chain of transmission is approved by great scholars
of *hadith* {*muhaddithun*}—both Sunni and Shi‘ah—is a clear testimony
to the soundness of the Shi‘ah’s view on the following:

1. Muhammad ibn ‘Abd Allah (S) is the most beloved prophet of God and
the seal of the prophets who by the decree of God was sent as the final
and universal messenger after whom no prophet will come.

2. ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (*‘a*) is the Prophet’s successor and executor of
his will, and the caliph of the Muslims after him.

[^1]: Al-Fakhr ar-Razi (Egypt, 1308 AH), vol. 1, p. pp. 436-437.

[^2]: Surah ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:193-194.

[^3]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:97.

[^4]: Nahj as-Sa‘adah (Beirut), vol. 1, p. 188; Al-Kafi (Tehran, 2nd
Edition, 1389 AH), vol. 8, p. 67.

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar (Beirut, 2nd Edition, 1403 AH), vol. 11, p. 42.

[^6]: Hadrat: The Arabic word Hadrat is used as a respectful form of
address. {Trans.}

[^7]: For more information on the abundant hadiths indicating the
Shi‘ah’s view concerning the finality of propethood of the Holy Prophet
(S), see Prof. Ja‘far Subhani’s Mafahim al-Qur’an.

[^8]: This hadith can be found in many references, some of which are the
following: Sahih al-Bukhari (Egypt), vol. 6, “Bab Ghazwah at-Tabuk,” p.
3; Sahih Muslim (Egypt), vol. 7, “Bab Fada’il ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib,” p.
120; Sunan Ibn Majah (Egypt), vol. 1, “Fada’il Ashab an-Nabi,” p. 55;
Mustadrak al-Hakim (Beirut), vol. 3, p. 109; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal,
vol. 1, pp. 170, 177, 179, 182, 184-185; vol. 3, p. 32; Sahih Tirmidhi
(Beirut), vol. 5, “Bab Manaqib ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib,” p. 21; Ibn
Maghazali, Al-Manaqib (Beirut, 1403 AH), p. 27; Bihar al-Anwar (Beirut,
2nd Edition, 143 AH), vol. 37, p. 254; Shaykh as-Saduq, Ma‘ani al-Akhbar
(Beirut, 1399 AH), p. 74; Kanz al-Fawa’id (Beirut 1405 AH), vol. 2, p.
168.


