Question 31: What is the criterion of taqiyyah {dissimulation}?
===============================================================

**Reply:** *Taqiyyah* means concealing one’s conviction and faith from
the enemies to avoid worldly, spiritual or religious harms, and it is
one of the religious obligations of every Muslim on which the Holy
Qur’an emphasizes.

Taqiyyah from the Qur’anic viewpoint
------------------------------------

The Glorious Qur’an has referred to this obligation in many verses. Here
are some of them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لاَّ يَتَّخِذِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الْكَافِرِينَ أَوْلِيَاء مِن دُوْنِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَمَن يَفْعَلْ ذَلِكَ فَلَيْسَ مِنَ اللّهِ فِي شَيْءٍ
إِلاَّ أَن تَتَّقُواْ مِنْهُمْ تُقَاةً ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The faithful should not take the faithless for allies instead of the
faithful, and whoever does that Allah will have nothing to do with him,
except when you are wary of them out of caution.”***[^1]

This verse vividly testifies to the fact that friendship with the
infidels is not permissible. But, in case of dissimulation {*taqiyyah*},
i.e. when one intends to save his life or parry dangers, then outward
friendship and concordance with them is permissible.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ مَن كَفَرَ بِاللّهِ مِن بَعْدِ إيمَانِهِ إِلاَّ مَنْ أُكْرِهَ
وَقَلْبُهُ مُطْمَئِنٌّ بِالإِيمَانِ وَلَـكِن مَّن شَرَحَ بِالْكُفْرِ
صَدْرًا فَعَلَيْهِمْ غَضَبٌ مِّنَ اللّهِ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever renounces faith in Allah after {affirming} his faith—barring
someone who is compelled while his heart is at rest in faith—but those
who open up their breasts to unfaith, upon such shall be Allah’s wrath,
and there is a great punishment for them.”***[^2]

Regarding the circumstances surrounding the revelation of this verse,
the exegetes {*mufassirun*} thus say:

One day, ‘Ammar ibn Yasir, his father and his mother were captured by
the enemies and the infidels asked them to renounce Islam and
acknowledge disbelief {*kufr*} and polytheism {*shirk*}. All those who
were with ‘Ammar bore witness to the Oneness of God and the prophethood
of the Holy Prophet (S).

Therefore, some of them attained martyrdom while others were tortured by
the enemies. In order to avoid the enemies’ torture, ‘Ammar uttered what
the infidels wanted him to utter, and so, he was freed.

When he met the Messenger of Allah (S) he was very regretful and
dejected for what he had said. So, the Holy Prophet (S) comforted him
and then the aforementioned verse was revealed.[^3]

From this verse and statements of exegetes, it becomes clear that hiding
one’s inner conviction for the sake of saving his life and avoiding
material and non-material harms was practiced during the time of the
Prophet (S) and so it is acceptable in Islam.

Taqiyyah from the Shi‘ah viewpoint
----------------------------------

Because the despotic Umayyad and ‘Abbasid governments throughout history
were inimical to the Shi‘ah and resolved to eliminate them,[^4] the
Shi‘ah used *taqiyyah* as per Qur’anic injunctions by hiding their true
beliefs. In doing so, they saved their lives as well as the lives of
their Muslim brethren under those critical circumstances.

It is clear that with an atmosphere full of despotism and strangulation
the Shi‘ah had no other way to protect themselves against the storm of
oppression that was threatening their lives than using *taqiyyah*. As
such, if tyrant kings and their agents had not been inimical to the
Shi‘ah and if they had not taken as the main agenda of their governments
the brutal carnage of the Shi‘ah, there would have been no reason for
the Shi‘ah’s resorting to *taqiyyah*.

It is necessary to note that *taqiyyah* is not practiced only by the
Shi‘ah. In fact, other Muslims also make use of the shield of *taqiyyah*
vis-à-vis such murderous enemies who show hostility to the Muslims of
all schools of thought like the Kharijites {*khawarij*} and oppressive
governments that resort to all unlawful ways. When they see that they
cannot confront their enemies, Muslims conceal their inner beliefs in
order to save their lives.

On this basis, if all the members of Muslim community have mutual
understanding and live in unity and cooperation, there will be no ground
for *taqiyyah* among the Muslims.

Conclusion
----------

From what have been stated so far, we can draw the following
conclusions:

1. *Taqiyyah* has its root in the Qur’an and in the conduct of the
Prophet’s Companions, and the Prophet’s (S) approval of it is a vivid
testimony to its existence and permissibility during the early period of
Islam.

2. The motive behind the Shi‘ah’s use of *taqiyyah* was to escape the
brutal killing and the storms of tyranny and oppression that were
intended to eradicate this school of thought.

3. *Taqiyyah* is not practiced only by the Shi‘ah; in fact, other Muslim
groups also resort to it.

4. The aim of using *taqiyyah* is not only the abandonment of and
concealing Islamic beliefs from polytheists; rather, the criterion of
*taqiyyah* which is intended to ensure the Muslims’ safety is more
general, and hiding one’s inner beliefs vis-à-vis any murderous enemy,
either because one lacks the ability to confront or because the
conditions for resistance are not available is an indispensable affair.

5. If there is good understanding between all the members of Muslim
community, there will exist no ground for *taqiyyah* among the Muslims.

[^1]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:28.

[^2]: Surah an-Nahl 16:106.

[^3]: See Jalal ad-Din as-Suyuti, Ad-Durr al-Manthur (Beirut), vol. 4,
p. 131.

[^4]: For more information on the merciless killing of the Shi‘ah
perpetrated by the Umayyad and ‘Abbasid caliphs, see Abu’l-Faraj
al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyin; ‘Allamah Amini, Shuhada’ al-Fadilah;
Muhammad Jawad Mughniyyah, Ash-Shi‘ah wa’l-Hakimun.


