Question 32 : Why is the Ja‘fari school of thought {madhhab} stipulated in the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran as the official madhhab of the country?
===================================================================================================================================================================

**Reply:** No doubt, the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran
shows respect to all Muslim schools of thought, but the Muslim schools
of jurisprudence {*madhahib* or *madhhab*s} such as Ja‘fari, Maliki,
Shafi‘i, Hanbali, Hanafi, etc. are neither identical nor concordant in
their attitudes toward the individual and social duties and so there are
many differences among them.

Also, while laying down laws and enacting regulations for a society, the
concordance and harmony of the said regulations seem to be
indispensable.

Therefore, only one Muslim school of thought should be recognized as the
source for enacting the social regulations of a certain country because
in case of relying on various sources of legislation, the achievement of
cohesive and systematic regulations will be impossible.

Therefore, one of the Muslim schools of jurisprudence that has correct
standards should be recognized as the source for condifying social laws
and regulations and thus prevent any possible chaos and discord in the
codification of the laws of country and pave the ground for the
formulation of a set of regulations in legal, social and other fields.

The criterion for selecting the Ja‘fari madhhab
-----------------------------------------------

The other question which is posed here is: What is the criterion for
recognizing the Ja‘fari *madhhab* from among the Muslim schools of
jurisprudence as the source for codifying the laws and regulations of
the country?

The answer is clear and that is because the vast majority of the
Iranians are Muslims who believe in the Ja‘fari school of jurisprudence
and think it can define their individual and social duties. As such, it
is clear that declaring the Ja‘fari *madhhab* to be the official
*madhhab* of the country as stated in the Constitution of the Islamic
Republic of Iran is not unusual and it is congruent with all logical and
legal standards.

The status of the other Muslim schools of thought and the respect shown to them
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran which recognizes the
Ja‘fari *madhhab* as the official *madhhab*, respects other *madhahib*
such as Shafi‘i, Hanbali, Hanafi, Maliki, and Zaydi. As a matter of
fact, the followers of these *madhahib* can follow the *fiqh* of their
respective *madhahib* in:

1. The performance of religious rites;

2. Religious training and education;

3. Carrying out personal activities; and

4. Specific religious activities such as marriage, divorce, inheritance,
last will and testament, etc.

In addition to this, in the region where the majority of the inhabitants
belong to any of the aforementioned *madhahib*, the local regulations
prescribed by local councils are compatible with that particular
*madhhab* and the rights of followers of other *madhahib* are also
observed.

In order to elaborate on this issue, we cite Article 12, Chapter 1 of
the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran:

The official religion of Iran is Islam while the official *madhhab* is
Shi‘ah Ithna ‘Ashari (Twelver Shi‘ah), and this principle is unalterable
and the other Islamic schools of thought such as Hanafi, Shafi‘i,
Maliki, Hanbali, and Zaydi are completely respected and the followers of
these *madhahib* are free to follow their *madhahib* in such areas like
religious rites, religious training and education, personal affairs like
marriage, divorce, inheritance, and last will and testament, or in
relevant legal cases. In every region where the followers of any of
these *madhahib* are in majority, the local regulations local councils
codify are to be compatible with that particular *madhhab* and the
rights of followers of other *madhahib* be preserved.

This article in the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran is a
clear testimony to its respect for all Islamic schools of thought.


