Question 34: Is the belief that great divine people {awliya’} have supernatural power tantamount to polytheism {shirk}?
=======================================================================================================================

**Reply:** It is clear that when a person wants someone to do something
for him or her, the former thinks that the latter is capable of doing it
and this capability takes two forms:

1. This capability may be of material and natural forces as in the case
of asking somebody to give us a glass of water.

2. Or, it may be a hidden force which exists beyond the material and
natural realm as in the case of the pious servant of God, ‘Isa ibn
Maryam (Jesus the son of Mary) (*‘a*) who was capable of healing
incurable ailments with his Messianic breath.

It is clear that the belief in such a metaphysical power, which is
related to and supported by the power and will of God, is like believing
in natural power, and it is by no means tantamount to polytheism
{*shirk*}, because the Lord Who has bestowed material and natural power
upon human beings can also grant His righteous servants supernatural
power.

Now, in elucidating the stated answer the belief that divine people have
supernatural power can be conceived in two ways:

1. To believe that a person is an independent and principal source of
that power and to consider him the author of divine acts.

No doubt, if we think that this supernatural power is independent of the
power of God, it will be tantamount to polytheism because according to
this belief someone other than God is regarded as the independent and
original source of power, to whom divine acts are attributed, whereas
the Lord of the worlds is the fountainhead of all kinds of power.

2. To believe that the supernatural power of some faithful pious
servants of God stems from the eternal power of God, and that this
everlasting power is manifested by Divine Command through certain divine
people. In fact, they are not independent; rather, they rely both in
their existence as well as in exercising supernatural power on God, the
Exalted.

It is clear that according to this belief, great divine people are not
regarded as gods nor divine acts are attributed to them because
righteous people are viewed as servants of God through whom God-given
supernatural power is manifested by the decree and inviolable will of
God.

In this regard, the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ ما كانَ لِرَسُولٍ أَنْ يَأْتِيَ بِآيَةٍ إِلاّ بِإِذْنِ اللّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And an apostle may not bring a sign except by Allah’s leave.”***[^1]

It is evident from what we have stated that apart from the fact that it
has nothing to do with polytheism, this belief is totally harmonious
with the principle of monotheism and Unity of God.

Supernatural power of great divine people from a Qur’anic viewpoint
-------------------------------------------------------------------

With utmost explicitness, the heavenly scripture of Islam mentions the
names of a number of righteous servants of God who, by the decree of
God, have such extraordinary power. Below are some instances:

### 1. The supernatural power of Hadrat Musa (Moses) (‘a)

God, the Exalted, ordered His prophet, Musa (*‘a*), to strike a rock
with his staff and fountains of refreshing water gushed forth:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَإِذِ اسْتَسْقَىٰ مُوسَىٰ لِقَوْمِهِ فَقُلْنَا اضْرِب بِّعَصَاكَ
الْحَجَرَ فَانفَجَرَتْ مِنْهُ اثْنَتَا عَشْرَةَ عَيْناً ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when Moses prayed for water for his people, We said, ‘Strike the
rock with your staff.’ Thereat twelve fountains gushed forth from
it.”***[^2]

### 2. The supernatural power of Hadrat ‘Isa (Jesus) (‘a)

Various instances of the supernatural power of Hadrat ‘Isa (*‘a*) are
mentioned in the Qur’an, one of which is the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنِّي أَخْلُقُ لَكُم مِّنَ الطِّينِ كَهَيْئَةِ الطَّيْرِ فَأَنفُخُ
فِيهِ فَيَكُونُ طَيْرًا بِإِذْنِ اللّهِ وَأُبْرِئُ الأكْمَهَ
والأَبْرَصَ وَأُحْيِـي الْمَوْتَىٰ بِإِذْنِ اللّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I will create for you out of clay the form of a bird, then I will
breathe into it, and it will become a bird by Allah’s leave. And I heal
the blind and the leper and revive the dead by Allah’s leave.”***[^3]

### 3. The supernatural power of Hadrat Sulayman (Solomon) (‘a)

The Glorious Qur’an points to the supernatural power of Hadrat Sulayman
(*‘a*) and states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَرِثَ سُلَيْمَانُ دَاوُودَ وَقَالَ يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ عُلِّمْنَا
مَنطِقَ الطَّيْرِ وَأُوتِينَا مِن كُلِّ شَيْءٍ إِنَّ هَذَا لَهُوَ
الْفَضْلُ الْمُبِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Solomon inherited from David, and he said, ‘O people! We have been
taught the speech of the birds, and we have been given out of
everything. Indeed this is a manifest advantage.”***[^4]

No doubt, the gushing forth of fountains from the rock which Hadrat Musa
(*‘a*) stroke with his staff, the creation of a real bird out of clay,
the healing of incurable ailments and the revival of the dead by Hadrat
‘Isa (*‘a*), and Hadrat Sulayman’s (*‘a*) knowledge of the logic and
language of birds are extraordinary affairs which are considered as
kinds of acts of supernatural power and authority.

Given that many Qur’anic verses point to the supernatural power of the
worthy servants of God, will our belief in the purport of these explicit
verses of the Qur’an, which bespeak of the extraordinary power of such
great divine people, be regarded as tantamount to polytheism {*shirk*}
or innovation in religion {*bid‘ah*}?

From this, it becomes evident that the belief that righteous servants of
God have supernatural power does not mean that they are regarded as gods
or authors of divine acts. If such a belief were to imply their divinity
{*uluhiyyah*} and lordship {*rububiyyah*}, then according to the Qur’an
such prophets like Musa, ‘Isa, Sulayman, and others (*‘a*) would be
taken to be gods, whereas all Muslims know that the Holy Qur’an
considers great divine people as righteous servants of God.

Thus, it is obvious that if in the belief that the nearest ones to God
have supernatural power, we can consider this power to be relying on the
inexhaustible power of God and regard great divine people as instruments
for manifesting divine power.

This belief will not only mean rejection of polytheism but it will also
be totally congruent with the principle of true monotheism because the
criterion of monotheism and Unity of God is attributing every power in
the world to God and believing that He is the author of every power and
every movement.

[^1]: Surah ar-Ra‘d 13:38.

[^2]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:60.

[^3]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:49.

[^4]: Surah an-Naml 27:16.


