Question 4: Who are the Imams?
==============================

**Reply:** During his lifetime, the Holy Prophet (S) declared that after
him there shall be twelve caliphs all of whom will be from Quraysh, and
through whom Islam shall be exalted.  
 Jabir ibn Samurah narrates:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وأله وسلم يقول : لا يزال الإسلام عزيزاً
إلى اثنى عشر خليفة ثم قال كلمة لم أسمعها فقلت لأبي ما قال؟ فقال: كلهم
من قريش."
  </p>
</blockquote>

I heard the Messenger of Allah (S) saying: ‘Islam will keep its honor
through twelve caliphs.’ Then, he said a statement which I failed to
catch. So I asked my father, “What did he (S) say?” He (my father)
replied that he (S) said: “All of them will be from Quraysh.[^1]

In the history of Islam, there are not twelve caliphs who preserve the
honor of Islam except the twelve Imams in whom the Shi‘ah believe; for
they are the twelve caliphs whom the Prophet (S) introduced as his
successors.

Now, let us see who the twelve caliphs are. If we say that they are the
four caliphs who are known by the Ahl as-Sunnah as “Rightly-Guided
Caliphs” {*khulafa’ ar-rashidun*}, there are no other caliphs who
contributed to exalting Islam.

The biography of the ‘Umayyad and ‘Abbasid caliphs is a testimony to
this fact. As for the twelve Imams in whom the Shi‘ah believe, they were
a clear manifestation of piety and virtue during their respective
periods.

They were also preservers of the Messenger of Allah’s (S) *Sunnah* and
the people to whom *Sahabah* {Companions} and *Tabi‘un* {Followers} were
attracted,[^2] and whose knowledge and trustworthiness are acknowledged
by historians. These twelve Imams are:

1. ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib;

2. Hasan ibn ‘Ali (al-Mujtaba);

3. Husayn ibn ‘Ali;

4. ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (Zayn al-‘Abidin);

5. Muhammad ibn ‘Ali (al-Baqir);

6. Ja‘far ibn Muhammad (as-Sadiq);

7. Musa ibn Ja‘far (al-Kazim);

8. ‘Ali ibn Musa (ar-Rida);

9. Muhammad ibn ‘Ali (at-Taqi);

10. ‘Ali ibn Muhammad (an-Naqi);

11. Hasan ibn ‘Ali (al-‘Askari); and

12. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan (al-Mahdi).

There have been *mutawatir* traditions related from the Prophet (S)
regarding the last Imam who is known as the “Promised Mahdi” transmitted
by Muslim *hadith* scholars {*muhaddithun*}.

For further information about the life of these great leaders, whom the
Messenger of Allah (S) himself has named, one may refer to the following
books:

1. *Tadhkirat al-Khawas* *(Tadhkirah Khawas* *al-Ummah)*;

2. *Kifayat al-Athar*;

3. *Wafiyat al-A‘yan*; and

4. *A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah* (by Sayyid Muhsin Amin al-‘Amili), which is the
most comprehensive of the four books.

[^1]: Muslim, Sahih (Egypt), vol. 6, p. 2. Abdul-Hamid Siddiqui
(trans.), Sahih Muslim (English Translation), vol. 3, hadith no. 4480.
{Trans.}

[^2]: Tabi‘un {‘Followers’ or ‘Successors’} refers to the second
generation of Muslims who came after the Companions, who did not know
the Prophet (S) but who knew his Companions. {Trans.}


