4. Qur’anic Message for Muslim Scientists
=========================================

As it is well-known, there are more than 750 Qur’anic verses dealing
with natural phenomena. We think that these verses involve an important
message for Muslim scientists. In our view, the following are the
essential points of that message:

a) In these verses, the study of all aspects of nature and the discovery
of the mysteries of creation is recommended.

***And in your creation and in what He spreads abroad of animals there
are signs for a people that are sure. (45:4)***

***Say, consider what is it that is in the heavens and the earth.
(10:101)***

***Say, travel on the earth and see how He made the first creation.
(29:20)***

According to the Holy Qur’an, we have to use our senses and intellect
for the understanding of nature, and this shall lead us to appreciate
the glory and majesty of Allah. As Allamah Tabataba’i puts:

The Qur’an invites reflection about heavenly signs, the brilliant stars
and the differences in their conditions and the systematic order that
governs them. It encourages meditation concerning the creation of the
earth, seas, mountains, the creation of plants and animals, human beings
and their inner world. Thus it invites to a study of natural and
mathematical sciences and all other fields, the learning of which is in
the interest of humanity and brings felicity to human society.

The Qur’an invites to these branches of knowledge on condition that
people are guided by this knowledge of truth. Otherwise a knowledge that
serves as an amusement and hinders one from knowing God and truth is
equivalent to ignorance in the vocabulary of the Qur’an.17

When the Holy Qur’an recommends that we look around the earth to find
out the origin of creation, this means that we have to obtain scientific
facts through our efforts. It is against the spirit of the Qur’an that
Muslims should remain idle while others get access to some of the
mysteries of nature, and then we use their results and depend on them.

According to the Holy Qur’an, we can get access to cognition of nature
if we use our senses and intellect. In fact the main reason our great
scholars, in the glorious period of Islamic civilization, paid attention
to foreign (e.g., Greek) sciences was due to the Qur’an’s emphasis on
the study of nature.

They studied nature to discover the mysteries of creation and to become
aware of Allah’s wisdom and power. Al-Biruni has explicitly stated that
the motive behind his research in scientific fields is Allah’s words in
the Qur’an:

***…And reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth: our Lord!
You have not created this in vain….(3:191)***

which persuades human beings to ponder about the creation of the heaven
and the earth, a creation which is purposeful and not vain.

The study of the so-called scientific verses in the Qur’an should
motivate Muslims to go after natural and physical sciences, and not
remain content with the hints given there.

b) The aforementioned verses state that everything in this world is
orderly and purposeful and there is no fault in the works of Allah:

***…And He created everything, then He ordained it very exactly.
(25:2)***

***And We did not create the heaven and the earth and what is between
them for sport. (21:16)***

***…You see no imperfection in the creation of the beneficent God. Then
look again, can you see any disorder? Then return back the eye again and
again, your look shall come back to you dazzled, aweary. (67:3-4)***

c) The Qur’an invites us to recognize the laws of nature (i.e., Allah’s
patterns in the universe) and to exploit them for the welfare of human
beings and without transgressing the limits of the Shari’ah:

***The sun and the moon follow reckoning…. And the heaven, He raised it
high and set the balance. Transgress not the balance. (55:5-8)***

Of course, the exploitation of material means should lead to the
spiritual development of human beings and not to their decay.

d) In the Qur’anic outlook, all sciences are different manifestations of
a world which is created and governed by one God. Therefore their
combination should lead to a single picture of the world.

e) Lastly, one of the most important things that we learn from the
Qur’an, in relation to science, is its unique world-view and
epistemology. Most of the evil resulting from the growth of science has
its origin in the materialistic outlook accompanying modern science. The
Qur’an warns us against these pitfalls and informs us of the impediments
to correct cognition of nature. It teaches us what tools to use for the
cognition of nature and what prevents us from using those tools
properly.18

In short, we believe that the most important lessons we learn from the
so-called scientific verses of the Qur’an are:

1. Priority should be given to the discovery of nature using human
senses and intellect.

2. The Holy Qur’an can give us the correct world-view.

Endnotes
--------

[^1]: Abu Hamid al-Ghazali, Ihya’ ‘ulum al-Din (Dar al-Ma’rifah) vol. 1,
p. 289.

[^2]: Abu Hamid al-Ghazali, The Jewels of the Qur’an, trans. by Muhammad
Abu al-Qasim (Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1983), pp. 45-48

[^3]: M.H. al-Dhahabi, al-Tafsir wal mufassirun (Dar al-Kutub
al-Hadith), vol. 2 p. 420.

[^4]: M.H. al-Dhahabi, al-Tafsir wal mufassirun vol. 2 477-484.

[^5]: Abd al-Rahman al-Kawakibi, Tab’ al-‘istibdad (Dar al-Qur’an
al-Karim, 1373), p. 42.

[^6]: Mustafa Sadiq al-Rafi’I, I’jaz al-Qur’an wa al-balaghat
al-Nabawiyyah (Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi), pp. 127-129

[^7]: Shaykh Muhammad Bakhit, Tanbih al-Uqul al-Insani… (Maktabat A.
Rabi’), pp. 9-10.

[^8]: ‘Ref. 3, pp. 505

[^9]: Abd al-Razzaq Nawfal, al-Qur’an wal ‘ilm al-hadith (Dar al-Kitab
al-‘Arabi), p. 26.Maurice Bucaille, The Bible, the Qur’an, and Science,
Crescent Publishing Co. (1978), p. 251.

[^10]: Maurice Bucaille, The Bible, the Qur’an, and Science, Crescent
Publishing Co. (1978), p. 251.

[^11]: Yusuf Muruwwah, al-Ulum, al-tabi’iyyah fi al-Qur’an (Muruwwah
al-‘Ilmiyyah), pp. 161-165.M.J.

[^12]: Maghniyyah, al-Tafsir al-kashif (Dar al-‘ilm lil-Malayin), vol.
4, p. 173.

[^13]: Ref. 3, p. 485-489.Muhammad ‘Ammarah, al-Islam wa qadaya al-‘asr
(Dar al-Wahdah), p. 75.

[^14]: Muhammad ‘Ammarah, al-Islam wa qadaya al-‘asr (Dar al-Wahdah), p.
75.

[^15]: Ref. 3, p. 519.

[^16]: A. Tabarah, Ruh al-Din al-‘Islami (Dar al-‘Ilm lil-Malayin), p.
270

[^17]: M.H. Tabataba’i, The Qur’an in Islam (Islamic Propagation
Organization), p. 96.

[^18]: M. Golshani, The Holy Qur’an and the Sciences of Nature Islamic
Propagation Organization), pp. 171-200
