Treachery
=========

Mutual Trust and Performing Duties
----------------------------------

Mutual trust is an essential element for the survival of a healthy and
united society. A society is considered happy and tranquil if the
relations between its members are based on trust. Thus, if people
violate the borders of their duties and become disloyal to other’s
rights, they then start to descend on the slope of social destruction.

There are various laws which rule mankind’s different affairs. Every man
has his share of these laws which he is compelled by reason, nature and
religion to follow. The purpose of these laws is to manifest the lights
of trust and harmony in man’s life. Without these laws man would ignore
or become careless about his debt to Allah and society.

Man, as a social being, has no choice but to interact with his
atmosphere; hence, creating countless social relationships. As a result
of these relationships a chain of rights and duties stem. These rights
and duties safeguard society from dissention, and pave the way for
solving any possible problems which naturally occur with any
relationship.

Regardless of the difficulty and inevitable sacrifices which come with
social duties, they must be fulfilled in order to grant man comfort and
happiness. Yes, it is in mans nature to seek happiness and wish to do so
without bearing any hardships, but he must realize that happiness cannot
happen be simply performing his duties towards the children of his kind.
It was once said that:

“Happiness is the reward for performing one’s duties.”

Not only is the happiness of a society more important than individual
happiness, but individual happiness is totally reliant on social
tranquility. It is also clear that treason of social rights violates the
spirit of social justice and create disorder in the social system. It is
every man’s responsibility to respect the lives and freedom of others.

Those who accustom themselves to the serious fulfillment of their duties
and take their obligations to Allah and society seriously, add to the
happiness of others and help them succeed in their affairs. They also
acquire the trust of others and triumph in the field of life.

Dr. S. Smiles says:

“Duties are man’s debts. He who intends to upkeep himself from
discreditable and immoral values in the eyes of others must pay off his
debt. Yet, such actions can only be performed by continuous and serious
struggle. Undertaking one’s duties is the principal matter which
occupies man from the first day he enters this world until the day on
which he departs it.

“Consequently, the more power and capabilities one possesses, the more
he is required to perform his duties; for man is like a clerk whose duty
is to serve children of his kind. This duty is based on the love of
justice and is not only an ideological obligation but, also a basic
necessity of man’s life. Yet, both traits manifest their affects in his
words and actions.

“The sense of responsibility is a great talent of nations; and a nation
has hope of success if its members enjoy the noble sense of
responsibility with conceit, arrogance and selfishness. This type of
action deserves only condolences, for nature will deem it unfit to
continue to survive sooner or later.”

Treachery and its Faults
------------------------

No one doubts that there are many factors which greatly influence the
spread of corruption. When a thorough investigation is carried out
regarding the factors which cause immorality and social lowliness, it
becomes evident that the most influential factor of all is the
prevalence of treason on men’s minds and reasons. We also discover that
the danger which is inflicted on society from treachery and its
devastating effects on social spirituality, exceed all other factors.

Treachery makes man’s spirit gloomy and leads his thoughts and
affections to misguidance and total loss. This threat arises from the
prevalence of lusts, when evil thoughts dictate acceptance of lowliness,
and humiliation instead of receiving inspirations from reason and faith.

Everyone needs others to trust in him. A worker or a merchant can make
some material gains through various types of treachery, and perhaps he
may be able to conceal his plots and fabrication for a short period of
time, but one day the matter will be uncovered causing him to loose his
credibility which is his main capital. He also will tarnish the dignity
of his social class by such actions. The treacherous people live in
constant fear. They fear anxiety and instability and are usually
pessimists.

It is a given fact that public tranquility and order depend on public
security. Since the insecurity and deadly anxiety which batters the
social environment is caused by treachery, it threatens the essence of
social life. Indeed, where there is no security from treason there can
be no freedom, brotherhood, or humanity.

Treason is not limited to certain affairs, but comprehends all of man’s
actions. When we examine words, and/or deeds we discover precise and
vivid limits to it, and if anyone slightly strays from such borders he
abandons trustworthiness and enters the field of treachery and
falsehood.

It is reported that a great man gave the following advise to his son:

“Son, be poor and deprived while people become rich and wealthy from
treachery and betrayal. Live without fame and position and let people
reach high positions by insistence and struggle. Bear with pain,
exhaustion, and deprivation and let people reach their goals and hopes
by bragging and solicitation. Refrain from association with the
prominent to whom people compete to be close to. Adopt the garment of
piety and morals until your hairs turn gray, but never let gloomy shame
tarnish you. Then thank your Lord and submit to Him with an innocent
heart and an optimistic conscience.”

Honesty is man’s capital in life. People trust and rely on the honest
which allows him (the honest) to lead a clean and honorable life. When
we rely on the honest, we observe honesty in every sector of life and
may reach many conclusions and have many learning experiences; hence
advancing in life feeling secure and happy.

Religion Condemns Treason
-------------------------

***“Be not unfaithful to Allah and the apostle, nor be unfaithful to
your trusts while you know.” (8:27)***

***“Surely Allah commands you to Allah, the Almighty, referred to the
laws which He legislated for His creatures as “The Trust”. He, Glory be
to Him, also warned against treachery in many instances in the Holy
Qur’an: make over trusts to their owners.” (4:58 )***

The Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said: “The worst from of
treachery is betraying the intimate and faithful (friend), and breach of
promises.”[^1]

He is also quoted as saying: “The worst of people is he who believes not
in trust and refrains not from treachery.”[^2]

And: “Avoid treason for it is the worst of sins; surely the treacherous
will be tortured in the fire for their treason.”[^3]

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) advised one of his a companions:

“Never say farewell to us without advising us of two traits: Adhere to
uttering the truth, and convey trusts to both the righteous and sinful
for they (the two traits) are the key to sustenance.[^4]

Islam calls all people to a stable and happy life under the rule of
performing assigned duties according to its exalted commands. It also
stressed the importance of conveying trusts.

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“Adhere to conveyance of trusts. For, by Him Who sent Muhammad (S) as a
righteous Prophet, even if the one who killed my Father entrusted me
with the sword he used kill him. I would give it back to him.[^5]

There is no consideration in Islam for the treacherous. Under certain
circumstances it even legislates the amputation of the hand of he who
embezzles the property of Muslims. Islam severely implements the penal
law against the treacherous so as to protect the social rights and
preserve public safety. This procedure places the sense of
responsibility in society, and helps bring about a righteous community.

Every wrong done has its bad consequences in this world and the
hereafter, in addition to being a factor in the downfall of humanity.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“He who does evil shall be punished for it in this world.” [^6]

According to Dr. Rose Keen:

“Every error I made in my life will stand in my way and deprive me of
happiness, it will distract my understanding and realization. The
opposite is also true; every attempt, truth, or righteous act
accompanies and motivates me to reach all goals and hopes.”

The Mechanical Theory which says that:

“Action and reaction are equal” applies to behavioral psychology too.
Good and bad actions have equal opposite affects on individuals and
those who surround or imitate them.

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

“Conveyance of trusts is the title of the true believers.” [^7]

Faith is the spirit’s defensive weapon. It is one of the more important
factors which can reach deep to the soul, it organizes man’s deeds and
conduct with precise order. Faith also re-establishes the sense of
individual and social responsibility, warns man against the influence of
social corruption, and guides society to righteousness and truth.

Faith prevents corruption and treachery. It holds parents responsible
for paving the way for their children to live happy lives by carefully
examining their children’s early habits, implementing faith in their
hearts and supporting praiseworthy traits in them.

Imam Zain al-Abideen (a.s.) said:

“You are responsible for him to whom you are granted guardianship; his
manners, guidance to his Lord, Glory be to Him, and helping him to obey
(his Lord).”

Dr. Raymund Peach said:

“It is not sufficient to generally adhere to the rules of religion. For
only constant and precise attention to every detail regarding the
children’s behavioral conduct and emotions in relation to religion can
be enough to implement faith in their hearts. Implement the fundamentals
of religion and its exalted holdings in their pure and kind hearts which
are ready to receive your advise and admonition. Do that without the
added restriction to religion. This will protect their faith and
confidence and guard them from straying and destruction.”

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

“Surely in men of reason there is a need for moral as much as crops need
rain.” [^8]

Dr. C. Robbin said:

“Some may dispute the fact that manners like walking and talking are
natural actions. In other words, they are among the initial matters
which we learn in life.

“It should be known that reason does not help man to learn good manners;
rather, manners rule man before he realizes the importance of them,
prior to any signs of mental maturity. In other words, manners are not
dependant on reason but are advantageous to them. I therefore, feel bad
when I hear a mother saying about her son’s behavior: ‘He will grow to
learn the right thing.’

If children do not get used to good manners (behavior) at a young age
they will be unable to acquire them by reason and understanding. Yes, we
can say that manners are the practical reason which guides us and opens
the gates to the shortest way to righteousness. This practical reason
protects us from idleness in the same way that it opposes extravagant
lusts and cravings, reason guards us against enmity, hatred and
resentment. In other words, it makes us sociable and warns us against
ignoring others and selfishness.

“Well-mannered individuals are never lonely; they can represent
societies and help awaken people to the truth.” [^9]

Despite all attempts being made to legislate strict laws to reduce
crimes of treachery and the educational programs to make people aware of
their consequences, and despite the many judicial and administrative
establishments that fight treachery, treacherous acts are constantly
increasing in number and are becoming a horrifying fact.

[^1]: Ghurar al-Hikam p. 50.  

[^2]: Ghurar al-Hikam p. 446

[^3]: Ghurar al-Hikam p. 150

[^4]: Safinah al-Bihar v.1, p. 41

[^5]: Amali as-Saduq p. 149.

[^6]: Nahj a1-Fasahah.

[^7]: Ghurar al-Hikam p. 453.

[^8]: Ghurar al-Hikam p. 224

[^9]: Chi Madanam


