Greed
=====

On the Necessities of Life
--------------------------

In this life our existence is surrounded by certain necessities which
hold a tight grip on us from the day that we are born. Some of these
necessities such as food, clothes and shelter are basic and the
preservation of life’s system depends on them. Needs of this type are
natural and cannot be taken care of permanently. The other type of needs
are non-essential and are constantly changing and can never be totally
fulfilled.

According to natural motives and the sense of need, man seeks money and
struggles with all his might against all problems and difficulties which
may stand in his way to make more money for to most people wealth is the
beauty of life.

It is natural for the condition of men to vary in this field. For
instance, if a man is surrounded by poverty and weakness, he starts to
seek sustenance by all means possible trying to eradicate the poverty
which surrounded him. If a man has acquired wealth, he becomes inflicted
with conceit and arrogance as if there was a direct relationship between
wealth and the latter traits. Finally, if a man acquires wealth and
security for himself, he becomes intoxicated with conceit and arrogance
and evil inspirations endlessly battle his mind.

Life takes various forms depending on how every individual views it and
because the reasoning ability differs from person to person. For example
there are many people who have not realized the truth or reached the
stage where they can distinguish between places of safety and danger.

Realization of the facts of life, and reaching the state of happiness
requires precision in the secrets of existence, especially the secret of
“knowing one’s self which can only be done in the domain of reason and
logic.

Man must understand why he is in this world in order to start his search
for happiness. He must choose the method with which he can advance
according to his natural and spiritual needs while refraining from
shortcomings that separate the soul from the realistic growth of one’s
personality.

Yet, success and happiness do not mean that man must constantly excel
over others in exploiting material resources, for material matters are
not the main goal in life and man should not violate the borders of
morality and piety to make material gains.

According to Dr. Carl:

“Personal interests overtake our minds in the ideological atmosphere
which liberal materialism founded. Wealth has come to be the greatest
talent in our eyes and success is now measured by currency bills.

“A society which gives priority to economical affairs can never be
inclined to morality which requires complete obedience to the laws of
life. An individual who excludes all affairs but the economical ones
from his day-to-day struggle cannot adhere to the natural laws of life.
Morality. undoubtedly, leads us to the truth and organizes all our
physical and psychological activities in accordance to the human system.
Moral excellence may be compared to strong engines which function
properly. Dissention in a society is not but a consequence of
immorality”

The authentic aim of life is to achieve spirituality. Spirituality is
the most important and valuable matter which man can achieve. He who
keeps his soul confined to spiritual treasures seldom needs this world,
for he gains spiritual satisfaction in the shadow of spirituality which
accompanies him for the rest of his life. Such an individual would not
exchange his spiritual wealth for material gains under any conditions.

A Greedy Person is Never Satisfied
----------------------------------

Coveting the belongings of others is a psychological state that forces
the individual to pursue materialism in a matter that makes material
gains an axis on which the mind rotates.

Material inclination arises from uncontrollable greed. Because of the
imaginary happiness that it creates, greed is considered a factor which
brings misery into the lives of men. As a result man disregards
everything and sacrifices all moral traits in his quest towards
gathering wealth until finally the feelings of want become rooted deep
in his soul.

Dr. Schopenhauer said:

“It is rather difficult to define the inclinations which are related to
acquiring wealth because individual’s satisfaction varies greatly and
there is not a defined scale by which people’s wants can be judged. Some
people are satisfied with small amounts of money that meet their
necessities while others com-plain about their unhappiness despite their
abundant wealth (which vastly surpasses their needs). Therefore,
everyone has certain limits to his wants by which he fulfills his hopes.
Yet, when man experiences difficulties on this path he complains and may
give up.

“The vast wealth of the rich does not deceive the poor. Wealth is like
salt water the more you drink the thirstier you become.”

Indeed, the greedy will never be satisfied with all the sustenance of
the world just as fire burns all the fuel that it is given!!

When greediness rules a nation, it transforms its social life into a
field of disputes and dissention in the place of justice, security and
stability. Naturally, in such a society moral excellence and
spirituality do not stand a chance.

It should be noted, however, that there is a great difference between
money worship and the desire for advancement, including that of material
features. Hence, it is important to draw a line between these two
aspects for there is no righteous justification preventing human
societies from seeking advancement and excellence in the shadows of
nature and talents.

The endeavor of the greedy creates a chain of miseries for his society,
for he intends to acquire his lusts with unjust methods including
methods which may bring poverty to others. One who covets seizes the
sources of wealth in order to acquire more for himself and consequently
creating acute economical problems.

Some people claim that wealth is a source that fulfills many desires, so
they give it their greatest attention. In fact, it is the poor who have
excelled in the most honorable and greatest fields in history. Writers,
inventors and scientists were mainly from the poor class.

Furthermore, vast wealth is destructive to many people. For example,
when youth inherit large sums of money they generally disregard all
avenues of education and knowledge drowning themselves in sin and lusts
because they feel no need for work or development.

Once a wealthy man visited a famous Greek philosopher. The latter did
not trust the wealthy man so he did not make any special arrangements
for his visit. The philosopher said to the wealthy man:

“Surely you have not come to learn from me but to put me down for my
financial situation, am I not right?

The wealthy man replied:

“Had I followed your path in acquiring knowledge 1 would not have had
wealth, a palace, servants, etc.”

At this the philosopher said:

“Regardless of Your material belongings, I am richer than you. I do not
need servants to protect me, for I fear no-one including Caesar. Because
you are dependent on others you will always be poor. I possess reason,
satisfaction and the freedom to think instead of gold and silver, while
you waste your time thinking about silver plates.

“My ideas are my vast empire where I live happily, while you spend your
lifetime in anxiety and unrest. All that which you possess is worthless
to me, but what I possess is abundant for you will never fulfill all
your hopes and wants, hut my needs are always fulfilled by using my
reason.

Surely everyone should rely on knowledge and not on gold and silver; for
only the ignorant rely on them.

Felicity and dissatisfaction undoubtedly are a part of everyone’s life;
each having its place in the events of life. Everyone who enters this
world shall experience a portion of both regardless of his material
condition. Here we can safely say that wealth, which exceeds one’s needs
is useless in finding happiness.

According to Socrates many individuals do not possess money, gems, fancy
garments, or palaces, yet their lives are a thousand times happier than
the lives of the wealthy.

Surely the greedy is a humiliated, poor slave to the world and its
money. He has surrendered his neck to the chains of wealth and has
submitted to immature thoughts. The greedy imagines that his wealth,
which is enough for generations of his descendants, is not but a reserve
for his gloomy days. Only when the bells of danger and death ring does a
greedy man realizes his mistakes.

When the bell rings to announce the final seconds of his life, he looks
at his wealth, for which he has wasted all his life, with sorrow and
disappointment knowing that it is useless to him in his grave-the grave
to which he carries sorrows for the many errors he has committed
throughout his life.

Fair Distribution in Islam
--------------------------

Along with its call upon people to struggle and advance Islam included a
strong warning against fanatical adherence to materialism. Islam
declares that such adherence deprives man from seeking the real goal of
life, the eternal happiness. Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) gave the following
description of the greedy man:

“An example of the greedy man of this world is that of the silkworm. The
more silk that it spins around itself, the less of a chance it has to
survive until it finally suffocates itself.”[^1]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“Refrain from greed for those who were before you perished as a result
of greed. Greed commanded them to be stingy and they obeyed: it ordered
them into alienation and they obeyed; and it commanded them to sin and
they sinned.”[^2]

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) pointed out the misery which results from coveting when
he said:

“Avoid greed for its champion is the captor of humiliation and
exhaustion,”[^3]

Dr. Mardin said:

“Wealth is not everything in man’s life, nor does his real happiness lie
in collecting money. Nevertheless, many young people make the mistake of
believing that money is the most important matter in life. They,
therefore, waste the primes of their life seeking wealth while depriving
themselves of everything else. This is a very mistaken way of thinking
and it is one of the reasons behind many people’s miseries.

“We struggle to acquire grand clothes, etc thinking that they are the
ways to happiness: while in fact they only bring -disappointment and
deprivation to us’’.[^4]

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

“A greedy person is a captor of humiliation, whose captivity does not
cease.[^5]

The righteous religion of Islam, which conforms to mans nature, equally
distributes between materialism and spirituality. It has, therefore,
chosen a path for its followers that guarantees healthy spirits and
bodies. Religious individuals possess wise and righteous spirits for
they understand divine facts.

Satisfaction is a unceasing treasure, for its possessors endeavor to
acquire only what they have a need for. Those with reason organize their
lives and avoid polluting their spiritual happiness with mistaken
attempts to collect wealth and lowliness. An individual who is satisfied
is happy with what he ethically acquires.

This sufficient method allows him to reach the real goal of life (moral
excellence); in this matter he achieves real wealth (that is
satisfaction) which brings him harmony and does not need to ask for that
which is in the hands of others.

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

“It is best to submit and adhere to satisfaction and piety, and to
relieve one’s self from covetousness and greed; for greed and
covetousness are present poverty and submission and satisfaction are
apparent wealth.” [^6]

He also pointed out the spiritual and psychological disorders which
affect the covetous when he said:

“One who covets brings illness.” [^7]

Dr. Mardin said:

“Certain thoughts which arise from greed, covetousness, and all other
psychological reactions not only adversely affect the body but also the
soul. They, therefore, deprive us of a good living and change the path
of harmonious living. Greed and covetousness destroy all natural human
traits in us.[^8]

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) is quoted as saying:

“Greed pollutes the soul. corrupts religion and destroys youthfulness.”
[^9]

The Messenger of Allah (S) explained the afflictions and calamities
which arise from greediness. He said:

“A greedy person faces seven acute problems:

1) Worrying, which harms his body and is disadvantageous to him;

2)Depression, which is endless;

3) Exhaustion, from which death is the only relief-and with that relief
the greed shall be more exhausted;

4) Fear, which uselessly disturbs his life;

5) Sadness, which uselessly disturbs his life;

6) Judgment, which does not save him from Allah’s torture unless Allah
forgives him.

7) Punishment, from which there is no escape or avoidance.”[^10]

Greediness: is surely an evil desire which leads man to humiliation and
sin. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

“greed is a motive for evil.” [^11]

He (a.s.) also said:

“The fruit of covetousness is complaining about shortcomings.” [^12]

Dr. S.M. Caughaust said:

“Stealing stems from greed. Thieves steal that which they do not own
because they covet it. He who steals a pair of socks from a merchant, or
a bicycle entrusted to him, only does so because of the influence of
covetousness to possess things. Thus, the thieves motive for stealing is
covetousness.”[^13]

Here we conclude that greed - this dangerous spiritual disorder-can be
treated by believing in Allah and the Last Day. Satisfaction can only be
achieved by strengthening one’s spirituality and developing moral
excellence.

[^1]: Usul al-Fasahah

[^2]: Nahj l-Fasahah p. 199

[^3]: Ghurar al-Hikam p. 135

[^4]: Khishtan Sazi

[^5]: Ghurar al-Hikam p. 50

[^6]: Ghurar al-Hikam p. 255

[^7]: Ghurar al-Hikam p. 544

[^8]: Pirozi Fikr

[^9]: Ghurar al-Hikam p. 77.

[^10]: Mustadrak al- Wasa’il v.2, p. 435

[^11]: Ghurar al-Hikam p. 16

[^12]: Ghurar al-Hikam p. 360

[^13]: Chi Midanam


