Disputing
=========

Radical Self-Love
-----------------

Coveting material things is a basic human nature. It is an instinct that
was implemented in man on the day he was born. It is the motive which
allows him to struggle continuously and preserve himself. As a result of
this instinct, we notice that man avoids that which harms him and is
attracted by advantageous matters. Therefore, he is a hostage of the
psychological phenomenon when he advances. This phenomenon plays a great
role in advancing the level of human civilization.

Yet, human happiness can only be achieved if men when struggling towards
it, protect themselves from immoderation and carelessness; and at the
same time refrain from the slavery of wants. Thereupon, in order for one
to fulfill the needs of his instincts in an appropriate manner, wherein
praiseworthy traits and excellent morals can develop, he must use his
reason in every field of life.

This is because reason guides man not his instincts. Reason is what
prevents instincts from both excessiveness and under development. It is
the element which makes us face the realities of truth and falsehood.
The power of reason, which has the greatest duty in developing man’s
personality, is what possess the ability to protect us from going astray
and grants us scrutiny in our affairs.

If the instinct of self-love violates the limits of moderation and
ventures into the territory of extravagance, it adversely affects man’s
reasoning system; hence preventing him from realizing the realities of
life. Those who fall victim to such a disorder will eventually drown in
the swamp of misguidance and corruption. Yet, the said instinct can be
criticized for its harmfulness only when it is within the boundaries of
extravagance. Therefore, the only goal of criticizing self-love is to
point out the disadvantages of allowing this instinct to violate the
limits of reason.

Both the success and failure of an individual correlate to their
spiritual and moral condition. Moral disorders, which are spread through
various stages of life, often stem from problems that arise form our
unruly and unjustifiable wants.

Man has been given abundant talents and capabilities. Everyone has the
power to follow his authentic and reasonable affection. Nevertheless, it
is apparent that nothing is more of a harder for man than to adjust his
instincts or wants including self-love conceit and arrogance.

Therefore, we are compelled to make more of an effort to adjust this
instinct or we will be unable to adopt excellent manners. Without
self-control, we cannot lead an acceptable and praiseworthy life.

What Do We Achieve from Arguments
---------------------------------

Success in social behavior directly relates to certain rules which we
must learn and build our conduct upon. For man’s role in his
relationships with others and his knowledge of the limits of his duties
are among the issues which are determinative to his/her misery or
happiness.

The need for harmony and establishing relationships is a trait deeply
implemented in man’s nature. Everyone is inclined to love and harmony;
hence resents loneliness and seclusion. However, unless a person reaches
peace of mind and soul, he will be incapable of living in peace with
others, or with himself.

Peace, harmony and cooperation are essential factors for a healthy and
peaceful social life; and respecting other’s rights and feelings is the
first condition to be observed in the art on constructive interaction.
In this case, interpersonal relationships enjoy strength and continuity.
Those who lack the foresaid traits are naturally deprived of balanced
relationships with others, and the basis of love and harmony are
weakened in them. They cannot, under the circumstances, keep their
relationships with others at an acceptable level.

One of the evil traits which severely hurts the feelings of others and
destroys the ties of love between people is disputing with them. Arguing
individuals should realize that excessive self-love is one of the main
factors which create this evil trait; it grows only when irrigated by
the flow of this treacherous instinct.

A disputatious person, in order to quench the thirst of his conceit,
opposes every opinion that may be brought up in any gathering, not to
present a righteous idea or eradicate a mistaken concept, but to destroy
his opponent’s personality by false accusations. He attempts to create a
sense of false excellence for himself by doing so. Such a person might
conceal his aims under exclamatory or wondering vocabulary. In this
manner, the disputatious looses the spirit of a just judge, and dares to
commit all kinds of oppression and encroachments upon other’s rights.

Furthermore, the opponent’s reaction, in this case, should not be
disregarded for when an individual’s pride is violated, it is inevitable
that he reacts to the cause. Therefore, he may exploit the appropriate
opportunity to revenge, using all his powers to do so. Thus, if this
trait is widespread in any given nation, it can result in disunity in
both the way of thinking and the manner of conduct.

A scholar commented on this subject by saying:

“Reason is a shinning light that guides mankind away from the darkness
of ignorance and relieves him from his problems. We boast about the fact
that we are the only creatures to possess reason saying that with reason
we have come to understand matters, their causes, results, and their
relations to other entities. Yet, woe unto us if we attempt to unveil
the truth by means of discussion and argumentations; for disputing
results is nothing save mental anxiety. Disputing also reveals the
ignorance of the disputants and their errors in scientific fields; it
never changes the way others think nor makes them adopt our ideologies.

A Glance at the Words of Leaders
--------------------------------

Islam has closely considered all aspects of social life, and scrutinized
every element of love and harmony, hence it strongly condemns all that
creates dissention among Muslims and shakes the foundation of their
unity. The leaders of religion have shown their followers how to follow
the path of purity and protect their hearts from the filth of all
obscurities.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“It is a virtue that a man hastens to his brother when the latter speaks
to him”. [^1]

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) said:

And learn good listening just as you learn good speech; and do not
interrupt another’s words.”

The leaders of religion have repeatedly criticized disputation, and
reminded people of its evil results up to the point that they prohibited
their followers from disputations even in righteous issues.

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“A worshipper does not reach the essence of belief until he abandons
boasting even when right.” [^2]

No one becomes victorious in the arena of disputation. Imam Hadi (a.s.)
gave the following advice to those who advocate defeating their
opponents by means of disputation:

“Boasting ruins long-standing relationships; ends strong relations, and
the least of its evils is competition (trying to excel over one s foes),
and competition is the main (factor in) alienation.”

Dr. Dale Carnegie wrote:

“In every ten verbal disputes, the disputant comes out in nine out of
ten cases believing more in their opinions and claiming that their
opponents are wrong. There is not a winner in these disputes where the
one defeated runs away. Yes, you crack your fingers in happiness over
your victory; but you think about the condition of your opponent! You
made him feel ignorant and hurt his feelings leaving a scar on his
heart.

‘“Disputing is an inappropriate way to convince others, and to influence
the way that other’s think. In fact, there is no relationship between
convincing and disputing, nor can misunderstandings be removed by
disputing. Selected advice and a peaceful approach are the elements
needed in this case. It is incumbent on man to sympathize with his
opponent.”

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“Avoid bragging for the lack of its goodness; and avoid bragging for its
advantages are few and it instigates enmity between brothers.”

A famous doctor once said:

“There are not many advantages to disputing. The intention for the
disputant can turn on the side of his foe, for feelings can erupt during
arguments. No matter how calm conversations are, they still have adverse
affects on the opponent’s heart. Thus, whenever we attempt to outsmart
him he insists on his opinion. One word can destroy a love relationship
forever. Furthermore, disputes never cause others to adopt our way of
thinking.”[^3]

Disputants always have a sense of anxiety in their hearts.

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“Avoid disputing for it occupies the heart, results in hypocrisy, and
creates hard feelings.”[^4]

Therefore, by observing the divine Islamic teachings we can pave the way
for ourselves to create a spiritual revolution in our spiritual
characteristics in an attempt achieve excellent human morals. Allah is
the Best Helper and on Him do we depend.

[^1]: Nahj al-Fasahah p. 633

[^2]: Safinah al-Bihar V.2, p. 522

[^3]: Dar Jostojui Kushbakhti

[^4]: Usul al-Kafi. p. 452


