Foreword
========

We have seen many a nation and person who apparently lived under certain
conditions, yet we witnessed how selected individuals or groups among
them excelled and took the lead in the field of civilization.

Among these groups are those who abandoned thinking and adopted the
habit of blaming every event in their lives on “luck”. When these groups
face any situation which requires them to reflect, they simply say: “It
is our luck”, “Amazing how’ coincidences occur”, “Strange is this life,
no one can violate its rules”!!

Yet if we take some time to reflect on this issue, we discover that
neither luck nor coincidences are factors in causing failure; the most
vita/factor which mainly causes failure is “ill manners”.

Germany, for example, after WWII was nothing more than a handful of
ashes and debris. Today Germany is one of the leading industrial
nations. Experts credit this unprecedented advancement to the sense of
responsibility and control which the Germans felt thereafter; not that
they have better minds or are more creative than other nations.

Thus, it is most accurate to say that the advancement of any nations,
including material advancement, is reliant upon its good conduct and
morality. This fact has been established throughout history, removing
any doubt that social conduct is a factor in the future of
civilizations.

\* \* \*

On the other hand we notice that the nature of a man depends on his
characteristics and values. Therefore, man deserves the title of
“humanitarian” for possessing such characteristics, without which he
does not differ from animals.

The search for the highest human values should be done in the field of
individual conduct. It is worthy to point out that achieving the highest
human values can be done through educating the soul and training it to
accept the assigned psychological and behavioral methods.

Hence, we find that sociologists and psychologists have made many
detailed scientific studies on how to counter or prevent corruption and
achieve good morals.

The scholars who are most knowledgeable and the best educators in this
field are our Holy Imams. The Imams have set guidelines for us through
their words, and their lives are examples for us to follow so that we
may achieve moral excellence. These guidelines and examples give us the
opportunity to live as happy humans beings who may enjoy excellent
morals.

\* \* \*

This topic especially concerns the young, for they are more sensitive
about these issues of life. Nevertheless, the There are many people who
suffer from their ill natures, and can find no means to rid themselves
of this quality.

The books that have been written in this field, as ideological and
practical guides for the young are scarce’ and do not have the advantage
of modern language skills. It is for this reason that we choose to
produce a book for today’s youth.

Fortunately, we have found the book at hard and have decided to publish
it; this book, Youth and Morals: A Step Towards Eradicating Corruption
deals with the analysis of various behavioral issues in a new’ style,
relying on Divine verses, prophetic narrations and tradition, from the
Holy Imams (a.s.).

We urge you to thoroughly read this book and use it to counter and
prevent social corruption.

The Organization for the Protection of Youth

Qum, Iran

The Winter of 1387 A.H.


