Introduction
============

Every individual in this world endeavors to achieve “happiness” and
“tranquility and struggles day and night to reach this dream in the
fields of’ life which appear like war arenas. He fights in this field
willingly in most cases to sacrifice everything in order to witness the
bird of happiness fly over his head so he may live beneath its shadow
the rest of his life.

It is unfortunate to see many individuals possessing various talents
which qualify them to lead a life of happiness and satisfaction
subjected to different factors which make their souls a toy for
discomfort and insecurity.

As a result, these individuals fall victim to the untrue dream that
living happily is nothing but mere fiction, and that man’s inevitable
conclusion is to become a straw being tossed around by the fictitious
waves of pain ending up on the bottom of the grave of disillusion and
poverty.

These pains and sufferings are not but the result of choosing false
images over facts and realities. They have not followed that light of
righteousness, nor have they resorted to a reliable segment on the path
of life Surely the reflections of the images which are drawn in the
minds of men in the sea of waves of anxieties and their lonely goals and
unrealistic hopes are the factors to blame for bringing mankind out of
light into darkness and making them subject to confusing hardships.

Man, who is the highest creature, is made of two distinguished powers,
the spiritual power and the mechanical power. In addition to the
material characteristics which he shares with animals, man has many
spiritual needs, which If fulfilled give him a very great chance of
reaching perfection. Whenever one of these two sides of man becomes more
powerful than the other the late becomes weaker and hence is defeated.

In light of the just mentioned fact, it is worthy to notice that
industry has truly changed the features of life. The industrial
advancement, together with the puzzling changes in the various aspects
of life have explained many ambiguous uncertainties, and solved
countless difficult questions.

Thus, many parts of the universe from the depth of the seas to the
darkness of space became fields for man’s journeys and discoveries. On
the other hand, the spiritual needs of man became weakened; corruption
appeared on the land and seas as a result of the crimes he committed in
the numerous corners of life. The number of disasters and inhuman crimes
has reached unbelielevels.

The factors of salvation have become weak in front of the phenomenon of
corruption and social disorder. The remains of spirituality are burning
in the midst of the fires of lust, loneliness and filth

Today we clearly observe that material gains have taken priority over
virtue.

Man has equipped himself with the tools of industry and experimental
sciences and has abandoned the good merits which are expected and needed
to guard his soul from being destroyed under the feet of the evilness of
lust and uncontrolled wants. Even human emotions are in a state of
struggle between life and death.

Lying, stinginess, hypocrisy, oppression, selfishness and other lowly
characteristics, all resembling an invincible dam blocking the stream of
human happiness and perfection, have chained the hands of man and thrown
him in the merciless waves of the ocean of relentless filth.

The triumph of the knights, loneliness, individual pains, social
disasters and various miseries in general, are the result of the fall of
human virtues. Both Sociologists and psychologists attest to the fact
that without excellent virtues and spiritual guidance man would wander
from the path of justice which leads him to peak of greatness and
perfection.

Individuals who excel in society and whose names are recorded in bold
letters by history all enjoy some sort of pure and appreciated virtues.
Societies which are not armed with the weapon of good manners are not
ruled by worthy rules and do not, in fact, deserve to live as a human
body.

It is for this reason that the destruction of previous great
civilizations did not take place because of political or economical
crisis but from a bankruptcy of good manners.

Man-made legislation and systems are unable to penetrate the human soul
nor can they guarantee constructive relationships between the different
societies and nations the same way spiritual manners do. Manmade laws,
which are manifestations of human ideas, are not qualified to bring
authentic happiness to mankind, this is because men have a limited
thinking capacity.

Thus, they cannot conceive all of the phenomena surrounding their lives.
Moreover, even if man knows the depth of the phenomenon surrounding him
he is always subjected to outside influences which prevent him from
accepting the truth. In light of the above, we observe that man-made
laws, change with time and their surrounding conditions. In fact, the
appearance of corruption and miseries are not but the result of the
shortcomings of such laws.

On the other hand, we have the sacred school of the prophets which is
inspired by the magnificent springs of the lights of revelation and
depends on unlimited Divine knowledge. Thus, these laws are not
vulnerable to the tides of time, change, or transformation.

Because of its comprehension of the realities of life and existence, the
prophetic school offers humanity the most accurate system for reaching
perfection and moral excellence, and calls man to direct his soul to
greatness.

The positive and appreciated effects of faithfulness on man are
undisputable, for it is clear that if man did not possess an internal
motive to prevent him from making himself a victim of his lusts and
unlimited wants, then any step he took towards, righteousness would mean
certain failure. Hence, it is impossible to establish a safe and perfect
human society, without equipping the human members with morality and
spirituality.

The basics on which the eternal Islamic faith was built by the greatest
personality of all times, Prophet Muhammad (S), and which rely from the
very first day on piety are those means of happiness that can bring
comfort in this world and the hereafter.

In fact, the Islamic call was built on the bases which requires man to
evaluate his spiritual value to the highest point by elevating the level
of his beliefs to a chain of pure and praiseworthy values. Islam
strictly prohibits man from sacrificing his excellent morals for the
sake of his lusts and cravings. Islam stands in the face of those who
dishonor humanity and fights them fiercely.

So a society where in the individual and social ties are built on
Islamic values enjoys tranquility, comfort and trust in all aspects. All
its members enjoy equal rights, and observe the interpersonal relations
set by the faith. Thus, giving other societies the opportunity to
achieve the same, which is a perfect step towards a great civil
revolution by mankind.

\* \* \*

In this book, we introduce some of the vital issues affecting man’s
social life and how Islam deals with them.

It is incumbent on me to mention here that a section of this book was
previously published in the magazine The Islamic Ideology which is
published in Persian in the holy city of Qum. I leave it to our
honorable readers to judge the value of this book which has been praised
by many scholars.

I hope that we all advance in promoting ourselves on the path of the
Islamic scholars, and by rescuing our souls from drowning in the filth
of unguided lusts.

Sayyid Mujtaba Musavi Lari

Rabi’ul Aww’al, 1387 (1967)


