Pessimism
=========

The Bright and Dark Points of Life
----------------------------------

Man’s life is a mixture of pain and comfort. Each one of these two
states absorbs a portion of life in this world. Every individual faces
his own share of experiences and becomes a victim of pain and comfort
from the problems and disasters of life. It is according to this bitter
fact that man’s life fluctuates between pain and ease.

We, as humans, cannot change this eternal law which rules our lives so
as to subject it to our own desires. Yet, after we come to realize the
deep meaning of this life, we can direct our vision towards the
beautiful side of existence and cast away the ugly entities which
tarnish the fact of life in this vast universe; this universe that is
filled with the amazement of creation and precision of wisdom; which it
tells us that every creature exists with an aim for which has been
created. On the other hand, we can ignore or forget the bright points in
the universe and concentrate on the gloomy spots.

Finally it is up to every individual to choose the direction of his
thinking. Hence, choosing the color and view of life he wishes to
experience.

It is incumbent on us to prepare ourselves to face and choose that which
is appropriate for us in order to avoid disadvantageous factors, so that
we do not loose the ability of self-control. Otherwise, we may face
irreplaceable loses, or even fall victim to the typhoons of misfortune.

Many of us imagine that had the sequence of events in our lives been
different, we might have been happy people. In fact, these people’s
problems are not related to the events of their lives, but to the
methods in which they deal with them. It is possible for us to change
the influence of such events, or even transform some of their effects
into useful ones.

A famous thinker wrote: Our thoughts always operate in the domain of
hate and dissatisfaction, so we always complain and cry. The reason
behind this crying is in our consciences. We are built in such a manner
that our existence feeds on that which is not appropriate for our souls
or spirits. Every day we wish and hope for new things, or perhaps we do
not really know what we want.

Yet, we believe that others have acquired happiness so we envy them
while we suffer. We are like misbehaving children who invent new excuses
and start weeping. Our souls suffer from their weeping and we do not
relax until we make them understand the facts and abandon what they
falsely imagine and their unruly wants.

These children, as a result of their numerous desires, become blind to
everything but miseries. It is our obligation to open their eyes towards
the good side of life. We must make them understand that none but those
who open their eyes to the garden of life, can cultivate its flowers and
roses.

Those blind ones will obtain nothing but thorns. If we are able to pass
the borders of depression and pessimism and examine the facts, we find
that even in these times, which have fallen in a deep horrifying pit,
there are exits everywhere with roses and flowers in the garden of life
that call the sights of onlookers to themselves at all times.

Thought has a deep affect on man’s happiness. In fact, the only
effective factor on man’s happiness is his ability to think and reason.
An unprecedented incident is unbearable and destructive in the eyes of
the pessimist, while in the viewpoint of the optimist, who sees things
in a positive way, such incidents do not lead to submission nor do they
cause a person to lose his sense of resistance under any condition.
Optimists never abandon the borders of modesty, restraint and patience.

Those who condition themselves to think that the axis of evil surrounds
them will only live a painful, gloomy and uncomfortable life. They will,
in effect, loose many of their powers and abilities as a result of their
exaggerated sensitivity and drown themselves in fatal ignorance of the
blessings and good things of the world.

According to one scholar:

“The world reacts to man exactly as man deals with the world. Thus, if
you laugh at the world, it will laugh with you. If you look at the world
gloomily, it will appear gloomy. If you meditate on the world, it will
count you among the mediators, and if you are merciful and truthful, you
will find people around you who will love you and open the treasures of
love and respect of their hearts to you.”

Despite the bitter appearance of pain, it produces special fruit for the
mind and soul. Man’s spiritual abilities become more clearly manifested
in the darkness of pain. Reason and human spirit evolve in the folds of
continuous sacrifices and un-submissive struggle…to the peak of human
perfection.

The Negative Effects of Pessimism
---------------------------------

Pessimism is a dangerous spiritual illness. It is the cause of many
losses, defects and disappointments. Pessimism is a painful misfortune
that tortures the human soul and leaves un-amendable defects on man’s
personality which cannot be erased.

When experiencing pain and/or inflictions people tend to become
sensitive, at this point it is possible for pessimism to appear as a
result of a strong revolt in the emotions and feelings of an individual.
Pessimism which enters the mind in this way leaves its influence on
man’s thinking process.

The beauty of creation is not manifested in the eyes of one whose
spiritual mirror has become darkened by the shadow of pessimism.
Moreover, even happiness appears to him in the garment of boredom and
disaster, and his ill thinking cannot comprehend conduct of innocent
individuals clear of evil aims. Those whose thought become so negative
will lose all of their advantageous abilities, because with their
incorrect imagination they create many problems for themselves; hence,
wasting their talents by worrying about incidents which they have not
and probably will be not faced with.

As we have said before, the effects of optimism spread to its
surroundings and enliven the spirit with hope; likewise, pessimism
dictates anxiety and pain to its surroundings, and eventually deprives
them of the light of hope, which clears the path of life for mankind.

The disadvantageous effects of pessimism are not limited only to the
soul: they adversely affect the body too. Studies show that pessimistic
patients have a lower rate of cure.

According to a medical doctor, it is more difficult to treat those who
are suspicious of everything and everyone, than to rescue a person who
jumps in the sea attempting to commit suicide. Giving medicine to an
individual who lives in constant anxiety is like placing water into
boiling oil. In order for any medicine to he helpful it is essential for
the patient to preserve his sense of comfort and belief.”

Those who suffer from pessimism clearly experience a sense of loneliness
and suspicion when dealing with others. As a result of such
unsatisfactory situations these people destroy their abilities to
develop and advance; hence, destining themselves to an unwanted life. In
light of these facts, pessimism is found to be a main factor in suicide.

If we examine any sector of human society, we will find that backbiting
and gossip stem from suspicion that is paired with a lack of examination
and reflection.

Despite their weaknesses in judging and their vast imaginations, people
often judge others without verifying the subject matter involved. These
people imagine without confirming their suspicion, in some circumstances
their personal aims can easily be depicted. This great shortcoming
causes the ties of unity and sincere relationships to break and deprives
people of trust in each other, which leads to the corruption of manners
and souls as well.

Most incidents of enmity, hate and envy which are harmful to both the
individual and society, result from suspicion which contradicts reality.
Suspicion spreads in the society to point that it may even occupy the
minds of philosophers and scholars.

We can pinpoint many instances in history when scholars have committed
grave mistakes by viewing their societies from the pessimistic angle;
thus building their ideas on the basis of criticism and search for the
shortcomings in the social system. So instead of serving the causes of
happiness, these confused scholar poison the spirit of their societies
with their harmful thinking. They also subject the fundamentals of
belief to criticism and disgust.

Abu al-’Ala al-Mauri was among the pessimistic scholars. This famous
philosopher thought so negatively of life that he called for the
prevention of intercourse in order to wipe out mankind; consequently
riding itself of the sufferings of life.

Islam Verses On Pessimism
-------------------------

The Holy Qur’an clearly counts pessimism and ill thinking among the sins
and evil deeds and warns

Muslims about thinking negatively of each other.

***“O you who believe! Avoid most suspicion, for surely suspicion in
some cases is a sin.” (Qur’an 49:12)***

The Islamic religion prohibits suspicion if decisive evidence doesn’t
exist. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“A Muslim is sacred to another Muslim: his blood, his property and (it
is prohibited) for one to think negatively of another.”[^1]

Therefore, just as it is prohibited to transfer the property of one
person to another without sufficient evidence, it is forbidden to
suspect people and accuse them of evil doings before proving them guilty
with undoubted evidence. The Prince of the Faithful (a.s.) said: “It is
not right to judge the trustworthy only on speculation.”[^2]

He then clarified the disadvantages and painful points of suspicion when
he said: “Be careful of suspicion, for suspicion ruins worship and makes
sins greater.” [^3]

He even describes suspecting the kind as being oppressive. “Suspecting
the kind (doer of good) is the worst sin and the ugliest type of
oppression.”[^4]

He also says that suspecting the ones you love causes relations to
worsen and finally to be cut off. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) states: “He who is
overwhelmed with suspicion does not leave any peace between him and his
beloved one.”[^5]

Suspicion has adverse effects on the spirits and conduct of others as
well as the suspicious individuals. Sometimes suspicion diverts the
suspected persons from the straight path and leads into corruption and
lowliness. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said: “Suspicion corrupts affairs and
instigates evilness.’[^6]

Dr. Mardin writes:

“Some business owners suspect their employees of stealing which, in
turn, forces the suspects to become what they are suspected of. Although
suspicion does not appear in words or actions, it influences the spirit
of the suspect and leads him to perform that which he is suspected of.”
[^7]

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) also stated regarding suspicion: “Avoid suspicion when
not appropriate, for this calls the healthy to sickness, and the
innocent to doubt.”[^8]

He also declared that those who suffer from suspicion are deprived of
healthy bodies and spirits: “A suspicious person can never be found
healthy.”[^9]

Dr. Carl wrote about this subject:

“Some habits, such as complaining and suspecting people, reduce the
individual’s ability to live. These negative behavioral habits adversely
influence the sympathetic order and the body’s glands. They can also
cause practical damage to the body.”[^10]

Dr. Mardin adds:

“Suspicion eradicates health and weakens the behavioral powers. Balanced
souls never expect harm, rather they anticipate goodness at all times
because they know that goodness is an eternal reality, and that evil is
not but the work of the weakness of the powers of goodness, just as
darkness is the result of the lack of light. Thus, seek the path of
light for it erases darkness from the hearts.’’[^11]

Suspicious individuals fear people, as Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

“He who is suspicious fears everyone.[^12]

Dr. Farmer is quoted as saying:

“Those who fear to speak out their ideas and viewpoints in public, where
everyone clearly states their opinions, and Who seeks refuge on side
streets and back alleys to avoid meeting their relatives on wide streets
or in public gardens, are ruled by fear, suspicion and pessimism.” [^13]

One of the factors which cause suspicion is bad memories which are
concealed in man’s spirit. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

“Hearts have evil notions and hearts resent them.” [^14]

Dr. Haleem Shakhter said:

“Those who lack self-confidence are overly sensitive, so They suffer
from minor inflictions. The memories of such inflictions remain in their
minds subconsciously and affect their actions, words, and thoughts. Soon
they fall victim to depression and suspicion and do not realize the
reason behind their sufferings.

Painful memories conceal themselves beyond our feelings and do not
easily manifest themselves to us. In other words, it is natural for man
to avoid painful memories and eradicate them from his mind. This
concealed enemy never stops inflicting evil and hatred on our souls,
manners, and conduct. We sometimes even hear or encounter words or
actions from ourselves or others for which we realize no justifiable
explanation. Yet if we carefully examine them we find they have been
caused by evil memories.” [^15]

People with lowly natures elect themselves to be judges over other’s
actions, thus the misdeeds of others are reflected onto them. Imam ‘Ali
(a.s.) pointed out this fact when he said:

“Evil doers never think good of anyone because they see others with
their own nature.”[^16]

Dr. Mann is quoted as saying:

“Some people place the blame on others by complaining about their deeds
while they, themselves, do the exact same thing; they do this to make up
for their own shortcomings and as a type of self-defense. This behavior
is described as a method of avoiding anxiety; comparing others with
one’s self is a resentful action. When this condition intensifies and
the individual’s self-defense increases, he reaches the category of
being ‘mentally ill’. This defense can he caused by doing something
socially unacceptable which in turn creates the sense of wanting to
relate it to others.”[^17]

When the Messenger of Allah (S) entered Medina after migrating from
Mecca, a man came to him and said: “O Messenger of Allah, the people of
this town are men of goodness, they are kind; you have done the right
thing in coming here.” The Messenger (S) said to the man: “You speak the
truth.” Another man then came to the Prophet and said: “Messenger of
Allah, the people of this town are evil, it would have been better if
you did not migrate to them!” The Messenger of Allah then said: “You
speak the truth.” When the people heard the Prophet’s reply to both the
men, they questioned him. The Prophet answered them: “Each of them spoke
that which was in his mind, therefore both of them are truthful”. The
Prophet (S) meant that each of the men was truthful about himself.

The forbidden type of suspicion is clearly understood as misguided
thinking and the inclination of the soul towards ill thinking and
insisting of it. More prohibited than this type of suspicion is acting
on it. Because the thoughts and notions which pass through the mind
without any actual effects on the individual’s conduct cannot be
considered subject to jurisprudential legislation. These thoughts are
involuntary, avoiding them is also involuntary; but it is the
individual’s option to manifest or not to manifest them in his actions.

The miseries of the pessimists stem from this terrifying disorder.
Therefore, it is incumbent on those who can pinpoint the reason which
caused them to be overly suspicious to treat their cases and rid
themselves of such misfortunes.

[^1]: Tirmidhi. Chap. 18, Ibn Majah, Chap. 2. Muslim, Chap. 32, Ahmad,
v.2, p. 277 and v. 3, p. 491.

[^2]: Nahj al-Balaghah p. 174.

[^3]: Ghurar al- Hikam p. 154.

[^4]: Ghurar al- Hikam p. 434.

[^5]: Ghurar al- Hikam p. 698.

[^6]: Ghurar al- Hikam p. 433.

[^7]: Pirozi Fikr.

[^8]: Ghurar al-Hikam p. 152

[^9]: Ghurar al-Hikam p. 835

[^10]: Rah Wa Rasm Zindagi

[^11]: Pirozi Fikr

[^12]: Ghurar al-Hikam p.712

[^13]: Raz Khushbakhti

[^14]: Ghurar al-Hikam p. 29

[^15]: Rushde Shakhsiyyat

[^16]: Ghurar al-Hikam p. 80

[^17]: Usule Rivanshinasi


