A Comparison
============

The literature of Arabic and Persian is replete with works containing
spiritual and moral teachings of highest sublimity and elegance though
mainly in the form of poetry. There is, for example, the famous qasidah
by Abu al-Fath al-Busti (360-400/971-1010), which begins with the verse:

*Worldly profit and achievement is loss,*

*And the gain unmarked by the seal of pure goodness.*

There is also the elegiacal qasidah of Abu al-Hasan al-Tihami, which he
wrote on the early death of his youthful son. It begins with these
lines:

*The law of fate governs the destiny of creation,*

*And this world is not a place to settle in.*

Every one of these works is an everlasting masterpiece of its kind and
shines like a star on the horizons of the Arabic literature of Islamic
era, never to lose its freshness and charm.

In Persian, the Gulistan and the Bustan of Sa'di and his qasaid serve as
an unusually attractive and effective means of moral advice and are
masterpieces of their own kind. To give some examples, there are those
famous verses of the Gulistan which start with the verse:

*Every breath is a fraction of life gone,*

*And when I see, not much has remained of it.*

Or in his qasa'id where he says:

*O people, the world is not a place for leisure and repose;*

*To the wise man, the world is not worth the effort of acquiring it.*

Or at another place where he says:

*The world on water and life on wind do rest;*

*Salutes to the brave who do not tie their hearts to them.*

And where he says:

*Time and fortune are subject to endless change;*

*The wise man doesn't attach his heart to the world.*

Sa'di's Bustan is full of profound and glowing spiritual advices, and,
perhaps, is at its best in the ninth chapter on "*Penitence and the
Right Way* ". The same is true of some portions of the Mathnawi of Rumi
and works of all other Persian poets, from whom we shall not further
quote any examples.

In Islamic literature, including the Arabic and the Persian, there exist
excellent examples of spiritual counsels and aphorisms. This Islamic
literary genre is not confined to these two languages, but is also found
in Turkish, Urdu, and other languages, and a characteristic spirit
pervades all of them. Anyone familiar with the Holy Quran, the sayings
of the Holy Prophet ('s), Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali ('a), the other Imams
('a), and Muslim saints of the first rank, can observe a characteristic
spirit pervading all Persian literature containing spiritual counsel,
which represents the spirit of Islam embodied in the Persian language
and embellished with its charm and sweetness.

If an expert or a group of experts in Arabic and Persian literature
acquainted with the works in all other languages that reflect the spirit
of Islam, were to collect the masterpieces in the field of spiritual
counsel, the extraordinary richness and maturity of the Islamic culture
in lhis field will be revealed.

It is strange that so far as the works on spiritual counsel are
concerned the Persian genius has mostly expressed itself in poetry;
there is no such work of eminence in prose. All that exists of it in
prose is in the form of short sayings, like the prose writings of the
Gulistan-a part of which consists of spiritual counsels and is in itself
a masterpiece-or the sayings ascribed to Khwajah 'Abd Allah al-'Ansari.

Of course, my own knowledge is inadequate, but as far as I know there
does not exist in Persian prose any remarkable work, except for short
sayings-not even a passage which is long enough to be counted as a short
discourse, especially a discourse which was originally delivered
extempore and later collected and recorded in writing.

There are discourses which have been related from Rumi or Sa'di, meant
as oral moral advice to their followers; they also by no means possess
the brilliance and charm of the poetic works of those masters, and
definitely are not worth considering for a comparison with the
discourses of the*Nahj al-balaghah* .

The same can be said about the writings which have reached us in the
form of a treatise or letter, such as the*Nasihat al-muluk* by Abu Hamid
Muhammad al-Ghazali, the *Taziyaneh-ye suluk* by Ahmad al-Ghazali, the
latter being an elaborate epistle addressed to his follower and pupil
'Ayn al-Qudat al-Hamadan.


