Spiritual Counsel and Wisdom
============================

Moral counsel, according to the Quran, is one of the three ways of
invitation towards God (*hikmah* ,*maw'izah, al jidal al-hasan* , i.e.
wisdom, good admonition, and honourable debate, as mentioned in 16:
125).

The difference between*hikmah* (wisdom, philosophy) and*maw'izah*
(spiritual and moral advice and admonition) lies in this that*hikmah* is
for instruction and imparting knowledge, while*maw'izah* is meant for
reminding.*Hikmah* is struggle against ignorance and*maw'izah* is
struggle against negligence and indifference.*Hikmah* deals with the
intellect and*maw'izah* appeals to the heart.*Hikmah* educates,
while*maw'izah* prepares the intellect for employment of its
reserves.*Hikmah* is a lamp and*maw'izah* is an eye-opener.*Hikmah* is
for ratiocination, while*maw'izah* is for self-awakening.*Hikmah* is the
language of the intellect, while*maw'izah* is the message for the
spirit. Accordingly, the personality of the speaker plays an essential
role in*maw'izah* , which is not the case with*hikmah* . In*hikmah* ,
two minds communicate in an impersonal manner But in*maw'izah* the
situation is like the passage of an electric charge that flows from the
speaker, who is at a higher potential, to the listener.

For this reason, it has been said of*maw'izah* that:

If it comes forth from the soul, then it necessarily alights upon the
heart.

Otherwise it does not go beyond the listener's ears. It is about the
quality of*maw'izah* that it is said:

The speeeh which originates from the heart enters another heart, and the
words which originate from the tongue do not go beyond the ears.

It is true that the words that come from the heart, being the message of
the soul, invade other hearts; but if they do not convey the message of
the soul, are no more than empty literary devices, which do not go
beyond the listener's ear-drum.


