Maw'izah and Khitabah (Exhortation and Oratory)
===============================================

*Maw'izah* also differs from*khitabah* (oratory, rhetoric). Although
oratory also deals with emotions, but it seeks to stir and agitate
them.*Maw'izah* on the other hand is intended to pacify emotions and it
seeks to bring them under control. Oratory is effective when emotions
are inert and stagnant;*maw'izah* is required when lusts and passions
become unmanageable. Oratory stirs the passion for power and glory, the
feelings of honour, heroism, chivalry, manliness, patriotism, nobility,
righteousness, virtue, and service; it is followed by movement and
excitement. But*maw'izah* checks inappropriate passion and excitement.
Rhetoric and oratory snatch control from the hands of calculating
reason, handing it over to tempestuous passions. But*maw'izah* appeases
the tempests of passions and prepares the ground for calculation and
foresight. Oratory draws one to the outside, and*maw'izah* makes him
turn to his inner self.

Rhetoric and counsel are both necessary and essential, and the*Nahj
al-balaghah* makes use of both of them. The main thing is to judge the
right time for the use of each of them. The impassioned speeches of Amir
al-Mu'minin ('a) were delivered at a time when it was necessary to stir
up passions and to build up a tempest to destroy an unjust and
oppressive structure, such as at the time of the Battle of Siffin when
'Ali ('a) delivered a fiery speech before the engagement with
Mu'awiyah's forces. Mu'awiyah's forces, arriving ahead of 'Ali's army,
had taken control of the river bank and stopped the supply of water to
'Ali's camp. At first 'Ali ('a) strived to abstain from resorting to
force, desiring the problem to be solved through negotiation. But
Mu'awiyah, who had some other designs, considering occupation of the
river bank a victory for himself, refused every offer of negotiation.
When things became difficult for 'Ali's men, it was time when he should
stir the emotions of his soldiers through a fiery speech, creating a
tempest that would rout the enemy. This is how 'Ali ('a) addressed his
companions:

They are eager that you should make them taste the flavour of battle. So
you have two alternatives before you: either submit to disgrace and
ignominy, or quench your swords in their blood and appease your thirst
with water. It is' death to survive through defeat and true life is to
die for the sake of victory. Muawiyah is leading a handful of deluded
insurgents and has deceived them by keeping them in the dark about the
truth, with the result that their throats are the targets of your deadly
arrows.[^1]

These words flared their emotions, provoked their sense of honour, and
made the blood surge in their veins. It was not yet sunset when 'Ali's
companions seized the river bank and threw back Mu'awiyah's forces.

However, 'Ali's*mawaiz* were delivered in different conditions. During
the days of the first three caliphs, and particularly during 'Uthman's
rule, immeasurable amounts of wealth and booty won through consecutive
victories flowed into Muslim hands. Due to the absence of any careful
programmes for correct utilization of that wealth, particularly due to
the aristocratic, or rather tribal, rule during the reign of 'Uthman,
moral corruption, worldliness, and love of comfort and luxury found
their way into the Muslim society. Tribal rivalries were revived, and
racial prejudice

between Arabs and non-Arabs was added to it. In that clamour for
worldliness and mounting prejudices, rivalries, and greed for greater
share of the war booty, the only cry of protest charged with spiritual
exhortation was that of 'Ali ('a).

God willing, we shall discuss in coming chapters the various themes
dealt with in 'Ali's*mawa'iz* , such as *taqwa* (God-fearing),
worldliness, *zuhd* (abstinence), desires, the dread of death, the
dreads of the Day of Judgement, the need to take lesson from the history
of past nations and peoples, etc.


