The Themes in Spiritual Advices
===============================

Various themes are found in the spiritual advices of the*Nahj
al-balaghah* : *taqwa* (God-fearing); *tawakkul* (trust in God); *sabr*
(patience, Fortitude); *zuhd* (abstinence); the renunciation of worldly
pleasures and luxuries, the renunciation of inordinate desires and
far-fetched hopes; the condemnation of injustice and prejudice, emphasis
on mercy, love, helping of the oppressed and sympathy toward the weak;
emphasis on the qualities of fortitude, courage, and strength; emphasis
on unity and solidarity and condemnation of disunity; the invitation to
take lesson from history; the invitation to thought, meditation,
remembrance, and self-criticism; the reminders about the brevity of life
and the swiftness of its pace; the remembrance of death; the hardships
of death-throes; experiences of the life after death; the reminders of
the dreadful events of the Day of Judgement, and so on. These are some
of the frequent themes of the spiritual advices of the *Nahj
al-balaghah* .

Ali's Logic
-----------

In order to understand this aspect of the*Nahj al-balaghah* , or, in
other words, to understand 'Ali ('a) when he speaks as a moral and
spiritual counsellor and to understand his didactic outlook, so as to
draw benefit from that everflowing source, it is not enough to enumerate
the various themes and topics dealt with by 'Ali ('a) in his discourses.
It is not sufficient merely to remark that 'Ali ('a) has spoken
about*taqwa* ,*tawakkul* or*zuhd* ; rather, we must see what
significance did he attribute to these words. We must uncover his
didactic philosophy regarding the development of the human character and
his perception of the human aspiration for piety, purity, freedom, and
deliverance from spiritual servitude and thraldom. As we know, these are
words employed by all-in particular those who are wont to play the role
of a moralist; but all individuals do not mean the same kind of things
by these terms. Sometimes, the meanings one person attributes to these
words are quite contrary to those meant by another, and naturally lead
to conclusions which are quite opposite.

Consequently, it is essential to elaborate somewhat the specific
meanings of these terms in 'Ali's vocabulary, starting with*taqwa* .

Taqwa
-----

*Taqwa* is one of the most frequent motifs of the*Nahj al-balaghah* . In
fact it would be hard to find another book which emphasizes this
spiritual term to the extent of this book. Even in the*Nahj al-balaghah*
, no other term or concept receives so much attention and stress
as*taqwa* . What is*taqwa* ?

Often it is thought that*taqwa* means piety and abstinence and so
implies a negative attitude. In other words, it is maintained that the
greater the amount of abstinence, withdrawal, and self-denial, the more
perfect is one's *taqwa* . According to this interpretation, *taqwa* is
a concept divorced from active life; secondly it is a negative attitude;
thirdly, it means that the more severely this negative attitude is
exercised, the greater one's *taqwa* would be. Accordingly, the
sanctimonious professors of *taqwa* , in order to avoid its being
tainted and to protect it from any blemish, withdraw from the bustle of
life, keeping themselves away from involvement in any matter or affair
of the world.

Undeniably, abstinence and caution exercised with discretion is an
essential principle of wholesome living. For, in order to lead a healthy
life, man is forced to negate and affirm, deny and posit, renounce and
accept, avoid and welcome different things. It is through denial and
negation that the positive in life can be realized. It is through
renunciation and avoidance that concentration is given to action.

The principle of*tawhid* contained in the dictum*la ilaha illa Allah* is
at the same time a negation as well as an affirmation. Without negation
of everything other than God it is not possible to arrive at*tawhid* .
That is why rebellion and surrender, kufr (unbelief) and iman (belief),
go together; that is, every surrender requires a rebellion and every
faith (iman) calls for a denial and rejection (kufr), and every
affirmation implies a negation. The Quran says:

*So whoever disbelieves in taghut and believes in God, has laid hold of
the most firm bond ....* (2:256)

However, firstly, every denial, negation, rejection, and rebellion
operates between the limits of two opposites; the negation of one thing
implies movement towards its opposite; the rejection of the one marks
the beginning of the acceptance of the other. Accordingly, every healthy
denial and rejection has both a direction and a goal, and is confined
within certain definite limits. Therefore, a blind practice and
purposeless attitude, which has neither direction nor a goal, nor is
confined within any limits, is neither defensible nor of any spiritual
worth.

Secondly, the meaning of*taqwa* in the*Nahj al-balaghah* is not
synonymous with that of 'abstinence', even in its logically accepted
sense discussed above.*Taqwa* , on the other hand, according to the*Nahj
al-balaghah* , is a spiritual faculty which appears as a result of
continued exercise and practice. The healthy and rational forms of
abstinence are, firstly, the preparatory causes for the emergence of
that spiritual faculty; secondly, they are also its effects and outcome.

This faculty strengthens and vitalizes the soul, giving it a kind of
immunity. A person who is devoid of this faculty, if he wants to keep
himself free from sins, it is unavoidable for him to keep away from the

causes of sin. Since society is never without these causes, inevitably
he has to go into seclusion and isolate himself. It follows from this
argument that one should either remain pious by isolating himself from
one's environment, or he should enter society and bid farewell to*taqwa*
. Moreover, according to this logic, the more isolated and secluded a
person's life is and the more he abstains from mixing with other people,
the greater is his piety and*taqwa* in the eyes of the common people.

However, if the faculty of*taqwa* is cultivated inside a person's soul,
it is no longer necessary for him to seclude himself from his
environment. He can keep himself clean and uncorrupted without severing
his relations with society.

The former kind of persons are like those who take refuge in mountains
for fear of some plague or epidemic. The second kind resemble those who
acquire immunity and resistance through vaccination and so do not deem
it necessary to leave the city and avoid contact with their townsfolk.
On the other hand, they hasten to the aid of the suffering sick in order
to save them. Sa'di is alluding to the first kind of pious in his
Gulistan, when he says:

*Saw I a sage in the mountains,*

*Happy in a cave, far from the world's tide.*

*Said I, "Why not to the city return,*

*And lighten your heart of this burden?"*

*He said, "The city abounds in tempting beauties,*

*And even elephants slip where mud is thick."*

The*Nahj al-balaghah* speaks of*taqwa* as a spiritual faculty acquired
through exercise and assiduity, which on its emergence produces certain
characteristic effects, one of which is the ability to abstain from sins
with ease.

I guarantee the truth of my words and I am responsible for what I say.
If similar events and experiences of the past serve as a lesson for a
person, then*taqwa* prevents him from plunging recklessly into doubts
...[^2]

Beware that sins are like unruly horses whose reins have been taken way
and which plunge with their riders into hell-fire. But*taqwa* is like a
trained steed whose reins are in the hands of its rider and enters with
its rider into Paradise.[^3]

In this sermon*taqwa* is described as a spiritual condition which
results in control and command over one's self. It explains that the
result of subjugation to desires and lusts and being devoid of*taqwa*
degrades one's personality making it vulnerable to the cravings of the
carnal self. In such a state, man is like a helpless rider without any
power and control, whom his mount takes wherever it desires. The essence
of*taqwa* lies in possessing a spiritual personality endowed with
will-power, and possessing mastery over the domain of one's self. A man
with*taqwa* is like an expert horseman riding a well-trained horse and
who with complete mastery and control drives his tractable steed in the
direction of his choice.

Certainly the*taqwa* of God assists His awliya (friends) in abstaining
from unlawful deeds and instils His fear into their hearts. As a result,
their nights are passed in wakefulness and their days in thirst [on
account of fasting].[^4]

Here 'Ali ('a) makes it clear that*taqwa* is something which
automatically leads to abstention from unlawful actions and to the fear
of God, which are its necessary effects. Therefore, according to this
view,*taqwa* is neither itself abstinence nor fear of God; rather, it is
a sacred spiritual faculty of which these two are only consequences:

For indeed, today*taqwa* is a shield and a safeguard, and tomorrow (i.e.
in the Hereafter) it shall be the path to Paradise.[^5]

In*khutbah* 157,*taqwa* is compared to an invincible fortress built on
heights which the enemy has no power to infiltrate. Throughout, the
emphasis of the Imam ('a) lies on the spiritual and psychological aspect
of*taqwa* and its effects upon human spirit involving the emergence of a
dislike for sin and corruption and an inclination towards piety, purity,
and virtue.

Further illustrations of this view can be cited from the*Nahj
al-balaghah* , but it seems that the above quotations are sufficient.

### Taqwa is Immunity not Restraint

###

We have already mentioned some of the various elements found in the
spiritual advices (*mawa'iz* ) of the *Nahj al-balaghah* . We began with
*taqwa* and saw that *taqwa* , from the viewpoint of the *Nahj
al-balaghah* , is a sublime spiritual faculty which is the cause of
certain attractions and repulsions; i.e. attraction towards edifying
spiritual values and repulsion towards degrading materialistic vices.
The *Nahj al-balaghah* considers *taqwa* as a spiritual state that gives
strength to human personality and makes man the master of his own self.

### Taqwa as Immunity

###

The*Nahj al-balaghah* stresses that *taqwa* is for man a shield and a
shelter, not a chain or a prison. There are many who do not distinguish
between immunity and restraint, between security and confinement, and
promptly advocate the destruction of the sanctuary of *taqwa* in the
name of freedom and liberation from bonds and restraint.

That which is common between a sanctuary and a prison is the existence
of a barrier. Whereas the walls of a sanctuary avert dangers, the walls
of a prison hinder the inmates from realizing their inner capacities and
from benefiting from the bounties of life. 'Ali ('a) clarifies the
difference between the two, where he says:

Let it be known to you, O servants of God, that*taqwa* is a formidable
fortress, whereas impiety and corruption is a weak and indefensible
enclosure that does not safeguard its people, and does not offer any
protection to those who take refuge in it. Indeed, it is only
with*taqwa* that the tentacles of sins and misdeeds can be severed.[^6]

'Ali ('a), in this sublime advice, compares sins and evil deeds which
are afflictions of the human soul to poisonous insects and reptiles, and
suggests that the faculty of*taqwa* is an effective defence against
them. In some of his discourses, he makes it clear that *taqwa* not only
does not entail restraint and restriction or is an impediment to
freedom, but on the other hand it is the source and fountainhead of all
true freedoms. In *khutbah* 230, he says:

*Taqwa* is the key to guidance, the provision for the next world, the
freedom from every kind of slavery, and the deliverance from every form
of destruction.

The message is clear.*Taqwa* gives man spiritual freedom and liberates
him from the chains of slavery and servitude to lusts and passions. It
releases him from the bonds of envy, lust, and anger, and this
expurgates society from all kinds of social bondages and servitudes. Men
who are not slaves of comfort, money, power, and glory, never surrender
to the various forms of bondage which plague the human society.

The*Nahj al-balaghah* deals with the theme of*taqwa* and its various
effects in many of its passages; but we don't consider it necessary to
discuss all of them here. Our main objective here is to discover the
meaning of*taqwa* from the point of view of the*Nahj al-balaghah* , so
as to unearth the reason for so much emphasis that this book places on
this concept.

Of the many effects of*taqwa* that have been pointed out, two are more
important than the rest: firstly, the development of insight and clarity
of vision; secondly, the capacity to solve problems and to weather
difficulties and crises. We have discussed this in detail elsewhere.
[^7] Moreover, a discussion of these effects of *taqwa* here will take
us beyond our present aim which is to clarify the true meaning of
*taqwa* . It will not be out of place to call attention to certain
profound remarks of the *Nahj al-balaghah* about the reciprocal
relationship between the human being and *taqwa* .

### A Reciprocal Commitment:

###

In spite of the great emphasis laid by the*Nahj al-balaghah* on*taqwa*
as a kind of guarantee and immunity against sin and temptation, it
should be noticed that one must never neglect to safeguard and
protect*taqwa* itself.*Taqwa* guards man, and man must safeguard
his*taqwa* . This, as we shall presently explain, is not a vicious
circle.

This reciprocal guarding of the one by the other is comparable to the
one between a person and his clothes. A man takes care of his clothes
and protects them from being spoiled or stolen, while the clothes in
turn guard him against heat or cold. In fact the Holy Quran speaks
of*taqwa* as a garment:

*And the garment of taqwa* -*that is better* . (7:26)

'Ali ('a), speaking about this relationship of mutual protection between
a person and his tawqa', says:

Turn your sleep into wakefulness by the means of*taqwa* and spend your
days in its company. Keep its consciousness alive in your hearts. With
it wash away your sins and cure your ailments... Beware, guard
your*taqwa* and place your self under its guard.[^8]

At another place in the same sermon, 'Ali ('a) says:

O God's servants, I advise you to cultivate the*taqwa* of God. Indeed it
is a right that God has over you and it is through it that you can have
any right over God. You should beseech God's help for guarding it and
seek its aid for [fulfilling your duty to] God.[^9]

Zuhd and Piety
--------------

Another spiritual motif conspicuous in the teachings of the*Nahj
al-balaghah* is*zuhd* , which after*taqwa* is the most recurring theme
of the book. '*Zuhd* ' means renunciation of the 'world', and very often
we encounter denunciation of the 'world', and invitation and exhortation
to renounce it. It appears to me that it forms one of the important
themes of the*Nahj al-balaghah* , which needs to be elucidated and
explained in the light of various aspects of 'Ali's approach.

We shall begin our discussion with the word '*zuhd* ' The words '*zuhd*
' and '*raghbah* ' (attraction, desire), if mentioned without reference
to their objects, are opposite to each other. '*Zuhd* ' means
indifference and avoidance, and '*raghbah* ' means attraction,
inclination, and desire.

Indifference can be of two kinds: involuntary and cultivated. A person
is involuntarily indifferent towards a certain thing when by nature he
does not have any desire for it, as in the case of a sick person who
shows no desire either for food, or fruits, or anything else. Obviously,
this kind of indifference and abstinence has nothing to do with the
particular sense implied in '*zuhd* '.

Another kind of indifference or abstinence is spiritual or intellectual;
that is, things which are natural objects of desire are not considered
the goal and objective by a human being in the course of his struggle
for perfection and felicity. The ultimate objective and goal may be
something above mundane aims and sensual pleasures; either it may be to
attain the sensuous pleasures of the Hereafter, or it may not belong to
this kind of things. It may be some high ethical and moral ideal, like
honour, dignity, nobility, liberty, or it may belong to the spiritual
sphere, like the remembrance of God, the love of God, and the desire to
acquire nearness to Him.

Accordingly the*zahid* (i.e. one who practises*zuhd* ) is someone whose
interest transcends the sphere of material existence, and whose object
of aspiration lies beyond the kind of things we have mentioned above.
The indifference of a*zahid* originates in the sphere of his ideas,
ideals, and hopes, not in his physiological makeup.

There are two places where we come across the definition of '*zuhd* ' in
the*Nahj al-balaghah* . Both of them confirm the above interpretation
of*zuhd* . 'Ali ('a), in*khutba* 81, says:

O people!*zuhd* means curtailing of hopes, thanking God for His
blessings and bounties, and abstaining from that which He has forbidden.

In*hikmah* 439, he says:

All*zuhd* is summarized in two sentences of the Quran: God, the Most
Exalted, says, *So that you may not grieve for what escapes you, nor
rejoice in what has come to you* . [57:23] Whoever does not grieve over
what he has lost and does not rejoice over what comes to him has
acquired *zuhd* in both of its aspects.

Obviously when something does not occupy a significant position amongst
one's objectives and ideals, or rather is not at all significant in the
scheme of things which matter to him, its gain and loss do not make the
slightest difference to him.

However, there are some points that need clarification. Is*zuhd* , or
detachment from the world, on which the*Nahj al-balaghah* , following
the Quranic teachings, puts so much emphasis, to be taken solely in an
ethical and spiritual sense? In other words, is*zuhd* purely a spiritual
state, or does it possess practical implications also? That is, is*zuhd*
spiritual abstinence only or is it accompanied by an abstinence in
practical life also? Assuming that*zuhd* is to be applied in practice,
is it limited to abstinence from unlawful things (*muharramat* ), as
pointed out in*khutba* 81, or does it include something more, as
exemplified by the life of 'Ali ('a) and before him bythe life of the
Holy Prophet ('s)?

Proceeding on the assumption that*zuhd* is not limited to-*muharramat*
only and that it covers permissible things (*mubahat* ) as well, one may
ask: what is its underlying rationale and philosophy? What is the use of
an ascetic life that limits and confines life, rejecting its blessings
and bounties? Is*zuhd* to be practised at all times or only under
certain particular conditions? Is*zuhd* -in the sense of abstinence from
even permissible things-basically in agreement with other Islamic
teachings?

Apart from this, the basis of*zuhd* and renunciation of the world is the
pursuit of supra-material objectives and ideals. What are they from the
point of view of Islam? In particular, how does the*Nahj al-balaghah*
describe them?

All these questions regarding*zuhd* , renunciation, and curtailing of
hopes-themes which have so often been discussed in the *Nahj
al-balaghah* -need to be clarified. We shall discuss these questions in
the following pages and try to answer them.

### Islamic Zuhd and Christian Asceticism

###

In the last section we said that*zuhd* , as defined by the *Nahj
al-balaghah* , is a spiritual state that makes the *zahid* , on account
of his spiritual and other worldly aspirations, indifferent towards the
manifestations of material existence. This indifference is not confined
to his heart, intellect, and feelings and is not limited to his
conscience. It also manifests itself on the practical level of life in
the form of simplicity, contentment, and obstention from hedonistic
urges and love of luxuries. A life of *zuhd* not only implies that a man
should be free from attachment to the material aspects of life, but he
should also practically abstain from indulgence in pleasures. The
*zuhhad* are those who in life are satisfied with the barest material
necessities. 'Ali ('a) was a *zahid* , who was not only emotionally
detached from the world but also indifferent to its pleasures and
enjoyments. In other words, he had 'renounced' the 'world'.

### Two Questions

###

Here, inevitably, two questions shall arise in the reader's mind.
Firstly, as we know, Islam has opposed monasticism considering it to be
an innovation of Christian priests and monks.[^10] The Prophet ('s) has
stated in unequivocal terms that:

There is no monasticism (*rahbaniyyah* ) in Islam.

Once when the Prophet ('s) was informed that some of his Companions had
retired into seclusion renouncing everything and devoting all their time

to worship and prayer in seclusion, he became very indignant. He told
them: "I, who am your prophet, am not such". In this way, the Prophet
('s) made them to understand that Islam is a religion of life and
society, not a monastic faith. Moreover, the comprehensive and
multifaceted teachings of Islam in social, economic, political and moral
spheres are based on reverence for life, not on its renunciation.

Apart from this, monasticism and renunciation of life are incompatible
with the world-view of Islam and its optimistic outlook about the
universe and creation. Unlike some other philosophies and creeds, Islam
does not view the world and life in society with pessimism. It does not
divide all creation into ugly and beautiful, black and white, good and
evil, proper and improper, right and wrong. Now the second question may
be stated in these words: "Aside from the fact that asceticism is the
same as monasticism-which are both incompatible with the Islamic
spirit-what is the philosophy underlying*zuhd* ?

Moreover, why should men be urged to practise*zuhd* ? Why should man,
seeing the limitless bounties of God and good things of life around him,
be called upon to pass by the side of this delightful stream
indifferently and without so much as wetting his feet? Are the ascetic
teachings found in Islam, on this basis, later innovations (*bid'ah* )
introduced into Islam from other creeds like Christianity and Buddhism?
And if this is correct, how are we to explain and interpret the
teachings of the*Nahj al-balaghah* ? How can we explain the indubitable
details known about the Prophet's life and that of 'Ali ('a)?

The answer is that Islamic*zuhd* is different from Christian asceticism
or monasticism. Asceticism is retreat from people and society and
seclusion for the purpose of worship. According to it, the life and
works of the world are separate from the works of the Here-after and the
one is alien to the other. One should, of necessity, choose either one
of the two. One should either devote oneself to worship of God which
shall bear fruits in the Hereafter, or take up the life of the world and
benefit from its immediate pleasures. Accordingly, monasticism is
opposed to life and social relationships. It requires with-drawal from
people and negation of responsibility and commitment towards them.

On the other hand,*zuhd* in Islam, though it requires a simple and
unaffected life-style and is based on abstention from luxuries and love
of comforts and pleasures, operates in the very midst of life and social
relations and is sociable. It draws inspiration, and proceeds, from the
goal of better fulfilment of social responsibilities and duties.

The conception of*zuhd* in Islam is not something that would lead to
asceticism, because a sharp distinction between this world and the next
is nowhere drawn. From the viewpoint of Islam, this world and the next
are not separable, not alien to each other. The relation of this world
to the other is similar to that between the inward and outward sides of
a single reality. They are like the warp and woof of a single fabric.
They are to each other as the soul to the body. Their relation-ship can
be assumed to be something midway between unity and duality. The works
of this world and those of the next are interrelated similarly. Their
difference is that of quality, without

being essential. Accordingly, that which is harmful for the other world
is also to one's detriment in the present world, and everything which is
beneficial for the summum bonum of life in this world is also beneficial
for life in the next world. Therefore, if a certain work which is in
accordance with the higher interests of life in this world is performed
with motives that are devoid of the higher, supra-material, and
transcendental elements, that work would be considered totally
this-worldly and would not, as the Quran tells us, elevate man in his
ascent towards God. However, if a work or action is motivated by sublime
aims and intentions and is executed with a higher vision that transcends
the narrow limits of worldly life, the same work and action is
considered 'other-worldly.'

The Islamic*zuhd* , as we said, is grounded in the very context and
stream of life and gives a peculiar quality to living by emphasizing
certain values in life. As affirmed by the Islamic texts, *zuhd* in
Islam is based on three essential principles of the Islamic
world-outlook.

### The Three Essential Principles

###

1. Enjoyments derived from the physical, material, and natural means of
life are not sufficient for man's happiness and felicity. A series of
spiritual needs are inbuilt in the human nature, without whose
satisfaction the enjoyment provided by material means of life is not
enough to make man truly happy.

2. The individual's felicity and happiness is not separable from that of
society. Since man is emotionally bound to his society, and carries
within him a sense of responsibility towards it, his individual
happiness cannot be independent of the prosperity and peace of his
fellow men.

3. The soul, despite its fusion and a kind of unity with the body, has a
reality of its own. It is a principle in addition to the body which
constitutes another principle in itself. The soul is an independent
source of pleasure and pain. Like the body, or rather even more than it,
it stands in need of nourishment, training, growth, and development. The
soul, however, cannot dispense with the health and vigour of the body.
At the same time, it is undeniable that total indulgence in physical
pleasures and complete immersion into the delights of sensual
experiences does not leave any opportunity for realizing the soul's
unlimited possibilities. Therefore, there exists a kind of
incompatibility between physical enjoyment and spiritual satisfaction.
This is especially true if the attention and attachment to physical
needs were carried to the very extreme of total immersion and
absorption.

It is not true that all sorrow and grief are related to the soul and
that all pleasures are derived from the body. In fact, the spiritual
pleasures are much profounder, purer, and lasting than bodily pleasures.
To sum up, one-sided attention to physical pleasures and material
enjoyments finally results in compromising the total human happiness.
Therefore, if we want to make our lives happy, rich, pure, majestic,
attractive, and beautiful, we cannot afford to ignore the spiritual
aspects of our being.

With due attention to these principles, the meaning of*zuhd* in Islam
becomes clear. The knowledge of these principles allows us to understand
why Islam rejects monasticism but welcomes a form of asceticism which is

rooted in the very heart of life and in the context of social existence.
We shall explain the meaning of*zuhd* in Islamic texts on the basis of
these three principles.

### The Zahid and the Monk

###

We said that Islam encourages*zuhd* but condemns monasticism. Both
the*zahid* and the ascetic monk seek abstinence from pleasures and
enjoyments. But the monk evades life in society and the
respon-sibilities and the duties it entails, regarding them as the low
and mean facets of worldly existence, and takes refuge in mountains or
monasteries. On the other hand, the*zahid* accepts society with its
norms, ideals, duties, and commitments. Both the*zahid* and the monk are
otherworldly, but the*zahid* is a social otherworldly. Also their
attitudes to abstinence from pleasures are not identical; the monk
disdains hygiene and cleanliness and derides married life and
procreation. The*zahid* , on the contrary, considers hygiene and
cleanliness, matrimony and parenthood to be a part of his duties. Both
the*zahid* and the monk are ascetics, but whereas the 'world' renounced
by the*zahid* is indulgence and immersion in pleasures, luxuries, and
comforts (he rejects the attitude which considers them to be life's
ultimate goal and objective), the 'world' renounced by the monk includes
life's work and activity, and the duty and responsibility which go with
social life. That is why the*zahid* 's*zuhd* operates in the midst of
social life, and is, therefore, not only compatible with social
responsibility and commitment but is moreover a very effective means of
discharging them.

The difference between the*zahid* and the monk arises from two different
world-outlooks. From the viewpoint of the monk, this world and the next
are two different spheres, separate from and unrelated to each other. To
him, happiness in this world is not only independent of happiness in the
next but is incompatible with it. He considers the two forms of
happiness as irreconcilable contradictories. Naturally, that which leads
to felicity and happiness in this world is considered different from the
works and deeds which lead to success in the Hereafter. In other words,
the means of acquiring happiness in this world and the next are regarded
as being incompatible and contradictory. It is imagined that a single
work and action cannot simultaneously be a means for acquiring happiness
in both the worlds.

But in the world-view of the*zahid* , the world and the Hereafter are
interconnected. The world is a preamble to the Hereafter. It is a farm
of which the Hereafter is the harvest. From the*zahid* 's viewpoint,
that which gives order, security, uprightness, prosperity, and flourish
to life is application of other-worldly criteria to the life of this
world.

The essence of felicity and happiness in the other world lies in
successful accomplishment of commitments and responsibilities of this
world, performed with faith, piety, purity, and*taqwa* .

In truth, the*zahid* 's concept of *zuhd* and the monk's rationale for
his asceticism are incompatible and contradictory to each other.
Basically, monasticism is a deviation introduced by men into the
teachings of prophets, due to ignorance or vested interests. Now we
shall explain the philosophy of *zuhd* in the light of the teachings of
the Islamic texts.

### Zuhd and Altruism

###

One of the ingredients of*zuhd* is altruism.*Ithar* (altruism)
and*atharah* (egoism) are derived from the same root.*Atharah* means
giving precedence to one's interests over those of others. In other
words it implies monopolizing everything for oneself and depriving
others. But*Ithar* means preferring others over oneself and bearing
hardship for the comfort and good of others.

The*zahid* , by virtue of his simple, humble, and content living, is
hard upon himself so that others may live in ease. He sacrifices for the
sake of the needy because with his sensitive heart which feels the pains
of others he can relish the world's bounties only when there does not
exist a single man oppressed by need. He derives greater satisfaction by
feeding and clothing others and working for their ease than if he did
those things for himself. He endures deprivation, hunger, and pain, so
that others may be well fed and live without hardships.

*Ithar* represents the most magestic and sublime manifestation of human
greatness, and only very great human beings climb to its noble heights.

The Holy Quran refers to the episode of the self-sacrifice of 'Ali ('a)
and his honoured family in the glorious verses of the Surat*Hal ata* .
'Ali, Fatimah, and their sons once gave away whatever they had-which was
no more than a few loaves of bread-to the poor for the sake of God, and
despite their own distress. That is why this story circulated among the
angels and a verse of the Quran was revealed in the praise of their act.

Once when the Holy Prophet ('s) came to visit Hadrat al-Zahra' ('s),
observing that his daughter had put on a silver bracelet and hung a new
curtain on the door, signs of unease appeared upon his face. Al-Zahra'
('a) was quick to discern the cause of her father's reaction. When the
Prophet ('s) left, without losing time, she took out her bracelet and
removing the curtain from the door, sent them to be carried to the
Prophet ('s) so that he might give them to the needy. When al-Zahra's
messenger brought them to the Prophet ('s) he looked at them with
amazement. He was glad that his daughter had taken the hint and foregone
her simplest luxuries for the benefit of others.

'The neighbours first', was the maxim in the household of 'Ali ('a) and
Fatimah ('a). In*khutbah* 193, which describes the qualities of the
pious, 'Ali ('a) says:

The man of [*taqwa* ] subjects his own self to hardships so that the
people may live in comfort.

The Holy Quran describes the Ansar (the Helpers), who in spite of their
poverty welcomed the Muhajirun (the Emigrants) as their own brethren,
giving them preference over their own selves, in these words:

*They love whosoever has migrated to them, not finiding in their breasts
any need for what they have been given, and prefer others above
themselves, even though poverty be their lot* (59:9)

Obviously, the altruistic ingredient of*zuhd* comes into play only under
certain conditions. In an affluent society, altruism is less frequently
required. But in conditions where poverty and deprivation are
prevalent-as in the society of al-Madinah during the Prophet's time-its
need is greater.

This is one of the secrets of the apparent difference of the life-styles
of 'Ali ('a) and the Holy Prophet ('s) with the rest of the Imams ('a).

In any case,*zuhd* with its underlying altruistic motives has nothing in
common with monasticism and escape from society; instead it is a product
of man's gregarious instincts and a manifestation of his noblest
feelings, which reinforce the social bonds between fellow human beings.

Sympathy and Kindness
---------------------

The sympathy and the willingness to share the suffering of the needy and
the deprived is another ingredient of*zuhd* . When the destitute witness
the luxuries and comforts of the richer classes, their anguish is
multiplied. To the hardships of poverty and destitution is added the
stinging feeling of deprivation and backwardness in relation to others.

Man, by nature, cannot tolerate to remain a silent spectator while
others who have no merit over him eat, drink, enjoy and relish freely at
the cost of his deprivation. When society is divided into haves and
have-nots, the man of God considers himself responsible. In the first
place, as Amir al-Mu'minin ('a) says, he should strive to change the
situation which permits the gluttony of the rich oppressor and the
hunger of the oppressed, in accordance with the covenant of God with the
learned men of the Ummah.[^11] In the second place, he strives to
ameliorate the state of affairs through altruism and self-sacrifice, by
sharing whatever he possesses with the needy and the deprived. But when
he sees that the situation has deteriorated beyond reparation and it is
practically impossible to alleviate the misery of the poor through
sympathy, he practically shares their deprivation and tries to soothe
their wounded hearts by adopting a life-style similar to that of the
poor.

Sympathy with others and sharing their suffering is of essential
importance especially in the case of the leaders of the Ummah on whom
all eyes are fixed. 'Ali ('a), more than at any other time, lived a
severely ascetic life during the days of his caliphate. He used to say:

Indeed God has made it obligatory for just leaders that they should
maintain themselves at the level of the poor class so that they do not
despair of their distress.[^12]

Should I be content with being called 'Amir al-Mu'minin' while refusing
to share the adversities of the times with the people? Or should I be an
example to them in the distress of life?[^13]

In the same letter (to 'Uthman ibn Hunayf) he says:

It is absolutely out of question that my desires should overpower me and
my greed should lead me to relish choicest foods while in the Hijaz and
Yamamah there may be some people who despair of even a single loaf of
bread and who do not get a full meal. Shall I lie with a satiated belly
while around me are those whose stomachs are hungry and whose livers are
burning?[^14]

At the same time, 'Ali ('a) would reproach anyone else for practising
the same kind of asceticism in life. When faced with their objection as
to why he himself practised it, he would reply, "I am not like you. The
leaders have a different duty." This approach of 'Ali ('a) can be
observed in the conversation with 'Asim ibn Ziyad al-Harith.[^15]

In volume IX of the Bihar al-'anwar, it has been related from al-Kafi
that Amir al-Mu'minin ('a) said:

God has appointed me the leader of the people and made it my duty to
adopt a way of living, in food and clothing, on a par with the poorest
classes of society, so that, on the one hand, it may soothe the distress
of the poor and, on the other, restrain the rich from revolting.[^16]

An incident is related from the life of the great*faqih* Wahid
Behbahani, may God be pleased with him. One day he observed one of his
daughters-in-law wearing a garment made of a fabric usually worn by
women of rich families of those days. He reproached his son (the late
Aqa Muhammad Isma'il, the lady's husband) in that regard. The son
recited this verse of the Quran in reply to his father's remarks:

*Say: 'Who has forbidden the ornament of God which He has brought forth
for His servants, and the good things of His providing?* (7:32)

The father said: "I don't say that putting on good dress, eating good
food, and making use of God's bounties is forbidden. Not at all. Such
restrictions do not exist in Islam. However, there is one thing to be
remembered. We are a family charged with the duty of the religious
leadership of Muslims and have special responsibilities. When the people
of poor families see the rich live luxuriously, their frustration is
aggravated. Their only consolation is that at least the 'Aqa's family'
lives like they do. Now if we too adopt the life-styles of the rich,
that will deprive them of their only consolation. However, we cannot
practically change the present social condition, but let us not grudge
at least this much of sympathy."

As can be clearly seen,*zuhd* , which derives motivation from sympathy
and readiness to share the sufferings of others, has nothing common with
monastic asceticism. It is not based on escapism from society. The
Islamic conception of*zuhd* is a means of alleviating the sufferings of
society.

### Zuhd and Freedom

###

Another ingredient of*zuhd* is love of freedom and independence. The
union between *zuhd* and freedom is as primordial as it is indissoluble.

The dictates of need and exigency are the criteria of opportunists,
whereas independence from want is characteristic of free men. The
deepest aspiration of the free men unattached to the world is
unencumbrance, buoyancy, absence of hindrance, and freedom of movement.

As a result they adopt*zuhd* and contentment so as to reduce their wants
to a minimum, liberating their selves from the bondage of need, of
things and persons.

The life of a human being, like that of any other animal, requires a
series of natural and indispensable necessities, like air, shelter,
bread, water, and clothing. Man cannot free himself entirely from
attachment to such needs and other things such as light and heat so as
to make himself, in philosophical terminology, "self-sustaining"
(*muktafi bidhatih* ).

However, there are a series of other wants which are not necessary and
natural, but are imposed upon one in the course of one's life either by
oneself, or by social and historical factors beyond his control, which
nevertheless set limits upon his freedom. Such constraints are not very
dangerous as long as they are not transformed into inner needs, such as
certain political constraints and compulsions. The most dangerous of
compulsions are those which emerge as inner needs from within one's own
self and shackle him.

The mechanism of these needs, which lead to inner weakness, impotence,
and defeat, operates in such a way that when one turns to luxuries and
comforts in order to add charm, delight, and glamour to one's life so as
to

feel more secure and strong in order to derive greater gratification
from life, one is impelled to possess more and more things. In the
course of time one gets gradually accustomed to and engrossed in the
means of one's comfort, luxury, and power. These habits gradually result
in deeper attachment to and love for those things, and he is bound to
them with invisible bonds, thus becoming helpless and impotent in front
of them. That is, the same thing which had once added charm and delight
to his life later deprives his personality of its vigour, and the same
thing which once made him feel powerful against nature now turns him
into a helpless slave without a will of his own.

Man's inclination towards*zuhd* is rooted in his love of freedom. By
nature he is disposed toward possession of things and their
exploitation; but when he realizes that the things, to the very extent
they make him outwardly powerful and successful, inwardly transform him
into a weakling without will-power and a slave, he rebels against this
slavery. This rebellion of man is what we call*zuhd* .

Our poets and sages have spoken a lot about freedom and liberation.
Hafiz calls himself 'the slave of the magnanimity of him who is free of
everything under the blue sky that carries any taint of attachment.'
Among the trees, he admires the cypress which to him seems 'free of all
woes.' What those great men meant by 'freedom' is freedom from
attachment, freedom from being possessed, bewitched, and captivated by
anything.

But freedom implies something greater than being devoid of attachments.
The ties which make a man weak, helpless, dependent, and impotent are
not only those which originate in the heart or emotional attachments; to
these must be added the various bodily, physical and psychological
conditionings and artificial appendages that are first acquired for
adding charm and glory to life and for satisfaction of the lust for
power and strength, later growing into a form of addiction or rather
becoming a second nature. These, while they may not involve one's
emotional attachments, or may even be regarded by one as reprehensible,
should be counted as even stronger means of human servitude and which
may bring greater even degradation than emotional attachments.

Take the example of an enlightened '*arif* with a heart free of worldly
attachments, for whom, nevertheless, addiction to tea, tobacco or opium
has become a second nature, or for whom abstention from foods to which
he is accustomed may endanger his life. Can such a man lead a free
existence?

Liberty from attachments is a necessary condition of freedom, but it is
not sufficient in itself. Accustoming oneself to a minimum of the
niceties of life and abstention from affluent living is another
condition of freedom.

The first thing to strike Abu Sa'id al-Khudri, one of the honoured
Companions, when describing the station of the Holy Prophet ('s), is:

The Prophet of God, may peace be upon him and his Household, could
manage with the minimum necessities of life.

Is it a merit to be able to do with a minimum of means? If we take only
the economic aspect into view, we should say that the Prophet's level of
consumption was quite low. In this respect, therefore, the answer would
be: "No, not at all; it is not a significant merit." But if viewed from
a spiritual

viewpoint, that is when examined by the criterion of freedom from
worldly bondages, we have to admit that it is a great merit indeed.
Because it is only by acquisition of this merit that a human being can
live with any measure of unfettered freedom and unimpeded mobility, and
participate in the incessant struggle of life with agility and vigour.

This matter is not restricted to habits involving the individual;
binding oneself to social habits and customs, to modes and manners of
dealing with people, the mesh of social connections and gatherings,
adherence to styles and fashions in dress and demeanour-these and the
like of these encumber life and deprive it of dynamism

Freedom of movement in the arena of life is like swimming; lesser the
interference and incumbrance for the swimmer, the greater is his ability
to move around in water. Too many attachments will not only deprive him
of his mobility but bring the danger of drowning.

Athir al-Din Akhsikati (d. 577 or 579/1181 or 1183) says:

*To cross the river of life, shed your robes;*

*Nakedness is a condition of keeping afloat.*

Farrukhi Yazdi says:

*Of nakedness the sage does not complain,*

*A sword of good steel would not rust without a sheath.*

Baba Tahir has a*ruba'i* which though intended for some other purpose is
nevertheless relevant here:

*O heart, thy path is better when covered with thorns;*

*Thy track is better when stretched on heavens high;*

*Nay, if thou can strip the skin off thine flesh,*

*Do it, for the lighter thy burden the better it be.*

Sa'di, too, relates a relevant fable in the chapter 7 of his Gulistan,
although it also aims at some other purpose:

I saw a rich mans son squatting by the side of his father's grave, and
bragging thus before a darwish's son: 'My father's tomb is constructed
of rare stones. Inside, it is paved with marble with enlaid turquois.
And look at the one of your father's! An unbaked brick or two was
fetched, on which a handful of earth was thrown.'

The sage's son heard these remarks and replied: 'Yet before your father
is able to budge under the pile of those stones, my father would have
reached the paradise itself.'

These are allegories underlining the significance of lightness and
freedom from bondages, which is the essential condition for dynamism,
nobility, and nimbleness. Leaps, movements, and struggles were achieved
by individuals who were practically freer of bondages and attachments;
that is, in some sense they were*zahid* s. Gandhi, with his ascetic mode
of life, brought the British imperialism to its knees. Ya'qub Layth
Saffar, in his own words, 'did not set aside his diet of bread and
onions until he became a terror for the caliph.' In our own times, the
Vietcongs were such an example. Their surprising power of resistance was
drawn from what in Islamic idiom has been called 'lightness of
provisions'. A Vietcong could sustain for days in his shelter with a
handful of rice and continue his battle with the enemy.

Which leader, religious or political, living in luxury and comfort has
brought about drastic upheavals in world history? Which monarch who
founded a dynasty, having transferred power from another family to his
own, has been a lover of luxuries and comforts?

'Ali ibn Abi Talib, may peace be upon him, was the freest of the world's
free men. He was a free man in the complete sense of the word, because
he was a*zahid* in the profoundest sense of the word. 'Ali ('a), in
the*Nahj al-balaghah* , lays great emphasis on renunciation of worldly
pleasures and comforts as a means of liberation. In one of the hikam
(aphorisms), he says:

Greed is everlasting slavery.[^17]

In a sermon he describes the*zuhd* of Jesus ('a), the son of Mary, in
these words:

He was free of any abasing greed.[^18]

At another place he says:

The world is a place of transit, not a place to abide. Its people fall
into two categories: those who sell away their souls into slavery, and
those who ransom their souls and liberate them.[^19]

In a letter to 'Uthman ibn Hunayf, 'Ali ('a) is more explicit than
elsewhere. Towards the end of the letter, addressing the world and its
pleasures, he reveals to us the philosophy of*zuhd* and the secrets of
renunciation:

O world! Get away from me! I have thrown thy reins on thy shoulders,
have freed myself from thy claws, and released myself from thy snares
Go, get thee away! By God, I shall not surrender to thee so that thou
should abase me! I shall not follow thee tractably that thou may control
me and lead me wherever thou willeth.

Yes. 'Ali's*zuhd* is a rebellion against abasement and indignity on
account of pleasures. It is a rebellion against human weakness and
impotence before the tyranny of desires. It is a defiance of servitude
to the world and obsequiousness before its charms.

### Zuhd And Spirituality

###

#### Zuhd, Love, and Worship

####

Another fountainhead of*zuhd* and renunciation of hedonism is the
aspiration to avail of spiritual bounties. Presently we do not intend to
undertake any argument to the effect that man and the universe possess
an undeniable spiritual aspect. It is another story by itself. It is
evident that from a materialistic outlook of the world, the rejection of
hedonism, materialism, and love of money and wealth as a prerequisite
for acquisition of spiritual virtues is devoid of any meaning.

We have, here, nothing to say about the followers of materialism as a
school of thought. At present, we address only those who have
experienced the aroma of spirituality. For, anybody who has smelled its
fragrance knows that as long as one does not liberate oneself from the
bondage of desire, as long as the infant soul is not weaned away from
the breasts of nature, and as long as the material aspects of life are
seen as not being the ultimate end of life and are seen as means, the
domain of the heart is not ready for the emergence of chaste emotions,
majestic thoughts, and angelic feelings. That

is why, it is said, that*zuhd* is the essential condition for exuberance
of gnosis and is inalienably linked with it.

The worship of God, in its real sense, that is, ardour of love and zeal
of devotion and service in the way of God, His constant presence in
thoughts and His remembrance, the sense of delight and ecstasy in His
adoration and worship-it is not at all compatible with self-adoration,
hedonist attitude, and being captured by the glamour and charm of
material things.

The need of*zuhd* is not characteristic solely of the worship of God;
rather, every kind of love and adoration, whether it pertains to one's
country, creed, conviction, or something else, calls for some kind
of*zuhd* and indifference towards material aspects of life.

It is characteristic of love and adoration, as opposed to knowledge,
science or philosophy, that they have to deal with the heart and as such
do not tolerate any rivals. Nothing prevents a scientist or a
philosopher who is enslaved to money and wealth from devoting and
concentrating his intellectual powers, when necessary, on the study of
the problems of philosophy, logic, physics, or mathematics. But it is
not possible, at the same time, that his heart should be full to the
brim with love, especially love of a spiritual nature, such as for
humanity, or his religion and creed. Certainly, it cannot burn with the
light of Divine love nor can it receive an enlightenment or inspiration
of a Divine sort. Consequently, the essential condition for reception of
spiritual grace and realization of authentic humanhood is purging the
temple of the heart from every trace of materialistic attachments and
exterminating from the Ka'bah of the heart all the idols of gold and
silver and destroying them.

As we have said before, we should not be led to misinterpret freedom
from the bondage of gold and silver, and indifference towards what these
metals can be exchanged for, as monastic asceticism which is an attempt
to evade responsibility and commitment. Instead, it is only in the light
of such*zuhd* that responsibility and commitment reacquire their real
significance and are no longer empty words without content and hollow
claims. The personality of 'Ali, upon whom be peace, is a glorious
example of it. In him*zuhd* and commitment were combined together. While
he was a*zahid* who had renounced the world, at the same time, he had a
heart that was most sensitive to the demands of social responsibility.
On the one hand he used to say:

What has 'Ali to do with perishable niceties and short-lived
pleasures.[^20]

On the other hand, a small injustice or the sight of someone in distress
was enough to snatch sleep from his eyes at nights. He was ready to go
to bed with an empty stomach lest someone in his dominion might have
remained hungry:

Shall I stuff my belly with delicious foods while in the Hijaz and
Yamamah there may be people who have no hope of getting a loaf of bread
or a full meal?[^21]

There was a direct relation between that*zuhd* of his and this
sensitiveness. Since 'Ali ('a) was a*zahid* , indifferent to the world
and unselfish, with a heart that overflowed with the exuberance of the
love of God, he looked at the world, from the minutest particle to the
greatest star,

as a unit entrusted with responsibility and duty. That is why he was so
sensitive towards the matters of social rights. Had he been a hedonist
devoted to his own interests, he would never have been the responsible
and committed person that he was.

The Islamic traditions are eloquent in regard to this philosophy
of*zuhd* and the*Nahj al-balaghah* lays particular emphasis upon it. In
a*hadith* , it is related from al-Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq ('a) that he
said:

All hearts that harbour doubt or entertain shirk shall be inauthentic;
that is why they adopted*zuhd* so that hearts may be emptied and made
ready for the Hereafter.[^23]

As can be seen from this tradition, every kind of hedonism and
attachment to pleasures is considered shirk and contrary to the worship
of the One God. Mawlana (Rumi) describes the*zuhd* of the 'arif in these
words:

*Zuhd* means taking pains while sowing; Mystic knowledge (*ma'rifah* )
is (care during) its cultivation; The '*arif* is the soul of the Law and
the spirit of*taqwa* ; For mystic knowledge is the fruit of the labours
of*zuhd* .

Abu 'Ali Ibn Sina, in the ninth namat of his*al-'Isharat* , which he
devotes to the description of various stations of the mystics (*maqamat
al-'arifin* ), differentiates between the*zuhd* of the '*arif* and that
of the*non-'arif* . He writes:

The*zahid* s who have no knowledge of the philosophy of *zuhd* , make a
certain deal in their imagination: they barter the goods of the world
for the goods of the Hereafter. They forego the enjoyments of the world
in order that they may enjoy the pleasures of the Hereafter. In other
words, they abstain here in order to indulge there. But an aware *zahid*
, acquainted with the philosophy of *zuhd* , practises it because of his
unwillingness to engage his inner self with anything other than God.
Such a man, out of his self-respect, regards anything other than God to
be unworthy of attention and servitude.

In another section of the same book where he discusses spiritual
discipline, Ibn Sina says:

This training has three ends in view. First, removal of impediments from
the path towards God; second, subjugation of the earnal self (*al-nafs
al-'ammarah* ) to the contented self (*al-nafs al-mutma'innah* ), third,
refinement of the inward (*batin* ).

Then he proceeds to mention the effective means of realization of these
three ends. He tells us that true*zuhd* helps in achieving the first of
these objectives, that is, removal of impediments, the non-God, from the
way.

### The Contradiction Between the World and the Hereafter

###

The problem of the conflict between the world and the Hereafter and the
contradiction between them as two opposite poles, such as the north and
the south, which are such that proximity to the one means remoteness
from the other-is related to the world of human heart, conscience, human
attachment, love and worship. God has not given two hearts to man:

*God has not assigned to any man two hearts within his breast.* (33:4)

With one heart one cannot choose two beloveds. That is why once when
questioned about his old and worn-out clothes, 'Ali ('a) replied:

These make the heart humble, subdue the self, and induce the believers
to follow it as an example.[^23]

That is, those who have no new clothes to wear are not ashamed to put on
old and worn-out dress. They no longer feel humiliation on their account
for they see that their leader himself hasn't put on any better. Then
'Ali ('a) goes on to add that the world and the Hereafter are like two
irreconcilable enemies. They are two divergent paths. Anyone who loves
the world and chooses its bondage is, by nature, led to loathe the
Hereafter and detest everything that is related to it. The world and the
Hereafter are like the east and the west, the north and the south.
Anyone who approaches the one gets farther from the other. They are like
two wives.

In one of his epistles, he writes:

I swear by God that, God willing, I shall so discipline my own self that
it would rejoice to have a single loaf of bread for eating and be
content with only salt to season it. (In prayer) I shall empty my eyes
of tears until they become like dried up springs. The cattle fill their
stomachs on the pasture and lie down to repose. The goats graze, devour
green herbs, and enter their enclosures. Should 'Ali in a similar manner
swallow whatever he ean lay his hands on and lie down to doze'?
Congratulations! For, if he does that' after long years he has chosen to
follow the wild grazing animals and the cattle led out to pasture.[^24]

Then he goes on to add:

Happy is the man who fulfils his duties to God and overcomes hardships
like a mill grinding the grain, who allows himself no sleep at nights
and when it overpowers him lies down on the ground with his hand for a
pillow. He is accompanied by those who keep their eyes awake in fear of
the Day of Judgement, whose bodies are ever away from their beds, whose
lips constantly hum in the Lord's remembrance, whose sins have been
erased by prolonged supplications for forgiveness. They are the party of
Allah; why surely Allah's party-they are the prosperers. (58:22)[^25]

The two passages quoted above completely illustrate the relation-ship
between*zuhd* and spirituality. To sum up, one has to choose one of the
two paths; either to drink, eat, browse and hanker after sensual
pleasures in utter indifference to the secrets of the spirit, to avoid
the agonies of love and its tears, to speak not of enlightenment and
progress, not to take a step beyond the threshold of bestiality; or to
resolve on a journey into the valley of authentic humanhood, towards the
effulgence and-exuberance of Divine grace which descends upon chaste
hearts and enlightened souls.

### Zuhd: Minimum of Intake for Maximum Output

###

Some days ago I was in Isfahan on a visit for a few days. During it, in
a gathering of the learned, a discussion started about*zuhd* . The
various aspects of it were scrutinized in the light of the multifaceted
teachings of Islam. Everyone wanted to find a comprehensive and
articulate definition of*zuhd* . Among them a learned high school
teacher,[^27] who (I later came to know, that he was writing a treatise
on the subject, the manuscript of which he showed me later) suggested a
wonderfully eloquent definition of*zuhd* . He said:

Islamic*zuhd* is minimizing the intake and maximizing the output.

This definition fascinated me and I saw that it was in conformity with
my own earlier understanding and the conclusions that I have drawn in
the foregoing chapters. Here I, with the permission of that learned man,
making a little amendment in his definition, would say:

*Zuhd* in Islam means drawing a minimum of intake for the sake of
maximizing the output.

That is, there exists a relation between drawing as little as possible
of material benefits of life on the one hand and aiming at maximizing
one's output on the other. Human 'outputs', whether in the sphere of the
actualization of one's potentialities, whether on the level of emotion
and morality, or from the point of view of individuals role in social
co-operation and mutual help, or from the aspect of realizing spiritual
edification and refinement, all in all have a converse relationship to
his intake of material benefits.

It is a human characteristic that the greater one's enjoyment of
material benefits and indulgence in such things as pleasures, luxuries,
and affluence, the greater is one's weakness, indignity, impotence,
sterility, and impoverishment. Conversely, abstinence from indulgent and
extravagant enjoyment of nature-of course, within definite
limits-refines and purifies human nature and invigorates and strengthens
two of the highest of all human powers: thought and will .

It is true only of animals that greater benefit from the possibilities
provided by nature contributes to their animal development and
perfection. Even in animals it is not applicable when we consider what
is called the 'merit' desirable in a beast. For example, sheep and
cattle which are reared for obtaining greater amount of meat, milk, or
fleece should be given greater attention and care and fed well. However,
this is not true of a race horse. It is impossible for a common stable
horse to show any good performance in a race. The horse which has to run
and win races is given days or rather months of training with a
controlled diet until its body becomes lean and nimble, shedding all its
excessive fat so that it can acquire the desirable agility and speed or
the 'excellence' of which it is capable.

*Zuhd* is also an exercise and discipline for man. But it is the
exercise of the soul. Through*zuhd* the soul is disciplined; shedding
all excessive appendages, and becoming, as a result, light, agile, and
nimble, it takes an easy flight into the skies of spiritual merits.

Incidentally, 'Ali ('a) also describes*taqwa* and*zuhd* as 'exercise'
and practice. The word*riyadah* originally meant exercising horses
intended for racing. Physical exercise is also called*riyadah.* 'Ali
('a) says:

Indeed, as to my self, I shall exercise it and discipline it
through*taqwa* . [^27]

What about plant life? Like animals that which may be, loosely speaking,
called the merit of a tree or shrub is its capacity to thrive with a
minimum amount of nourishment from nature. 'Ali ('a), also, makes an
allusion to this point in one of his letters to his governors. In that
letter, after describing his own ascetic life-style, characterized by a
minimum of consumption, 'Ali ('a) encourages him to emulate it. He says:

I can already anticipate your criticism. Someone might say that if this
is what the son of Abu Talib eats then weakness should have made him
unfit for an encounter with the enemy's warriors. Remember the untended
tree that thrives in the harsh conditions of the desert-its wood is firm
and tough; even the fire lit from it is more enduring and fierce.

This law, which applies to all living things, is more effective in the
case of man because of the various characteristics special to him which
are summed up under the term 'human personality'.[^28]

The word '*zuhd* ', despite its sublime human meaning, has suffered an
evil fate, and is fiercely denounced particularly in our own times.
Sometimes, the term is advertently or otherwise misinterpreted;
some-times it is equated with sanctimoniousness and show of piety; at
other times, it is considered equivalent to monasticism and ascetic
seclusion. Everybody is free to coin terms of his own with any meaning
of his own choice. But no one has the right to condemn any concept or
term by imparting to it a wrong and misconceived meaning and sense. In
its system of ethics and education, Islam has used a certain term,
*zuhd* . The *Nahj al-balaghah* and the Islamic tradition are replete
with it. Before we make any judgement about *zuhd* in Islam, first,
before everything, we must understand its Islamic connotation. The
meaning of *zuhd* in Islam is what we have tried to explain, and the
philosophy behind it is what we have discussed in the light of Islamic
texts. If anyone finds any fault with this meaning and philosophy, let
him inform me so that I too might be benefited.

What school of thought and what kind of logic can justify monasticism?
What school of thought can recommend and justify the worship of money,
consumerism, love of goods, lust for position, or-to use an expression
which includes them all-worldliness? Is it possible for man to be the
slave and prisoner of material things-or in the words of Amir
al-Mu'minin 'Ali ('a), 'the slave of the world and the slave of him who
exercises control over it'-and yet speak of 'human personality'?

Here, it would not be out of place to cite the views of a Marxist writer
about the relation between love of money and human personality. In a
useful and concise book regarding capitalist and Marxist economies, he
points out the moral consequences of the power of money for society. He
writes:

The extraordinary power of 'gold' over our contemporary society is
something deeply detested by men of sensitive nature. Men in search of
truth have always expressed their strong aversion towards this filthy
metal, and consider it to be the main cause of corruption in
contemporary society. However, those little round pieces of a shining
yellow metal called 'gold' are really not to be blamed. The power and
domination of money as a general manifestation of power and authority of
things over man is the essential characteristic of a disorderly economy
based on barter and exchange. In the same way as the uncivilized man of
ancient times adored and worshipped idols made by his own hands, the
contemporary man also worships the product of his own labour, and his
life is overwhelmed by the power of things he has made with his own
hands. In order that the worship of consumer goods and the worship of
money, which is the filthiest form evolved of idolatry, may be
completely eradicated, the social causes which

brought them into existence should be eliminated and the society should
be so organized that the power and authority of the little coins of this
yellow brilliant metal would be thoroughly obliterated. In such an
organization of society, things will no more wield their present power
over human beings. On the other hand, man's power and predominance over
things shall be absolute and according to a preconceived scheme. Then
worship of money and things shall give their place to honour and
reverence for the human personality.

We agree with the author that the power of things over man, and in
particular the authority of money, is opposed to the demands of human
dignity and nobility, and is as condemnable as idolatry. However, we do
not agree with his suggested exclusive prescription for solution of this
problem.

Here we are not concerned with the question whether collective ownership
is preferable from a social or economic point of view. Nevertheless,
morally speaking, this suggestion, instead of redeeming society's spirit
of honesty, eliminates right away the very object of honesty!

Man can reclaim his identity only by liberating himself from the power
of money and by bringing money under his own control. True human
personality can emerge when the danger of money and goods remains
possible without overcoming man, who is not ruled by them but rules
them. This kind of personality is what Islam calls*zuhd* .

In the educational system of Islam, man regains his personality without
the need to obliterate the right of property. Those who are trained in
the school of Islamic teachings are equipped with the power of*zuhd* .
They strip money and goods of their power and subjugate them to their
own authority.
