Writing a Hamza
===============

48. How is a *hamza* written when it comes at the beginning of a word?

49. How is a *hamza* written when it comes in the middle of a word and
does not have a vowel sign?

50. How is a *hamza* written when it comes in the middle of a word and
does have a vowel sign?

51. How is a *hamza* written if it has a *fathah* and comes after a
*dummah* or *kasrah*?

52. How is a *hamza* written if it comes in the middle of a word and has
a vowel sign while the letter before it does not have a vowel sign?

53. How is a *hamza* written if it comes after an *alif* or *yā'*?

54. How is a *hamza* written if it comes between an *alif* and a letter
other than a *yā'* being a pronoun?

55. How is a *hamza* written if it comes at the end of a word and is
preceded by a letter without a vowel sign?

56. How is a *hamza* written if it comes at the end of a word and is
preceded by a letter with a vowel sign?

57. How is a *hamza* written if it comes at the end of a word, is
connected to the feminine *tā'*, and is preceded by a weak letter?

48. When a *hamza* is written at the beginning of a word, it is written
in the form of an *alif*, for example: **إصبَع.**

49. When a *hamza* comes in the middle of a word and does not have a
vowel sign, it is written according to the vowel sign of the letter
preceding it, for example: **ذِئبٌ.**

50. When a *hamza* comes in the middle of a word and has a vowel sign,
and the preceding letter has a vowel sign as well, it will take on the
form of its vowel sign, for example: **سَألَ.**

51. If a *hamza* has a *fathah* and comes after a letter that has a
*kasrah* or *dummah*, it will be written according to the vowel sign
that precedes it, for example: **مُؤَنٌ** .

52. If a *hamza* comes in the middle of a word, has a vowel sign, and is
preceded by a letter that does not have a vowel sign, it will be written
according to its vowel sign, for example: **یَیئِسُ.**

53. If a *hamza* comes between an *alif* and a *yā'* it should be
written in the form of a *yā'*, for example: **الرّاِئي.**

54. If a *hamza* comes between an *alif* and a pronoun that is not a
*yā'* there are two cases. If it has a *kasrah* or *dummah* it is
written according to its vowel sign, for example: **بَقاؤُهُ,** but if
it has a *fathah* it is written as a plain *hamza*, for example:
**بَقاءَهُ.**

55. If a *hamza* comes at the end of a word and the letter before it
does not have a vowel sign it is written as a plain *hamza*, for
example: **جُزءٌ.**

56. If a *hamza* comes at the end of a word and the letter before it has
a vowel sign it will be written according the vowel sign of the previous
letter, for example: **قَرَأ.**

57. If a *hamza* comes at the end of a word and is connected to a
feminine *tā'* ther e are two cases. If the letter before it is a sound
letter without a vowel sign the *hamza* is written in the form of an
*alif*, for example: **نَسأة,** but if the previous letter has a vowel
sign the *hamza* is written according the vowels sign of the previous
letter, for example: **فِئَة.**

58. If a *hamza* comes at the end of a word and is connected to a
feminine *tā'* and preceded by a weak letter without a vowel sign, there
are two cases. It is written in the form of a *yā'* if preceded by a
*yā'*, for example: **خَطیئَة.** But, it is written as a plain *hamza*
if preceded by an *alif* or a *wāw*, for example: **قِراءَة.** The same
rules apply to the feminine *alif*.


