Non-Perfect Verbs
=================

62. How are non-perfect verbs conjugated?

63. How is a verb with a *hamza* changed?

64. How is a double-lettered verb changed?

65. How is a quasi-sound verb changed?

66. How is a hollow verb changed?

67. How is a defective verb changed if the *wāw, tā',* or *yā'* pronouns
are added to it?

68. How is a defective verb changed if the dual *alif* or *nā* is added
to it?

62. Non-perfect verbs are like perfect verbs with regards to
conjugation, except they are changed a little due to *idghām* in
double-lettered verbs, weak letters in weak verbs, and erasing the
*hamza* in verbs which have one.

63. If there are two *hamzas* at the beginning of a verb and the second
one does not have a vowel sign, the second *hamza* will be changed into
a letter that is in congruence with the vowel sign of the previous
letter, for example: **آمنتُ ، أومِنُ و اِیذَن** which were originally
**أأمَنتُ ، أؤمِنُ و اِئذَن**.

64. Double-lettered verbs are changed because of *idghām*. This is
obligatory if both of the like letters have vowel signs, for example:
**مَدَّ.** If the first letter has a vowel sign and the second letter
does not it is obligatory to write them separately if the *sakūn* is
used to connect the verb to the nominative pronoun with a vowel sign,
for example: **مَدَدتُ.** It is permissible to do *idghām* or to write
the letters separately if it is a aorist tense verb in the jussive case
or a verb in the imperative form, for example: **لم یَمُدَّ** **or**
**لم یَمدُد.**

65. If the verb is a quasi-sound verb without increase letters, the weak
letter is a *wāw*, and the second root letter in the aorist tense has a
*kasrah* the first root letter is erased in the aorist tense and the
imperative form, for example: **یَعِدُ.** It is forbidden to erase the
first root letter if the verb has increase letters, the weak letter is a
*yā'*, or the second root letter in the aorist tense does not have a
*kasrah*, for example: **أوجَزَ** which becomes **یُوجِزُ.**

66. If a triliteral hollow verb is connected with a pronoun and its
third root letter has a vowel sign, the second root letter will remain,
for example: **قام.** But, if the third root letter does not have a
vowel sign the second root letter will be erased, for example:
**صُمتُ.**

67. If a defective verb is connected to the plural *wāw* or the second
person *yā'* its third root letter will be erased. In this case, if the
second root letter has a *fathah*, for example: **رَمَی,** it will
remain the same, for example: **رَمَوا.** If the second root letter has
a *dummah*, for example: **یَدعُو** or a *kasrah*, for example:
**یَرمِي,** it will be given a *dummah* with the *wāw* and a *kasrah*
with the *yā'*, for example: **یَدعُونَ.** The third root letter is also
erased if it is an *alif* connected to the feminine *tā'*, for example:
**رَمَت.**

68. If a defective verb is connected to the dual *alif* or *nā* and the
third root letter is an *alif*, it will be changed back to what it
originally was, for example: **رَمَینا.** But, if it is a verb with four
or more letters, the third root letter will be changed into a *yā'*, for
example: **اِهتَدَیتُ.**


