The Conjugation of the Passive Voice
====================================

73. Where does the conjugation of the passive voice refer to?

73. The conjugation of the passive voice refers to the conjugation of
the active voice, except the aorist tense of quasi-sound verbs where the
first root letter is always mentioned, and the preterite tense of
triliteral hollow verbs and five-letter-verbs where the *kasrah* that is
given to the second root letter is transferred to the letter before it.
If the second root letter is a *wāw*, in this case, it will be changed
into a *yā'*, for example: قِیلَ.

74. What is a noun?

75. How many categories of nouns are there?

76. What is a conjugational noun?

77. What is a non-conjugational noun?

78. How many types of conjugational nouns are there?

79. What is the difference between apalistic and derived nouns?

80. What is the principle derived noun?

81. How many derived nouns are there?

74. A noun is that which denotes a meaning which in itself is not
accompanied by time, for example: **کتاب.**

75. There are two categories of nouns: conjugational and
non-conjugational.

76. A conjugational noun is that which is put into the dual, plural,
diminutive, and the possessive forms, for example **مدینة** which is put
into the following forms: **مَدِینتانِ ، مُدُنٌ ، مُدِینَةٌ ، و
مَدَنِيٌّ.**

77. A non-conjugational noun is that which remains in one state, for
example: **مَن** which remains in the same state if it is used with a
masculine or feminine word and if it is in the single, dual, or plural
form.

78. There are two types of mutasaraf nouns: apalistic and derived.

79. An apalistic noun is a noun that which is derived from a verb, for
example: **رَجُلٌ.** A derived noun is that which is taken from a noun,
for example: **مَریضٌ.**

80. The principle derived noun is the infinitive of verbs without
increase letters, but the infinitive of verbs with increase letters are
also derived nouns.

81. There are eight types of derived nouns: active participle nouns,
passive participle nouns, epithets, comparatives/superlatives, the
exaggerated form, adverbial nouns of place, adverbial nouns of time, and
instrumental nouns.


