The Infinitive
==============

82. What is an infinitive?

83. How many categories of infinitives are there?

84. How many categories of infinitives for verbs without increase
letters are there?

85. Are infinitives formed by grammatical rules or are they formed by
usage alone?

86. Do triliteral verbs have prominent infinitive forms?

87. How many infinitives are there for the quadriliteral verb without
increase letters?

88. List the infinitives for verbs with increase letters.

82. An infinitive is that which denotes a state or an action without
denoting its time, for example: **حُسنٌ.**

83. There are three categories of infinitives: infinitives for verbs
without increase letters, infinitives for verbs with increase letters,
and *mīmī* infinitives.

84. There are two categories of infinitives for verbs without increase
letters: triliteral, for example: **فَضل** and quadriliteral, for
example: **زَلزَلة.**

85. All infinitives are formed by grammatical rules except infinitives
for triliteral verbs without increase letters, for there are many forms
which cannot be known except by referring to dictionaries.

86. The prominent infinitive forms (that do not always occur) for
triliteral verbs are as follows: the form **فَعُلَ** usually produces
infinitives in the forms of **فُعُولة ، فَعالة، و فَعَل**, for example:
**سُهُولة.** The form **فَعِلَ** of intransitive verbs usually produces
infinitives in the forms of **فَعَل و فُعُول,** for example: **فَرَح.**
The forms **فَعَلَ و فَعِلَ** of transitive verbs usually produce
infinitives in the form of **فَعل,** for example: **فَهم.**

87. There are two infinitives for quadriliteral verbs without increase
letters: **فَعلَلَة و فِعلال.** The second one follows the rules in
double-lettered verbs, for example: **وَسوَسَ وَسوَسَة و وِسواس** and is
according to how Arabs use them in other than double-lettered verbs, for
example: **دَحرَجَ دَجرَجَة** و **دِحراج.**

88. The infinitives for verbs with increase letters are as follows:

• **فَعَّلَ** becomes **تَفعیل و تَفعیلَة**

• **فاعَلَ** becomes **مُفاعَلَة و فِعال**

• **أفعَلَ** becomes **إفعال**

• **تَفَعَّلَ** becomes **تَفَعُّل**

• **تفاعَلَ** becomes **تَفاعُل**

• **اِفتَعَلَ** becomes **اِفتِعال**

• **اِنفَعَلَ** becomes **اِنفِعال**

• **اِفعَّلَ** becomes **اِفعِلال**

• **اِستَفعَلَ** becomes **اِستِفعال**

• **اِفعَوعَلَ** becomes **اِفعِیعال**

• **تَفَعلَلَ** becomes **تَفَعلُل**

• **اِفعَنلَلَ** becomes **اِفعِنلال**

• **اِفعَلَلَّ** becomes **اِفعِلَّال**


