Preterite, Aorist, and Imperative Verbs
=======================================

5. What is a verb and how many types of verbs are there?

6. What is a preterit tense verb?

7. What is an aorist tense verb?

8. How are aorist tense verbs formed?

9. Is the state of the preterit tense changed if it is a triliteral
verb?

10. Is the state changed if it is not a triliteral verb?

11. What is an imperative verb and how many types of imperative verbs
are there?

12. What is the difference between an imperative by form and an
imperative by a *lām*?

13. How are imperative verbs formed?

14. How is the vowel sign of the *alif* added to the beginning of
imperative verbs determined?

5. A verb is a word that indicates a state, for example **حَسُنَ** or an
action, for example: **یأخُذُ** in the past, present, or future. There
are three types of verbs: preterit, aorist, and imperative.

6. A preterit tense verb is a verb that indicates a state or action that
happened in the past, for example: **کَرُمَ**

7. An aorist tense verb is a verb that indicates a state or action that
is happening in the present or will happen in the future. For example:
**یَحسُنُ**

Point: an aorist tense verb is specifically used for the future when a
*sīn* or **سوف** is added to the beginning of it, for example:
**سأکتُبُ**

Point: It indicates the past when it comes after the jussive **لَم** or
**لَمَّا** , for example: **زُُرتُکَ و لم تکن في البیتِ**

8. An aorist tense verb is formed from the preterite form by adding an
aorist letter to the beginning of it. This letter has a *dummah* if it
is quadriliteral, for example: **یُزَخرِفُ** and it has a *fathah* in
any other case, for example: **یَلمَعُ**

9. If the preterite form is triliteral, the first root letter is given
and *sakūn* and the second root letter is given a *dummah, fathah,* or
*kasrah*. For example: **یَنصُرُ** ، **یَفتَحُ** ، **یَجلِسُ**

10. If the preterite form is not triliteral and it has an additional
*tā'* added to the beginning, it will remain the same, for example:
**یَتَعَلَّمُ.** If this is not the case the glottal stop at the
beginning will be erased and the letter before the last letter will be
given a *kasrah*, for example: **یُرسِلُ**

11. The imperative tense verb is a verb that asks for a state or action
in the future. For example: **اُکتُب.** There are two types of
imperatives: imperative by form and imperative by *lām*.

12. The imperative by form is only used with the second person in the
active voice, for example: **اِجتَهِد.** The imperative by *lām* is used
with everything else in the active or passive voice, for example:
**لِیُکافإ المُجتهِدُ**

13. The imperative form is formed from the aorist tense by erasing the
aorist letter from the beginning. Then, if the letter after the erased
aorist letter has a vowel sign this will be the form, for example:
**تَعَلَّم.** But, if the letter after the erased aorist letter has a
*sakūn* a glottal stop will be added to the beginning of the word, for
example: **اِنتَبِه**

14. The added glottal stop in the imperative form is given a *dummah*
when the aorist tense verb is triliteral and the second root letter has
a *dummah*, for example: **اُنظُر.** It is given a *fathah* when the
verb is quadriliteral, for example: **أکرِم.** It is given a *kasrah*
when any other case, for example: **اِعلَم.** So, when the verb is
quadriliteral the glottal stop is a *qat‛* glottal stop and in every
other case it is a *wasl* glottal stop.


