Adverbial Nouns of Place and Time and Instrumental Nouns
========================================================

105. What are adverbial nouns of time and place?

106. How are adverbial nouns of time and place formed from triliteral
verbs?

107. How are adverbial nouns of time and place formed from verbs with
more than three letters?

108. What is an instrumental noun and how many kinds are there?

105. An adverbial noun of time is a form that indicates the place that
the verb took place in, for example: **مَطبَخ.** An adverbial noun of
time is a form that indicates the time are verb took place, for example:
**مَغرِب.**

106. Adverbial nouns of time and place are formed from triliteral verbs
on the form of **مَفعَل** if the verb is a sound verb whose second root
letter has a *dummah* or a *fathah* in the aorist tense or if the verb
is a defective verb, for example: **مَجمَع.** They are formed on the
form of **مَفعِل** if the second root letter has a *kasrah* in the
aorist tense or is a quasi-sound verb in the preterite tense, for
example: **مَجلِس.** There are rare exceptions to this rule, for
example**:** **مَطلِع و مَغرِب و مَشرِق** whose second root letter has a
*dummah* in the aorist tense.

107. Adverbial nouns of time and place are formed from verbs with more
than three letters in the same way as their passive participle noun or
their *mīmī* infinitive form, for example: **مُنصَرَف.**

108. The instrumental noun is a form that indicates a tool of an action.
They are derived and non-derived. There are no rules for the
instrumental nouns that are not derived, for example: **جَرَس.** The
derived instrumental nouns are formed from transitive triliteral verbs
and there are three forms: **مِفعَل** for example: **مِبرَد, مِفعَلَة**
for example: **مِکنَسَة,** and **مِفعَال** for example: **مِفتَاح.**


