The Structure of a Noun
=======================

109. How many letters does a noun have?

110. Can a noun that has erased letters be less than two letters?

109. Principally, a noun has three letters, for example: **قَلَم,** four
letters, for example: **جَعفَر,** or five letters, for example:
**سَفَرجَل.** Any noun that has less than three letters or more than
five letters has either erased letters or added letters.

110. The erasing that takes place in nouns stops at leaving the word
with two letters, for example: **أبٍ** which is originally **أبوٌ.** It
does not become less than this unless it is a diptote, in this case it
can be one letter, for example the pronoun *tā'* or two letters, for
example: **مَن.**

Maqsur, Mamdud and Manqus Nouns
-------------------------------

111. How many types of declinable nouns are their in respects to the end
of the word?

112. In how many cases is a *maqsūr* noun stemmed from a defective verb?

113. In how many cases is a *mamdūd* noun stemmed from a defective verb?

114. In how many cases is a *manqūs* noun stemmed from a sound verb?

111. There are three types of declinable nouns in respects to the end of
the word. The first kind is a *maqsūr* noun which is a noun that ends in
a necessary *alif*, for example: **الفَتیَ.** The second kind is a
*mamdūd* noun which is a noun that ends in a *hamzah* preceded by an
added *alif*, for example: **سَماء.** The third type is a *manqūs* noun
which is a noun that ends in a necessary *yā'* preceded by a *kasrah*,
for example: **الدّاِعِي.**

112. A *maqsūr* noun stems from a defective verb in four cases: First,
when it is in the form **أفعَل** indicating a color, defect, trickery,
or the superlative/comparative case, for example: **الأحویَ.** Second,
in adverbial nouns of time and place and *mīmī* infinitives, for
example: **المَرمیَ.** Third, in the plural of the form **فِعلَة,** for
example: **الحِلیَ.** Fourth, the infinitive of the intransitive form
**فَعِلَ,** for example: **الرِّضَیَ.**

113. A *mamdūd* noun stems from a defective noun in five cases: First,
in infinitives of verbs with increase letters, for example: **الإعطاء.**
Second, what is formed from the infinitives in the form **تأساء.**
Third, the exaggerated form **فَعَّال,** for example: **بَطَّاء.**
Fourth, the form فِعَال which is made plural in the form**أفعِلَة,** for
example: **رِداء.** Fifth, the infinitives of the form **فَعَلَ** of
verbs which indicate sound or sickness, for example: **المُشاء.**

114. A *mamdūd* noun stems from a sound verb in the female form of
**أفعَل** indicating a color, for example: **الحَمرَاء.** All other
*mamdūd* nouns do not have grammatical rules, for example: **الأناء.**


