Rules Pertaining to the Dual Form
=================================

115. How many types of nouns are there?

116. How is the dual form formed?

117. How is a *maqsūr* noun put into the dual form?

118. How is a *mamdūd* noun put into the dual form?

119. How are nouns whose third root letter becomes erased put into the
dual form?

115. There are three types of nouns: singular (a noun that indicates one
item), dual (a noun that indicates two items), and plural (a noun that
indicates more than two items).

116. The dual form is formed by adding an *alif* and *nūn* to the end of
the singular noun when it is in the nominative case, for example:
**حَضَرَ الرَّجُلانِ** or by adding a *yā'* and *nūn* to the end of the
singular noun when it is in the accusative or genitive cases, for
example: **اِشتریا الکتابَینِ.**

117. A triliteral *maqsūr* noun is put into the dual form returning its
*alif* into its original state, for example **عَصَا** becomes
**عَصَوَان.** If it is formed from a noun with more than three letters
the *alif* is changed into a *yā'*, for example: المُصطفیَ becomes
**المُصطَفَیان.** If the *yā'* of a manqūs noun is erased it is returned
when put into the dual form, for example: **هادٍ** becomes **هادِیان.**

118. If the *mamdūd hamzah* was added to put the noun in the feminine
case it will be changed to a *wāw*, for example: **حَمراء** becomes
**حَمرَاوَان.** If it was an original part of the word it will remain,
for example: **قَرَّاء** becomes **قَرَّاءان.** If it was changed into
an *hamzah* from a *wāw* or a *yā'* it is permissible to do one of the
two previous actions, for example one can say **دُعاءان** or
**دُعاوان.**

119. The third root letter in nouns whose third root letter is erased,
for example **أب** returns when put into the dual form, for example:
**أبَوانِ.** There are exceptions, for example: ید becomes **یدان.**


