Sound Masculine Plural
======================

120. How many types of plurals are there?

121. How is a sound masculine plural formed?

122. Are there exceptions to this rule?

123. Are all nouns pluralized in this way?

124. What is the condition of this plural of names?

125. What are the conditions of this plural of adjectives?

126. What are added to adjectives?

120. There are three types of plurals: sound masculine plurals, sound
feminine plurals, and broken plurals.

121. The general rule regarding sound masculine plurals is that its
single form is not changed and a *wāw* and *nūn* with a *fathah* is
added to the end of the word when it is in the nominative case and a
*yā'* and *nūn* with a *fathah* is added to the end of the word when it
is in the accusative or genitive cases. For example: **مُرسَلون َ و
مُرسَلینَ.**

122. The exceptions to this rule are: *manqūs* nouns; their *yā'* is
erased and the letter before the *wāw* is given a *dummah* or the letter
before the *yā'* is given a *kasrah*, for example: **هادُونَ,** *maqsūr*
nouns; their *alif* is erased and the letter before the *wāw* or *yā'*
keeps its *fathah* indicating the *alif*, for example: **مصطَفَونَ,**
and *mamdūd* nouns; which undertake the same change as is given to it in
the dual form, for example: **بَنَّاؤُونَ.**

123. The only nouns that are pluralized in this form are masculine
proper nouns with intellects and their characteristics.

124. The condition for names is that they do not have the feminine *tā'*
and are not compound names, for example: **سَعیدونَ.**

125. The conditions of adjectives are that they do not have a *tā'* that
can be used in a feminine case, they do not indicate the superlative or
comparative form, they are not in the form **أفعل فَعلاء,** they are not
in the form **فَعلان فَعلیَ,** and they are not a word whose usage is
the same in the masculine and feminine cases, for example: **عالِمونَ.**

126. The relative noun is added to adjectives due to their similarities,
for example: **لُبنانیُّونَ.**


