Broken Plurals
==============

130. What is a broken plural?

131. How many types of broken plurals are there?

132. What do you understand from a plural of a plural?

133. Can a plural be made plural?

134. How can a plural be made plural?

135. What is a quasi-plural noun?

136. What is a quasi-plural?

137. Are quasi-plural nouns and quasi-plural nouns made plural?

130. A broken plural is a plural that changes the singular form of the
noun, either by adding letters, for example: **رجال** the plural of
**رَجُل,** or by erasing letters, for example: **رُسُل** the plural of
**رَسُول,** or by changing the vowel signs, for example: **أسُد** the
plural of **أسَد.**

131. There are two types of broken plurals: a plural of paucity, which
is a plural that indicates three to ten, and a plural of multitude,
which is a plural that indicates three or more. There are four forms for
the plural of paucity: **أفعُل,** for example: **أنفُس,** **أفعال,** for
example: **أجداد,** **أفعِلَة,** for example: **أعمدَة,** and
**فِعلَة,** for example **فِتیَة.** Any other form used as a broken
plural is a plural of multitude and if these forms are used in any other
way they are being used figuratively.

132. The form of a plural of a plural is any plural where after there
are two letters with vowel signs after an added **alif**, for example:
**دَراهِم,** or if a *yā'* falls in between three letters, for example:
**ریاحِین.**

133. A plural is made plural to increase the number of whatever it is
making plural, for example**:الأیادي** which is the plural of **الأیدي**
which is the plural of**الید.**

134. A plural is made plural in the same way that a singular noun is
made plural according to its form, therefore the plural of **أکلُب**
would be **أکالِب** or the plural of **أظفار** would be **أظافیر.**
These are the only two forms that are used to make a plural plural.

135. A quasi-plural noun is that which indicates a group, not an
instance from the group. For example: **شَعب.**

136. A quasi-plural is that which indicates a group, the difference
between this and a quasi-sound noun is by a *tā'*, for example
**تُفَّاحَة,** or by a *yā'*, for example: **إفرَنجي.**

137. A quasi-plural noun and a quasi-plural is made plural in the same
way as singular nouns according to their forms, as an example the plural
of **قوم** becomes **أقوام.**


