Rules of Broken Plurals
=======================

138. Are there rules for broken plurals or not?

139. In how many places are there rules for broken plurals in regards to
nouns?

140. In how many places are there rules for broken plurals in regards to
adjectives?

138. Most of the time there are no rules for broken plurals except for a
few forms of nouns and adjectives.

139. There are rules in the following forms of nouns on how they are
made into broken plurals:

• **فَعل، فُعل، فَعل، فَعَل و فَعِل** become **أفعال,** for example:
**قُفل** becomes **أقفال.**

• **فِعلَة** becomes **فِعَل,** for example: **عِبرَة** becomes
**عِبَر**

• **فُعلَة** becomes **فُعَل,** for example: **صُورَة** becomes
**صُوَر**

• Any triliteral noun where an *alif* or *wāw* is added after its first
root letter becomes **فَوَاعِل,** for example: **خاتَم** becomes
**خَواتِم**

• **أفعل** (regardless of what vowel sign its *hamzah* or second root
letter have) becomes **أفاعِل,** for example: **إصبَع** becomes
**أصابِع**

• Any feminine noun whose third letter is a long vowel becomes
**فَعائل** , for example: **کنیسة** becomes **کَنائس**

• All quadriliteral nouns where a long vowel is added before its last
letter become **فَعالیل,** for example: **عُصفور** becomes **عَصافیر**

140. There are rules in the following forms of adjectives on how they
are made into broken plurals:

• **أفعل** **فَعلاء** becomes **فُعل,** for example: **أخضَر** becomes
**خُضر**

• Comparative/superlative forms become **أفاعِل,** for example **أکبر**
becomes **أکابِر**

• Defective verbs in the form **فاعل** become **فُعَلَة,** for example
**رامٍ** becomes **رُماة,** and hollow verbs in the same form that
indicate making or building something become **فَعَلَة,** for example:
**حاک** becomes **حَیَکَة,** and all other words in this form become
فُ**عَّل أو فُعّال و فَعَلَة و فُعَلاء**

• **فاعِلة** becomes **فَواعل** **or** **فُعَّل,** for example:
**عاذِلة** becomes **عَواذِل و عُذَّل**

• **فَعیل** if it has the meaning of an accusative indicating a form of
tribulation becomes **فَعلیَ** for example: **جریح** becomes **جَرحیَ**

• **فَعیل** when it means an actor becomes **أفعال,** for example:
**شَریف** becomes **أشراف,** if it indicates a character trait it
becomes **فُعَلاء و فعال,** for example: **کَریم** becomes **کُرماء و
کرام,** and if it is a double-lettered word or a defective word it
becomes **أفعلاء,** for example: **شقي** becomes **أشقیاء**

• **فَعُول** meaning an actor becomes **فُعَل** or **أفعال,** for
example: **صَبور** becomes **صُبَر**

• **فَعلان فَعلی**َ becomes **فُعالی** or **فِعال,** for example:
**سکران** becomes **سُکاری**


