Possessive Nouns
================

159. What is a possessive noun?

160. What is the ruling of possessive noun?

161. How is a word ending in a *hamzah* made into a possessive noun?

162. How is a word ending in an *alif* made into a possessive noun?

163. How is a word ending in a *yā'* made into a possessive noun?

164. How is a word ending in a doubled *yā'* made into a possessive
noun?

165. How is the form **فعیلة** made into a possessive noun?

166. How is a triliteral noun whose third root letter has been erased
made into a possessive noun?

159. A possessive noun is a noun where a doubled *yā'* is added to the
end it in order to relate it to something, for example: **لبنان**
becomes **لبنانيّ.**

160. The ruling of a possessive noun is that the feminine *tā'* and the
signs of the dual and plural forms should be erased from the word and
the letter that comes before the possessive *yā'* is always given a
*kasrah*, for example: **عراقین** becomes **عراقيّ.**

161. If the noun ends in a *hamzah* and one wants to make it into a
possessive noun there are three cases: first, if it is a feminine
*hamzah* it is changed to a *wāw*, for example: **بیضاء** becomes
**بَیضاويّ.** Second, if it is a replacement of a weak letter one can
either change it to a *wāw* or have it remain as it is, for example:
**سَماء** becomes **سَماويّ** or **سَمائيّ.** Third, if it is an
original letter it is not changed, for example: **قرّاء** becomes
**قرّائيّ.**

162. If the noun ends in an *alif* and one wants to make it into a
possessive noun there are three cases: first, if the *alif* is the third
letter it is changed into a *wāw*, for example: **فتیَ** becomes
**فَتَويّ.** Second, if it is the fourth letter and the second letter of
the word does not have a vowel sign it is changed into a *wāw*, for
example: **معنیَ** becomes **مَعنَوِيّ.** Third, the *alif* is erased if
it is the fifth letter or greater, for example: **خُزَامیَ** becomes
**خُزاميّ.**

163. If the noun ends in a *yā'* and one wants to make it into a
possessive noun the *yā'* is changed into a *wāw* and the letter before
it is given a *fathah*, for example: **الشجيّ** becomes **الشَجَويّ.**
The exception is if the *yā'* comes after a sound letter without a vowel
sign, in this case it is not changed, for example: **ظَبي** becomes
**ظَبیيّ.**

164. If the noun ends in a doubled *yā'* and one wants to make it into a
possessive noun there are three cases: first, if it is after one letter,
the second *yā'* is changed into a *wāw* and the first is given its
original form with a *fathah*, for example: حيّ becomes حَیَويّ. Second,
if it is after two letters, the first *yā'* is erased and the second is
changed into a *wāw* and the letter before it is given a *fathah*, for
example: **نَبيّ** becomes **نَبَوِيّ.** Third, if it is after three or
more letters the word remains the same, for example: **کرسي** becomes
**کرسيٌ.**

165. If the noun is in the form **فعیلة** and one wants to make it into
a possessive noun the *yā'* is erased and the letter before it is given
a *fathah*, for example: **مدینة** becomes **مَدَنيّ.** The exception to
this rule is if the second root letter is weak or doubled, in this case
the *yā'* is not erased, for example: *طَوِیلة* becomes **طَویليّ.**

166. If the noun is a trilateral noun whose third letter is erased and
two letters remain and one wants to make it into a possessive noun the
erased letter returns in the possessive form, for example: **أب**
becomes **أبَويّ.** If a feminine *tā'* replaces the erased letter, it
will be erased and the original letter will be brought back, for
example: **سنة** becomes **سنويّ.**


