Declination
===========

173. What is declination?

174. Are all nouns declinable?

175. What verbs are declinable?

176. What are the names of the declinable states?

177. How many types of declinable words are there?

178. What are vowel-declinable words?

179. What are lettered declinable words, representing vowel-signed ones?

180. What are the five nouns and how are they declined?

181. How is the dual form declined?

182. How is the sound masculine plural declined?

183. What are the five verbs and how are they declined?

173. Declination is the changing of the end of nouns and verbs due the
change in their state, for example: **قَدِمَ الغائبُ و رأیتُ الغائبَ و
سلّمتُ علی الغائبِ.**

174. All nouns are declinable except for certain nouns which will be
discussed in the indeclination section.

175. The aorist tense from among the verbs is declinable except in the
feminine *nūn* or the *nūn* of emphasis is added to it.

176. The names of the states of declination are: nominative, accusative
and subjunctive, genitive, and jussive. The nominative, subjunctive, and
jussive states are for verbs and the nominative, accusative, and
genitive states are for nouns.

177. There are two types of declinable words: vowel-declinable words and
lettered-declinable words.

178. There are four types of vowel-declinable words: single nouns,
broken plurals, feminine sound plurals, and aorist tense verbs without
clear nominative pronouns. All of these have a *dummah* in the
nominative state, a *fathah* in the accusative or subjunctive state
except the feminine sound plural which has a *kasrah*, a *kasrah* in the
genitive case except for words that do not conjugate which have a
*fathah*, and a *sakūn* in the jussive case except for verbs whose last
letter is weak, in this case the letter is erased, for example: **لم**
**یدعُ.**

179. There are four lettered declinable words: the five nouns, the dual
form, the masculine sound plurals, and the five verbs.

180. The five nouns are: **أبٌ و أخٌ و حَمٌ و فَمٌ و ذُو.** The
condition on **فَمٌ** is that its *mīm* is erased. All of these nouns
are given a *wāw* in the nominative state, for example: **جاء**
**أبوه,** an *alif* in the accusative state, for example: **رأیتُ**
**أخاه,** and a *yā'* in the genitive state, for example: **مَررتُ بذي
أدَبٍ.**

181. The dual form is given an *alif* in the nominative state, for
example: **جَلَسَ الرّجُلانِ** and a *yā'* in the accusative and
genitive states, for example: **أحضَرتُ الغائبَینِ و ذَهَبتُ
بالحاصرَینِ.**

182. A sound masculine plural is given a *wāw* in the nominative state,
for example: **وَصَلَ القادمونَ** and a *yā'* in the accusative and
genitive states, for example: **اِستَقبَلنا القادمونَ و رَحَّبنا**
**بالقادمونَ.**

183. The five verbs are the aorist tense verbs that are connected to the
dual *alif*, the plural *wāw*, or the second person *yā'*, for example:
**یَفعَلان و تَفعَلان و یَفعَلون و تَفعَلون و** **تَفعَلین.** The *nūn*
remains in the nominative state and is erased in the subjunctive and
jussive states, for example: **لم یَذهَبا و لن** **تَذهَبي.**


