Implied Declinable Signs
========================

184. When are the signs of declination implied?

185. When is the *wāw* implied?

186. When is the nominative *nūn* implied?

187. When is the *sakūn* implied?

184. There are four cases when the signs of declination are implied:
declinable nouns that end in an *alif*, for example: **الفتیَ,** nouns
that are prefixed to a first person *yā'*, for example: **غلامي,**
declinable words that end in a *wāw* preceded by a *dummah* or a *yā'*
preceded by a *kasrah*, for example: **یَدعُو** **القاصي,** and in words
whose last letter is erased, for example: **قاضٍ.** All vowel signs are
implied when the word ends in an *alif* because an *alif* cannot take a
vowel sign. The vowel signs are implied in nouns that are prefixed to a
first person *yā'* because the last letter has to receive a *kasrah* in
relation to the *yā'*. The vowel sign is implied in the third case due
to difficulty in pronunciation. A *fathah* is able to come in the third
case, for example: **لن** **یَدعُوَ** **القاصيَ,** a *wāw* and *yā'* can
receive vowel signs if they are preceded by a letter without a vowel
sign, for example: **دَلوٌ,** if the last letter is erased the *dummah*
and *kasrah* are implied while the *fathah* remains, for example:
**رأیتُ** **قاضیاً.**

185. The *wāw* is implied in masculine sound plurals in the nominative
state which are prefixed to a first person *yā'*, for example: **جاءَ**
**مُکرِميَّ.** We would say that this word is in the nominative state
and its sign is a *wāw* that has turned into a **yā'** because of
incorporation.

186. The nominative *nūn* is implied in two cases: if it comes before a
*nūn* of emphasis, for example: **هل** **تُکرِمانَّ** or if it comes
before the *nūn* of separation, for example: **هل** **تُکرِمُوني.**

187. The *sakūn* is implied if it follows a letter without a vowel sign,
for example: **احترام** **الشیوخَ.** In this case the *mīm* is given a
*kasrah* so two letters without vowel signs will not occur together.


