Conjugational and Non-Conjugational Declinable Nouns
====================================================

188. What is a conjugational declinable noun?

189. What is a non-conjugational declinable noun?

190. How many types of nouns are there that do not conjugate?

191. When is a proper noun non-conjugational?

192. What condition makes an adjective non-conjugational?

193. When is a plural non-conjugational?

194. What condition makes a noun ending in a feminine *alif*
non-conjugational?

195. When does a non-conjugational noun receive a *kasrah*?

188. A conjugational declinable noun is a noun which accepts nunation
and all vowel signs, for example: **جاءنا رجلٌ عالِمٌ.**

189. A non-conjugational declinable noun is a noun that does not accept
a *kasrah* or nunation; it is limited in accepting a *dummah* and a
*fathah* only, for example: **قَدِمَ** **إبرهیمُ** و **سافَرتُ** مَعَ
**یُوسفَ.**

190. The nouns which do not conjugate are: singular proper nouns and
singular adjectives, plurals in the forms **مَفاعِل** and **مَفاعِیل,**
and any noun that ends in the feminine *alif*.

191. Proper nouns are non-conjugational in six cases: First, if it ends
in an additional *alif* and *nūn*, for example: **عثمان.** Second, if it
is in a form similar to a verb, for example: **أحمَد.** Third, if it is
an insignificant compound, for example: **بَعلَبَکَّ.** Fourth, if it is
feminine, be it grammatically **(مُعاویة),** real **(مریم),** or
grammatically and real **(وردة).** Fifth, if it is a non-Arabic word
consisting of more than three letters, for example: **إبراهیم.** Sixth,
if it is transformed, for example: **عُمَر**which is transformed from
**عامر.**

193. Plurals become non-conjugational when they have the following
forms: **مَفاعِل** for example: **مَساجِد** or **مَفاعِیل** for example:
**مَصابِیح.**

194. *Maqsūr* and *mamdūd* nouns ending in the feminine *alif* are
non-conjugational whether they are singular or plural or proper or
adjective on the condition that the *alif* is additional, not an
original letter of the word and that it has four letters or more, for
example: **سَلمیَ.**

195. A non-conjugational noun is but in the genitive form by giving it a
*kasrah* when it is the compliment of a prefixed noun or given the
*alif-lam* prefix, for example: **مَرَرتُ** **بأفضَلِ العُلماءِ.**


