Indeclinable Words
==================

196. What is an indeclinable word and what are its signs?

197. How many types of indeclinable words are there?

198. Which nouns are necessarily indeclinable?

199. How many types of nouns are there that are indeclinable for a
reason?

200. What are intended vocatives indeclinable on?

201. What is the subject of a *lā* that denies a whole genius
indeclinable on?

202. What are compound numbers indeclinable on?

203. What are the six directions indeclinable on?

204. What verbs are necessarily indeclinable?

205. What are preterite tense verbs indeclinable on?

206. What are imperative verbs indeclinable on?

207. What verbs are there that are indeclinable for a reason?

208. Are the signs of indeclinable words ever implied?

196. An indeclinable word is a word whose end does not change no matter
where it is in the sentence, for example: **مَن رأیتَ.** It has four
signs: a *dummah, fathah*, *kasrah*, and *sakūn*. The *dummah* and
*kasrah* are specific to nouns, for example: **حَیثُ** , and
prepositions, for example: **مُنذُ.** The *fathah* and *sakūn* are seen
both in nouns, for example: **أینَ** , verbs, for example: **قامَ,** and
prepositions, for example: **لَیتَ.**

197. There are two types of indeclinable words: necessary indeclinable
words, which are indeclinable in every state and words that are
indeclinable for a reason which will be made declinable when the reason
disappears.

198. The nouns which are necessarily indeclinable are: personal
pronouns, demonstrative pronouns, conjuncts, conditional nouns,
interrogative nouns, some metonymies, some adverbial nouns of time and
place, verbal nouns, and sounds.

199. There are four types of nouns which become indeclinable for a
reason: First; intended vocatives, second; the subject of a *lā* that
denies a whole genius, third; compound numbers, and fourth; the six
directions and similar words.

200. If an implied vocative is singular it will become indeclinable on a
vocalized *dummah*, for example: **یا رجلُ** or an implied *dummah*, for
example: **یا فتیَ.** If it is in the dual form it becomes indeclinable
on an *alif*, for example: **یا مُؤمنانِ.** If it is a masculine sound
plural it becomes indeclinable on a *wāw*, for example: **یا مؤمنونَ.**

201. If the subject of a *lā* that denies a whole genius is indefinite
and singular (not a compliment to a prefixed noun or similar to a
compliment to a prefixed noun) it is always made indeclinable on a
*fathah*, for example: **یا رَجُلَ في الدَّارِ.** If it is in the dual
form or a masculine sound plural it is made indeclinable on a *yā'*, for
example: **لا عالِمَینِ و لا عالِمِینَ في المدینة.**

202. If the compound number is inbetween 11 and 19, excluding 12, both
of its parts are made indeclinable on a *fathah*, for example: **جاءنی
خمسَةَ عَشَرَ رَجُلاً.**

203. The six directions, which are:، **تحتُ ، یمینُ ، شمالُ ، خلفُ و
قُدَّامُ فوقُ** and whatever else has their meanings, for example:
**قَبلُ ، بَعدُ ، أولُ ، دونُ ، و حسبُ,** are all made indeclinable on a
*dummah*.

204. Verbs that are necessarily indeclinable are the preterite tense and
the imperative.

205. The preterite tense is made indeclinable on a *fathah*. Hence, it
is correct to say that if a plural *wāw* or nominative pronoun is added
to it, it would have an implied *fathah* due to the vowel sign in
congruence with the *wāw* in the first case and the *sakūn* in the
second.

206. An imperative is made indeclinable on a *sakūn* if the feminine
*nūn* is added to it, for example: **اِحفَظنَ** or its last letter is
sound and there is nothing added to it, for example: **اِحفَظ.** It is
made indeclinable by erasing its last letter if it is weak and nothing
is added to it, for example: **اُدنُ.** It is made indeclinable by
erasing the *nūn* if it is connected to the dual *alif*, the plural
*wāw*, or the second person *yā'*, for example: **اِحفظا.** It is made
indeclinable on a *fathah* if it is connected to a *nūn* of emphasis,
for example: **اِحفَظَنَّ.**

207. The verbs which are made indeclinable for a reason are the aorist
tense verb and no other. It is made indeclinable on a *sakūn* if the
feminine *nūn* is added to it, for example: **یَذهَبنَ.** It is made
indeclinable on a *fathah* if a *nūn* of emphasis is added to it, for
example: **لِیَحفَظَنَّ.** If the aorist tense verb is not in these two
cases then it is declinable.

208. Indeclinable signs are implied just like declinable signs are,
either because another sign takes its place or because there is a reason
that it cannot be mentioned, for example in vocatives, whether they be
indeclinable before the vocation (ی**ا حِذامِ)** or declinable before it
**(یا یحییَ),** or in aorist tense verbs ending in an *alif* (**دَعا)**,
or the subject of a *lā* that denies a whole genius (**لا فتیَ هُنا).**


