Adverbial Nounds
================

238. What is an adverbial noun?

239. How many kinds of adverbial nous are there?

240. How many kinds of declinable adverbial nouns?

241. How many kinds of adverbial nouns of time are there?

242. How many kind s of adverbial nouns of place are there?

243. How many indeclinable adverbial nouns are there?

244. What are the rulings of *haythu, ladun,* and *laday*?

245. What are the rulings of *idh*?

246. What are the rulings of *ams*?

247. What are the rulings of *mudh* and *mundh*?

248. What are the rulings of *qat, limā,* and *alān*?

249. What are the rulings of *anna, ayyān,* and *mata*?

238. An adverbial noun is that which takes the meaning of 'in' in
places, for example**:حیث** and in time, for example**:مَتیَ** .

239. There are two types of adverbial nouns: declinable and
indeclinable.

240. There are two types of declinable adverbial nouns: adverbial nouns
of place and adverbial nouns of time.

241. There are three types of adverbial nouns of time: unspecific, which
denotes an unspecific time period, for example**:حین** , specific, which
denotes a specific time period, for example**:یومُ** **الجُمُعة** , and
numerical, for example:**ثَلاثةُ أیَّام** .

242. There are two types of adverbial nouns of place: unspecific, as in
the six directions and the likes, for example**:فَوق** , and limited,
for example**:البَیت** .

243. There are sixteen indeclinable adverbial nouns: six for place
(**حیثُ ، لَدُن ، لَدیَ ، أینَ ، هُنا و ثَمَّ** ), nine for time **(إذ ،
أمس ، مُذ ، مُنذُ ، قطّ ، لمّا ، أیّان ، متیَ و الآن**), and one for
both time and place **(أنَّیَ).**

244. **حیثُ** is not prefixed to anything except a sentence, for
example**:تاجِر** **حَیثُ** **أخوکَ** **مُقیمٌ** . **لَدُن** and
**لَدیَ** puts the noun that compliments them when they are prefixed
into the genitive case, for example**:جَلَستُ لدیَ الصّدیق** .

245. **إذ** usually is prefixed to: a preterit tense verb, for
example**:إذ جِئتُم جِئنا** , to a nominal sentence, for example:**إذ
هُوَ في البَیتِ** , or to a aorist tense verb, for example**:إذ یَقولُ
لِصاحِبِه لا تَحزَن إنَّ اللهَ مَعَنا.**

246. If **أمس** is intended to mean the day before it is given a
*kasrah*, for example: **أمس** **الدَّابرُ** **لا** **یعود,** and if it
is intended to mean a few days before, an *alif* and *lām* is added to
it, or is prefixed it is given the normal vowel signs, for example:
**کُلُّ یومٍ** **یصیرُ أمساً***.*

247. **مُذ** and **مُنذُ** are sometimes prefixed to a singular noun,
for example: **ما** **رأیتُهُ مُذ یوم الأحد** and sometimes to a
sentence, for example:**ما صادفتُهُ** **مُنذُ تَفارَقنا**.

248. **قطّ** is an adverbial noun to emphasize the preterit tense in
time and does not come expect after a negative preterit tense verb, for
example**:ما فَعَلتُ هذا قَطٌّ . لمّا**is only prefixed to a sentence in
the preterit tense, for example**:مّا** **تلاقیا** **اتَّفقا** *.*
**الآن** is an adverbial noun for the present.

249. **أنَّیَ** is an adverbial noun of place meaning **أینَ,** for
example**:أنَّیَ** **تجلِس** **أجلِس** , or meaning from where, for
example**:أنَّیَ لکَ هذا** , or is an adverbial meaning of time, for
example**:أنَّیَ جِئتَ** *.* **أیَّان و متی** are adverbial nouns of
time.


