Cardinal Numbers
================

253. What is a number?

254. How many foundational cardinal numbers are there?

255. What are the rulings of single numbers with the masculine or
feminine word they are numbering?

256. What is the ruling of a compound number with the word it is
numbering?

257. Are compound numbers declinable or indeclinable?

258. What are the rulings of decimal and coupled numbers?

259. What is the ruling of the word that comes after a number?

260. What is the case of a numbered word?

253. A number indicates the amount of the numbered thing; cardinal, or
the order of it; ordinal.

254. There are four types of cardinal numbers: singular, with are one to
ten, a hundred and a thousand, compound, which are eleven to nineteen,
decimal, which are twenty to ninety by tens, and coupled which are
twenty one to ninety nine (not including the decimals).

255. Singular cardinal numbers: when between three and ten accept the
feminine *tā'* when the numbered object is masculine and do not accept
it when the numbered object is feminine, for example**:ثلاثةُ رجالٍ و
ثلاثُ فَتیَاتٍ,** the numbers one and two are masculine with a masculine
numbered object and feminine with a feminine, for example: **رجلٌ**
**واحدٌ و امرأتانِ اثنتانِ,** the numbers one hundred and a thousand are
the same when the numbered object is masculine or feminine, for example:
**مائة صبيٍ و ألف قتاةٍ.**

256. Compound numbers: with a masculine numbered object - the first part
is feminine and the second masculine, for example: **ثلاثةَ** **عَشَرَ**
**رجلاً,** with a feminine numbered object - the first part is masculine
and the second feminine, for example: **ثلاثَ** **عَشرة** **امرأةً.**
Eleven and twelve are exceptions; they are masculine with a masculine
numbered object and feminine with a feminine, for example: **اثنا**
**عَشَرَ** **رجلاً.**

257. Both parts of a compound number are indeclinable with a *fathah*
except the number eleven and twelve, whose first part is declinable as a
dual form whose *nūn* is erased when prefixed and its second part is
indeclinable, for example**:عِندي اثنا عَشَرَ قلماً** **و** **اثنتا
عَشرَةَ** **دَواةً.** There are two points to pay attention to: One, the
*shīn* of the number ten (feminine form) has a *fathah* when it is
singular and a *sakūn* when it is in a compound number. Two, the *shīn*
of the number ten (masculine form) has a *sakūn* when it is singular and
a *fathah* when it is in a compound number.

258. Decimal numbers remain in the same form when used with a masculine
or feminine numbered word, for example**:عِشرونَ** **رجلاً** **و**
**عِشرونَ** **امرأةً.** The first part of coupled numbers becomes
masculine and feminine like singular numbers and the second part is the
same with masculine or feminine numbered words like decimal numbers.

259. There are two cases for the noun that comes after a number:
genitive, in the plural form between the numbers three and ten, for
example**:أربعة** **رجالٍ,** or in the singular form with the numbers
one hundred and one thousand, for example**:مائة** **رجلٍ,** or
accusative in the singular form between the numbers eleven and ninety
nine, for example: **خمسة عَشَرَ** **قَلماً.**

260. The numbered word is always singular except if it is in the
genitive case after a number between three and ten, where in this case
it is plural, as you have seen.


