Conjugation of A Verb With Its Pronoun
======================================

32. What happens to a verb if it is related to a mentioned noun or an
implied nominative pronoun?

33. Does a verb change if it is related to a clear nominative pronoun?

34. What is the difference between an implied pronoun and a clear
pronoun?

35. How many clear connected nominative pronouns are there?

36. What happens to the *tā'*?

37. When is a *nā, alif,* or *yā'* used?

38. When is a *wāw* or *nūn* used?

39. When is the pronoun implied?

40. When is it permissible to imply a pronoun?

41. When is it obligatory to imply a pronoun?

42. When is it obligatory to imply a pronoun, being an exception to the
rule?

43. Does a verb change with accusative or genitive pronouns?

32. A verb does not change if it is related to a mentioned word or an
implied nominative pronoun, for example: **قامَ الخَطیبُ فَتَکَلَّمَ.**

33. The end of a verb should be given a *sakūn* if connected to a clear
nominative pronoun of a sound letter, for example: **دَرَستُ.** The end
of a verb should be given a vowel sign similar to that of the clear
nominative pronoun of a weak letter, for example a *dummah* should be
placed before a *wāw*, as in **دَرَسُوا,** a *fathah* should be placed
before an *alif*, as in **یَدرُسَانِ,** and a *kasrah* should be placed
before a *yā'*, as in **تَدرُسِینَ.**

34. A clear pronoun is a pronoun that is written and spoken, for
example: **أنتَ.** An implied pronoun is tacitly intended, for example:
**اِفهَم.** In this example a 'you' is implied in the verb.

35. There are six clear connected nominative pronouns**:** **التاء ، نا
، الألف ، الیاء ، الواو و النون المخفَّفة.** These pronouns are either
agents or the subject of the predications and are only connected to
verbs.

36. The **التاء** has a *dummah* when it is a singular and plural first
person pronoun, for example: **شَرِبتُ.** It has a *fathah* when it is a
masculine singular second person pronoun, for example: **شَرِبتَ.** It
has a *kasrah* when it is a feminine singular second person pronoun in
the preterite tense, for example: **شَرِبتِ.** It also has a *dummah*
when connected to the dual or plural signs of the second person pronouns
and the feminine plural third person pronoun, for example:
**شَرِبتُما.**

37. The **نا** is used for the dual and plural first person pronouns,
for example: **شَرِبنا.** The **الألف** is used for all dual pronouns,
for example: **یَشرَبانِ.** The **الیاء** is used in the aorist tense
verbs and in commands, for example: **اِشرَبي.**

38. The **الواو** is used for plural masculine beings with intellects,
for example: **شَرِبُوا.** The **النون المخفَّفة** is used for plural
feminine beings with intellects, for example: **شَرِبنَ.**

39. A pronoun is implied in the preterite and aorist tense with the
singular third person pronoun, for example: **المسافرُ** **انطَلَقَ.**
It is implied in the aorist tense and command with the singular
masculine second person pronoun, for example: **تَسألُ.** It is also
implied in the aorist tense with all first person pronouns, for example:
**أسألُ.**

40. It is permissible to imply a pronoun with third person pronouns.

41. It is obligatory to imply a pronoun with first person pronouns and
singular second person pronouns.

42. It is obligatory to imply a pronoun, as an exception to the rule, in
exceptive verbs, verbs of wonder, comparative/superlative verbs, in the
predicate of an appropinquation verb except with the predicate of
**عسیَ.** They are not implied when they are in the nominative state.

43. A verb does not change when connected to accusative and genitive
pronouns.


