The Awaited Saviour
===================

The awaited Mahdi, Muhammad ibn Hasan (Peace be on him) was born during
the lifetime of his father. He is in occultation, but is alive and will
continue to live so long as the world lasts, for an infallible Imam must
exist at all times. It is an agreed opinion of the Ummah that there
could be no time when there would not be a master, either known and
manifest or hidden and concealed. Moreover, Allah's grace is obligatory
at all times. The Imam is His grace and so his existence is also
obligatory.

His long life is not a far-fetched idea, for during the past ages many
other persons such as Prophet Shu'ayb, Noah, Luqman, Khizr and Isa
(Jesus) (Peace be on them) and Iblis (the Devil) and Dajjal (the
Imposter) lived three thousand years or more. Moreover long life is
possible, and whatever is possible, is within the power of Allah.

Imam Mahdi (Peace be On him) is not expected to have concealed himself
of his own accord, for he is infallible and he cannot refrain from doing
what is obligatory. Nor can be ordered by Allah to conceal himself, for
Allah being Just and Judicious would not order him to do a wrong thing.
Obviously it is improper for an Imam to hide himself from the eyes and
to deprive the people from being benefited by his instructions.
Therefore his occultation is due to the abundance of the enemies and the
infidels and the paucity of the supporters.

The Mahdi must reappear, for the Holy Prophet has said: â€œEven if only
one hour of the world was left, Allah would lengthen that hour until a
man of my progeny would appear. His name would be the same as my name
and his patronymic (kunyah) would be the same as my patronymic. He would
fill the earth with justice and fair-play as it would be filled with
tyranny and oppression. It would be obligatory for everybody to follow
him.

Certain benefits continue to accrue from the Imam even during his
occultation in the same way as the sun is beneficial even when it is
under the cloud or a lamp is beneficial even when it is behind a
curtain.


