Monotheism
==========

Allah is One in the sense that He has no partner in His Divinity. He has
said:

***Say: He is Allah, the One.***[^1]

If He had a partner, there would have been conflict between the two and
that would have caused disorder, as Allah has said: Had there been
several gods in the heavens and the earth, they would have been
disordered.[^2]

Abstract
--------

Allah is not composed of anything. If He had been made up of several
parts, He would have depended on them, and a dependent cannot be
self-existing.

Immaterial
----------

Allah is not a body, nor a quality nor an essence, for if He had been
any such thing, He would not have been self-existing and would have
required a maker. And that is impossible.

Invisible
---------

Allah cannot be seen by the sense of sight, neither in this world, nor
in the next, for He is Abstract. Everything visible must have a body and
a direction while Allah is free from them. He has said:

***You will never see Me***[^3]

He has also said:

***“Eyesight does not perceive Him***[^4]

Unchangeable
------------

Allah is not subject to any eventualities, or else He would have become
transient, but His transience is impossible.

Non-Incarnation
---------------

Allah can not be described as incarnate, for that would mean the
combination of the self-existing with what is not self-existing and that
is impossible.

Non-Combination
---------------

Allah does not combine with anything else, for combination turns two
things into one without any addition or subtraction and that is
impossible. Nothing that is impossible can be attributed to Allah.

His Attributes Are His 'Self'
-----------------------------

Allah does not have any additional concepts or attributes in the sense
that He is not knowing with knowledge and He is not Able with ability,
for if He had any additional attributes, He would have been subject to
eventualities if these attributes originated in time, and there would
have been several eternal and ever-lasting beings if these attributes
had no beginning. Both these things are impossible. More-over, in this
case the Self-existing Being will be in need of His attributes supposed
to be distinct from Him and thus will no longer remain self-existing,
which is absurd.

Independent
-----------

Allah is Independent in the sense that He is not in need of anyone or
anything else, for being Self-Existing He cannot be needy. Allah has no
direction and no place, for anyone having direction and place is in need
of them. Further, it has proved that Allah is not an organism, nor is He
an essence nor a quality. Therefore He does not have a place or a
direction.

Absolute
--------

Allah does not have a child or a wife for it has been proved that He is
not in need of anyone else. Further all that is besides Him is not
Self-Existing. Then how can a non-self-existing being become
self-existing? The Holy Qur'an says:

***There is not anything like Him.***[^5]

***Jesus is like Adam. Allah created him from clay.***[^6]

[^1]: Surah al-Ikhlas, 112:1

[^2]: Surah al-Anbiya’, 21:22

[^3]: Surah al-A’raf, 7:143

[^4]: Surah al-An’am, 6:104

[^5]: Surah ash-Shura, 42:11

[^6]: Surah Aal-e-Imran, 3:59


