Foreword
========

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***

In order to fully grasp the spirit of Qur'anic injunctions and to
thoroughly understand and appreciate the teachings of Islam with a view
to translating it into action, one has to take recourse to the holy
Qur'an and Sunnah. Unless any Islamic commandment is viewed in the light
of both the holy Qur'an and the holy Prophet's Hadith, its real purport
and its true spirit and exact fore corners of implementation cannot be
truly made known.

The institution of Hadith is a powerful instrument for the
interpretation of Islamic injuctions. Barring this instrument any claim
to understand and appreciate the Islamic teachings is an empty slogan
and unfruitful attempt. History can bear witness for authenticity or
otherwise of this claim.

Unfortunately such a powerful instrument has been very ruthlessly dealt
with immediately after the demise of the holy Prophet Muhammad (P) by
the so called rulers of the Muslim Common­ wealth. For obvious reasons
the rulers suppressed and subdued the narrators of Hadith and even
persecuted the companions of the holy Prophet for no other reason than
the charge of citation and recitation of Hadith. Needless to name any
particular ruler or caliph.

However when the tides were turned against such a ruthless practice
Mua'wiyah played the most treacherous role by illicitly introducing a
large number of concocted and fabricated Hadith invented in the workshop
of his stipendiaries and hired narrators of Hadith of course in the garb
of reviving the sacred practice of the narration "of Hadith.

Thus heap upon heap of Hadith were piled up by the connivance and active
support of Mua'wiyah who in fact tried to establish the so called
official Islam contrary to actual precepts by the help of those
concocted Hadith. It is an irony off ate that compilers of Hadith relied
upon everybody even a Kharjite to take a Hadith from him, but
deliberately and conveniently ignored any Hadith received from Imam Ali
(P) or Descendants of the holy Prophet or anyone who was their well­
wisher.

Naturally a completely alien Islam was established by the help of Mua
'wiyah and subsequent caliphs. Shias rejected all such concocted Hadith
and were branded as Rafazah who with the passage of time with utmost
sacrifices and unparalleled strenuous efforts of course through the able
guidance of Descendants of the holy Prophet of Islam and their well­
wishers collected and compiled authentic Hadith and paved the way for
establishing authentic Islam.

Sayyid Murtadha al-Askari, the renowned scholar on the subject, has very
ably made a probe into the History of this delicate institution of
Hadith and very ably unveiled the picture of the institution of Hadith
in such a superb manner that every line and contour of its countenance
becomes distinctly clear.

His scholarly and unbiased analysis of the subject invites the attention
of the Muslims all over the world to view the subject dispassionately
and try to differentiate and dissociate the authentic from the
unauthentic and fabricated Hadith. In this way it will be a great
service to Islam to introduce it in its true colours and contours
through the help of reliable and authentic Hadith.

**-Publishers**


