Part 5
======

**(continued from Part 4)**

[Humayd b. Muslim reported:]

By God, later I visited him when he was ill. By God, other than Whom
there is no deity, I saw him drinking water without being able to quench
his thirst, and then vomiting. He would cry out, "The thirst, the
thirst!" Again he would drink water without being able to quench his
thirst, again he would vomit. He would then burn with thirst. This went
on until he died, may God curse him.

When al-Husayn saw the extent of the number of troops encamped with
'Umar b. Sa'd, may God curse him, at Ninawa in order to do battle
against him, he sent to 'Umar b. Sa'd that he wanted to meet him. The
two men met at night and talked together for a long time. (When) 'Umar
b. Sa'd went back to his camp, he wrote to Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad, may he
be cursed.

God has put out the fire of hatred, united (the people) in one opinion
(lit. word), and set right the affairs of the community. This man,
al-Husayn, has given me a promise that he will return to the place which
he came from, or he will go to one of the border outposts - he will
become like any (other) of the Muslims, with the same rights and duties
as them; or he will go to Yazid, the Commander of the faithful, and
offer him his hand and see (if the difference) between them (can be
reconciled). In this (offer) you have the consent (to what you have
demanded) and the community gains benefit.

When Ubayd Allah read the letter, he said: "This is the letter about a
sincere man who is anxious for his people."

"Are you going vo accept this from him," demanded Shamir b. Dhi
al-Jawshan, jumping up,

When he has encamped on your land nearby? By God if he was a man from
your land and he would not put his hand in yours, whether he was in a
position of power and strength (or) whether he was in a position of
weakness and impotence you would not give this concession, for it would
be (a mark) of weakness. Rather let him and his followers submit to your
authority. Then if you punish them, (it will be because) you are the
(person) most appropriate to punish, and if you forgive them, you have
the right (to do so)."

"What you have suggested is good," replied Ibn Ziyad. "Your view is the
correct view. Take this message to 'Umar b. Sad and let him offer
al-Husayn and his followers (the opportunity of) submitting to my
authority. If they do that, let him send them to me in peace. If they
refuse, he should fight them. If he ('Umar b. Sa'd) acts (according to)
my instructions, then listen to him and obey him. However if he refuses
to fight them then you are the commander of the army (lit. people),
attack him, cut his head off and send it to me."

Then he wrote to Umar b. Sa'd:

I did not send you to al-Husayn for you to restrain yourself from
(fighting) him, nor to idle the time away with him, nor to promise him
peace and preservation (of his life), nor to make excuses for him, nor
to be an intercessor on his behalf with me. Therefore see that if
al-Husayn and his followers submit to my authority and surrender, you
send them to me in peace. If they refuse, then march against them to
fight them and to punish them; for they deserve that. If al-Husayn is
killed, make the horses trample on his body, both front and back; for he
is a disobedient rebel, and I do not consider that this will be in any
way wrong after death. But it is my view that you should do this to him
if you kill him. If you carry out your command concerning him, we will
give you the reward due to one who is attentive and obedient. If you
refuse, then we withdraw (the command of) our province and army from you
and leave the army to Shamir b. Dhl al-Jawshan. We have given him our
authority.

Greetings.

Shamir b. Dhi al-Jawshan brought the letter to 'Umar b. Sad. After he
had brought it and read it, 'Umar said to him:

Shame upon you, what is this to you? May God never show favour to your
house. May God make abominable what you have brought to me! By God, I
did not think that you would cause him to refuse what I had written to
him, and ruin for us a matter which we had hoped to set right. Al Husayn
will not surrender, for there is a spirit like (his) father's in his
body."

"Tell me what you are going to do," demanded Shamir. "Are you going to
carry out the governor's command and fight his enemy or are you going to
leave the command of the army to me?"

"No, (there is going to be) no advantage to you. I will carry that out
instead of you. you take command of the foot-soldiers."

'Umar b. Sa'd prepared to (do battle with) al-Husayn, peace be on him,
on the night of Thursday, 9th of the month of Muharram. (In the
meantime) Shamir went out and stood in front of the followers of al-
Husayn, peace be on him.

"Where are my sister's sons?" he demanded. Al Abbas,Jafar, Abd Allah
and Uthman, sons of Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be on him, came forward.

"What do you want?" they asked.

"Sons of my sister, you are guaranteed security," he said.

"God curse you and curse the security which you offer without offering
itlto the son of the Apostle of God," the young men replied.

"Cavalry of God, mount and announce the news of Heaven (i.e. death),"
Umar b. Sa'd called out and the people mounted and he approached (the
supporters of al-Husayn) after the afternoon (asr) prayer.
Meanwhile, al-Husayn, peace be on him, was sitting in front of his tent
dozing with his head on his knees. His sister heard the clamour (from
the enemy's ranks). She came up to him and said, "My brother, don't you
hear the sounds which are getting nearer?"

I have just seen the Apostle of God, may God bless him and grant him
peace, in my sleep," said al-Husayn, peace be on him, as he raised his
head. "He said to me: 'You are coming to us.'

His sister struck at her face and cried out in grief.

"You have no (reason) to lament, sister," al-Husayn, peace be on him,
told her. "Be quiet, may God have mercy on you."

Then he turned to al-Abbas b. Ali "Brother, the enemy have come, so get
ready; but first, al-Abbas, you, yourself, ride out to meet them, to
talk to them about what they have (in mind) and what appears
(appropriate) to them and to ask about what has brought them (against
us)."

Al-Abbas went towards them with about twenty horsemen, among whom was
Zuhayr b. al-Qayn.

"How do you see (the situation)?" he asked. "What do you want?'

"The command of the governor has arrived that we should offer you (the
opportunity of) submitting to his authority, otherwise we (must) attack
you," they answered.

"Do not hurry (to do anything) until I have gone back to Abu Abd Allah
(al-Husayn) and told him what you have said, 'Abbas requested.

They stopped (where they were) and told him: "Go to him and inform him,
and tell us what he says to you."

Al 'Abbas went galloping back to al Husayn, peace be on him, to give
him the information. While his companions remained exchanging words with
the enemy, trying to test them and dissuade them from fighting against
al-Husayn, peace be on him, (al-'Abbas) told him what the enemy had
said.

Go back to them," he, peace be on him, said, "if you can, delay them
until the morning and (persuade) them to keep from us during the
evening. Then, perhaps, we may be able to pray to our Lord during the
night to call upon Him and seek His forgiveness. He knows that I have
always loved His formal prayer, the recitation of His Book and (making)
many invocations to Him, seeking His forgiveness.

Al Abbas went back to the people, and returned (after) being with them,
accompanied by a messenger on behalf of Umar b. Saed, who had said: "We
will grant you a day until tomorrow. Then if you surrender, we will send
you to our governor, Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad but if you refuse we will not
leave you (any longer)."

(After) he departed, towards the evening al-Husayn gathered his
followers around him.

