Part 6
======

**(continued from Part 5)**

[ Ali b. al Husayn, Zayn al Abidin, reported: ]

I went near to hear what he would say to them (even though) at that
time I was sick. I heard my father say to his followers: I glorify God
with the most perfect glorification and I praise Him in happiness and
misfortune. O God, I praise You for blessing us with prophethood,
teaching us the Qur'an and making us understand the religion. You have
given us hearing, sight and hearts, and have made us among those who
give thanks (to You). I know of no followers more loyal and more
virtuous than my followers, nor of any House more pious and more
close-knit than my House. May God reward you well on my behalf. Indeed,
I do not think that there will be (any further) days (left) to us by
these men. I permit you to leave me. All (of you) go away with the
absolution of your oath (to follow me), for there will be no (further)
obligation on you from me. This is a night (whose darkness) will give
cover to you. Use it as a camel (i.e. ride away in it).

His brothers and sons, the sons of his sisters and the sons of 'Abd
Allah b. Ja'far said:

We will not leave you to make ourselves continue living after your
(death). God will never see us (do) such a thing.

Al Abbas b. Ali, peace be on them, was the first of them to make this
declaration. Then the (whole) group followed him, (all) declaring the
same thing.

"Sons of 'Aqil" said al-Husayn, "enough of your (family) has been
killed. So go away as I have permitted you."

"Glory be to God," they replied, "what would the people say?

They would say that we deserted our shaykh, our lord, the sons of our
uncle, who was the best of uncles; that we had not shot arrows alongside
them, we had not thrust spears alongside them, we had not struck swords
alongside them. (At such an accusation) we do not know what we would do.
No, by God, we will not do (such a thing). Rather we will ransom you
with our lives, property and families. We will fight for you until we
reach your destination. May God make life abominable (for us) after your
(death)."

Then Muslim b. Awsaja arose and spoke:

Could we leave you alone? How should we excuse ourselves before God
concerning the performance of our duty to your By God, I will stab them
with my spear (until it breaks), I will strike them with my sword as
long as the hilt is in my hand. If I have no weapon (left) to fight them
with, I will throw stones (at them). By God we will never leave you
until God knows that we have preserved through you (the company of His
Apostle) in his absence. By God, if I knew what I would die and then be
revived and then burnt and then revived, and then scattered, and that
would be done to me seventy times, I would never leave you until I met
my death (fighting) on your behalf. So how could I do it when there can
only be one death, which is a great blessing which can never be
rejected.

Zuhayr b. al-Qayn, may God have mercy on him, spoke:

By God, I would prefer to be killed and then recalled to life; and then
be killed a thousand times in this manner; and that in this way God, the
Mighty and Exalted, should protect your life and the lives of these
young men of your House.

All his followers spoke in similar vein, one after the other. Al-
Husayn, peace be on him, called (on God to) reward them well and then
went back to his tent.

[ Ali b. al-Husayn, peace be on them, Zayn al Abidin reported: ]

I was sitting on that evening (before the morning of the day) in which
my father was killed. With me was my aunt, Zaynab, who was nursing me
when my father left to go to his tent. With him was Juwayn, the retainer
(mawla) of Abu Dharr al-Ghiffarl, who was preparing his sword and
putting it right My father recited:

Time, shame on you as a friend! At the day's dawning and the sun's
setting,

How many a companion or seeker will be a corpse! Time will not be
satisfied with any substitute.

The matter will rest with the Mighty One, and every living creature
will have to journey along my path.
He repeated it twice or three times. I understood it and realised what
he meant. Tears choked me and I pushed them back. I kept silent and knew
that tribulation had come upon us. As for my aunt, she heard what I
heard - but she is a woman and weakness and grief are part of the
qualities of women; she could not control herself, she jumped up,
tearing at her clothes and sighing, and went to him.

"Then I will lose (a brother)," Zaynab said to him. "Would that death
deprived me of life today, (for) my mother, Fatima, is dead, and my
father, 'Ah, and my brother, al-Hasan, peace be on them (all)."

"O sister,' al-Husayn said to her as he looked at her with his eyes
full of tears, " don't let Satan take away your forbearance. (Remember:)
If the sandgrouse are left (alone) at night, they will sleep (i.e. let
nature take its course)."

"O my grief, your life will be violently wrenched from you and that is
more wounding to my heart and harsher to my soul," she lamented, and
then she struck at her face. she bent down to (the hem of) her garment
and (began to) tear it. Then she fell down in a faint.

Al-Husayn, peace be on him, got up and bathed her face with water Then
he said to her:

Sister, fear God and take comfort in the consolation of God. Know that
the people on the earth will die and the inhabitants of heaven will not
continue to exist (for ever). For everything will be destroyed except
the face of God Who created creation by His power (qudra); He sends
forth creatures and He causes them to return; He is unique and alone. My
grandfather was better than me, my father was better than me and my
mother was better than me. I and every Muslim have an ideal model in the
Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family.

By This and the like he tried to console her and he said: Sister, I
swear to you - and I (always) keep my oaths - that you must not tear
your clothes, nor scratch your face, nor cry out with grief and loss
when I am destroyed.

Then he brought her and made her sit with me. He went out to his
followers and ordered them to bring their tents (much) closer together
so that the tent-pegs came within the area of each other's tents, and so
that if they remained among their tents, the enemy could only approach
(them), from one side (for there would be) tents behind them, and to
their right and left. Thus (the tents completely) surrounded them except
for the one way which the enemy could come against them.
(After that) he, peace be on him, returned to his place and spent the
whole night in performing the prayer, in calling on God's forgiveness
and in making invocations. In the same way, his followers performed the
prayer, made invocations and sought God's forgiveness.

[ Al Dahhak b. Abd Allah reported: ]

(A contingent of) Umar b. Sa'd's (continually) passed us keeping watch
over us while al-Husayn, himself, recited:

Let not those who disbelieve think that our giving them a delay is
better for their souls. We give them a delay only that they might
increase their wickedness. They shall have a disgraceful punishment. God
does not leave the believers in the situation you are in until He has
made the evil distinct from the good. [ Quran III, 117/8 ]

A man called 'Abd Allah b. Samir, (who was) among those horsemen heard
that. He was given to much laughter, and was a brave fighter, a
treacherous knight and a noble. He cried out: "By the Lord of the Ka'ba,
we are the good, we have been distinguished from you."

"O terrible sinner," cried Burayr b. Hudayr, "has God made you one of
the good?"

"A curse on you, whoever you are?" he shouted back.

"I am Burayr b. Hudayr," he replied. And they both cursed each other.

