Introduction
============

##### (1)

One of the most wonderful pictures of intellect and knowledge in Islam
is Imam Abu Ja’far Muhammad al-Jawad (a.s), who possessed the virtues
and nobilities of the world, made springs of wisdom and knowledge flow
in the earth and was the teacher and pioneer of the scientific and
cultural revival of his age. Scholars, jurisprudents, narrators of
traditions and learners of wisdom and sciences came to him to drink from
the pure fount of his sciences and cultures. Jurisprudents have reported
much from him concerning the verdicts of the Islamic Sharia, worships,
mu’amalat**[1]** and other branches of jurisprudence, and all have been
recorded in the encyclopedias of jurisprudence and Hadith.

This great Imam was one of the founders of the jurisprudence of the
Ahlul Bayt**[2]** (a.s) that represented creation, originality and
progress of intellect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ritual observances, social customs and ethical rules.  
 **[2]** Ahlul Bayt is a term referring to the honored family of the
Prophet (s), namely his daughter Fatima, Imam Ali, Imam Hasan, Imam
Husayn and the other nine infallible imams descending from Imam Husayn
(peace be upon them all).

Scholars have reported from him wonderful varieties of wisdom and
literatures regarding noble deeds and conducts that are among the most
precious maxims dealing with different educational and moral issues.

##### (2)

Imam Abu Ja’far al-Jawad (a.s), with his talents, geniuses and great,
endless scientific ability, has proven the luminous reality adopted by
the Shia that an imam must be the most aware and virtuous one of the
people of his time and the one who has more knowledge than anyone else,
regardless of whether he is young or old. Allah has provided the
infallible imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) with knowledge, wisdom and
sound judgment similar to how He provided the Arch-Prophets with these
qualities. This concept is one of the main elements in the doctrine of
the Shia.

Imam Abu Ja’far (a.s) has proven that clearly. He undertook the imamate
and the religious leadership after his father’s death while he was, as
historians have unanimously agreed, not more than seven years old. This
great role would not allow its keeper, according to the mentality of a
child, to plunge into any field of knowledge or to enter into any field
of debates and controversies with great scholars and specialists because
this is not possible for a little child, but Imam al-Jawad (a.s), though
he was still a little child, broke that notion.

The most famous scholars of his time asked him some of the most
complicated philosophical, theological and jurisprudential questions,
and he answered them all. Among those scholars was Yahya bin Aktham, the
chief of the judges of Baghdad whom the Abbasids had chosen to test Imam
al-Jawad (a.s). He asked Imam al-Jawad (a.s) about a jurisprudential
question, and Imam al-Jawad (a.s) ramified the question into several
branches and asked Yahya which branch he meant. Yahya did not know what
to say and could not save himself from that embarrassing situation, and
then he confessed that he could not keep pace with Imam al-Jawad
(a.s).**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** We shall discuss this question and others in the coming
chapters.

The arguments of Imam al-Jawad (a.s) with Yahya and with other scholars
of that time occupied the public opinion in Baghdad and in other towns.
They were the main topics talked of in meetings then, and the caravans
transported them everywhere. They were and still are a source of
admiration throughout history.

What proves the great treasure of his knowledge while he was still young
is that the Shia jurisprudents, after the death of Imam ar-Redha (a.s),
hastened towards Yathrib (Medina) to know the next infallible imam. The
reliable people guided them to Imam al-Jawad (a.s). They went to him and
asked him the most ambiguous and complicated questions, and he answered
them all. Narrators say that, on another occasion, he was asked thirty
thousand questions, and he answered them all. It is natural that there
is no justification to this confusing and amazing matter except that
which the Shia believe:  Allah has endowed the infallible imams of Ahlul
Bayt (a.s) with knowledge, wisdom and virtue, with the likes of which no
one amongst people has ever been endowed.

##### (3)

Some historians say that the talents and geniuses of Imam al-Jawad (a.s)
affected al-Ma’moon, the Abbasid caliph, and consequently he loved Imam
al-Jawad (a.s) sincerely and preferred him to even his own children and
family. He married him to his daughter Umm al-Fadhl, gifted him
abundantly and ordered his government bodies and the rest of the
official departments to respect and glorify him. However, this is not
true, as we shall detail in this book later on.

##### (4)

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) did not face any economical pressures throughout his
life. He lived at ease. Al-Ma’moon gave him a yearly salary of one
million dirhams, which was a considerable amount at that time when one
dirham equaled the price of one sheep.

This was besides the abundant amounts of the legal dues he received
which the Shia believed must be paid to Imam al-Jawad (a.s), like for

example, the half of the khums, which the Shia jurisprudents call as the
right of the imam, the monies whose owners were unknown and other legal
dues besides the incomes of the entails that some benevolent people of
the Shia had entailed on Ahlul Bayt (a.s) in Qom**[1]** and other
places. Imam al-Jawad (a.s) economized in spending on himself. He spent
those abundant monies on the poor and needy people amongst the Muslims.
It is because of this unequalled generosity that he has been called
al-Jawad (the generous, the liberal). This surname was the most
particular and famous surname of his, to the extent that he was known
amongst the people by it.

##### (5)

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) was surrounded by a halo of veneration and
glorification and respected highly by all classes of society. People saw
in his personality the scope of his great fathers who had carried the
torch of guidance and goodness to mankind. However, he did not pay any
attention to the manifestations of venerations and glorifications with
which he was surrounded. Instead, he preferred asceticism and avoided
all the pleasures of this world.

Once, al-Husayn saw him in Baghdad while the masses had crowded around
him. He said to himself that Imam al-Jawad (a.s) would not return to his
asceticism and sincerity to Allah. Imam al-Jawad (a.s) felt that in him.
He came to him and kindly and leniently said, ‘O Husayn, the bread of
barley and the ground salt in the sanctum of my grandfather, the
messenger of Allah (a.s), are more beloved to me than what you see me
in…’**[2]**. 

This phenomenon was one of the prominent aspects in the conducts of Imam
al-Jawad (a.s) as it was the prominent aspect in the conducts of all of
the infallible imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s). It has never been
mentioned that any of them tried this worldly life or its pleasures. All
of them preferred the obedience of Allah instead and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A holy city in Iran where Fatima (s), the daughter of Imam
ar-Redha (s) and the aunt of Imam al-Jawad (s), was buried.  
 **[2]** Ithbat al-Hudat, vol.6 p.185.

looked forward to the afterlife and did everything that might take them
closer to Allah.

##### (6)

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) lived that short period of his holy life tending
towards knowledge. He established the bases and principles of knowledge
and made use of the period of his stay in Baghdad in spreading
knowledge, teaching different sciences and merging the intellect with
the Islamic sciences and literatures.**[1]** A great number of scholars
and narrators joined him to learn from him the different Islamic
sciences, such as theology, philosophy, jurisprudence and interpretation
(tafsir). This book relates the biographies of those scholars and
narrators according to the sources of biographies and history. Talking
about these men completes our research on the personality of Imam
al-Jawad (a.s).

##### (7)

The age in which Imam al-Jawad (a.s) lived was one of the best Islamic
ages throughout history because civilization spread widely in that age.
From among the wonderful scenes of that civilization was the development
of sciences, the establishment of institutes and libraries and the
translation of medical and philosophical books from Greek and other
languages into Arabic. Baghdad became the capital of the greatest
civilization of sciences and intellect in the history of Islam. Baghdad
was full of scholars and specialists in medicine, linguistics,
jurisprudence and other branches of knowledge. The economical life in
Baghdad developed to a very far extent, but unfortunately great wealth
accumulated in the hands of certain classes, especially the class that
served the Abbasid rule and worked in the interest of the Abbasids. This
class of people became terribly rich to a degree that they did not know
how to spend their monies. They made the doors of their houses out of
gold and wallowed in luxuries and pleasures while the masses of the
Muslim people

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Aqeedat ash-Shia, p.200.

suffered from poverty, deprivation and bitter living.

We should study the age of Imam Muhammad al-Jawad (a.s) and search for
its civilizational, economical, political and social features for
studying the age in a methodical way is necessary for researchers. This
book is not a special study on the biography of Imam Muhammad al-Jawad
(a.s) only, but it is a comprehensive study of the Islamic age in which
Imam al-Jawad (a.s) lived.

##### (8)

Studying the biographies of the kings who ruled during the age of Imam
al-Jawad (a.s) is relevant to his life because it shows the difficulties
and misfortunes from which he and the Islamic nation had to suffer
during the reigns of those kings, who tried their best to wrong the
people and force them to do what they disliked.

Imam Abu Ja’far Muhammad al-Jawad (a.s) spent most of his life during
the reign of al-Ma’moon, who was one of the most prominent Abbasid
caliphs based on his intellect, intelligent policies and influential
power in controlling events. We discuss his biography objectively and
discuss the political events that had taken place during his reign, such
as his appointing Imam al-Jawad (a.s) as his heir apparent, the bloody
wars between him and his brother al-Ameen, the battle of Abu as-Saraya
and others. We mention the reasons that led al-Ma’moon to marry his
daughter Umm al-Fadhl to Imam al-Jawad (a.s). We also mention the
biography of al-Mu’tasim, the Abbasid caliph, during whose reign Imam
al-Jawad (a.s) suffered the bitterest kinds of persecution. He forced
Imam al-Jawad (a.s) to leave Yathrib (Medina) and live unwillingly in
Baghdad under house arrest. He set detectors to spy on him and watch his
sayings and doings and all those who visited him and had relations with
him. When he saw the high personality of Imam al-Jawad (a.s) and found
that he did not support him or acknowledge his policies which tended to
spread injustice and corruption everywhere in the earth, he had poison
injected in him by the Imam’s wife, Umm al-Fadhl (al-Ma'moon’s
daughter). She assassinated him while he was still young.

We have detailed that in one of the forthcoming chapters of this book.

##### (9)

I think that there is no benefit to the nation better than publishing
the biographies of the infallible imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s) and making
their virtues and exploits known to people because they were the genuine
source of man’s dignity and honor, and they were the overflowing springs
of intellect and knowledge not only to this umma, but also to all people
despite their different races, religions and inclinations. The
infallible imams raised high the banner of truth to guide the deviant,
conduct the confused, show the right path and lead to the faith in
Allah, which is the basis of goodness and peace in the earth.

Researching the conducts of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) leads to shining
treasures of knowledge and wisdom and unveils the souls that have been
loyal to the truth, that have been created for faith, that have gone
towards Allah the Almighty, that have adopted the mission to invite to
Him and that have suffered, for the sake of that, from the Pharaohs of
their ages, from the likes of which no reformer in the earth has ever
suffered.

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) was one of that pure progeny who raised the words of
Allah. He was tried as severe a trial as was possible and, therefore,
faced from the tyrants of his age different kinds of persecution and
oppression. This book will show all these aspects clearly.

##### (10)

The Arabic library has no study on the life of Imam Abu Ja’far al-Jawad
(a.s) who is one of the flowing springs of intellect and knowledge in
Islam and one of the prides of this nation and one of its pioneering
leaders. No one has written on his life except Muhammad bin Wahban who
called his book “Akhbar Abi Ja’far ath-Thani: the

news of Abu Ja’far the Second”**[1]**, but, unfortunately, it is not
available in our libraries. It may be one of the manuscripts that the
umma has lost or may be in one of the wardrobes of the manuscripts of
the international libraries.

I have been successful – thanks to Allah – in researching the biography
of this great Imam who has filled the world with his virtues, knowledge,
asceticism and piety. I do not claim that I have covered all the sides
of his shining life, for this is something far from the reality, but I
have shed faint lights on some aspects of his personality, that was the
scope of the lives of his pure fathers who had lit the torch of
intellectual and social life in Islam.

I think it is my duty, at the end of this introduction, to offer my
appreciation, gratitude and loyalty to the great scholar Sheikh Hadi
al-Qurashi for his efforts in reviewing many encyclopedias such as
*Wassa'il ash-Shia* and other sources which provided us with a lot of
information about the life of Imam Abu Ja'far al-Jawad (a.s), besides
his valuable notes in this book. Also I feel it is my duty to thank the
nobleman Sayyid Abdurrasool, the son of Sayyid Redha al-Husayni
as-Sa'igh, for his contribution in spending towards the publication of
the book in its first edition. I pray to Allah to make him successful in
every noble deed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ath-Tharee’a, vol.1 p.315, al-A’laam, vol.7 p.155.
