His Birth and Upbringing
========================

Before indulging in research on the aspects of Imam al-Jawad's
personality and talking about his life and other related concerns, I
would like to refer to his noble lineage and that which is associated
with it, concerning his birth, his qualities and other things which
might be considered as clues to talk about his personality.

His noble lineage
-----------------

In the world of lineages, there is no lineage nobler or more exalted
than the lineage of Imam Abu Jafar al-Jawad (a.s). He was from the heart
of the Prophet’s family, which was the holiest, most honorable family
that humanity has ever known throughout the ages, the family that has
provided the world with the elements of virtue and perfection and
illuminated all the corners of life with knowledge and faith. The
honored origins and pure wombs he came from are as follows:

His father
----------

His father was Imam Ali ar-Redha bin**[1]** Imam Musa bin Ja’far
al-Kadhim bin Imam Muhammad al-Baqir bin Imam Ali Zaynol Aabideen bin
Imam al-Husayn bin Imam Ali bin Abu Talib (peace be upon them). This is
the golden chain which if read on the deaf and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bin means “the son of” and bint means “the daughter of”.

the dumb they will recover by the will of Allah, as al-Ma’moon, the
Abbasid caliph, has said.**[1]** Ahmed bin Hanbal says, “If this chain
of lineage is recited on a mad person, he will recover from his
madness.”**[2]**

Abul Ala’ al-Ma’arri,**[3]** who mistrusted most people, said regarding
this noble family,

“The ones whose brilliance was shown

before the creation of Mars and Libra,

before the Heavens had been created,

and their orbits had been ordered to circuit.”

From this good and noble tree, close to Allah and dear to every Muslim,
Imam Muhammad al-Jawad (a.s) branched out.

His mother
----------

His mother was one of the purest and most abstinent and virtuous of
Muslim women. It was sufficient to her that she had given birth to one
of the best figures of Islam and one of the best imams of the Muslims.
It did not degrade her position nor harm her dignity that she was a
bondmaid. Islam has declared a war against this phenomenon and considers
it as an aspect of the pre-Islamic life, which Islam has done away with.
In the Islamic point of view, piety and obedience to Allah are the bases
of preference amongst people and nothing else.

Islam proudly annulled all kinds of racial segregation and considered
them as factors of backwardness and declination in society because they
divided the nation into fighting sects and parties. Therefore, the imams
of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) married bondmaids in order to do away with
malicious feuds and remove the causes of separation amongst Muslims.
Imam Ali bin al-Husayn Zaynol Aabideen (as-Sajjad) (a.s) married a
bondmaid who gave birth to the great

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Uyun Akhbar ar-Redha, vol.2 p.147.  
 **[2]** As-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa, p.207.  
 **[3]** He was a famous Arab poet.

revolutionary martyr, Zayd. Imam ar-Redha (a.s) married a bondmaid who
gave birth to Imam al-Jawad (a.s). The situation of the infallible imams
in their marriages with bondmaids was a decisive refutation towards the
enemies of Islam who tried their best to keep Muslims divided.

As for the name of the mother of Imam al-Jawad (a.s), historians
disagree, and each group says something different. Here are some of the
historians’ accounts:

1. Her name was al-Khayzuran. Imam ar-Redha (a.s) named her so when her
actual name was Durrah.**[1]**

2. Her name was Sukaynah al-Nawbiyyah, or al-Muraysiyyah**[2]**, as was
said by historians. It was said that her lineage belonged to Maria
al-Qubtiyyah the wife of Prophet Muhammad (a.s).**[3]**

3. Her name was Rayhanah.**[4]**

4. Her name was Sabeekah.**[5]**

Some sources of history neglect mentioning her name and just call her
“Umm Walad.”**[6]** Anyhow, it is not of great importance to know what
her actual name was. Of greater interest is her life history; however,
unfortunately, the sources at hand have not mentioned anything about her
life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bahr al-Ansab, vol2 p.19, a manuscript in Ameerul Mo’mineen
Library, Dala’il al-Imamah, p.29, Dhiya’ul Aalameen, vol.2, a manuscript
in al-Husayniyya ash-Shushtariyya Library.  
 **[2]** Al-Fusul al-Muhimmah, p.252, Tathkiratul Khawass by ibn
al-Jawzi, p.321.  
 **[3]** Al-Miqna’ah, p.482.  
 **[4]** Dala’il al-Imama, p.209  
 **[5]** Al-Irshad, p.356.  
 **[6]** Umdat al-Talib, p.188. Umm Walad is a metonymy used to refer to
a bondmaid.

The great newborn
-----------------

Imam ar-Redha (a.s) took much care of his (wife) bondmaid because he had
perceived through the unseen that she would give birth to a boy that
Allah had chosen for the imamate and the general guardianship of the
Holy Prophet (a.s). He would be one of the Prophet’s twelve successors.
Imam ar-Redha (a.s) had informed his close companions of that.

Imam ar-Redha (a.s) entrusted his honored sister Hakeemah bint Imam Musa
bin Ja’far al-Kadhim (a.s) to remain with his wife until she gave birth
to her child.**[1]** Lady Hakeemah carried out everything her brother
had asked her to do. When the bondmaid felt she was about to give birth,
Imam ar-Redha (a.s) asked his sister to come with a midwife. Imam
ar-Redha (a.s) lit a lamp in the house**[2]** and remained in
expectation of the great newborn. It was not long until his bondmaid
gave birth to a great figure of intellect and jihad in Islam.

The delight of Imam ar-Redha (a.s)
----------------------------------

Waves of delight and joy overcame Imam ar-Redha (a.s) after the birth of
his blessed newborn son. He began saying,

“The like of Moses son of Imran, the splitter of the seas, and the like
of Jesus son of Mary, blessed be the mother that bore him… has been
borne to me.”**[3]**

Imam ar-Redha (a.s) turned to his companions and told them the good news
of his newborn son. He said, ‘Allah has granted me one who will inherit
me and inherit the children of Dawood….’**[4]**

He told them that that newborn child would be the imam after him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Dala'il al-Imama, 209.  
 **[2]** Mukhtasar al-Bihar fee Ahwal al-A’imma by Nooruddeen, a
manuscript in the library of Kashiful Ghita’.  
 **[3]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 12 p.103.  
 **[4]** Ibid.,104.

He received that great newborn with tremendous joy and delight because
that child was the awaited spiritual leader of the umma for that period.
Amongst his companions, there was Di’bil al-Khuza’iy,**[1]** a poet of
the Ahlul Bayt (a.s). He participated with the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) in their
joys and delights over the birth of Imam al-Jawad (a.s).

Ceremonies of the birth
-----------------------

Imam ar-Redha (a.s) took his newborn son and carried out the ritual
ceremonies for him. He recited the adhan in his right ear and the
iqama**[2]** in his left ear and then placed him back in his
cradle.**[3]** 

His surname
-----------

Imam ar-Redha (a.s) gave his son Imam Muhammad al-Jawad (a.s) the
surname of Abu Ja’far, like the surname of his grandfather Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir (a.s). It is differentiated between them by saying Abu Ja’far
the first for Imam al-Baqir (a.s) and Abu Ja’far the second for Imam
al-Jawad (a.s).

His epithets
------------

As regards his noble epithets, they show his great personality and
exalted self. The most common are as follows:

1. Al-Jawad (the generous): he was thus called because of his abundant
acts of good, beneficence and charity towards the people.

2. Al-Taqiy (the pious): he was thus called because he feared Allah and
turned and resorted to Him. He never responded to any incitement of
desire or fancy. Al-Ma’moon, the Abbasid caliph, had tried him with
different types of provocations, but he was not deceived. He turned to
Allah and preferred His obedience to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Jami’ ar-Riwat, vol.2 p.311.  
 **[2]** Adhan and iqama are calls to prayer that are recited before the
prayer begins.  
 **[3]** Mukhtasar al-Bihar fee Ahwal al-A’imma.

3. Al-Qani’ (the satisfied).

4. Al-Murtadha (being satisfied with).**[1]**

5. Al-Radhiy (the satisfied).

6. Al-Mukhtar (the elect).

7. Al-Mutawakkil (the reliant (on Allah)).

8. Al-Zakiy (the pure).**[2]**

9. Bab al-Murad (the gate of desires and hopes).  He was known by this
epithet amongst the Muslims who believed that he was a gate from the
gates of the Divine Mercy, to which afflicted and needy people resorted
in order to rid themselves of their misfortunes and afflictions.

These are his epithets of which each and every one refers to one of his
exalted qualities and noble tendencies that are a source of pride to
this umma.

His features
------------

His features were like those of his fathers, which in turn were like the
features of the prophets. The lineaments of piety were apparent on his
holy face. Some sources of history describe him as “white-faced with a
moderate stature.”**[3]** Other historians mention that he was very
brown based on only one odd narration,**[4]** which Imam al-Khoo’iy
proved to be a fabricated narration.**[5]** We have therefore brushed
this narration away for it is odd and untrue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** An-Nujoom az-Zahirah, vol.2 p.231, al-Fusul al-Muhimmah,
p.252.  
 **[2]** Dala'il al-Imama, p.209.  
 **[3]** Noor al-Absaar, p.146, al-Fusul al-Muhimmah by ibn al-Sabbagh,
p.252.  
 **[4]** Al-Makassib, chap. Of al-Qiyafa.  
 **[5]** Misbah al-Faqaha, p.384.

His birthday
------------

Historians widely concur that Imam al-Jawad (a.s) was born on the
nineteenth of Ramadan, 195 AH.**[1]** It has also been mentioned that he
was born on the fifth of Ramadan, 175 AH, but this is totally untrue for
it is definite that he was not been born in that year but in the year
195 instead, as narrators and historians have unanimously agreed.

The figure on his ring (seal)
-----------------------------

The figure on his ring showed that he had devoted himself to Allah. He
had written on his ring (as his own seal) “glory is (only) to
Allah”.**[2]** He believed that glory was to Allah alone, the Creator of
the universe and the Giver of life.

His upbringing
--------------

Imam Muhammad al-Jawad (a.s) was brought up in the house of prophethood
and imamate, that house by which Allah had honored the Muslims. He grew
up in the shade of that honored house while receiving high ideals from
his father, who shed rays of light from his great soul onto him. His
father himself had undertaken his upbringing. He took him with him
wherever he went and fed him with his own hands. Yahya as-San’ani said,
“Once, I went to Abul Hasan ar-Redha (a.s) (Imam al-Jawad’s father) in
Mecca while he was peeling a banana and feeding Abu Ja’far (Imam
al-Jawad). I said to him, ‘May I die for you! Is this the blessed
newborn?’ He said,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** An-Nujoom az-Zahirah, vol.2 p.231, al-Fusul al-Muhimmah, p.252,
al-Irshad, p.356.  
 **[2]** Dala'il al-Imama, p.209. It has been mentioned in Makarim
al-Akhlaq, p.92 that Muhammad bin Eesa said, “I heard al-Muwaffaq
saying: once I was before Abu Ja’far the second (Imam al-Jawad), and he
showed me a ring on his finger. He asked me, ‘Do you know this ring?’ I
said, ‘Yes, I know its figure but not its picture.’ It was a silver ring
with a round stone. On it was written, ‘Sufficient unto me is Allah.’
Above and under the writing there was a flower. I asked him, ‘Whose ring
is this?’ He said, ‘It is Abul Hasan’s.’ I asked, ‘Then, how did it come
to be in your hand?’ He said, ‘When he was about to die, he gave it to
me and said, “Do not take it off your hand (finger) except to (give to)
my son Ali!”’

‘Yes, O Yahya! This is the newborn that no one in Islam has been born
for our Shia more blessed than him.’”**[1]**

This kind of education coupled with love and respect has a great
influence on the psychological structure and success of a person,
according to psychologists and educationists.

His intelligence and genius
---------------------------

Imam Muhammad al-Jawad (a.s) displayed signs of intelligence and genius
in his early years that astonished people and filled them with
admiration and high regard. Historians have mentioned many signs of his
intelligence. Here are some of them:

1. Umayya bin Ali narrated, “I was with Abul**[2]** Hasan ar-Redha in
Mecca in the year that he went on pilgrimage to bid farewell to the
Sacred House (the Kaaba) when he intended to travel to Khurasan (in
Iran). His son Abu Ja’far al-Jawad was with him. Abul Hasan bid his
farewell to the House and went to the Sanctum (of Abraham) and offered
prayer there. Abu Ja’far was carried by one of Imam ar-Redha’s servants
to circumambulate the Kaaba. When he (with the servant) reached the Rock
of Abraham, he sat there and remained for some time. Muwaffaq, the
servant, asked him to get up so they could leave, but he refused and was
very sad and depressed. Muwaffaq went to Imam ar-Redha (a.s) and told
him about the state of his son. Imam ar-Redha (a.s) came and asked him
to get up. He responded to his father with sighs and tears saying, ‘How
can I get up O father, while you have bid farewell to the House in such
a way as if you shall never come back to it…?’

A wave of pain occupied Imam ar-Redha (a.s). He begged his son to come
with him and the son responded to his father.”**[3]**

This event shows the intelligence of Imam al-Jawad (a.s) because he
understood from the farewell of his father to the Sacred House that it

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tanqeeh al-Maqal, vol.3 p.317, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 12 p.117.  
 **[2]** “Abul” is combined of Abu (the father of) and al (the).  
 **[3]** Kashf al-Ghumma, vol.3 p.152.

was his last farewell. He saw the fear and grief in his father’s
expressions that made him perceive it was the end of his father’s life.
Indeed it was so, because Imam ar-Redha (a.s), after his travel to
Khurasan, did not come back to the sacred lands (Mecca and Medina). He
was martyred at the hands of al-Ma’moon, the Abbasid caliph, with
poison.

2. Once, al-Ma’moon with his official procession passed by some children
playing in a street in Baghdad, amongst whom was Imam al-Jawad (a.s).
When the children saw the procession of al-Ma’moon, they ran away except
Imam al-Jawad (a.s) who remained standing in his place. Al-Ma’moon, who
did not know this child, became astonished and asked him, “Why did you
not run away with those children?”

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) answered with a wonderful reason that affected
al-Ma’moon. He said, “O Ameerul Mo’mineen,**[1]** the street is not so
narrow that I should clear it for you and neither have I any guilt that
I should fear you. I trust that you do not harm a guiltless one.”

Al-Ma’moon was astounded and asked the child about his lineage, to which
Imam al-Jawad (a.s) responded accordingly. Al-Ma'moon prayed to Allah to
have mercy on Imam al-Jawad’s father.**[2]** We shall discuss this point
later on.

3. One of the signs of his incredible intelligence is that when he was
in his early childhood, scholars and jurisprudents asked him thirty
thousand questions and he answered them all. There is no way to justify
this phenomenon except to say that Allah the Almighty has endowed the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s) with great powers of knowledge that He has endowed to
no one except His Arch-prophets.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** People had grown accustomed to addressing rulers with this title
even though they did not deserve it because it was the attribute of Imam
Ali (s) alone.  
 **[2]** Akhbar ad-Duwal, p.115.

Imam ar-Redha praises Imam al-Jawad 
------------------------------------

Imam ar-Redha (a.s) always praised Imam al-Jawad (a.s) and pointed out
his virtues and talents. Once, al-Fadhl bin Sahl sent to Muhammad bin
Abu Abbad, the clerk of Imam ar-Redha (a.s), asking him about the kind
of relation of Imam ar-Redha (a.s) with his son Imam Muhammad al-Jawad
(a.s), and the clerk replied, “Ar-Redha does not mention (his son)
Muhammad except by his surname. He often says: Abu Ja’far (Muhammad
al-Jawad) wrote to me, or I wrote to Abu Ja’far…and even though he is
yet a child in Medina, the letters that come to his father are so
eloquent and fluent.”**[1]**

Narrators have narrated of the extent that Imam ar-Redha (a.s) would
glorify his son Muhammad al-Jawad. They said that once Abbad bin
Isma’eel and ibn Asbaat were with Imam ar-Redha (a.s) in Mina**[2]**
when Abu Ja’far was brought to his father ar-Redha (a.s). They asked
him, “Is this the blessed newborn?”

Imam ar-Redha (a.s) became delighted and said, “Yes, this is the newborn
that no one in Islam has been born more blessed than him.”**[3]**

There are many other narrations related from Imam ar-Redha (a.s) showing
that he often praised Imam al-Jawad (a.s) and pointed out his great
talents and virtues.

Glorification
-------------

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) was surrounded, since his early days, with a halo of
glorification and exaltation by the religious people who believed that
he was one of the Prophet’s successors, the love of whom Allah had
imposed on all Muslims.

Historians mention that Ali bin Ja’far, the great jurisprudent and the
brother of Imam Musa bin Ja’far (al-Kadhim) (a.s) and one of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 12 p.104, Ithbat al-Hudat, vol.6 p.161.  
 **[2]** A place near Mecca in the Arabia.  
 **[3]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 12 p.104.

famous personalities of the Alawid**[1]** Family at that time, was one
of those who sanctified Imam al-Jawad (a.s) and acknowledged his virtue
and imamate.

Muhammad bin al-Hasan bin Imara said, “Once, I was with Ali bin Ja’far
in Medina, where I stayed with him for two years to write down what he
had heard from his brother (Imam Musa al-Kadhim), when one day Abu
Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali (al-Jawad) (a.s) came into the mosque of the
messenger of Allah (a.s). Ali bin Ja’far suddenly jumped without shoes
or garment and kissed his hand and glorified him. Imam al-Jawad (a.s)
looked at him and said, ‘O uncle, sit down please! May Allah have mercy
on you.’

Ali bin Ja’far bowed respectfully and said, ‘O my master, how can I sit
while you are standing?’

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) went away and then Ali bin Ja’far returned to his
companions. They began scolding him for glorifying Imam al-Jawad (a.s)
who was very young yet. They said to him, ‘You are the uncle of his
father, so why did you act in that way with him?’

He answered them with the answer of one who believed in his Lord and
religion and who recognized the actual position of the imamate. He said
to them, ‘Keep silent! It is Allah Who has not qualified this beard (he
caught his beard with his hand) for the imamate and has qualified this
young man and placed him in that position according to His will. We seek
the protection of Allah from what you say. I am just a slave to him (to
Imam al-Jawad).’”**[2]** 

Ali bin Ja’far proved that the imamate did not submit to the wish of man
or his will but was instead in the hand of Allah, Who chose for it whom
He willed from amongst His people, regardless of whether the imam was
young or old.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Belonging to the Alawi (Imam Ali’s progeny) branch of the great
family of Hashim, the Prophet’s grandfather.  
 **[2]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 12 p.117, Usool al-Kafi, vol. 1 p.380.

Impressions of his personality
------------------------------

The talents of Imam Muhammad al-Jawad (a.s) occupied the passions of
scholars, and they therefore recorded their admirations and
glorifications of him in their books. Here is some of what they have
said about him:

1. Ath-Thahabi
--------------

Ath-Thahabi has said, “Muhammad (al-Jawad) was surnamed al-Jawad (the
generous), al-Qani’ (the satisfied) and al-Murtadha (been satisfied
with) and he was one of the chiefs of the Prophet’s family…he was
described as being generous; therefore, he was surnamed
al-Jawad….”**[1]**

2. Ibn Taymiya   
-----------------

He has said, “Muhammad bin Ali al-Jawad was one of the notables of the
Hashemites. He was famous of his generosity, and, therefore, he was
called al-Jawad.”**[2]** 

3. As-Safadi
------------

As-Safadi has said, “Muhammad (al-Jawad) was surnamed al-Jawad, al-Qani’
and al-Murtadha. He was one of the chiefs of the Prophet’s family…he was
described as being generous; therefore, he was surnamed
al-Jawad….”**[3]**

4. Ibn al-Jawzi
---------------

As-Sibt bin al-Jawzi has said, “Muhammad al-Jawad followed the footsteps
of his father in knowledge, piety and generosity.”**[4]**  

5. Mahmood bin Wuhayb
---------------------

Sheikh Mahmood bin Wuhayb has said, “Muhammad al-Jawad inherited the
knowledge and virtue of his father, and he was the loftiest amongst his
brothers in position and perfection.”**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tareekh al-Islam, 8 p.158.  
 **[2]** Minhaj as-Sunna, vol.2 p.127.  
 **[3]** Al-Wafi bil-Wafiyyat, vol.4 p.105.  
 **[4]** Tathkirat al-Khawass, p.321.  
 **[5]** Jawharat al-Kalam fee Madh as-Sadah al-A’laam, p.149.

6. Az-Zarkali
-------------

Khayruddeen az-Zarkali has said, “Muhammad bin ar-Redha bin Musa
al-Kadhim, at-Talibi, al-Hashimi, al-Qurashi, Abu Ja’far, surnamed
al-Jawad, the ninth of the twelve imams of the Shia, was exalted like
his ancestors, intelligent, eloquent, quick-witted….’**[1]**

7. Kamaludden
-------------

Sheikh Kamaluddeen Muhammad bin Talha has said, ‘As for the virtues of
Abu Ja’far al-Jawad, they did not last long for the Divine Fate had
determined that he would stay in this world for a little while and leave
for his Lord soon; so his stay was brief and his days were
short.’**[2]**

8. Ali bin Eesa al-Arbali
-------------------------

He has said, ‘Al-Jawad was in all cases generous (jawad)…he exceeded all
people in the purity of his lineage and birth and sat on the top of
glory. No one had ever approached his rank or his glory. He was exalted
in position. His high position was above stars and his rank was above
all ranks. When a delegation saw a fire, they said: it must be his
fire.**[3]** No fire was predominant over his fire. Exalted was he
towards highness. Glory and honor felt proud of him. Mastership found
its meaning in him. He was far from every vice and close to every
virtue. Nobilities diffused from his sides and glory dripped from him.
News of generosity were narrated about him, his progeny and his fathers.
Blessed is he who strives to be loyal to him, and woe unto him who tries
to be his opponent. When the loots of glory and loftiness are divided,
the purest of them will be his, and when the backs of honor are mounted,
the highest of them will be his. He matches the rain in generosity and
the lion in courage and zeal and defeats conducts with his good
conduct.’**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-A’laam, vol.7 p.155.  
 **[2]** Matalib as-Sa’ool fee Manaqib Aal ar-Rasool, vol.2 p.74.  
 **[3]** The Arabs, in the past, used to let their fires flame, out of
generosity, so that travelers and wayfarers could resort to them.  
 **[4]** Kash al-Ghummah, vol.3 p.160.
