From His High Ideals
====================

The personality of Imam Abu Ja'far al-Jawad (a.s) possessed all the high
ideals and lofty examples that any human being would take pride in. Here
are some of these ideals:

Imamate
-------

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) assumed the imamate and the general religious
leadership when he was just seven years and some months in age, as Jesus
Christ (a.s) had assumed the prophethood when he was even younger than
this in age.

Imamate is based on a deep philosophy that aims at exalting the position
of man and administering the truth and justice that man seeks. And here,
we will briefly digress to discuss some affairs of imamate.

### Its Goals

Imamate takes great care to achieve its actual goals, under the shadows
of which man can live happily and peacefully. From among the goals of
imamate are the following:

1. Administering justice everywhere, social and political alike, so that
the nation, under the shadow of imamate, will not face any social or
individual injustice and no individual or community will be preferred to
another for all should be equal before justice and the truth. By
administering this pure justice, man can become the deputy of Allah on
His earth and the nation will not find any crookedness in its path.

2. Rising against injustice and tyranny, resisting oppression and
preventing the control of the strong over the weak; the Shia have
undoubtedly undertaken this aspect. They have led successive revolutions
against injustice and aggression and have fought the oppressive powers.
The heads of their chiefs and imams have been raised on spears, forever
illuminating the path of freedom and dignity.

Mo’awiya[^1] had a notable group of the Shia killed, among whom was Amr
bin al-Hamq al-Khuza’iy, a propagandist for truth, freedom and struggle.
After being killed, his head was raised on a spear and circulated in the
towns and countries, illuminating for people the way of struggle. Yazeed
the son of Mo’awiya had the pure progeny of the Prophet (a.s) killed and
their heads raised on spears as they were paraded through different
towns. These and other revolutions have given Islam eternal glories
throughout history. They have forced the world to recognize that Islam
is a religion of struggle and revolt against injustice, oppression and
tyranny.

The great revolutions that rose in the history of Islam rose not but by
the inspiration of the imamate, whose shining principles occupied the
hearts of those revolutionaries who mined the palaces and castles of the
unjust and the tyrants with bombs that tore down all signs of their
pride and arrogance.

3. Protecting the economy of the nation and not spending from the
Treasury except to serve the public welfare, develop the economical
resources, increase the individual income and reform the general economy
to remove poverty, which is the equivalent of disbelief. The ruler and
the other officers of the government have no right to meddle with the
powers and properties of the state or to unlawfully take something for
themselves or their relatives. The main cause of the revolution that
overthrew the government of Othman, the chief of the Umayyad family, was
the meddling of the Umayyads with the wealth of the state and seizing it
for themselves and their followers.

4. Spreading faith in Allah, upon which the powers of good and peace on
earth are based; when faith in Allah roots deeply inside a man, it
becomes impossible for him to commit any injustice or oppression against
others. Rather, the man becomes a source of mercy and good to others.

5. Purifying the souls and hearts and planting noble qualities and
virtues in them so that doing good and avoiding evil may become one of
their elements and constituents, and consequently the goals of humanity
can be achieved.

6. Spreading peace and security and removing all kinds of disturbances
and troubles, and thus, individuals may live peacefully, without feeling
that fear follows them or terror chases them, and a sheep can live
beside a wolf without fearing or being cautious of it.

These are some of the goals of the imamate in which the Shia believe and
which is the higher base for the development of mankind in all stages of
history.

The Qualities Of The Imam
-------------------------

An imam must have high qualities and noble ideals such as:

### Knowledge

The Shia unanimously agree that an imam must be incomparable in his
abundant knowledge of sciences and he must be the most aware of the
people of his time in the affairs of the Sharia and the verdicts of
religion. He must be aware of the political and administrative affairs
and other affairs regarding what concerns the people. As regards the
evidences for this, they are so clear that no one can deny or hide them.

The first imam, Ameerul Mo’mineen Ali bin Abu Talib (a.s), the master of
the pure progeny of the Prophet (a.s), established many fields of
knowledge. They were thirty-two in number, as al- Aqqad[^2] has said.
Over fourteen centuries ago, he was informing people of the
technological development of this age. He said, “A time will come to
people when the people in the West will be able to see the people in the
East, and the people in the East will be able to see the people in the
West.”

He also said, “A time will come to people when the people in the West
will be able to hear the people in the East, and the people in the East
will be able to hear the people in the West.” And this has been verified
with the inventions of the radio and the television.

He also said, “A time will come to people when iron will move.” This has
also come true with the inventions of the car, the train and other
things. Imam Ali (a.s) talked about many things like this, and our
readers can find them in different books such as al-Ghayba by at-Toossi,
Bihar al-Anwar by al-Majlisi and other books that have been written on
this subject.

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s), a miracle of knowledge and intellect in the earth,
talked about pollution in space and in the seas and its serious harms
against man. He talked about the existence of life on some planets. It
was he who established the bases of anatomy, especially the organs of
man and talked about the wonders inside man’s body and the wonderful
systems such as the digestive system and other systems. All this has
been mentioned in the book Tawheed al- Mufadhdhal, which is a wonderful
tradition of Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) as narrated by al-Mufadhdhal.

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) is considered as the first establisher of physics
and chemistry, for he instructed their bases to his disciple Jabir bin
Hayyan, the pride of the East and the pioneer of development in the
earth.

Al-Jawad (a.s) proved what the Shia believe about the imamate. Though he
was very young, he was skilled in all the different sciences. He was
asked by the ulama and the jurisprudents about everything, and he
answered all of them, and this caused Shiism to spread everywhere at
that time and led most of the ulama to believe in imamate.

Many ulama, jurisprudents and narrators met with Imam al-Jawad (a.s)
while he was seven years and some months of age. They surrounded him to
drink from the spring of his knowledge. They narrated from him answers
to many philosophical and theological questions. This is the clearest
evidence of the Shia’s belief in imamate.

### Infallibility

There is another very important quality that the Shia believe inherent
to their imams. It is the infallibility of the imams and their immunity
from entering into any field of sin and unlawfulness. This is a clear
fact with no room for doubt. He who ponders over the lives of the pure
imams will find this fact very clear.

Imam Ali (a.s) has said, “By Allah, if I were to be given the seven
regions with all that is under their spheres just to disobey Allah by
depriving an ant of a husk of a barley grain, I would not do so.” Is
infallibility other than this?!

If Imam Husayn (a.s) had made peace with the Umayyads and submitted to
their policies, he would not have faced the misfortunes and disasters of
Kerbala.[^3] Infallibility was the most prominent quality of the imams.
They had great faith and infinite powers of piety that protected them
from committing any sort of sin.

Infallibility, in this frame, does not contradict knowledge and is not
irregular to the laws of life. He who denies the infallibility of the
imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s) will deviate from the truth and incline
towards the untruth.

### His Worship

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) was the truest worshipper who performed worships at
his time, the most reverent to Allah and the sincerest in obeying Him,
like all the pure imams from his fathers had been before him and had
devoted their lives to Allah and done all that might take them closer to
Allah. The forms of his worships were as follows:

### His Offering Recommended Worships (Nafila)

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) used to offer a lot of recommended worships
(nawafil).

Narrators of traditions have reported that he would offer two rak’as
(units of prayer), in each of which he would recite the sura of
al-Fatiha (1) and the sura of al-Ikhlaas (112) seventy times.[^4]

He would offer a lot of worship in the month of Rajab. Ar-Rayyan bin
as-Salt said, “When Abu Ja’far the second was in Baghdad, he fasted on
the middle and the twenty-seventh of Rajab and all his servants fasted
with him. He ordered us to offer a prayer that was twelve rak’as.

In each rak’a we had to recite the sura of al-Fatiha and another sura,
and when we finished the prayer, we recited the suras of al-Fatiha,
al-Ikhlass, al-Falaq (113) and an-Naas (114) four times each, and *la
ilaha illallahu wallahu akbar, subhanallah wel hamdulillah, wa la hawla
wa la quwwata illabillah al-aliy al-adheem*[^5] four times.” [^6]

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) said, “In Rajab there is a night that is better than
all that the sun rises on: it is the night of the twenty- seventh.” He
mentioned a special prayer to be offered that night.[^7]

### His Hajj

Imam Abu Ja'far al-Jawad (a.s) performed the hajj many times. Al-Hasan
bin Ali al-Kufi narrated some of Imam al-Jawad’s worships during the
hajj. He said, “I saw Abu Ja'far the second (a.s) in 215 (or 225) AH bid
farewell to the House (the Kaaba)…he circumambulated the House and
kissed the Yemeni Corner in every turn. In the seventh turn, he kissed
the corner and the Black Rock and rubbed his hand (over the Rock) and
then rubbed his face with his hand. Then, he came to the Temple (of
Abraham) and offered a prayer of two rak’as behind it. He went to the
rear of the Kaaba, removed his dress from his abdomen and stayed long
supplicating Allah.

Then, he went out from the gate of al-Hannatin and left. In 219 AH I saw
him bid farewell to the House in the night. He kissed the Yemeni Corner
and the Black Rock in every turn. In the seventh turn, he went to the
rear of the Kaaba near the Yemeni Corner and on the rectangular rock. He
removed the dress from his abdomen, kissed the Rock and rubbed on it. He
went to the Temple, offered prayer behind it and then he left and did
not come back to the House. He stayed at the rear of the Kaaba
(al-Multazam) as much as the period of the circumambulation of some of
our companions who circumambulated seven or eight turns...”[^8]

Ali bin Mahziyar narrated, ‘I saw Abu Ja'far the second (a.s) in the
night of ziyarah (visit) make the circumambulation of women and offer
prayer behind the Temple (of Abraham). Then, he entered the well of
Zamzam and ladled some water with the bucket. He drank some and pour
some over some of his body…one of our companions told me that he had
seen him (Imam al-Jawad) in the next year do the same thing.’[^9]

This detailed description of narrators is because the actions of the
imams are from the Sunna that the Shia follow in their worship.

### His Supplications

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) had many supplications showing the extent of his
devotedness to Allah the Almighty.

From among his supplications is this one: “O You Who has no like or an
example, You are Allah; there is no god but You. There is no creator
save You. You annihilate the creatures and You remain. You are patient
with whoever disobeys You. In forgiveness is Your satisfaction…”[^10]

Once, Muhammad bin al-Fudhayl had written to him asking to teach him a
supplication. Imam al-Jawad (a.s) wrote to him, “In the morning and in
the evening you say: ‘Allah, Allah is my Lord, the Beneficent, the
Merciful. I do not associate with Him anything’ and if you add to this
more, it will be good for you. You supplicate Allah with this
supplication to satisfy your need because it is for everything by the
will of Allah the Almighty and Allah does whatever He likes.”[^11]

The supplications of the infallible imams show the essence of sincerity
and obedience to Allah. They had devoted themselves to Allah and His
love had been impressed in their feelings and emotions and so they were
wholeheartedly devoted when supplicated Him.

### His Asceticism

Being ascetic in this life was one of the most prominent morals of the
pure imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s). They turned away from the pleasures of
this life and did all that might take them closer to Allah.

Imam Ali (a.s), the pioneer of the great justice in the earth, during
his caliphate wore the coarsest clothes and ate the coarsest foods. He
did not take any gold or silver for himself, did not collect wealth or
build houses. In the light of this shining conduct all the pure imams
walked. They all were ascetic in this life and they turned away from its
pleasures.

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) was in the prime of youth when al-Ma'moon gave him
abundant monies about one million dirhams besides the legal dues that
came to him from the Shia who believed in his imamate and the entailed
endowments in Qum and other places, but he did not spend anything of
those monies on his private affairs. He spent them on the poor and the
needy.

Al-Husayn al-Mukari saw Imam al-Jawad (a.s) in Baghdad while being
surrounded by honoring and glorifying by the official and public
milieus. He thought with himself that Imam al-Jawad (a.s) would not go
back to his homeland in Yathrib and he would reside in Baghdad where he
lived at ease and luxury. Imam al-Jawad (a.s) knew Husayn’s intention
and so he went near him and said, ‘O Husayn, the bread of barley and the
ground salt in the sanctum (Medina) of my grandfather the messenger of
Allah is more beloved to me than what you see me in…’[^12]

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) did not like the means of luxury and ease the state
had given to him. He was like his fathers who had divorced the worldly
life and turned towards Allah thinking of nothing other than Him.

### His Generosity

Imam Abu Ja'far (a.s) was one of the most generous and open- handed
people. He was called al-Jawad (the generous) because of his excessive
generosity, open-handedness, charitableness and kindness to people.
Historians mentioned many scenes of his generosity.

1. One year, Ahmed bin Hadeed and some of his companions set out to
perform the hajj. On their way, some robbers attacked them and robbed
all the monies and luggage they had. When they arrived in Yathrib, Ahmed
bin Hadeed went to Imam al-Jawad (a.s) and told him about what had
happened to him and to his companions. Imam al-Jawad (a.s) gave him some
clothes and a sum of money to be distributed among his companions. This
sum of money was as much as that which had been robbed from them.[^13]
Imam al-Jawad (a.s) had saved them from their distress and recompensed
them for what had been taken from them.

2. Al-Utbi narrated that one of the Alawids loved a bondmaid in Yathrib
and he could not pay her price. He told Imam al-Jawad (a.s) of that.
Imam al-Jawad (a.s) asked him about her keeper and he told who he was.
Some days later, the Alawid man asked about the bondmaid and it was said
to him that she had been sold. He asked who the buyer was and the answer
was “we do not know”. Imam al- Jawad (a.s) had bought the bondmaid
secretly. The Alawid man was so upset and distressed. He hurried to Imam
al-Jawad (a.s) crying out, ‘The bondmaid was sold.’

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) smiled at him and said, ‘Do you know who has bought
her?’

The man said, ‘No, I do not.’

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) took the man with him and went to the small village
where the bondmaid was there. He took the man to a house and ordered him
to come in. The man refused to go into the house because he did not know
whose house it was. Imam al-Jawad (a.s) had just bought the house
recently. Imam al-Jawad (a.s) insisted on the man to come in. They both
came into the house and when they saw the bondmaid, Imam al-Jawad (a.s)
asked the man, ‘Do you know her?’

The man said, ‘Yes, I do!’

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) said to him, ‘She, the house with all its furniture,
the garden and its yield are yours. You can live with the bondmaid.’ The
man’s heart was filled with delight and he was confused how to thank
Imam al-Jawad (a.s).[^14]

These are some of the plentiful news historians have mentioned about the
generosity of Imam al-Jawad (a.s). Narrators and historians say that the
generosity of Imam al-Jawad (a.s) and his charity had included even the
animals.

Muhammad bin al-Waleed al-Kirmani narrated, ‘One day, I had a meal with
Abu Ja'far the second (a.s). When I finished eating and the dishes were
lifted, the servant went to pick the crumbs that were on the ground. Abu
Ja'far (a.s) said to him, ‘Leave whatever there is in the desert even if
it is a leg of a sheep and pick whatever on the ground inside the
house!’[^15] Imam al-Jawad (a.s) ordered his servant to leave the food
that was in the desert for birds and beasts.

### Doing Good To People

Being benevolent and merciful to people was another prominent quality of
Imam al-Jawad (a.s). Historians mentioned many stories on his
benevolence which we mention some here:

Ahmed bin Zakariyya as-Saydalani narrated that a man from bani[^16]
Hanifa from Sajistan had said, “I accompanied Abu Ja'far in the year
when he went to perform the hajj at the beginning of the rule of al-
Mu’tassim.[^17] I said to him when we were at the meal, ‘May I die for
you! Our wali believes in you and loves you. On me there is a land tax
to his diwan. If you please, may I die for you, to write to him to be
kind to me.’ He said, ‘I do not know him.’ I said, ‘May I die for you!
He is one of your lovers and followers and your letter to him will
benefit me.”

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) responded to him and wrote this letter: “The bearer
of my letter has mentioned the good beliefs of you. You will not be
rewarded for your deeds except those which you do correctly. Do good to
your brothers and know that Allah the Almighty will ask you about
everything even to the weight of an atom and a grain of mustard…’

When the man went back to Sajistan, he found that the wali al-Husayn bin
Abdullah an-Naysaboori, who knew about the letter that Imam al-Jawad
(a.s) had sent to him, had come to receive him from two leagues before
he would arrive. The wali took the letter and kissed it. He considered
that as an honor to him. He asked the man about his need and the man
told him.

He said to the man, ‘Do not give me any tax as long as I am in my
position’ Then he asked him about his family and children to know their
number and then he gave them presents. The man did not pay the tax as
long as the wali was alive, besides that the wali did not stop his gifts
to him. All that was due to the blessing and kindness of Imam al-Jawad
(a.s).[^18]

### His Comforting The People

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) comforted people in their joys and sorrows.
Historians said that Ibrahim bin Muhammad al-Hamadani had received a
grievance from the wali and he wrote to Imam al-Jawad (a.s) telling him
about what had happened to him.

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) felt pain and replied to him by this letter: “May
Allah hasten your victory over him, who has wronged you, and save you
from his burden (troubles). Be certain that the help of Allah will come
soon inshallah and the good afterlife will be yours…and praise Allah too
much’[^19]

He often comforted afflicted and distressed people. Once, he sent a
letter to a man, who had been afflicted by the death of his son. He said
in the letter: “In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. You
mentioned your distress of losing your son and mentioned that he was the
most beloved one among your children to you. Thus, Allah the Almighty
takes from children and other than children the purest one that a family
has, so that the reward of the afflicted ones is increased. May Allah
increase your reward, comfort you and strengthen your heart, He is
Mighty, Powerful. May Allah give you a descendant soon and I hope that
He has done so inshallah…’[^20] This emotional letter showed the extent
of the sympathy of Imam al-Jawad (a.s) with people and his comfort to
them in their joys and sorrows.

A man of the Shia wrote to Imam al-Jawad (a.s) complaining to him the
pain and the sorrow that occupied him after the death of his son and the
imam replied to him in a letter of comfort saying: “Have you not known
that Allah the Almighty chooses from the properties and the children of
a believer the most precious ones to reward him in return?”[^21]

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) participated with people in their joys and
distresses, comforted them in their misfortunes and disasters and helped
the poor and the week. By this benevolence and charity Imam al-Jawad
(a.s) had occupied the hearts and the feelings and made people love him
and be sincere to him in the full sense of the word.

These were some of the values and ideals of Imam al-Jawad (a.s) that had
raised him to the highest position like his fathers who had made the
springs of knowledge and wisdom overflow everywhere in the earth and
raised the torch of guidance and faith.

Imam al-Jawad (a.s) was one of the most wonderful examples of virtue and
perfection in the earth. People had never seen at his time an equal to
him in knowledge, piety, devotedness and religiousness. He was unique in
his virtues and morals which were the secret of his imamate.

The Islamic circles admired Imam al-Jawad (a.s) and wondered at his
talents and intellectual and scientific abilities which were infinite.
These talents and abilities have confirmed the faith and certainty of
the Shia and their belief that the imam must be the most aware, most
knowledgeable, most virtuous and most pious of the people of his time.

[^1]: The first ruler of the Umayyad state.

[^2]: He is an Egyptian author

[^3]: Kerbala is a place in Iraq where Imam Husayn (s), his family and
his companions were martyred at the hands of the Umayyad army on Ashura
(the tenth of Muharram) in the famous event of Islamic history.

[^4]: Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol. 5 p.298.

[^5]: la ilaha illallah (there is no god but Allah) wallahu akbar (and
Allah is great), subhanallah (glory be to Allah) wel hamdulillah (and
praise be to Allah), wa la hawla wa la quwwata illabillah al-aliy
al-adheem (there is no power and strength save in Allah, the High, the
Great).

[^6]: Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol. 5 p.243.

[^7]: Ibid., p.242.

[^8]: Wassa’il ash-Shia, vol.10 p.232.

[^9]: Ibid., vol.9 p.515.

[^10]: A’yan ash-Shia, vol.2,4 p.245.

[^11]: Uyun Akhbar ar-Ridha’, vol. 2 p.534.

[^12]: Ithbat al-Hudat, vol.6 p.185.

[^13]: Al-Wafi bil-Wafiyyat, vol.4 p.105, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 12 p.109.

[^14]: Mir’at az-Zamaan, vol.6 p.105, a manuscript in Ameerul Mo’mineen
Library.

[^15]: Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol. 6 p.499.

[^16]: Bani means “the family of” or “the tribe of”.

[^17]: One of the Abbasid caliphs

[^18]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 12 p.129.

[^19]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 12 p.126

[^20]: Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol. 2 p.874.

[^21]: Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol. 2 p.893


