The Age Of Imam Al-Jawad (A.S)
==============================

The age of Imam Abu Ja'far al-Jawad (a.s) was one of the brightest and
most wonderful Islamic ages. It was distinguished by its scientific rise
and intellectual development. Muslims and other than Muslims remained
living for generations and centuries on the tables of the intellectual
and scientific treasures that had been established in that age.

We have to talk-in brief- about the aspects of the life in the age of
Imam al-Jawad (a.s). Studying that age has become inevitable for
researchers because it uncovers the dimensions of personality, leads to
its intellectual sides and all its other sides.

Cultural Life
-------------

The cultural life in that age is considered as one of the most prominent
aspects of life in all the Islamic ages at all. Cultural movements have
flourished, sciences have spread widely, institutes have been
established, public libraries have spread everywhere and people came to
seek knowledge eagerly.

Nicholson says, ‘The vast area of the Abbasid State, its abundant wealth
and the prosperity of trade had a great influence on the cultural
renaissance that the East had never witnessed before until it seemed
that all people from the caliph to the meanest person in the society had
suddenly become students seeking knowledge or at least assistants to
literature.

During the reign of the Abbasid State, people traveled through three
continents looking for sources of knowledge to come back to their
countries like bees carrying with them honey to the eager students.
Then, they classified, by virtue of their great efforts, what they had
got in books that they were like the encyclopedias of today which had
the greatest favor on conveying these modern sciences to us in a way
unexpected before..’[^1]

Cultural Centers
----------------

The cultural centers at the time of Imam al-Jawad (a.s) were:

### 1. Yathrib

Yathrib (Medina) was one of the most important scientific centers in
that age. The school of Ahlul Bayt (a.s) had been established there and
included the best jurisprudents and narrators who made every effort to
record the traditions of the infallible imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s) for
these traditions were as the spirit and essence of Islam. In Yathrib,
the school of Successors had also been established. It was a
jurisprudential school that took jurisprudence from the traditions
narrated by the Prophet’s companions or due to opinion and analogy.

### 2.Kufa

Kufa came after Yathrib in its importance. The great mosque in Kufa was
one of the most important Islamic institutes and schools. Many seminars
were held in this mosque. The general sphere of study was on the Islamic
sciences such as jurisprudence, tafsir (interpretation of the Qur’an),
Hadith and other branches.

Kufa had adopted the Alawite doctrine and its school was interested in
the knowledge of Ahlul Bayt (a.s). Al-Hasan bin Ali al-Washsha’ said, ‘I
have seen in this mosque (the mosque of Kufa) nine hundred sheiks each
saying: Ja’far bin Muhammad (as-Sadiq) has told me so- and-so…’[^2]

It was not only jurisprudence that was dealt with in the school of Kufa,
but also grammar was studied and taught. In Kufa, a school of
grammarians had been established. From the famous scholars of this
school was al-Kisa’iy, whom ar-Rasheed (the Abbasid caliph) had
entrusted to teach his two sons al-Ameen and al-Ma’moon. Worth
mentioning is that grammar has been established by Imam Ali (a.s). It
was he who had classified the bases and rules of Arabic grammar.

### 3.Basra

Basra was a very important center of grammar. The first one who had
established the base of the school of Basra was Abul Aswad ad- Du’ali,
the disciple of Imam Ali (a.s). This school competed with the school of
Kufa. The grammarians of Basra were called (people of logic) to be
distinguished from the grammarians of Kufa. One of the most prominent
scholars of this school of grammar was Seebwayh the Persian who had
written a book called “the book of Seebwayh” that is the maturest book
in Arabic. De Beaur[^3] says, ‘If we look at the book of Seebwayh, we
shall find it a mature work and a great effort. Later scholars have said
it must be a fruit of cooperative efforts of scientists like the Canon
of Avicenna.’[^4]

As Basra was a field for grammar it was a school of Tafsir, one of whose
prominent ulama was Abu Amr bin al-Ala’. It was also a school of prosody
whose bases had been established by al-Khalil bin Ahmed the author of
“al-Ayn” which was the first dictionary in the Arabic language.

### 4. Baghdad

Baghdad had flourished with many scientific and cultural movements.
Institutes and schools had spread everywhere and nothing was easier than
knowledge which had been at hand to everyone. Baghdad had not
specialized in a certain branch of knowledge like the other Islamic
centers, but it had all sciences besides all kinds of arts. Baghdad had
been the greatest scientific center in that age.

Students from all sides of the worlds came to it seeking knowledge.
(Augustan Le Bon) says, ‘Scientists, artists and men of literature from
all nations and countries; Greeks, Persians, Copts and others came to
Baghdad and made it the center of culture in the world.’ Abul Faraj
al-Isfahani said that al-Ma’moon was often alone with philosophers. He
liked their company and felt pleased with their discussions though he
knew that people of knowledge were the choice of Allah from among His
creatures and the elite of His people.[^5]

Prevailing Sciences
-------------------

### 1. Sciences Of The Qur’an

From among the sciences of the Qur’an, there are:

#### A. Recitation

This branch of knowledge studies the recitation of the Qur'an. It has
been found in seven ways and each way is ascribed to a reciter. From the
famous reciters in the Abbasid age were Yahya bin al-Harith ath- Thimari
(d.154 AH), Hamza bin Habib az-Zayyat (d.156 AH), Abu Abdurrahman
al-Muqri (d. 213 AH) and Khalaf bin Hisham al- Bazzaz (d. 229 AH).[^6]

#### B. Tafsir (interpretation)

It is the interpretation of the Holy Qur'an and explaining its meanings.
The commentators of the Holy Qur'an had two ways in their
interpretations.

The first is the interpretation due to the transmitted sayings of the
Prophet (a.s) and the infallible imams. This is the way that has been
followed by most of the Shia commentators like in Tafsir al-Qummi,
Tafsir al-Askari and Tafsir al-Burhan. Their evidence on that is that
the infallible imams were singled out with the knowledge of the Qur'an
as it was in its reality and fact.

Imam Abu Ja'far al-Baqir (a.s) says, ‘No one can claim that he has (the
knowledge of) all the Qur'an; its esoteric and apparent knowledge except
the guardians.’[^7] There are many evidences proving that we must refer
to the infallible imams in interpreting the Qur'an.

Sheikh at-Toossi says, ‘Interpreting the Qur'an is not possible except
by relying on the true traditions of the Prophet (a.s) and the
infallible imams whose sayings are evidence like the Prophet’s.’[^8]

The second is the interpretation due to opinion that is to rely on the
reasonable accounts related to approval. The interpreters of the
Mu’tazilites and other sects have followed this kind of interpretation
and did not pay any attention to the sayings of the infallible imams
concerning the interpretation of the Qur'an. They depended in their
interpretations on that which they approved reasonably.

Anyhow, the first school of Tafsir due to the transmitted traditions was
at the time of Imam Ali (a.s) who was the first interpreter of the
Qur'an and from whom Abdullah bin Abbas and other great companions took
interpretation. The infallible imams (a.s) paid too much attention to
the Tafsir of the Qur'an through their lectures on interpretation, the
reasons behind the revelation of the Qur’anic verses and the merit of
reciting the Qur'an.

### 2. Hadith

Hadith is one of the most important sources of the Islamic legislation.
The Hadith is the traditions transmitted from the Prophet (a.s) or the
infallible imams whether their sayings, doings or their approving of
others’ sayings or doings. It is called the Sunna.

The Shia were the first who had written down the traditions and the
infallible imams (a.s) encouraged their companions to do that. Abu Basir
said, “Once, I went to Abu Abdullah (as-Sadiq) and he said, ‘What
prevents you from writing down traditions? You shall not memorize them
until you write them down. Some people from Basra have just left now.
They asked about some things and wrote down the answers.’

The companions of Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s) had written down all the true
traditions in big volumes which were the first collections of the Shia
that were the base for the four collections of the three sheikhs.[^9]

### 3. Jurisprudence

From the most distinct sciences that had prevailed in that age and all
the Islamic ages was Jurisprudence which explained to people their
obligations and their responsibility before Allah in following these
obligations during their lives. The care for studying jurisprudence was
more than it for other sciences.

The infallible imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s) had a great role in
establishing their jurisprudential school from which great jurisprudents
and ulama had graduated such as Zurara, Muhammad bin Muslim, Jabir bin
Yazeed al-Ju’fi and other great ulama. These jurisprudents recorded all
what they had heard from the infallible imams (a.s) in their books which
were about four hundred ones and then they were edited and collected in
the four famous books to which the Shia jurisprudents refer in deriving
the legal verdicts.

This activity of seeking and learning jurisprudence eagerly was not
limited to the Shia, but all the Islamic sects took much care of that.

### 4. Usool

The branch of Usool[^10] had been established by Imam Abu Ja'far al-
Baqir (a.s). Ijtihad and the deriving of the legal verdicts depend on
this science which was studied widely in that age.

### 5. Grammar

Grammar played an important role in the Abbasid age. Its studies were a
point of argumentations. In the palaces of the caliphs meetings were
held for this matter and sharp disputes took place between grammarians.
Many famous scholars had specialized in this science at the head of whom
were al-Kisa’iy, al-Farra’ and Seebwayh. This branch of knowledge had
been established by Imam Ali (a.s), the pioneer of knowledge and wisdom
in the earth.

### 6. Theology

From the studies prevailing in that age was theology. Theology means the
defending of one’s religious beliefs through scientific proofs. This art
had been established by the infallible imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s) and
then some of their disciples specialized in it. At the head was the
great scholar Hisham bin al-Hakam and from the famous Sunni theologians
were Wasil bin Ata’, Abul Huthayl al- Allaf, Abul Hasan al-Ash’ari and
al-Ghazali.

### 7. Medicine

Medicine developed widely in the Abbasid age and the Abbasid kings
encouraged people to study it. They gave prizes and great monies to
those specialized in medicine like the physician Gibril bin Bakhtsho’
an-Nasrani.

### 8. Chemistry

From the sciences that got great attention in that age was chemistry.
Jabir bin Hayyan, the pride of the Arabic East, had specialized in this
branch and received his information from Imam as-Sadiq (a.s), the
thinking mind of humanity. It was he who had established this science.

In addition, civil engineering, architecture and astronomy were spread
and prevailing in the age of Imam al-Jawad (a.s). Hundreds of books had
been written on these sciences, some of which were lost and some are
still kept in the bookcases of the world libraries.

Translation
-----------

From the aspects of the development of the cultural life in that age was
the interest in translating books from foreign languages into Arabic.
Translated books were on medicine, mathematics, astronomy, philosophy
and politics. The head of the divan of translation was Hunayn bin
Is~haq. Ibn an-Nadeem had mentioned

many of these translated books in his book al-Fihrist. Ibn an-Nadeem
said, ‘Between al-Ma’moon and the king of Rome there were
correspondences. Once, al-Ma’moon wrote to the king of Rome asking his
permission to send him what he would choose from the ancient sciences
kept in the country of the Romans. The king responded to him after he
had refused at first. Then, al-Ma’moon sent some men, from among whom
were al-Hajjaj bin Matar, Ibnul Batriq, Salim the chief of Baytol Hikma
(the house of wisdom) and others, to Rome. When they came back carrying
with them scientific books, he ordered them to translate the books into
Arabic and the books were translated.’[^11]

These translated books helped the Arabic intellect to grow and
participated in the development of sciences in the Islamic countries.

Institutes And Libraries
------------------------

The Abbasid government had established in Baghdad schools and institutes
to teach the Islamic branches of knowledge and other sciences. About
thirty schools had been established in Baghdad and each of them was more
wonderful than a wonderful palace. The greatest and more famous one was
an-Nidhamiyya School.[^12]

Many libraries had also been established in Baghdad such as the library
of Baytol Hikma, to which ar-Rasheed had conveyed his private library
and added to it the books his father al-Mahdi and grandfather al-Mansor
had gathered. During his reign, al-Ma’moon asked the emir of Sicilia for
some scientific and philosophical books. When the books arrived, he took
them to the library of Baytol Hikma. He also brought many books to this
library from Khurasan. Whenever he heard of a book, he brought it to
this library. This library was the richest one in the world which
researchers and students always referred to. It was still so until when
the Mongols attacked and occupied Baghdad. They destroyed the library
with all its books and so the Islamic world had lost its greatest
heritage.

Maps And Observatories
----------------------

From the signs of the cultural and civilizational development in that
age was that al-Ma’moon had ordered to draw a map of the world which was
called (as-Sorah al-Ma’moniyya-the Ma’mooni picture). It was the first
map of the world that had been drawn in the Abbasid age. Al-Ma’moon had
also ordered to build an observatory. It was built in ash-Shamasiyya, a
quarter in Baghdad.[^13]

In this prosperous, scientific sphere Imam al-Jawad (a.s) was the
pioneer of the cultural movement. Scholars and scientists gathered
around him ladling from the springs of his knowledge and asking him
about the minutest questions in philosophy and theology and they got
satisfactory answers from him.

Political Life
--------------

The political life at the time of Imam Abu Ja'far al-Jawad (a.s) was
ugly and absolutely critical not only to Imam al-Jawad (a.s), but also
to all Muslims. The umma had been afflicted with violent waves of
seditions and troubles. Before talking about those events, we find it is
necessary to talk about the system of the rule in the Abbasid age and
some other matters that have a relation with the subject.

The System Of The Rule
----------------------

The system of the Abbasid rule was the same as the Umayyad rule. It did
not change. Nicholson described it as a despotic rule and that the
Abbasids had an absolute rule over the nation like that of the Sasanian
kings before them.[^14]

The rule was run due to the desires and fancies of the Abbasid kings and
their emirs paying no attention to the Islamic law. Their
administrative, economical, and political conducts had deviated from
what Islam had legislated.

The Abbasid kings were arbitrary with the affairs of Muslims. They
imposed on them a terroristic rule with no mercy or kindness that was
too far from the Islamic caliphate which had been legislated to spread
justice, equality and truth between people.

The Caliphate And Heridity
--------------------------

The Islamic caliphate with its original principle did not submit to any
rule of heredity or nepotism or tendencies and fancies. Islam had fought
all these things and considered them as facets of corruption and
intellectual backwardness to Muslims. Islam had established the
caliphate on noble values, high ideals and the power to run the affairs
of Muslims justly. Whoever had these qualities would be qualified to
undertake this serious position on which the safety and happiness of the
nation depended.

As for the Shia, they saw that the caliphate was the right of the
infallible imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s) not because they were the close
relatives of the Prophet (a.s), but because of their excellences,
virtues and talents that no one other than them had ever had.

However, the Abbasids considered hereditary in the rule as the firm base
for them to deserve the caliphate because they were the cousins of the
Prophet (a.s). They spent great monies on the media to spread that among
people. Mercenaries hastened towards the Abbasids by defaming the
Alawids[^15] and announcing that the Abbasids were worthier of the
Prophet (a.s) than his progeny.

Historians say that Abban bin Abdul Hameed was exiled by the Abbasids
because of his loyalty to Ahlul Bayt (a.s). He went to the
Barmakids[^16] asking them to intercede for him with Harun ar-Rasheed.
They said to him that there was no way to that except that he would say
in his poetry that the Abbasids were the heirs of the Prophet (a.s) and
worthier of the caliphate than the Alawids. He responded to them and
composed a poem on that. When he recited the poem before ar- Rasheed,
ar-Rasheed was so pleased. He was satisfied with Abban and gifted him
with much money.

### Unusual Conducts

When the Abbasids kept to the hereditary system of rule, they did many
things unusual, strange and against the advantage of the nation. They
entrusted their children with the caliphate while they were not adult
yet. Ar-Rasheed entrusted his son al-Ameen with the caliphate while he
was five years old and to his son al-Ma’moon when he was thirteen years.
They deviated from the principles of Islam that the position of the
caliphate must be trusted to one who should be wise, experienced and
well-qualified besides his experience in running all the affairs of the
nation. They appointed more than one person in the position of the heir
apparent at the same time which would separate the nation and destroy
its unity. Ar-Rasheed had trusted the caliphate to both of his sons
al-Ameen and al-Ma’moon that made them, later on after their father’s
death, fight each other and involve the nation in bad crises and
dangerous seditions that we shall discuss in the next chapters.

Vizierate
---------

From the most important bodies in the Abbasid state was the vizierate.
It was, in most cases, a vizierate of authorization that the caliph
authorized his vizier to run all the affairs of his state while he
occupied himself with amusement, play and insolence. Al-Mahdi, the
Abbasid caliph, had appointed Ya’qob bin Dawod as his vizier and
entrusted him with all the affairs of his subjects and he turned to
pleasures. Ar-Rasheed had made Yahya bin Khalid al-Barmaki his vizier
and given him absolute authority and he turned to his pleasures and
lusts, and his red nights in Baghdad witnessed on that.

Yahya ran the affairs of the vast state due to his tendencies. He spent
great monies on the poets who praised him. He possessed buildings and
gardens that yielded millions of dinars and that was the reason which
made Harun ar-Rasheed throw him into prison, kill his son Ja’far and
confiscate all their properties.

Al-Ma’moon set his vizier al-Fadhl bin Sahl free to do in the state
whatever he liked. He became extremely wealthy through plundering and
taking bribes.

The nation suffered misfortunes and ordeals during the times of these
viziers. They were the striking force over the public. The caliphs used
them as means to subject the people, plunder their wealth and force them
to do what they did not will.

The viziers were liable to rage and revenge from people because of the
injustice and oppression they committed. Di’bil al-Khiza’iy[^17] had
advised al-Fadhl bin Marwan, a vizier of the Abbasids, and recommended
him to do good and be kind to people. He had mentioned to him as
examples three of the viziers who had had the same name as his and
preceded him in this position; al-Fadhl bin Yahya, al-Fadhl bin
ar-Rabee’ and al-Fadhl bin Sahl. When they were unjust and oppressive,
they met wrath and revenge.

From the strange events of treason that those viziers had committed was
that in one day al-Khaqani, the vizier of al-Muqtadir Billah, had
appointed nineteen supervisors on Kufa and taken bribe from each one of
them.[^18] Many such scandals and bad deeds were committed by those
viziers of the Abbasids.

The Sedition Between Al-Ameen And Al-Ma’moon
--------------------------------------------

Perhaps, one of the most prominent events at the age of Imam al- Jawad
(a.s) was the great sedition that had taken place between al- Ameen and
al-Ma’moon and caused a war between them and cost the Muslims too much
bloods just for that each of them wanted to be the caliph although they
were brothers. Before we talk about these events, we refer, in brief, to
some aspects of al-Ameen.

Al-Ameen had no any good quality that might make him fit to this
important position in Islam (the caliphate). Historians had unanimously
mentioned that he had no any noble quality. Ar- Rasheed, his father, had
entrusted him with the caliphate out of the influence of his wife Lady
Zubayda.

Al-Ameen disliked knowledge and despised the ulama. He was illiterate
not knowing reading and writing.[^19] Since he was so, then how did his
father ar-Rasheed entrust him with the caliphate?

He was weak-willed. He had been entrusted with the rule over the vast
state and could not manage the affairs or be successful in his policies.
Al-Mas’oodi, the historian, says about him, ‘He was of bad conduct and
unintelligent. He followed his fancies, ignored his serious affairs,
relied on others in the important matters, and trusted in disloyal
ones.’[^20] Al-Kutubi described him by saying, ‘Vice was so easy to him
so that he followed his fancy and desires and did not think of his end.
He was very stingy in food and did not care when he would sit or with
whom he would drink.’[^21]

There is no doubt that good thinking and intelligence are from the
conditions that must be available in one who would rule over the
Muslims.

He hid himself from the public, from his family, his emirs and officials
and despised them. He turned to amusement and singing and entrusted the
affairs of his state to his vizier al-Fadhl bin ar-Rabee’ who acted
after his desires and tendencies.

Once, Isma’eel bin Subayh, who was favorite by al-Ameen, said to him, ‘O
Ameerul Mo’mineen, your leaders, soldiers and the public of your
subjects began mistrusting you and doubting your hide from them. You may
sit for some time in a meeting and let them come to you because this
will calm them down and make them give up their illusions.’

Al-Ameen responded to him and sat in his royal court. Poets came and
recited their poems. Then he got in al-Khuraqah and left to
ash-Shamasiyya. Knights on their horses stopped in rows at the banks of
the Tigris. Foods and treasures were carried with him. Al-Khuraqah was a
ship in the shape of a lion. People had never seen a scene more
beautiful than that. Abu Nu’as, the poet, was with him in the ship to
drink with him and recite him poetry.

These were some of al-Ameen’s features giving us a conception that he
was insignificant person spending his time on his pleasures and lusts
and paying no attention to the affairs of the Islamic state.

Deposing Al-Ma’moon
-------------------

Al-Ameen assumed the caliphate on the day when his father ar- Rasheed
died. When everything became stable to him, he deposed his brother
al-Ma’moon and made his son, who was a baby in the cradle, as his heir
apparent and called him an-Natiq bil Haqq. He sent to the Kaaba a
messenger to fetch him the book of the covenant which his father had
hung in the Kaaba and in which he had written that the position of the
heir apparent would be for al-Ma’moon after al- Ameen. When the covenant
was brought to him, he tore it. He did so according to the suggestion of
al-Fadhl bin ar-Rabee’ and Bakr bin al-Mu’tamir as historians say.

Destructive Wars
----------------

When al-Ameen deposed his brother al-Ma’moon from the position of the
heir apparent and informed him of that officially, he appointed Ali bin
Eesa to lead an army against al-Ma’moon. He gave him ties of gold and
said to him, ‘Tie al-Ma’moon and do not kill him until you bring him
alive to me.’ He gave him two million dinars. When al-Ma’moon knew that,
he announced himself as Ameerul Mo’mineen. He stopped sending the land
tax to al-Ameen, removed his name from the flag and from the dirhams and
dinars, and announced his disobedience against him.

He appointed Tahir bin al- Husayn and Harthamah bin A’yun at the head of
an army to fight against al-Ameen. The two armies met in ar-Riyy in a
violent war where rivers of bloods were shed. Finally, the army of
al-Ma’moon won the battle and the leader of al-Ameen’s army was killed
and all their baggage and weapons were taken. Tahir bin al-Husayn wrote
to al-Fadhl bin Sahl, the vizier of al-Ma’moon, informing him of this
victory. He said in his letter, ‘I write to you while the head of Ali
bin Eesa is in my lap and his ring is in my hand, and praise be to Allah
the Lord of the worlds.’

Al-Fadhl bin Sahl came to al-Ma’moon, greeted him and called him as the
caliph. He told him about the victory of his army. When al- Ma’moon was
certain of victory, he sent to Tahir, the general leader of his army,
gifts and monies, thanked him too much for that and ordered him to march
to occupy Iraq and do away with his brother al-Ameen.

Blockade Of Baghdad
-------------------

The armies of al-Ma’moon moved to occupy Baghdad under the leadership of
Tahir bin al-Husayn. They blockaded Baghdad and the blockade lasted for
a long time until the signs of civilization in Baghdad were destroyed,
poverty and wretchedness prevailed, criminals and wicked people
assassinated good people, plundered the properties and violated the
women. Then, a group of good people gathered under the leadership of a
man called Sahl bin Salama and stood against those wicked people with
weapons and drove them out of Baghdad.[^22]

Anyhow, Baghdad faced great losses and destruction because of this great
sedition. It lost many of its people. The armies of al-Ma’moon marched
to surround the palace of al-Ameen and defeat his forces. The army of
al-Ameen could not stand against the armies of al- Ma’moon that had high
morale besides the weapons and equipments they had.

The Murder Of Al-Ameen
----------------------

In the middle of that ordeal al-Ameen was busy with amusement and play.
Historians said that he was fishing with some of his servants among whom
was Kawthar whom al-Ameen was fond of. The news of the defeat of his
army and the blockade of his palace came to him but he was indifferent.
He said, ‘Kawthar has fished three fishes but I have fished just two.’
The vanguard of al-Ma’moon’s army attacked al-Ameen and killed him. His
head was taken to Tahir bin al-Husayn who set it on a spear and recited
the Qur’anic verse, ***(O Allah, Master of the Kingdom! Thou givest the
kingdom to whomsoever Thou pleasest and takest away the kingdom from
whomsoever Thou pleasest).***[^23]

The disagreement between al-Ameen and al-Ma’moon was the most important
political event in that age.

The Caliphate Of Ibrahim The Dissolute
--------------------------------------

From among the political events in that age was the caliphate of Ibrahim
al-khalee’ (the dissolute) who had left no kind of debauchery unless he
committed it. He was drunk most of his times. The Abbasids had appointed
him as their caliph out of their spite and hate against al-Ma’moon. Bad
people and people of play and singing had paid homage to him expecting
money from him but he procrastinated in giving them and when it was so
long, they surrounded his palace. Then, one of his men came out telling
the mob that the caliph had no money. One of the funny people got up and
said, ‘Let our caliph come out to us to sing three songs for the people
in this side and three songs for the people in that side and this will
be their gift…’[^24]

Di’bil the poet had mocked him in some verses of poetry describing him
with the ugliest qualities and saying that his Holy Book was his lute.
(Ruster Stein) says, ‘He had no talents of a ruler but he was a man of a
nice tact interested in music and singing.’[^25]

Al-Ma’moon with his armies marched towards Baghdad to do away with the
rebellion of Ibrahim. When Ibrahim knew about that, he fled and all
those whom he trusted in their support fled. Ibrahim remained hidden in
Baghdad with his fear and fright. When al-Ma’moon arrested him, he
forgave him and set him free because he had no any political weight to
be feared.

The Revolt Of Abu As-Saraya
---------------------------

One of the greatest public revolts that had taken place at the time of
Imam Abu Ja'far al-Jawad (a.s) was the revolt of Abu as-Saraya that
defended the fateful matters of all the Muslim peoples. The revolt
invited to Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s) of the progeny of Prophet Muhammad (a.s)
who were the hope of the oppressed and deprived. The revolt was about to
do away with the Abbasid state. Most of Muslim countries responded. Abu
as-Saraya through his intelligence and experience could bring some of
Imam Musa al-Kadhim’s sons and make them leaders in his army that made
masses of people support and join this revolt enthusiastically.

However, al-Ma’moon through his political talents could defeat this
movement. He brought Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s) to Khurasan and forced him to
accept the position of heir apparent. Doing so, he showed to people that
he was Alawid in thought. He was kind to the Alawids and instructed all
the bodies of his government to defame Mo’awiya and to prefer Imam Ali
(a.s) to all of the Prophet’s companions. Thus, people thought
al-Ma’moon as a Shiite. In this cunning way he could win the events and
put out the flame of the revolt.

These events and revolts that took place at the time of Imam al- Jawad
(a.s) showed that the political state was not stable.

The Abbasids Pay Homage To The Alawids
--------------------------------------

No Muslim doubted that Ahlul Bayt (a.s) had the right and were worthier
of the caliphate than the Abbasids. The Abbasids themselves did not find
that they were the people of the caliphate as long as the Alawids were
there. They unanimously paid homage to the Alawid leader Muhammad
Thunnafs az-Zakiyya. They gathered together with the Alawids in
al-Abwa’. Salih bin Ali got up to say, ‘You are the men to whom the eyes
of people extend. Allah has gathered you in this place. Agree on paying
homage to one of you and separate everywhere and pray Allah to make you
succeed and win victory…’

Al-Mansor ad-Dawaniqi (the later-on Abbasid caliph) invited people to
pay homage to Muhammad Thunnafs az-Zakiyya whom all the Islamic
movements supported at that time. Al-Mansor addressed people by saying,
‘What for do you deceive yourselves? By Allah, you know that people do
not bow their necks or respond to anyone more than to this young man-he
pointed at Muhammad bin Abdullah…’

People said, ‘By Allah, you are true. We know this.’

The Alawids and the Abbasids began paying homage to Muhammad. From among
the people who paid homage were Abul Abbas as- Saffah and Abu Ja'far
al-Mansor. The most enthusiastic one in serving and flattering Muhammad
was al-Mansor ad-Dawaniqi. He led his (Muhammad’s) camel and leveled his
clothes and said, ‘He is the Mahdi of us, Ahlul Bayt.’[^26]

The homage of al-Mansor to Muhammad was out of hypocrisy. One day,
Uthman bin Muhammad az-Zubayri was brought to al-Mansor[^27] as captive
after the failure of the revolt of Muhammad Thunnafs az- Zakiyya.
Al-Mansor shouted at him, ‘O Uthman, you have rebelled against me with
Muhammad…’

Uthman, who mocked at life and was indifferent to death, replied as a
freeman, ‘I and you had paid homage to him in Mecca; I carried out my
homage and you broke your homage…’

These words were like a thunderbolt on the head of this tyrant. He
abused Uthman and Uthman replied with the same and then the tyrant
ordered Uthman to be killed and he was killed.[^28]

The Abbasid had unanimously paid homage to Muhammad Thunnafs az-Zakiyya
but they broke their homage and killed Muhammad and all his companions
of the Alawids.

Seizing The Authority
---------------------

The Abbasids had seized the authority from the Alawids. They instructed
their propagandist at the beginning of the revolt to invite to Imam
ar-Ridha’ (a.s) and to deceive the masses cunningly that the caliphate
was the right of Ahlul Bayt (a.s) and no one else had a share in it. For
the sake of this aim, Muslims sacrificed their dear souls and
properties. Muslims believed and were certain that no one would save and
free them from the oppression and injustice of the Umayyads except Ahlul
Bayt (a.s), the people of justice and truth.

Mir Ali says, ‘The word of Ahlul Bayt (a.s) was the magic that united
the hearts of the different classes of people and gathered them around
the black banner…’[^29]

The Abbasids hid under this shed that united passions and feelings and
began repeating the same mottos the masses announced that there would be
no ruler over the Muslims except Imam ar-Ridha’ of the Prophet’s
progeny. The nation set out in its way destroying the forts of the
oppressors and annihilating their propagandists and armies. When the
victory came, the Abbasids crept to the throne and occupied the position
of Ahlul Bayt (a.s) and robbed the efforts of the masses.

Disappointment Of Muslims
-------------------------

The hopes of Muslims were disappointed when the Abbasids assumed the
leadership of the nation. Nothing of the Umayyad policies changed.
Oppression came back and the door of injustice was wide open again.

Dr. Ahmed Mahmod Subhi says, ‘…but that high example of justice and
equity that people expected from the Abbasids became an illusion. The
violence of al-Mansor and ar-Rasheed and their greediness, and the
oppression of the sons of Ali bin Eesa and their playing with the wealth
of the Muslims reminds us of al-Hajjaj, Hisham, and Yousuf bin Umar
ath-Thaqafi. Resentment spread among all people after Abdullah
as-Saffah[^30] and also al-Mansor had begun their rules with shedding
the Muslims’ blood so excessively in a way that had not been seen
before.’[^31]

The poets of that age had described the disappointment of the Muslims
and the loss of their expectations under the Abbasid rule. Sadif, the
poet, says,

“We hope our intimacy comes back,

after separation, enmity and grudge,

and the state, whose leaders’ rule on us like the rule of idolaters,

passes away.”

When al-Mansor, the tyrant, heard these verses, he wrote to his governor
Abdussamad to bury the poet alive and he did.[^32]

The wishes and expectations of the Muslim peoples had collapsed and
their dreams turned into mirage. The Abbasid rule was based on tyranny
and oppression and the rulers were athirst for shedding bloods. The
political life during the Umayyad reign might be much better than that
of the first Abbasid age. The Umayyads had virtues that al-Mansor
ad-Dawaniqi had not any as Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) said.

Persecuting The Alawids
-----------------------

Most of the Abbasid governments persecuted the Alawids officially and
openly and treated them with absolute severity and violence. The Alawids
faced torture that they had never faced during the Umayyad rule. The
first one who had opened the door of evil and severe punishment against
the Alawids was the Pharaoh of this Umma; al-Mansor ad-Dawaniqi[^33] who
said, ‘I have killed from the progeny of Fatima[^34] one thousand or
more and left their master and guardian Ja’far bin Muhammad
(as-Sadiq).’[^35]

He was the keeper of the wardrobe of the heads of the Alawids which he
had left to his son al- Mahdi to fix his rule. That wardrobe included
heads of children, young and old men from the Alawids.[^36] This
dissolute had kept these heads until his afterlife to present them as a
gift to their grandfather Prophet Muhammad (a.s)! Woe unto him on the
Day of Resurrection!

It was he who had put the masters of the Alawids in his horrible prisons
until bad smells killed them and he tore down prisons on some of them
until they died. This tyrant blood shedder had committed all kinds of
massacres against the Alawids. They suffered during his rule horrible
kinds of torment and punishment that were beyond description.

As for Musa al-Hadi, the other Abbasid caliph, he did worse than al-
Mansor. He was the man of the event of Fakh which was not less than the
event of Kerbala in its terrible scenes. This blood shedder had
committed crimes in this event that were incomparable. He had ordered to
kill the children and the captives. He kept on chasing the Alawids and
killed whomever he caught. But the days of this tyrant lasted no long
until Allah killed him.

And as for Harun ar-Rasheed, he was not less than his predecessors in
his enmity towards Ahlul Bayt (a.s) and in persecuting them. He said,
‘Until when shall I be patient with the progeny of Abu Talib? By Allah,
I will kill them and kill their followers and I will do and do!’[^37] It
was he who had imprisoned Imam Musa bin Ja’far for many years and then
inserted poison to him until he died in his prison. Ar- Rasheed did his
best in oppressing the Alawids and burdening them.

During his reign the Alawids suffered not less than what they had
suffered during the days of al-Mansor.

When al-Ma’moon was the caliph, he cancelled the chase against the
Alawids, assigned dues to them and took care of them. However, it did
not last long because after he had assassinated Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s), he
began again chasing and oppressing them as his predecessors had done.

Anyhow, the greatest political problem by which Muslims had been tried
was the oppression against Ahlul Bayt (a.s). They suffered hunger to a
degree that al-Qassim bin Ibrahim cooked dead animals because of his
poverty and neediness.[^38] Many misfortunes had afflicted Ahlul Bayt
(a.s) at that period and of course, they caused great sorrow and
distress to Imam al-Jawad (a.s).

The Creation Of The Qur’an
--------------------------

Perhaps, one of the most complicated political problems that Muslims had
been tried with in that age was the problem of (the creation of the
Qur'an) which caused seditions and misfortunes to the nation.

Al-Ma’moon put forth this question in 212 AH and tried the ulama with it
terribly. Whoever did not believe in al-Ma’moon thought would be
imprisoned, exiled or killed.[^39] He forced people to believe in his
thought through subjection and punishment.

This question is considered as one of the most dangerous events that had
happened in that age. Philosophers and theologians have explained and
clarified its ambiguities. In order to avoid expiation, we shall not
talk about this matter in details.

### Economical Life

Islam has always tried the best with its rulings to develop and flourish
the economical life of people. Islam considered poverty as a destructive
disaster that must be removed. Islam has bound rulers and people in
charge to try their best to improve the general economy of the nation,
to increase the income of individuals and to spread ease and luxury
among people so that Muslims would be away from corruption and deviation
which resulted from poverty and deprivation undoubtedly. Islam had made
it impermissible for the rulers and people in charge to spend the wealth
of the nation on other than the advantage of Muslims and prohibited them
from having a hold on this wealth for themselves, their relatives and
companions.

Nevertheless, the Abbasid rulers contradicted the orders of Islam and
took people as their slaves and the wealth of the Muslims as theirs.
They spent the wealth of the nation on their pleasures and amusements
caring neither for Allah nor for His people. This bad policy caused many
crises to the general economy. The society had divided into two classes;
the first class of the too wealthy people who had nothing to do save
enjoying pleasures and amusements and the other class was of the
laboring people who worked in agriculture and other industries and
suffered hardships for the sake of those wealthy masters in order to get
a bite from the tables of those masters. The result of this imbalance in
the economical life was the loss of stability in both political and
social life.[^40] Here we talk in brief about some sides of the
economical life in that age.

#### The Income Of The State

The income of the Islamic state during the Abbasid age where Imam
al-Jawad (a.s) lived was very great. Ibn Khuldon mentioned that the land
tax at the reign of al-Ma’moon was about 400 million dirhams.[^41]

The wealth was so abundant to a degree that money was not counted but
was weighed. The wali of al-Mu’tassim (the Abbasid caliph) on Rome had
counted the land tax of that country and found it less than three
millions. Al-Mu’tassim wrote to him blaming, ‘The land tax of the worst
village on which the worst of my slaves are is more than that of your
land.’[^42]

Unfortunately, this great wealth was not spent on the development of
Muslims but the greatest part of it was spent on pleasures and lusts.
This great wealth reflected the life of luxury Baghdad witnessed at that
age as reflected in the stories of (A Thousand and One Night).

#### Striving To Collect Wealth

At that time, people strove to collect wealth by all means whether
lawful or unlawful. Wealth had been the criterion of men’s values.
People panted for collecting wealth in any means without refraining from
unlawfulness or vices. Cheating and deception were the best means of
collecting monies.[^43]

#### Accumulation Of Wealth

Plentiful wealth had been accumulated near some people especially in
Baghdad which was the capital of the Islamic nation. A class of
capitalists, who owned a great wealth, was found in Baghdad. Basra also
had a big class of wealthy people who had abundant monies for Basra was
the port of Iraq and the important commercial center that connected the
East with the West. It received the trades of India and the islands of
the eastern seas. Therefore, Basra was called “the land of India” and
“the mother of Iraq”.[^44]

#### The Expenditures Of Al-Ma’moon’s Marriage

From the lavish expenditure and wasting in the wealth of Muslims was
that when al-Ma'moon had spent great monies on his marriage with Lady
Pouran. He had given her one million dinars as dowry. Her father
al-Hasan bin Sahl had stipulated that al-Ma'moon should perform the
wedding in his (the pride’s father’s) village lying in Fam as-Sulh and
al-Ma'moon had responded to him. When al-Ma'moon wanted to marry, he
traveled to Fam as-Sulh. He scattered on the army that was with him one
million dinars. There were thirty thousand young and old male servants
and seven thousand maids with him. The army that was with him included
three hundred common soldiers and one hundred knights.

Al-Hasan bin Sahl, the bride’s father, slaughtered for his guests about
thirty thousand sheep, sixty thousand chickens, four hundred cows and
four hundred camels. People called that invitation as “the invitation of
Islam”.

But the fact is that Islam is free from such irresponsible behaviors.
Islam has prohibited spending from the treasury of Muslims on anything
that has no advantage for the Muslims.

When al-Ma'moon married Pouran, small balls of ambergris were scattered
from above the roof of al-Hasan bin Sahl’s house. People disregarded
these balls at first. Then, a man from above the roof called out,
‘Whoever got a ball let him open it and he will find a piece of paper
inside it. Whatever is written in the paper will be his.’ People opened
the balls and found small papers in them. Some of them had prizes of one
thousand dinars, some of five hundred dinars and so on until one hundred
dinars. Some of them had a prize of a horse, some had ten silk garments,
five garments, a male servant, or a maid. Whoever got that piece of
paper went to the divan and received that which had been written in
it.[^45] He had spent on the leaders of his army only about fifty
million dirhams.[^46]

When the moment of wedding came, Pouran was seated on a mat of gold.
Then, al-Ma'moon with his aunts and some Abbasid women came in to her.
Al-Hasan bin Sahl scattered above the heads of al- Ma'moon and his wife
three hundred pearls each of them weighing one weight. No one stretched
his hand to pick any. Then, al- Ma'moon asked his aunts to pick them and
he himself picked one, but one of the Abbasid women took it from him.

Al-Hasan bin Sahl and al-Ma'moon had spent these great monies on that
marriage and all those monies were from the treasury of the Muslims
where Allah had ordered to be spent to improve the people’s life and to
remove poverty and wretchedness.

When Harun ar-Rasheed got married to Lady Zubayda, he made an invitation
that no one like it had ever taken place in Islam. The gifts he gave
were uncountable. Gold vessels were full of silver coins and silver
vessels were full of gold coins besides musk and ambergris.[^47] This
was the wasting and lavishness that Islam had prohibited in order to
save the general economy of the nation.

#### Gifts And Donations

The Abbasid kings gifted the monies of the Muslims to the singers,
songstresses, their servants and agents. Once, Ibrahim bin al-Mahdi the
Abbasid sang a song to the caliph Muhammad al-Ameen and he gave him
three hundred million dirhams. Ibrahim found them too much for him and
said, ‘O my master, would that you have ordered twenty million dirhams!’
The caliph said, ‘Is it but the land tax of just one village?’[^48] One
day, Ibn Muhriz sang a song before ar- Rasheed who was affected by the
song and gave one hundred thousand dirhams to the singer. He gave the
same to the singer Dahman al-Ashqar.[^49] When al-Mahdi became the
caliph, he distributed all that which was in one of the wardrobes of the
treasury among his servants[^50] besides many many gifts and donations
that were given from the treasury which had been ordered to be spent on
vital projects to develop the nation.

#### Possession Of Maids

Instead of that the Abbasids would build and develop the nation and
improve the economy, they turned greedily to possess maids and
exaggerate in buying them. Beautiful maids were brought to Baghdad from
all points of the world; from Abyssinia, Rome, Georgia, and hybrid Arab
women from Medina, Ta’if, Yamama and Egypt who were eloquent and
quick-witted.[^51] Ar-Rasheed had about two thousand maids and
al-Mutawakkil had about four thousand maids.[^52]

One day, ar-Rasheed visited the Barmakids and when he wanted to leave,
their maids went out and stood in two rows like an army. They were
singing and playing lutes and tambourines until the last gate of the
palace.[^53]

The mother of Ja’far al-Barmaki had one hundred female slaves each
wearing dresses and jewels different from the other.[^54] Possessing
maids in such great numbers was the result of abundant wealth
accumulated near the people of this capitalist class that they did not
know how to spend it.

#### Diversity In Building

The Abbasid kings diversified in building their palaces. They built huge
palaces that no one had ever seen like them anywhere. They built in
Baghdad the palace of al-Khuld to be like the Garden of al- Khuld that
Allah had promised the pious of. From the great buildings was the palace
that al-Ameen had built. Historians said it was too white gilded with
pure gold and azurite. It had great gates with shining gold nails on
which there were precious jewels. It was furnished with red rugs as had
been dyed with blood. It had pictures and statutes of gold with
ambergris and camphor.[^55]

Ja’far al-Barmaki had spent on the building of his house about twenty
million dirhams. People diversified in building palaces and lavishness
and luxury in that age were to a degree that many of the doors of houses
in Baghdad were made of gold where the majority of the nation suffered
hunger and deprivation.

#### Furniture Of Houses

The palaces of the Abbasids were furnished with the most precious and
splendid furniture in the world. Historians said that Lady Zubayda had
chosen a carpet having pictures of animals and birds of all kinds made
of gold and the eyes of those animals and birds were from corundum and
other precious stones. It was said the she had spent on making this
carpet about one million dinars.[^56] Her other furniture was made of
gold inlaid with jewels and precious stones, others of ebony and
sandalwood with gold and all kinds of silk. She used candles of
ambergris and put on shoes inlaid with jewels and gems.[^57]

As for the meetings of the Barmakids, they were amazing. When ar-
Rasheed attended the meetings of the Barmakids, and while he was between
gold vessels and silk sofas and maids strutting in silk and jewels,
receiving him with good perfumes which he did not know what they were,
he imagined that he was in Paradise between beauty, jewels and
perfumes.[^58]

#### Clothes

As a result of the lavishness and luxury of the Abbasids, they had
established in their palaces small factories to manufacture cloths
called Dar at-Tiraz. The officer in charge managed the affairs of
workers, tools and salaries.[^59]

#### Foods

Due to the development of civilization kinds of foods and meals became
various. Tayfor mentioned that once Ja’far bin Muhammad al-Antaki had
lunch with al-Ma'moon and three hundred kinds of food were put on the
table.[^60] Because of the various kinds of food, their teeth decayed
and so they fixed them with gold as treatment.[^61]

### The Wealth From The Abbasids

The Abbasid kings and their viziers had left wealth after them that
could not be counted.

#### 1. Al-Mansor

The stingy tyrant al-Mansor ad-Dawaniqi had left wealth that he had
robbed from Muslims about 600 million dirhams and 14 million
dinars.[^62] He had accumulated these great monies in his treasuries and
left poverty and wretchedness to prevail over all the Islamic countries.

#### 2. Ar-Rasheed

He had left about 900 million dirhams.[^63]

#### 3. Al-Khayzuran

She was ar-Rasheed’s mother. She had left after her death about one
million and sixty thousand dirhams.[^64]

#### 4. Amr bin Su’da

He was one of the viziers of al-Ma'moon. He had left after his death
about eight million dirhams. They informed al-Ma'moon of that in a piece
of paper and he wrote on the paper, ‘This is little for one who worked
for us and his service to us was long. May Allah bless them for his
children.’[^65]

Most of these monies had been robbed from the Muslims or from the
treasury and spent in ways that had no any advantage for the Muslims or
the nation.

### The Life Of Amusement And Diversion

Most of the Abbasid caliphs lived a life of amusement, diversion and
debauchery without remembering Allah or the afterlife. They spent their
lives with pleasures, lusts and trivial play and singing.

Ahmed bin Sadaqa said, ‘I went to al-Ma'moon on the day of as-
Sa’anin.[^66] There were twenty Roman maids before him. They were in
silk and had gold crosses in their necks and leaves of palm and olive in
their hands. Al-Ma'moon said, ‘O Ahmed, you have composed some verses on
these maids. Come on! Sing them!’ Ahmed began singing and al-Ma'moon
kept on drinking while the maids were dancing before him.[^67]

Books of history and literature are full of the stories of their
amusement, play, debauchery, libertinism and their inadvertence to the
affairs of Muslims.

They played backgammon and chess. The bred doves and exaggerated in
their prices.[^68] They made cocks and dogs quarrel as a kind of play
and games.[^69] They practiced gambling which spread even in the saloons
of the poor. [^70]

Unfortunately, singing, play and debauchery reached even to some orators
who were required to be pious and devout. Al-Khateeb al- Baghdadi said
about the orator Muhammad bin ad-Dhaw’ that he was not reliable for
people to take knowledge from him because he drank wine and practiced
adultery openly. Abu Nu’as, the poet, visited him in Kufa in the house
of a vintner called Jabir.[^71]

### Ascetism

Beside the life of diversion and debauchery that people lived in the age
of Imam al-Jawad (a.s), there was another group of people who turned to
asceticism and left the pleasures of life aside. From these people was
Ibrahim bin al-Adham who had left the life of luxury and turned to the
obedience of Allah. He often recited,

‘Take Allah as your friend,

and leave people aside.’

Ma’rof al-Karkhi and Bishr bin al-Harith were also from the famous
ascetic people at that time.

Of course, the call to asceticism had come out of the excessive
diversion, debauchery and libertinism of the Abbasid kings and the
capitalist class and their not refraining from what Allah had
prohibited.

[^1]: Tareekh al-Islam (History of Islam), vol.2 p.322.

[^2]: The Life of Imam Musa bin Ja’far, vol.1 p.82.

[^3]: He might be De Beauvoir.

[^4]: The History of Philosophy in Islam, p.39.

[^5]: The Civilization of the Arabs, p.218.

[^6]: Al-Ma’arif, p.230-231, al-Fihrist, p.42-45.

[^7]: At-Tibyan, vol.1 p.4.

[^8]: The Life of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir, vol.1 p.181.

[^9]: The introduction of al-Muqni’ wel Hidayeh, p.10.

[^10]: Usool is the main principles and bases of religion.

[^11]: Al-Fihrist, p.339.

[^12]: Rihlat (the travel of) Ibn Jubayr, p.208.

[^13]: Asr (the age of) al-Ma’moon, vol.1 p.375.

[^14]: Ittijahat ash-Shi’r al-Arabi (courses of the Arabic poetry),
p.49.

[^15]: The progeny of Imam Ali bin Abu Talib (s).

[^16]: A priestly family of Iranian origin who achieved prominence in
the 8th century as scribes and viziers to the Abbasid caliphs.

[^17]: A Shia poet who defended Ahlul Bayt (s) through his poetry and
situations.

[^18]: Tareekh at-Tamaddun al-Islami (history of Islamic civilization),
vol. 4 p.182.

[^19]: As-Sulook li Ma’rifat Duwal al-Mulook (the way to know the states
of kings) by al-Maqrizi, vol.1 p.16.

[^20]: At-Tanbeeh wel Ishraf, p.302.

[^21]: Uyun at-Tawareekh, vol.3 p.212.

[^22]: Ittijahat ash-Shi’r al-Arabi, p.73.

[^23]: Uyun at-Tawareekh, vol.3 p.211.

[^24]: Al-Aghani by Abul Faraj al-Isfahani.

[^25]: Britannica, Islamic Encyclopedia, vol.1 p.140.

[^26]: Maqatil at-Talibiyeen.

[^27]: After being the caliph of the Abbasid.

[^28]: Tareekh ibnul Atheer.

[^29]: Ruh al-Islam (the spirit of Islam), p.308.

[^30]: The first Abbasid caliph.

[^31]: Nadhariyyat al-Imama (the theory of imamate), p.381.

[^32]: Al-Umdah by ibn Rashiq, vol.1 p.75-76.

[^33]: Tareekh al-Khulafa’ (the history of the caliphs) by as-Sayoti,
p.261

[^34]: The daughter of the Prophet (s).

[^35]: Al-Adab fee Dhil at-Tashayyu’ (literature in the shadow of
Shiism), p.68.

[^36]: Tareekh at-Tabari, vol.10 p.446.

[^37]: The Life of Imam Musa bin Ja’far, vol.2 p.47.

[^38]: Al-Hada’iq al-Wardiyya (flowery gardens), vol.2 p.220.

[^39]: Asr (the age of) al-Ma’moon.

[^40]: Al-Idarah al-Islamiyya fee Izz al-Arab (Islamic administration in
the glory of the Arabs), p.82.

[^41]: Muqaddimat ibn Khuldon, p.179-180.

[^42]: Ahsan at-Taqaseem by al-Maqdisi, p.64.

[^43]: The introduction of al-Bukhala’ (the stingy), p.24.

[^44]: Ibid.

[^45]: Tareekh at-Tabari, vol.7 p.149, Tareekh ibnul Atheer, vol.4
p.206.

[^46]: Tazyeen al-Aswaq (decorating the markets) by al-Antaki, vol.3
p.117.

[^47]: Al-Islam wel Hadhara al-Arabiyya (Islam and the Arabic
civilization).

[^48]: Ibid.

[^49]: Al-Mustatraf, p.182-184.

[^50]: Tareekh Baghdad, vol.5 p.393.

[^51]: Hadharat (civilization of) al-Islam, p.98.

[^52]: Al-Aghani, vol.9 p.88.

[^53]: Hadharat al-Islam fee Dar as-Salam, p.96.

[^54]: Al-Jahshiyari, p.246.

[^55]: Tabaqat ash-Shu’ara’ (classes of poets) by ibnul Mu’tazz, p.209.

[^56]: Hadharat al-Islam, p.95 as quoted from al-Mustatraf, p.96.

[^57]: Ibid.

[^58]: Hadharat al-Islam, p.96.

[^59]: Muqaddimat ibn Khuldon, p.267.

[^60]: Tareekh Baghdad by Tayfor, p.36.

[^61]: Social and economical organizations (at-Tandhimat al-Ijtima’iyya
wel Iqtisadiyya) by Salih Ahmed, p.177.

[^62]: Umara’ ash-Shi’r al-Arabi (emirs of Arabic poetry), p.45.

[^63]: Ibid.

[^64]: Islam and the Arabic Civilization, vol.2 p.230.

[^65]: Ibid., p.231.

[^66]: A feast of the Christians.

[^67]: Al-Aghani, vol.19 p.138.

[^68]: Hayat al-Haywan (life of animals), vol.3 p.91.

[^69]: Al-Aghani, vol.6 p.75.

[^70]: Hayat al-Haywan, vol.5 p.115.

[^71]: Al-Awraq, p.61.


