A STORY
=======

Ali’s in the World of Heavens
-----------------------------

Ali was beginning to tire of sitting by his brother on the bank now that
he had finished his mathematics homework. He had excelled at today’s
work to such a degree that he could do the problems without even
thinking about them.[^1] Deeply bored, Ali peeked at the mathematics
book his brother was reading. The book contained no numbers; Ali only
saw meaningless symbols.[^2] “What is the use of a mathematics book”,
Ali thought, “without numbers or practical problems to solve?” But as he
studied the book, Ali realized the symbols were not stable. Instead, as
his brother read, the symbols were mysteriously changing and
transforming into a different set of symbols. Ali’s brother did not seem
to notice the changing symbols for it was his thoughts that were
defining the meaning of the symbols. Ali imagined his brother's brain
expanding, getting bigger and bigger as it was filled with all the
things he has been reading.

The hot sun made Ali feel very sleepy and stupid, and he turned his
attention from the perplexing book to the small pleasure of making a
daisy chain. Ali wondered if it would be possible to make a chain with
an infinite radius and whether it would be worth the trouble of getting
up and picking an infinite number of daisies. He also wondered whether
the diameter consisting of all the real numbers would be larger than the
total number of daisies in the circumference?[^3]

Pondering this question, Ali was saddened to realize that no daisy could
live long enough to finish this infinite chain; it would either shrivel
and die or be brutally consumed by a rabbit - a rabbit like the one with
a white head and pink eyes that had just run by him. This idea of the
daisies and a selfish rabbit seemed nothing more than sad[^4] until Ali
heard the white-headed rabbit (or just Whitehead for the sake of
simplicity) exclaim, “Oh dear! Oh dear!  Not again! Why do I have to
lose my ability to talk every time I am here?”[^5] This was no ordinary
rabbit.

Ali wondered whether Whitehead was real at all,[^6] or whether he might
have imagined this impossible creature. “I think I should simply ignore
it and continue to act according to my interest[^7] , which is to make
this infinitely large chain of daisies,” Ali thought. Then, something
even stranger happened.

The rabbit did not appear to be speaking because his lips weren’t
moving, but Ali could still hear Whitehead saying, “Importance is
derived from the immanence of infinitude in the finite”.[^8] Ali was
confused about how to respond - whether in words or through his
thoughts -  since Whitehead seemed to magically communicate through
thought rather than speech. Finally, Ali made up his mind. Rather than
putting his thoughts into words, he simply thought, “To make a daisy
chain is my desire, which is a matter of fact that is so important to me
that I should not waste my time talking to you”. Despite his desire to
build an infinitely large chain of daisies, and its relative importance
to him, Ali’s curiosity burned. He wondered why the rabbit was
complaining that it can’t talk if it didn’t need to talk? Once again,
Ali heard the rabbit’s voice in his head, “Expression is founded on the
finite occasion[^9] and only animals express themselves unconsciously. I
am not an animal, so stop referring to me as*it* !” Ali was stunned upon
this outburst. This was such an unusual occurrence in an ordinary day.
Was it really an ordinary day?

At this point, Ali found himself thinking about the book that his
brother was reading, and he wondered about the mode of communication
between his brother and the author of the book. Were the numbers
elements of a finite world; were the symbols elements of an infinite
world? Perhaps the relationship between numbers and mathematical symbols
paralleled the relationship between language and thought. Perhaps these
concepts were related to each other just as any reflection is related to
the original object. It is never a perfect translation. There is always
some distortion. Which element is more important? Which element reflects
the infinite?

Ali shouted angrily, “Who are you? What are you?”

Through his thoughts Whitehead explained, “I was once a nebula and later
united with some dust particles from the Moon. Finally I arrived on
Earth in the form of a white-headed rabbit”.[^10] Without thinking
another word, Whitehead started running. He was running purposefully to
reach a destination rather than trying to escape from Ali. He seemed to
know that Ali was going to follow him wherever he went, even down a
dark, unmarked hole in the ground. Following his curiosity and the
intriguing rabbit, Ali found himself in a new alternate reality.

Down, down, down he tumbled.  Suddenly, Ali landed on a heap of sticks
and dry leaves with a loud thump! Looking around, he saw he had landed
next to a man in a suit. With a twitch of his nose, the man introduced
himself saying, “Hello, I am Whitehead. I’m glad you have arrived in the
World of Heavens. This passage between our worlds is called Gabriel’s
Horn.[^11] We tried to make the passage nicer, but we could never finish
painting the inside since it is infinitely large. The hole is too small
and cumbersome for two people at once. I’m doing entirely too much
talking! This is what you need to know. This world is very different
from your world. Here, everyone and everything can talk. Take care, as
all your thoughts are automatically translated into words that others
will hear.[^12] Like raindrops on a pond, your words will constantly
fall and the ripples of consequence they create may be hard to control.
Welcome, and good luck”. At this, the man ran away, leaving Ali alone in
his quest for eternal knowledge.

With Whitehead’s warning weighing on his mind, Ali wandered around a
bit, trying to figure out what this whole new world was about. After a
bit, he came across someone who was shaped like a symbol. This person
looked exactly like the letter “U” and “U” was wearing a black tie. He
or she  - it was hard to know  - introduced itself in the fashion of
James Bond saying, “Hello. I am Stan - Under Stan. I’ll be your guide in
this world, and I shall do my best to help you understand everything as
it was, as it is, and as it shall be”.

Hearing the word “everything” was enough to scare Ali. He knew he would
never have enough time to understand all the weird things in this place,
and he was already yearning to return home and feed his cat. “Forget
about your cat.  Let's concentrate on the daisies,” U said. U continued
excitedly, “Wasn’t it you who wanted to have an infinitely large chain
of daisies?” U asked the question in a very Aristotelian way, so Ali
nodded his head in agreement. “What would you need for such a chain
besides infinitely many daisies?” U continued.

“What a stupid question!” Ali thought, but he tried to dismiss this idea
so as not to offend U. Instead he responded, “I would need time, an
infinite amount of time”. U was happy to hear this answer and calmly
said, “Well, then my Master shall give you what you wish for since he
has infinite patience”.[^13] U pointed out a huge green sign with the
following words written on it:

*I am Master of this World;*

*And what I know not, is not knowledge.[^14]*

Ali rebelled against this idea, once again falling back on the
constraints of time and place found in his world, rather than exploring
the logic of this new world. Ali wondered how this statement could make
any sense when even human knowledge was constrained by time and place.
Moreover, Ali had his own experiences and knowledge to consider and
perhaps that would be outside the master’s domain. Directing his
thoughts to U, Ali asked “What about my own perspective? What about my
imagination?”

U had not been chosen to initiate newcomers without reason, and he had
been in this business for years. This was perhaps the thousandth time
that he had been forced to answer such an arrogant question. However,
instead of getting angry he chose to stay calm and intelligently
answered, “You are forgetting the fact that our Master has infinite
knowledge. Your imagination is actually part of His imagination. He is
giving you what you need in a non-changing world so you can grasp the
meaning of everything, and perhaps even build your chain of
daisies.[^15] His gift is infinite time. Now that you have infinite
time, and because the daisies will not die, you may have a chance to
succeed in your quest. You may also be interested to know we have some
rational daisies, as well as irrational ones. They are all real, though.
You can build a chain in which the diameter can be smaller or greater
than the circumference. It is all up to you”.

Ali wondered how this was possible. How could one's knowledge not be
limited by the present parameters of the universe?[^16] Ali could only
imagine an answer if he believed that the master had existed in both
realities since the beginning of time. But that would also mean Ali was
going to be forced to stay here with the master for the rest of time in
order to understand him. Ali was upset, thinking he would not be able to
see his brother anymore. “Perhaps,” he wondered, “the best way to
proceed is to just try and enjoy the present, exactly as it is right
now”. Ali maintained hope that he would be able to change the future
through his actions in the present and hopefully return back to his own
world. However, the question remained. Were these two worlds somehow
consistent with each other, or were they contradictory?

U told Ali to follow him and it showed him an apple. Admiring the apple,
Ali noticed how wonderful this apple was, how perfect and delicious. Ali
also remembered the rotten apple that he had given to his cat the day
before. That is, he tried to remember the rotten apple. He pushed
himself, trying to visualize the apple, but he just couldn't imagine the
rotten apple, because the image of the perfect apple defeated all the
other thoughts in his mind. “How could this happen?” Ali asked.

“Nothing ever changes in this place, neither for better or worse, even
in my mind,” U replied in a philosophical manner. It added that, “Our
universe escapes from the limitations of the finite. Things that you
find contradictory in your own world are simply consistent in this
world. This is because our Master can presently see the past and
future,[^17] and any contradictory things work in harmony in our world”.
U tried to explain this unexpected reality as the two walked along a
long path through a garden. Like everything here, the garden was
unusual, filled with animals and flowers chatting with each other. Not
only did the animals and plants seem to be communicating, the stones,
and even the dust particles floating in the air seemed to be
communicating. Ali even saw the number*pi* in the air flirting with a
circle.

“This is too chaotic. I can’t understand a word when so many things are
talking at once,” Ali complained. He was burning to know more about this
world that was pulsating with consciousness, and wished he could
interview each element of the world to learn about its experiences.
During his journey, Ali met with a wide variety of things, and each
seemed to be living and talking. They were all working in harmony,
without conflict. Ali saw a tree producing apples and serving them in a
respectful way to others. As its presence thrived in the environment,
Ali heard the tree saying, “Thank you for bringing me into existence,
Master. You are beautiful and perfect; you give life to me without
expecting anything back but my appreciation”. If only he had the time,
Ali would ask the trees how photosynthesis felt inside their bodies, and
what they felt when chloroplasts transformed solar energy into ATP. He
longed to talk to the number pi and learn about the beautiful circles
around him. Everything here seemed to be beautifully connected.

Sadly, there was no time to explore. Instead, someone called Anaxagoras
approached Ali and told of his adventures trying to square the
circles.[^18] Ali wondered if “squaring” was slang only when the guy
called Tangent said he used to live next to the most beautiful circle in
the world, but could never get inside its heart.

Ali explored the World of Heavens, never feeling as though he had enough
time. For days on end he observed the elements of the land living in
harmony witnessing their contributions to the environment, and trying to
learn about the experiences of each element.[^19] At the end of each
day, Whitehead visited Ali and tried to explain the ways of this world,
naming all the elements Ali had encountered. Whitehead only introduced
the name of something after Ali had observed it for himself. When Ali
asked why Whitehead wouldn’t tell him the name of things before
encountering them, Whitehead explained, “In the World of Heavens, we
must first let you see everything before you learn its name. In fact,
you were supposed to see these things in the other world and then learn
the names here, but for some reason you were rushed and born prematurely
into this world”.

Grappling with learning so many new concepts, Ali felt as though he was
reading a book in which the chapters included everything ever written by
the master - this master who claimed to have knowledge of all unchanging
things, and represented them in the book with their true value and
meaning. After spending time in this place, Ali found himself thinking,
“This should be the true world, a world which is both complete and
consistent.” Ali threw himself into learning the ways of the new world
so that he could gain an intuitive understanding of how this foreign
world operated. Ali learned about tangents, and circles; he learned
about pi. He even had homework and tests in which the answers always
referenced the lessons he had learned that day. There were never any
trick questions[^20] and by the end, Ali was able to answer many
questions without much thinking.[^21]

Suddenly, Ali awoke from his long sleep to find his brother shaking him.
Ali, understanding he had returned to his native world, saw that with
his visit to the World of Heavens his present world had changed because
his views and interpretation of this changing world had changed. Ali
asked to see his brother's book and studied it, looking for clues that
might show him how to understand the universe from a new point of view
that would combine all three perspectives: the book’s perspective, the
universe’s perspective, and Ali’s own perspective. Ali found that
although the book, Ali, and the universe appeared to represent three
different perspectives, they were basically telling the same truth. He
discovered that as he knew more about himself, he understood the book
better, and as he better understood the book, he better understood the
universe. Thus, Ali realized that he himself was a small example of the
entire universe. From his experience in the World of Heavens, Ali had
learned infinity was not possible in this world. All the forms of this
world were essentially referent beyond themselves, even the numbers and
symbols found in mathematics. Ali now understood that in this world he
would learn and grow until he was ready to reenter the World of Heavens
and its harmonious, coherent existence. Ali had come to see the trees on
the bank as serving apples to people, and being replaced by new trees
when the time came. Ali now understood that consciousness infused every
particle of dust, every breath of life, and every concept in the
universe. Ali saw the master as alive and charged with supervising and
controlling the universe in order to prepare all his subjects for the
unchanging world of eternity.

As for the rabbit, Whitehead was in the fields looking for another human
to take to the World of Heavens for a taste of eternity.


