CONCLUSION
==========

By passing through the Gabriel’s Horn, Ali learns that every form in
this world refers to a realized being in the World of Heavens.
Meanwhile, Ali’s brother studies his book to learn more about this
world. It is up to the reader to decide which character is more
successful in reaching general truths by starting from particulars. In
this story, Ali’s brother represents the philosopher Leibniz, who aimed
to inherit two thousand years of human thought (Whitehead, 1938). Ali
represented William James, who “intuitively discovered the great truth”
(Whitehead, 1938, p.4). The most important lesson Ali learned from his
experience in the World of Heavens was the true, organic, and connected
state of all things. Before visiting the World of Heavens, Ali was
saddened at the idea of organisms such as animals, vegetables, even
daisies dying disconnected from one another in their own worlds. After
learning the truths of the World of Heavens and seeing that everything
is dependent on one another to survive, he came to the romantic view
that the everything is conscious and lives in harmonious connection with
one another. The apple tree was serving its apples to other organisms,
and doing it because the goal of its existence is to provide abundantly
and thrive, rather than out of any sense of obligation. Death made way
for others to live and experience life. It wasn’t a cause for sadness.
Ali was illuminated by the understanding that the opportunity to live
was reason enough for happiness. The rabbit presented this lesson to
Ali, representing Alfred North Whitehead’s belief that there was only
one subject worth studying and that was life in all its manifestations
(Whitehead, 1929).


