FOOTNOTES
=========

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] A. N. Whitehead believes education should achieve automaticity so
that the mind is free to study higher-level problems (Ocken, 2007). He
disagreed with the idea that people must always think about what they
are doing. He believed thought is useful only at decisive moments
(Whitehead, 1911), and it should come with a decisive consciousness,
which results from concentration and elimination of the irrelevant
(Whitehead, 1938d).

[^2] The book, with no numbers and no practical problems, is a reference
to Alfred Whitehead’s unsuccessful effort with Bernard Russell to reduce
mathematics to logic in Principia Mathematica (1910). Despite all their
effort to put certainty back into the foundations of mathematics, the
book was a failure in creating a closed system of truth. Nevertheless,
it turned out to be an open-ended starting point for Alfred N. Whitehead
(Ernest, 2000), as well as for Ali. However, Ali was the one who
discovered that the symbols were changing themselves, as they were
causing a change in his brother’s mind. The brother was unaware of that
change, and for him the book was only a source to understand the static
matter-of-fact world around him.

[^3] Both real numbers and natural numbers are infinitely large, as well
as the daisies and the real numbers in the number plane. Cantor showed
that the real numbers’ infinity is larger than the infinity of natural
numbers. Interested readers may want to read Dauben (1979) who opposed
that actual infinity is an expression of any sort of reality.

[^4] A. N. Whitehead’s process philosophy considers life as an organic
entity. The reality (and learning) is beauty-centered and holistic
(Ernest, 2000). At this point, Ali sees the world as composed of
disconnected bodies that are in constant competition with each other.

[^5] Rabbit’s inability to talk explains why A.N. Whitehead thinks
failure of language is the great problem of philosophy in the finite
world (1938c). This relates to our inability to express concepts of the
infinite world (where important things come from) by using the tools of
the finite world (language). Secondly, the rabbit’s inability to talk
metaphorically represents how A.N. Whitehead separates humans and
animals from vegetation; yet he still emphasizes that the main
characteristic of the animals is their lack of having the same level of
expression as humans.

The Whitehead in the story went through a Kafka-style metamorphosis in
Ali’s world and became a rabbit. Therefore, he doesn't possess the
ability to express himself as humans do. The only communication tool
that remained was what he used to have in his original world - speaking
without uttering words.

[^6] Understandably, Ali doubts the reality of the rabbit as he has not
met a talking rabbit before. Utilizing such a knowledge that is not
connected to past experiences is a difficult task for Ali. A. N.
Whitehead formulizes this by saying, “each actual occasion is a
distillation of the totality of the past (McMahon, 1999, chap. 3)”.

[^7] A. N. Whitehead (1938a) explains the notion of importance as the
“interest, involving [the] intensity of individual feeling which leads
to publicity of expression” (p. 11). Ali’s interest in the story is to
build a daisy chain, which is a definitely the way he chose to express
himself. However, this interest becomes important for him to such a
degree that he ignores all the other things around him, including a
talking rabbit.

According to A. N. Whitehead, importance should be based on the unity of
the universe, whereas the interests stem from the individuality of the
details. As interest always modifies expression, Ali is in need of
guidance that would emphasize higher order thinking skills — connected
to his individual interests— that will lead him to the unity.

Importance based on the unity of the universe comes from infinity and
learning becomes important as it leads to generalizable facts.
Expression is displayed in the temporal and finite world which is shaped
by individual interest. A. N. Whitehead’s education connects the finite
with the infinite, and aims to bring importance and interest together in
the classroom.

[^8] (Whitehead, 1938b, p.28)

[^9] (Whitehead, 1938b, p.28)

[^10] This reflects the organic connectedness of everything in the
changing temporal world. According to A. N. Whitehead (1938a, p 30)
“human body is that region of the world which is the primary field of
human expression”, thus the correct answer to who or what we are should
be in whatever way we express ourselves. Because our body and mind are
in constant change, each of the atoms within our body has been, and will
be, a part of something else.

[^11] Evangelista Torricelli is the inventor of Gabriel's Horn figure
which has infinite surface area, but finite volume. The name refers to
the Archangel Gabriel who blows the horn to announce Judgment Day. In
the story, it is the metaphorical connection between the finite and the
infinite worlds.

[^12] A. N. Whitehead claims “language is thought, and that thought is
language,” (1938b) and it is the first step to achieve in the precision
stage of a child’s cyclic growth after the initial romance period. Ali’s
interest to build an infinitely large daisy chain was the first step in
his romance period, where his interests were shaped. At this stage, Ali
is about to enter the first precision stage, and he needs to know the
perfect method to communicate with the elements of the World of Heavens
in order to reach the stage of generalization. Such a language doesn’t
exist in the temporal world, but the ripples of his words with this
perfect language will help him reach the final stage.

[^13] (Whitehead, 1985, p. 346).

[^14] This “…is a rhyme which fits onto the tradition respecting Dr.
Whewell, who was Master of Trinity College, Cambridge, about eighty
years ago. The rhyme is well-known, and runs thus:

I am Master of this College;

And what I know not, is not knowledge.

This attitude is always prevalent in the learned world. It sterilizes
imaginative thought, and thereby blocks progress” (Whitehead, 1938c,
p.59).

By providing this example, Whitehead opposes the God-role played by the
teachers, who see themselves as the owner of eternal knowledge.
According to A. N. Whitehead, it is not possible for a teacher to know
everything that is necessary for pupils. Students need to learn not only
specialized knowledge of the teacher, but also how it is connected to
life and all other subjects. A. N. Whitehead’s (1929, p.4) definition of
education is, “…the acquisition of the art of the utilization of
knowledge”. As his definition suggests, the role of the teacher is to
teach how to learn this art.

[^15] As this is not the real world, no such teacher exists in the
temporal world. I am in no way implying that the teachers should play
the role of God as the source of knowledge. I assume the sarcasm in
these sentences is clear, as it targets those teachers who are very much
fond of such a role.

[^16] (Whitehead, 1938c, p. 60)

[^17] A. N. Whitehead (1929) claims, “[the] present contains all that
there is. It is the holy ground; for it is the past, and it is the
future”. According to him, this is the type of knowledge we should be
providing to our children, instead of teaching depreciation of the
present or the knowledge of the past, which doesn’t equip them for the
present. For example, when we teach about history of mathematics we are
interested in bringing attention to the experiences of the past
mathematicians and showing their life so that students can relate those
experiences to their own lives, and learn from the process. A. N.
Whitehead believes any other type of knowledge of the past is a deadly
harm to the minds of our students.

[^18] Squaring the circle is the historical challenge of constructing a
square with the same area as a given circle by using only a finite
number of steps with compass and ruler. Informally, one can also claim
that Ali’s job of making a daisy chain with an infinite radius is
squaring the circle and logically not possible. On the other hand,
Anaxagoras was an ancient Anatolian philosopher who is known for his
work on squaring the circle. It was much later proven that this task is
not possible because the number pi was proved to not be an algebraic
irrational number.

[^19] Ernest (2000) describes A. N. Whitehead’s notion of organic
connectedness of all things as an inspiration to ecological philosophers
which “posits human knowing and human culture as an open-ended
phenomenon” (p. 226). According to A. N. Whitehead, various forms of
knowledge are linked, and the pupil should be thrown into every possible
combination. The student doesn’t need to be taught too many subjects;
but what is taught should be taught thoroughly. The most important
subject matter of knowledge should be life itself (Whitehead, 1929).

[^20] A. N. Whitehead believes that uniform external examination is a
deadly practice because there will always be some issues that are not
covered by the individual teacher of the pupil, which will mean tricking
the student. On the contrary, the educational system proposed by A N.
Whitehead depends on the character of the students and the genius of the
teacher to teach them how to learn about life (Whitehead, 1929)..

He also opposes a uniform curriculum filled with inert knowledge because
educators deal with the human mind, not with dead matter. The human mind
is not an instrument that needs to be sharpened by learning inert ideas
and skills. Humans are social beings, and each of them is a part of a
culture; you cannot postpone life until you have sharpened their minds
(Whitehead, 1929)..

[^21] As Ali gained the automaticity of basic knowledge and gained an
understanding of the well-connectedness of life around him, it is now
time for him to go back to his own world. At this time, he completed the
precision stage, and is ready to apply his knowledge to further
generalizations in his own world.

Author Notes: M. Sencer Corlu is a graduate student of mathematics
education at Texas A&M University with research interests in social
constructivist theories, teacher education, and integration of
mathematics and science.
