2. Marriage And Divorce
=======================

**Q93: Civil divorce between a man and a woman is finalized according to
Western laws, but the man refuses to grant** ***shar'i*** **divorce or
provide maintenance to his wife, and refuses to accept** ***shar'i***
**mediation. What is the position of the wife knowing that her patience
in this situation is absolutely a cause of hardship?**

A: Her case should be taken to *al-hakim al-shar'i* or his
representative who would advise the husband to abide by one of the two
options -- either he provide maintenance or implement the *shar'i*
divorce -- even if it is through a representative other than himself. If
he refuses both options and it is not possible to provide maintenance
for her from his property, then the *hakim* or his representative can
divorce her. (MMS, p. 26, Q47)

**Q94: Is it permissible to have a sexual relationship without a**
***shar'i*** **contract with women who are unbelievers from People of
the Book, or without a religion, knowing that the government and state
of their country are in a state of war with the Muslims, either directly
or indirectly?**

A: That is not permissible. (MMS, pp. 26-27, Q48)

Masturbation
------------

**Q95: You mentioned in a previous dialogue that masturbation is
forbidden. Are the male and female alike in this ruling?**

A: Yes. As it is forbidden for the man to titillate his genitalia until
he ejaculates, so too it is not permissible for the woman to titillate
her genitalia to orgasm. (FM, p. 431)

**Q96: Certain illnesses require that the doctor may request the
patient's semen for examination, and discharging it by the**
***shar'i*** **way is difficult because it must be discharged in the
presence of the doctor.**

A: If the patient is in dire need to do so, then he is allowed. (FM, pp.
431-32)

**Q97: If a person desires to test his ability to have children and the
doctor asks him to discharge the semen to examine it.**

A: As long as he is not obliged to do that, it is not permissible for
him to masturbate. (FM, p. 432)

**Q98: A man cannot impregnate [sterile] and asks the doctor to
determine the reason for his sterility through an examination of his
sperm. The emission (of such semen) is obtained by the use of an
instrument attached to his genitals and, by its movements, causes a
discharge. Is this to be considered as masturbation and thus forbidden,
or is it allowed for the purpose of the examination? And does it matter
whether the patient is in difficulty or is acting out of necessity?**

A: Yes, it is considered as masturbation. It is not allowed unless the
examination requires it. It is equally so for reliance upon that except
under the previous two situations [difficulty and necessity], assuming,
as does your question that some definitive result can be determined from
it. God knows best. (MMS, p. 14, Q11)

Sexual Fantasy
--------------

**Q99: Thinking intentionally about women other than one's wife with an
image in mind of having sexual intercourse, if the penis becomes erect
without discharge of semen.**

A: It is not prohibited if it does not lead to a forbidden act. (FM, p.
431)

Looking at non-mahram Women
---------------------------

**Q100: These days women go out on public streets while some parts of
their body that should be covered are exposed. Is it permissible to look
at them without lust and sexual pleasure?**

A: Yes, this is permissible if they do not desist from exposing
themselves if asked to do so. (FM, p. 430)

Mixed Swimming Pools
--------------------

**Q101: Is a Muslim permitted to go to mixed swimming pools [men and
women] without a suspicious motive, especially when they (women) remove
the dress of modesty from themselves and would not desist if asked to do
so?**

A: Although looking without a suspicious motive and lust at those who
are scantily dressed and would not desist if asked to do so is
permissible, presence in these places of moral depravity is absolutely
not permissible based on precaution. (MMS, p. 25, Q45)

Statues, Portraits and Films
----------------------------

**Q102: Is it permissible to make a statue in the shape of a human being
or an animal?**

A: [No, it is not permissible]. (FM, p. 410)

**Q103: What about drawing of human or animal portraits that are not
three-dimensional?**

A: It is permissible. (FM, p. 410)

**Q104: What about buying and selling statues of human beings and
animals, and displaying them for decoration?**

A: It is permissible as well. (FM, p. 410)

**Q105: Some students of the faculty of fine arts study sculpturing and
similar things relating to corporeal objects of creation that possess
souls. If they refuse to participate in making them, then they will be
prevented from passing and graduating from the faculty. Is it
permissible for them to do that?**

A: Being denied success if they abandon it (i.e. refuse to participate
in this activity) is not an appropriate justification for committing
this act [which is forbidden by *shari'ah*]. (FM, p. 434)

**Q106: Stuffing animals and placing them in the reception area or the
living room for the purpose of decoration.**

A: It is permissible (FM, p. 412)

**Q107: Is it permissible to hang portraits of the Prophet (S), and
Imams (a.s.) in the house? Is it correct to believe that they are their
(a.s.) pictures?**

A: It is permissible to hang them. But to believe that they (portraits)
are in accordance with them (a.s.) is certainly a wrong belief. (FM, p.
418)

**Q108: Some directors release historical films about the Prophet (S) or
the Imams (a.s.). Is it permissible to represent the noble Prophet (S)
before the people in his role as the Prophet (S), or to represent the
Imam (a.s.) in his role as the Imam (a.s.)? If the answer is in the
affirmative, is it necessary for the one representing them to be a
believer (*****mu'min*****)?**

A: It is permissible to represent them (a.s.) provided that it does not
impugn their noble station and sacred personalities -- be it in the
future -- in the eyes of the people. It is quite likely that the
attributes and characteristics of the one playing the role will have
some influence in this. (FM, pp. 418-19)

Hijab
-----

**Q109: Giving a film, to a** ***non-mahram*** **man for developing and
printing, that contains pictures of women who observe** ***hijab***
**but are unveiled (in the photos).**

A: This is permissible if the one who will develop and print the
pictures does not know the women pictured in the film, and such pictures
are not suggestive or will not cause any attraction. (FM, p. 420)

**Q110: Is she allowed to have a picture of herself taken without the**
***hijab*** **to place on a passport, for example?**

A: If she is forced to place the uncovered picture on her passport or
other official documents, then it is permissible. But, the one who takes
her picture must be her husband or her *mahram*. However, should the
need arise, it is permissible for her to have the picture taken by a
*non-mahram* photographer. (FM, p. 420)

**Q111: How about a woman who comes out in public and the upper part of
her feet are exposed to the sight of** ***non-mahram*****?**

A: This is not permissible for her. (FM, p. 430)

**Q112: Some husbands who are not religiously committed demand that
their wives neglect prayers, remove the** ***hijab*****, serve alcoholic
beverages to guests, participate in gambling games, shake hands with
guests, etc., forcing them (wives) to do it if they refuse. Is it
permissible for the wife to leave his house in order to preserve her**
***shar'i*** **obligatory duties?**

A: Yes, it is permissible for the wife to leave his house at that time
to the extent required by the circumstances, and in spite of that, she
is entitled to full maintenance. (FM, p. 427)

**Q113: A woman faithfully observes the** ***hijab*** **but her husband
prevents her from this and gives her a choice between abandoning the**
***hijab*** **and divorce.**

A: It is not permissible for her to abandon her *hijab* even if the
matter ends in divorce. (FM, pp. 427-28)

**Q114: But divorce would entail for some of them (women) great
difficulty, distress and hardship.**

A: She should endure the difficulty and hardship, and recollect His
saying, the Exalted: "...and whoever is careful of (his duty to) Allah,
He will make for him an outlet, and give him sustenance from whence he
thinks not..." (Qur'an, 65:2-3). (FM, p. 428)

Beard
-----

**Q115: Some men shave their beard and leave some hair on the chin
alone. Is this sufficient by the** ***shari'ah*****?**

A: [It is not sufficient]. (FM, p. 434)

Cosmetics
---------

**Q116: It is normal these days for a woman to put on mascara and
make-up, wear rings, necklaces and bracelets for beauty and then go out
in front of people in the markets and streets.**

A: This is not permissible for her except for mascara and rings provided
that she is safe from falling into forbidden activities and does not
intend by it to excite *non-mahram* men. (FM, p. 430)

**Q117: Is it permissible for a woman to go out of her house for some
errands perfumed, with the fragrance of her perfume reaching**
***non-mahram*** **men?**

A: She ought not do that. It is not permissible if it tempts a
*non-mahram* man or normally causes him excitement. (FM, p. 439)

Miscellaneous Rulings Pertaining to Women
-----------------------------------------

**Q118: Is it permissible for a woman to learn to drive a car with a**
***non-mahram*** **man, which necessitates being alone with him and
going with him to places appropriate for practice, when these places are
normally free from traffic?**

A: This is permissible for her provided that she is safe from falling
into a forbidden activity. (FM, pp. 419-20)

**Q119: Is it permissible for a woman to look at the parts of the body
of another woman between the waist and knees with the exception of the
anterior and the posterior?**

A: Yes this is permissible for her if there is no physical excitement.
(FM, p. 428)

**Q120: Embracing and kissing of women among themselves at airports, on
public streets, in parks and at markets.**

A: Embracing and kissing of women among themselves is permissible
provided that it does not lead to a forbidden act. (FM, p. 430)

**Q121: Does all fluid which issues forth from a woman during the state
of passion or sexual arousal require performance of** ***ghusl*** **for
her? Or are there distinguishing characteristics for it as some**
***ulama*** **have indicated? Does her** ***ghusl*** **exempt her from
performing** ***wudu'*****?**

A: It is obligatory for her to perform *ghusl* when the fluid is
discharged in a state of passion without regard to other
characteristics -- like languor -- and it exempts her from *wudu'*. God
knows best. (MMS, p. 20, Q27)

**Q122: Is it permissible for a Muslim woman to display her hair in
front of a non-Muslim woman?**

A: That is permissible, but it is discouraged (*makruh*) if it is highly
probable that she (non-Muslim) will describe the beauty of the Muslim
woman to her husband. (MMS, p. 35, Q71)

**Q123: Following the death of a beloved, women wear black as a sign of
grief and beat their faces, chests, etc. Is that permissible?**

A: Yes, that is permissible. (FM, p. 439)


