3. Rights Of Parents
====================

**Q124: What is the degree to which a child is obligated to obey the
orders of his parents?**

A: Islam makes it incumbent on the child to deal with his parents with
kindness (*husna*). (FM, p. 435)

**Q125: Is it recommended (for a child) to obey his parents in
everything, even in matters of daily life, as when the father says to
his child "eat this fruit" or "sleep at 10 o'clock" or similar things?**

A: Yes, this is recommended for him (the child). (FM, p. 435)

**Q126: If the father prohibits his child from doing a certain thing
that may bring harm to his child if he does it, knowing that in the
opinion of his child this assessment is incorrect.**

A: It is not permissible to oppose the father in such a situation
because he will suffer from his opposition on account of his (the
father) affection for him (the child). (FM, p. 435)

**Q127: If a father says to his child: "I know that there is no danger
involved in your trip, my child, but your separation from me, your
absence and the distance are really hard for me to bear and cause me
suffering; it is for this reason that I forbid you to travel."**

Follow up: Before I respond, let me ask you this question. If the child
obeys his father and does not travel, will the cancellation of such a
trip hurt him in any way?

Response: Absolutely not. The child will not suffer in any way, but he
will be prevented from fulfilling his wish.

A: In this case then, it is not permissible for him to go on the trip,
as long as such travel causes his father suffering. (FM, pp. 435-36)

**Q128: Is it permissible for the parents to utilize the wealth of their
child who has not attained the age of puberty (*****non-baligh*****)?**

A: It is permissible for the father if its utilization is not to the
detriment of the child. As for the mother, she is not allowed to utilize
his (her child) wealth without the permission of the father or paternal
grandfather. If one of them permits her and it is not detrimental to the
child, then it is permissible. But, if it brings harm to their child,
then it is not permissible; rather, it is obligatory for them to protect
his wealth until he is grown up. (FM, p. 417)

Gifts for New-Born
------------------

**Q129: Some gifts are offered to the family on the occasion of the
birth of a child, normally in the form of gold jewelry, food, or money.
Are they for the new-born or his parents?**

A: The gifts differ in these cases. Some are indicated to be for the
new-born, for example, gold jewelry appropriate for the baby. These are
meant for him. Others are of benefit to someone other than the baby, for
example, food and similar items, which are meant for the parents. It
seems apparent that money placed under the pillow of the new-born or
slipped into his clothes is considered of the first category and thus
belongs to the new-born himself. (FM, p. 417)

Disciplining Children
---------------------

**Q130: Is it permissible to beat pupils in school and is it obligatory
to obtain the consent of the guardian of the pupil to be beaten?**

A: It is permissible to beat pupils if they bother others or are
committing forbidden acts -- but with the permission of the guardian --
three strikes [no more]. The beating must be done in a gentle manner
such that it does not cause redness on the body, otherwise *diyah* will
be obligatory. (FM, pp. 433-34)


