6. Lottery
==========

**Q183: [Lottery] is a well-known game in America and is the closest
thing to [*****yanasib*****], if it is not exactly the same. Is it
permissible for a Muslim to engage in the sale of lotteries with special
machines with the justification that it is rescuing
(*****istinqadh*****) wealth from the hands of the unbelievers?**

A: If he is authorized by an established company to offer and distribute
them (lottery tickets) among non-Muslims, then it is permitted and he
should seize the wealth with the justification of rescuing (*istinqadh*)
it and not with the intent of selling (the lottery tickets).
Alternatively, the Muslim seller takes it (money) in return for his
relinquishment of his right (over the lottery tickets), if he had any
special right over them. (MMS, p. 12, Q7)

Chess, Backgammon, Wrestling and Boxing
---------------------------------------

**Q184: What is the general rule for an instrument to be prohibited and
to be considered an instrument of gambling. Is it making and adopting it
(the instrument) for gambling or is it its conventional usage? Is there
a difference between its being a convention for a particular society or
its being so universally?**

A: The general rule is that it is made for gambling and used for it,
such that the term "gambling instrument" can be applied to it. It is
enough if it is regarded as an instrument (for gambling) in one
particular society. (MMS, pp. 27-28, Q52)

**Q185: (Is it permissible) to play chess and backgammon without placing
a bet?**

A: It is not permissible to play them. (FM, p. 436)

**Q186: What is the ruling on playing chess by using the customary
pieces? Is the ruling any different in the case where the game is played
by computer which employs symbols and shapes instead of the customary
pieces?**

A: Playing it (chess) is absolutely forbidden even without placing a
bet. And there is no difference in this, whether it is (played) with
customary pieces or by computer. (MMS, p. 27, Q51)

**Q187: Some people play with gambling instruments other than chess and
backgammon for enjoyment and without placing a bet.**

A: [It is prohibited to play with all that is considered a gambling
instrument even without placing a bet]. (FM, p. 436)

**Q188: Some electronic games that appear on TV with an apparatus called
"Atari" and are played with buttons for enjoyment, without placing a
bet.**

A: If the pictures that appear on the screen are pictures of the
instruments of gambling, then it is not permissible to play with them
using the "Atari" apparatus, otherwise, it is permissible. (FM, p. 436)

**Q189: Wrestling and boxing matches without placing a bet?**

A: They are permissible if they do not lead to substantial bodily harm.
(FM, p. 434)


