8. Slandering Allah (S.W.T.), Prophet (S) Or Imams (A.S.)
=========================================================

**Q194: During verbal disputes, some people unfortunately employ words
in a non-serious manner that imply disbelief in Allah (s.w.t.) or
articulate that which is inappropriate for the infallible ones (a.s.).
Is it obligatory to impose a penalty (*****hadd*****) on them for
that?**

A: As long as they are not serious and do not mean what they are saying,
there is no *shar'i* penalty on them but they are deserving of *ta'zir*.
(FM, p. 419)

**Q195: If they are serious and intend to slander Allah (s.w.t.), the
Prophet (S), the Imams (a.s.), religion or school of law
(*****madhhab*****) and persist in this.**

A: The ruling upon them is death. (FM, p. 419)

Gossip
------

**Q196: Is it permissible to gossip about a deviant (*****mukhalif*****)
Muslim?**

A: It is preferable to refrain from gossiping about him. (MMS, p. 21,
Q32)

Stealing, Cheating and Deceiving
--------------------------------

**Q197: Is it permissible for a Muslim to steal from the unbelievers in
their country [Europe] or to deceive them in taking their properties by
employing means that are known to them (the unbelievers)?**

A: It is not permissible to steal from their private and public
properties, and likewise to damage or destroy them (properties), if this
tarnishes the reputation of Islam and Muslims in general. Similarly, it
is not permissible even if it is not as such, but considered a deception
and breach of an implied trust given to them (the unbelievers) on entry
or on reception of a residency permit for their (the unbelievers)
country, since the prohibition of deception and breach of trust is with
regard to anyone. (MMS, p. 24, Q39)

**Q198: Is it permissible for a Muslim to provide incorrect information
to government agencies in Europe to obtain through legal channels
privileges and financial or non-financial facilities?**

A: That is not permissible for it constitutes lying and for whatever has
been mentioned, there is no justification for that. (MMS, pp. 24-25,
Q42)

**Q199: Is it permissible to cheat on school exams if some of the
teachers help the students in doing so?**

A: This is not permissible. (FM, p. 434)

Greeting Non-Muslims
--------------------

**Q200: What is the ruling on saying "*****salam*****" or replying to it
with respect to the People of the Book, or others amongst the
unbelievers? Is it permissible to congratulate them on some of their
special occasions like Christmas and the like?**

A: There is no objection to commencing with "*salam*" to them, but it is
discouraged (*makruh*) except when necessary, even if it is customary.
Their "*salam*" should be replied by saying "*'alayk*." There is no
objection to congratulating them on special occasions. (MMS, pp. 31-32,
Q63)


