A- 'Ibadat
==========

Ritual Purity (taharah)
-----------------------

**Q1: It often happens that I shake hands with someone while my hands
are wet. I do not know whether the one with whom I shook hands is a
Muslim or an unbeliever (*****kafir*****), who is not regarded as
ritually pure (*****tahir*****). Is it obligatory for me to ask him in
order to make sure?**

A: Certainly not. It is not obligatory for you to ask him. You may say
"the hand with which I touched his hand was ritually pure." (FM, pp.
398-99)

**Q2: A university student, businessman, tourist or some such person
travels to a non-Muslim country, say, Europe, such that scarcely a day
passes without direct contact with its Christian and Jewish inhabitants,
with the attendant moisture exchange in the cafe, or at the barber shop,
doctor's office, dry cleaner's, etc. making it difficult to count (the
places). What should he do?**

A: He should assume the ritual purity of their bodies as long as he does
not know that their ritual impurity (*najasah*) was acquired from an
external source. (FM, p. 399)

**Q3: If I move into a place which was inhabited before me by people who
are not judged to be ritually pure, is it correct for me to consider
everything ritually pure?**

A: Yes, consider everything ritually pure if you do not know or are
unsure of its ritual impurity. (FM, p. 399)

**Q4: An electrically-operated washing machine can dry clothes, after
the water supply is cut off from it, due to the power of spinning rather
than squeezing. Is that enough for their ritual purification
(*****tathir*****)?**

A: Yes, that is enough for their ritual purification. (FM, p. 398)

**Q5: Some people throw newspapers, magazines and some respected books
in the garbage, although they contain some verses of the Qur'an or names
of Allah (s.w.t.).**

A: This is not permissible and it is obligatory to take them out of such
places and to purify them if they have come into contact with some
ritual impurity. (FM, p. 419)

**Q6: Some types of soap which are imported from outside contain lard in
their ingredients but at the end, only 5% remains in them. In that case,
is the ruling of transformation (*****istihalah*****) applicable (to it)
and (is the soap) ruled to be ritually pure, or does it remain ritually
impure?**

A: It remains ritually impure. God knows best. (MMS, p. 17, Q17)

**Q7: What is the ruling on blood that coagulates under the fingernail,
this being the result of a blow or some other cause? This blood then
moves gradually to the outside and it is not possible to remove it. Is
this blood ritually impure or ritually pure? And how is it treated if it
is considered ritually impure?**

A: If it does not change (into something other than blood), it is to be
considered ritually impure, and it is obligatory to remove it if there
is no difficulty in doing so. But if it presents a problem, then that
which seems apparent is to substitute *tayammum* for *wudu'* and
*ghusl*. God knows best. (MMS, p. 21, Q33)

**Q8: Some food items given to poultry are mixed with 30% pig bones
which helps the chicken gain weight at the rate of about 2 kg in 40
days. What is the ruling on this and is there any objection to it?**

A: This precludes neither the permissibility of consuming its meat nor
its ritual purity, if it is slaughtered in the Islamic manner. But it is
preferable to keep animals away from these food items. God knows best.
(MMS, p. 27, Q50)

### Major Ablution (ghusl)

**Q9: What is the ruling on someone who performs one of the obligatory**
***ghusls*** **and, after completing the** ***ghusl*** **or a few hours
thereafter, he finds something that prevented the water from reaching a
finger of his left hand or a toe of his left foot. Is he obligated to
repeat the** ***ghusl*** **of the entire left part, or is it adequate to
wash only that spot with the intention of** ***ghusl*****?**

A: It is enough to wash that spot only and, based on obligatory
precaution, he should combine it with *wudu'* if a *hadath* has taken
place during that time. God knows best. (MMS, p. 19, Q25)

### Menstrual Bleeding (hayd)

**Q10: A woman has regular periods and on the seventh day she is free of
menstrual blood. But after relations with her husband, blood returns and
continues until the tenth day and then stops. In this case, is there any
sin or is expiation obligatory for her?**

A: There is no sin on her part and no expiation is needed in the
hypothetical question. God knows best. (MMS, p. 20, Q28)

**Q11: If a woman with regular menstrual cycle notices, during 2 or 3
days of her cycle, intermittent blood which has none of the
characteristics of** ***hayd*****. Then, she sees blood with the
characteristics of** ***hayd*** **for 5 days -- which altogether makes 7
(days). What is the ruling on her?**

A: The intermittent blood is not *hayd* because the minimum number of
days for it to be *hayd* is 3 days. However, what she sees in the 5 days
is considered *hayd*. (MMS, p. 35, Q73)

### Irregular Bleeding (istihadah)

**Q12: Is a woman with light (*****qalilah*****) or moderate
(*****mutawassitah*****) bleeding (*****istihadah*****) obligated to
perform the** ***wudu'*** **between two prayers even if no blood is
found between them (the prayers)? How about** ***tawaf*** **and its
prayer?**

A: It is not obligatory, assuming that the blood has stopped and the
cotton was not stained by it. (MMS, p. 21, Q31)

**Q13: Is a man permitted to have relations with his wife after her**
***nifas*** **period lasting 10 days has ended, while being aware that
blood continues, with the characteristic of** ***istihadah*****, to
flow** **from her for more than 18 days?**

A: It is permissible, although it is preferable to take precautions from
the 10th until the 18th day. (MMS, p. 20, Q29)

### Bleeding after Childbirth (nifas)

**Q14: Is** ***nifas*** **applicable only upon giving birth? Or is it
deemed to occur simply because of a delivery, regardless of whether it
is full-term or not -- such as the miscarried foetus with a soul or
without a soul, or the miscarried** ***mudgah*** **(lump of flesh) or
'*****alaqah*** **(blood-clot)?**

A: The ruling of *nifas* between a full-term creation and others to
which the term "birth" can be applied do not differ in their
implementation. As for the blood that exits with the *mudgah* and
*'alaqah*, applying the ruling of *nifas* to them is problematic, rather
forbidden. (MMS, p. 21, Q30)

Ritual Prayers and Fasts
------------------------

**Q15: Is it permissible for a person to delay his prayers from their
earliest time by participating in the commemoration ceremonies
(*****majalis*****) of (Imam) Husayn established during the ten days
of** ***Muharram*****?**

A: It is permissible, but it is best to perform the prayers at their
earliest time, and the organizers of the *majalis* ought to arrange them
in such a way as to avoid conflict with the performance of prayers at
their earliest time. (MMS, pp. 35-36, Q74)

**Q16: Is it permissible for a person who wakes up a few minutes before
the time of morning prayer to go back to sleep if he knows or considers
it a strong possibility that he will not wake up again before sunrise?**

A: If this is considered a sign of contempt or trivialization with
regard to prayers, then it is not permissible. (FM, p. 400)

**Q17: A woman is performing prayer and she is unaware that some of her
hair is outside of her head-cover. Is it obligatory for me to inform her
of this during or after her prayer?**

A: Certainly not. It is not obligatory for you to inform her. Even if
she does not become aware of it until her prayer is complete, her prayer
will be valid. If she becomes aware of it during (the prayer) and
hastens to cover it (her hair), again her prayer will be valid. (FM, p.
400)

**Q18: What about another (woman) who offers prayer while the upper part
of her feet are exposed.**

A: This is permissible for her since it is allowed for the upper part of
the feet and the soles to be exposed in prayers. (FM, p. 431)

**Q19: What is the ruling on a person who used to pray and fast but
committed several mistakes in the major ablution (*****ghusl*****). He
is absolutely sure now that some of his previous** ***ghusls*** **were
void, but he does not know how many. As a result he is not aware of how
many invalid prayers and fasts he offered with them.**

A: His fasts are valid even if his *ghusl* is invalid. However, it is
obligatory for him to offer *qada* of all the prayers he offered with
the invalid *ghusl*. If he is unsure about the minimum and the maximum,
he may limit himself to the minimum. (FM, p. 399)

**Q20: A person fasts in the month of** ***Ramadan*** **for several
years and he does not know, due to ignorance, that the** ***ghusl***
**of** ***janabah*** **is obligatory, so he does not perform**
***ghusl*****.**

A: His fast is correct and no expiation (*kaffarah*) is obligatory for
him. (FM, p. 402)

**Q21: Some allergy sufferers use an apparatus which we call an
"inhalator" to assist them in easy breathing. After its placement in the
mouth and pressing it, this apparatus emits what is like pressurized
gas. Can this apparatus be used at the time of fasting?**

A: Yes. One who uses this (apparatus) remains on his fast and his fast
is valid. (FM, p. 402)

**Q22: Food or serum in a plastic bag containing water, sugar and some
medication is administered to a patient by injection directly into the
blood -- due to sickness or some other reasons such as to provide
nourishment. Is the fasting person obliged to avoid it?**

A: It is not obligatory, although it is more appropriate (for him) to do
so. (FM, p. 403)

**Q23: Is it permissible to offer meals to those who are not fasting --
that is, those with and without an excuse for not fasting in the month
of** ***Ramadan*** **-- whether in restaurants or in homes, if this
offering is not considered disrespectful to the sanctity of the noble
month?**

A: It is permissible (to offer meals) to those who have an excuse (for
not fasting) [but not to the others]. (FM, pp. 402-3)

### Friday (jumu'ah) Prayer

**Q24: Does performing Friday (*****jumu'ah*****) prayer compensate for
noon (*****zuhr*****) prayer or not? Is Friday prayer superior to the
noon prayer?**

A: Performing Friday prayer in such a way that all appropriate
conditions are fulfilled, according to the *shari'ah*, is superior to
performing noon (prayer). If the *mukallaf* performs it (Friday prayer)
as such, then it (Friday prayer) replaces it (*zuhr*). (MMS, p. 11, Q5)

**Q25: Is one entitled to object to the holding of Friday prayer by
claiming that the** ***marjas*** **of the Muslims in Najaf and Qum do
not establish it, while knowing that in the city in which the**
***mukallaf*** **resides, most of the residents perform Friday prayer on
the basis of their** ***fiqh*****?**

A: One is not entitled to do that. As for non-holding of Friday (prayer)
by the *marjas*, who are of the opinion that it (Friday prayer) is
superior to *zuhr* (prayer) and the former replacing it (*zuhr*), may be
due to personal excuses or the like. This does not prevent others from
establishing it (Friday prayer). God knows best. (MMS, p. 12, Q6)

### Qiblah

**Q26: The views of the** ***ulama*** **differ regarding the (direction
of the)** ***qiblah*** **from New York and similar places in North
America. Can you explain in some detail how we are to face the**
***qiblah*** **from there?**

A: Facing the *qiblah* from distant places which have the curvature of
the earth between them and the revered *Ka'bah* is determined by the
parallel lines that commence from the front of the body of the person
praying and the lines of curvature that arch around the surface of the
earth in the direction of the revered *Ka'bah*, in such a manner that
the lines end there (the *Ka'bah*), even if it is only by probability.
The direction of the lines may be established on a globe by connecting
the position of the person praying to the revered *Ka'bah* by a
thread -- ensuring that it remains on a direct course, rather than
veering left or right. According to our tests, the direction of this
thread from areas such as New York in North America is to the East,
yielding to the North by the degree indicated by the aforementioned
thread.

As for those who say that Mecca lies beneath the 22nd parallel, New York
falls above the 40th parallel, and this requires that the person in New
York must face the direction of the honored *Ka'bah* by bearing to the
South rather than to the North, the answer to this is as follows:

This holds true if one uses a flat map as opposed to a global one. The
change in the direction of the abovementioned thread on a global model
is a result of the portions lying between the two points, if it is
viewed in relation to the North and South poles. The support for this is
that, if we neglect and do not take into consideration the four cardinal
points on the globe, and we turned around a global map putting Mecca in
the summit, as if it were the North Pole, we would observe that the
direction of the abovementioned thread (in a situation for a person in
New York) would be exactly the same as that obtained by the earlier
mentioned thread. The person in New York who wants to face the direction
of the revered *Ka'bah* must take this direction and not veer towards
the right.

In short, in our opinion, what is more likely in the method of facing
the direction is as explained in the foregoing. It is clearly the better
position also with regard to the necessity of observing the imaginary
line that passes through the earth directly between the position of the
person praying and the *Ka'bah*. Since it is not possible to face the
direction of this (imaginary) line during prayer, it is necessary to
follow the direction of the line of curvature parallel to it, and which
goes over the surface of the earth. The parallel line just mentioned is
the same as that which we already pointed out, whose direction from New
York is towards northeast. Even so, however, the prayer of a person
facing southeast would be valid if he is acting on a firm *shar'i* proof
in his possession to that effect. God knows best. (MMS, pp. 9-11, Q1)

### Imported Leather

**Q27: A man is wearing a watch whose strap is made of natural leather
imported from a non-Muslim country and he does not know whether the
leather is from the skin of an animal slaughtered in the Islamic manner
or not. The belt on his pants is made from the same kind of leather.
Does he have to remove them when he intends to offer prayer?**

A: His prayer is valid with them as long as there is a strong
probability that the strap or the belt is from the skin of an animal
whose flesh is edible and that was slaughtered in the *shar'i* manner.
(FM, pp. 397-98)

**Q28: What about a wallet placed inside the pocket during prayer if it
is made of the same leather as the strap previously mentioned?**

A: One is permitted to offer prayer with it. (FM, p. 398)

**Q29: Suppose that he is confident that the strap or the belt is made
from the skin of an animal that was not slaughtered in the Islamic
manner but he prays with it due to forgetfulness and** **then remembers
while praying, and immediately removes his watch or belt.**

A: His prayer is valid unless his forgetfulness is due to carelessness
and not giving due importance to the matter [in which case he is obliged
to repeat his prayer]. (FM, p. 398)

### Prostration

**Q30: Sometimes I intend to pray and there are some white pieces of
paper in my pocket. Is it permissible for me to perform prostration on
them?**

A: Yes, it is permissible for you to prostrate on them if they are
ritually pure and made out of wood-pulp or similar material on which
prostration is permissible. The same rule applies if they are made of
cotton or linen. (FM, pp. 399-400)

**Q31: . . . prostration on cement?**

A: Likewise, it is permissible for you to prostrate on it. (FM, p. 400)

**Q32: I listen to a tape recorder, radio or television emitting the
voice of a reciter of the Qur'an, reciting a verse which demands
prostration. Should I prostrate?**

A: Certainly not. You are not obliged to prostrate yourself except when
you hear it (the verse) from the reciter himself, not on his recorded
tape. (FM, p. 400)

### Crescent (hilal)

**Q33: If I attain personal confidence that the astronomical
calculations on the birth of the crescent (*****hilal*****) announced by
the experts are correct, can I, relying on my confidence, confirm the
first of the month and fast, or for the** ***Eid*** **and break my
fast?**

A: Confidence in the birth of the crescent and its visibility is of no
consequence; rather, the actual sighting has to be confirmed by yourself
or someone else. Yes, it is enough to confirm the actual sighting in
another city if it shares the horizon of your city, such that a sighting
in that city would necessitate a sighting in your city, if there were no
barriers such as clouds, dust, mountains, etc. (FM, p. 403)

### Traveller (musafir)

**Q34: A student, worker or employee studies or works in an area
situated at more than 22 km from his city. He goes daily to his
workplace and returns to his city, and there is a possibility that this
will continue for a year or more. What is the ruling in this case with
respect to his prayers and fasts (*****siyam*****)?**

A: He should offer complete (*tamm*) prayers and observe the fasts. (FM,
pp. 400-401)

**Q35: What if he were to travel three or four times a week during the
year, not because his job demands travelling, but for other purposes
like sight-seeing and tourism or for treating a patient, visiting the
shrines of the Imams (a.s.), etc. What is the ruling on his prayers?**

A: He should perform complete prayers and observe the fasts, since,
given his situation he is considered a frequent traveller according to
convention ('*urf*). If he were to travel twice a week and stay five
days in his hometown [then it is obligatory for him to offer both the
short (*qasr*) and the complete (prayers); and, in the month of
*Ramadan*, to combine observance of the fasts in it (*Ramadan*) and
their *qada* after it]. (FM, p. 401)

**Q36: A** ***mukallaf*** **offers morning prayer in his city and then
travels in a westerly direction. He arrives in a city in which the dawn
has not yet appeared and then emerges. Or, he offers noon prayer in his
city and then travels by air, arriving in a city where the sun has not
begun to go down (noon), and only later begins its descent. Or, he
offers the evening prayer in it (city), then travels to a city where the
sun has not yet set, and then sets. Is he obliged to repeat the prayer
in all these hypothetical situations?**

A: There are two perspectives. It is a better precaution (to repeat the
prayer), although apparently it is not (obligatory to repeat it). (MS,
p. 464, Q81)

**Q37: What is the ruling for a person who travels after noon
(*****zuhr*****) during the month of** ***Ramadan*** **while fasting?**

A: [He should complete his fast] and there is no *qada* on him. (FM, p.
401)

**Q38: And if he travels before noon, having intended to do so and
decided on the trip the night before?**

A: [There is no fasting for him on this day]. He will break his fast
after reaching the *hadd al-tarakhkhus* and he is obligated to offer its
*qada* after that. (FM, p. 401)

**Q39: What if he travels before noon but did not intend to travel and
had not decided on it the night before?**

A: The same ruling applies as in the previous case (Q38). (FM, pp.
401-2)

**Q40: A traveler in the month of** ***Ramadan*** **returns to his
hometown or place of residence after noon. Is it obligatory for him to
abstain (from things that render a fast void) in the remaining part of
the day?**

A: It is not obligatory for him although it is more appropriate to
abstain for the rest of the day. (FM, p. 402)

**Q41: What if he returns before noon and has broken (the fast) on his
trip?**

A: The ruling is as previously mentioned (Q40). (FM, p. 402)

**Q42: What if he returns to his hometown or place of residence and
arrives before noon without breaking the fast on his trip?**

A: It is obligatory for him to make the intention to fast and abstain
from things that render a fast void for the remaining part of that day.
In that case, there is no *qada* on him. (FM, p. 402)

**Q43: What about one whose duty it is to fast while travelling. After
dawn has appeared in his city, he travels by air with the intention to
fast. He arrives in another city where the dawn has not yet emerged. Is
he permitted to eat, drink, etc.?**

A: Apparently, it is permissible. (MS, p. 466, Q85)

**Q44: What about one who travels from his city in the month of**
***Ramadan*** **after noon and arrives in a city where the sun has not
begun its descent. Is it obligatory for him to abstain (from things that
break the fast) and complete his fast?**

A: That is a better precaution. (MS, p. 466, Q86)

**Q45: If a fasting person in the month of** ***Ramadan*** **travels by
air in a westerly direction after** ***maghrib*** **-- without breaking
(*****iftar*****) his fast in his city -- and arrives at a place where
the sun has not yet set, is it obligatory for him to abstain from things
(that break the fast) until** ***maghrib*****?**

A: Apparently, it is not obligatory although it is a better precaution.
(MS, p. 464, Q80)

**Q46: What about one whose duty is to fast while travelling. If he
travels from his city, in which the crescent of** ***Ramadan*** **has
been seen, to a city where the crescent has not yet been seen because of
a variation in their horizon?**

A: He is not obligated to fast on that day. (MS, p. 466, Q87)

**Q47: What if he observes the** ***Eid*** **in a city in which the
crescent of** ***Shawwal*** **has been seen, and then travels to a city
where the crescent has not been seen due to a variation in their
horizon?**

A: It is a better precaution for him to abstain (from things that break
the fast) for the rest of the day and, also, to observe its *qada*. (MS,
pp. 466-67, Q87)

### Boundaries of a City

**Q48: There are extended cities with adjoining borders and sides which,
in the past, were reckoned to be separate cities, but after prosperous
growth, became one city. Do you regard them as one or several cities? A
person travels from the farthest point in the East (of the city) with
the intention of travelling to another place, and the time for prayer
comes when he is at the farthest westerly point (of the city). He wishes
to pray. Should he pray** ***qasr*** **or does he pray complete? And
similarly, if he returns from a journey to the outskirts (of the city),
and the time for prayer comes, does he pray** ***qasr*****, or complete?
What about the person who is fasting, and leaves (the city) or returns
to it?**

A: The hypothetical cities all count as one. The rulings of separate
cities does not actually apply to this case. True, the rule with respect
to computing the distance is from the point at which the term
"traveller" (*musafir*) becomes applied to someone. Were this city truly
one of the larger cities and the term ("traveller") is applied upon the
exit of a person from his zone or area of residence, even if it is
deemed to be inside the city, then the ruling of "traveller" applies on
him. And the distance would be computed from this point, which is
considered *hadd al-tarakhkhus* with respect to that person. If the term
("traveller") does not apply to him unless he leaves the (larger) city,
then the last region of the city is to be counted as the beginning for
distance measurement with respect to him. God knows best. (MMS, p. 32,
Q64)

Exhumation of Grave
-------------------

**Q49: Is it permissible to excavate the grave of the deceased if it
does not entail disrespect for** **the deceased?**

A: It is not permissible except for special purposes that have been
explained in the books of *fiqh*, such as cases of dire necessity. (FM,
p. 420)

**Q50: In a previous question (Q26), we informed your eminence about the
differences among the Muslims regarding the direction of the**
***qiblah*****. What is the ruling on one who was buried facing a
direction adopted at the time of burial and then (the direction) was
changed after the burial, given that exhumation and identification of
those buried in the previous direction or the new direction would entail
great hardship?**

A: In response to the question, it is not obligatory to execute the
change. (MMS, p. 11, Q2)

Khums
-----

**Q51: A person buys a garment for an occasion. After wearing it, he
puts it away and a year passes without it being worn a second time. Is**
***khums*** **obligatory on it? Likewise, (is** ***khums***
**obligatory) with respect to jewelry temporarily used and then set
aside for more than a year without being used?**

A: If the garment is of the type customarily prepared for similar
occasions in the years that follow, then *khums* is not obligatory.
Otherwise, based on obligatory precaution, *khums* applies to it. The
same situation applies to jewelry. God knows best. (MMS, p. 18, Q22)

**Q52: Is** ***khums*** **obligatory for furnishings that the mother
prepares for her daughter [like marital gifts] when a number of years
elapse before they come into use?**

A: *Khums* is not obligatory on them if not preparing [the marital
gifts] gradually damages her prestige, because it would not be easy for
her to prepare them at the time of her marriage. God knows best. (MMS,
p. 18, Q23)

**Q53: If one year elapses on bank shares, is it obligatory to pay**
***khums*** **on them? If it is obligatory, then is it based on the
actual value or purchase price?**

A: It is obligatory to pay *khums* on the actual value. (MMS, p. 34,
Q67)

**Q54: A person builds a house on land for which he has paid**
***khums*****. During the construction of this house a year or more
elapses. He has spent money for one or two years while building it (the
house), knowing that he does not own any home besides this one. Is it
obligatory for him to pay** ***khums*** **for this house? If it is
obligatory, then is the** ***khums*** **calculation based on all the
expenditures in building the house, is it based on the market value of
the house or is it enough to negotiate with** ***al-hakim
al-shar'i*****?**

A: He should evaluate the house (excluding the land) and take out
*khums* on its value except with regard to the money expended in the
year in which he takes up residence in it (home), for there is no
*khums* on it. (MMS, p. 34, Q68)

**Q55: A person builds a house by borrowing money, repaying the state
bank in installments. He decides to settle (with** ***al-hakim
al-shar'i*****) on the** ***khums*** **of the house, knowing that this
house is not part of his necessary (annual) provision
(*****ma'unah*****). Is there any** ***khums*** **on these installments
that he has paid to the bank?**

A: On the supposition of the question, *khums* will be applied on the
house at the end of the year on the total present value (of the house)
if he has paid all his loans; however, if he has paid only part of it,
then it is applied to that proportion. (MMS, pp. 34-35, Q70)

Charity
-------

**Q56: Is it permissible to set aside charity money in a specific place,
with the intention of charity, and then to give it to the poor? Can one
change it with another currency?**

A: The money does not become a recommended charity by mere separation.
(MMS, p. 35, Q72)

Hajj
----

**Q57: A man who is financially able in a particular year is prevented
from travelling because he could not obtain a visa to perform the**
***hajj*** **in that year. Then, he is forced to spend the money which
was set aside for** ***hajj*****, after the season, to fulfill his
living needs. Thereafter, he is not able to obtain the money needed to
perform the** ***hajj*****.**

A: If he acquires the ability in later years, then *hajj* is obligatory
for him, and if he does not acquire the ability, then it is not
obligatory for him. (FM, pp. 403-4)

**Q58: What if I am able to perform** ***hajj*** **this year while I am
a student at the University or high school and it happens that the time
of travelling for** ***hajj*** **conflicts with my final exams such that
the trip for** ***hajj*** **would lead to my failure and loss of a
school year, which causes me extreme material and emotional
difficulty.**

A: As long as your travel for *hajj* causes you extreme difficulty as
you said, it is permissible for you to abandon the *hajj* for that year.
(FM, p. 404)

**Q59: From which direction should one throw pebbles at**
***jamratu-l-'aqabah*** **(in Mina)?**

A: Stone it from the front [because it is not permissible to stone it
from the back]. (FM, p. 404)

**Q60: What is the ruling on one who enters the state of** ***ihram***
**from Jeddah, instead of Johfah, because of ignorance?**

A: If he made a *nadhr* for the *ihram* in Jeddah, then his *ihram* is
valid. (FM, p. 404)

**Q61: Is one permitted after** ***tawaf*** **and** ***sa'y*****, to cut
the hair (*****taqsir*****) of someone else who has requested him to do
so, before cutting his own?**

A: It is not permissible for one to attend to the *taqsir* of others
before his own. (FM, p. 404)


