B - Mu'amalat
=============

1. Interest (Riba)
------------------

**Q62: What is the ruling on depositing money in banks sponsored by
Muslim and non-Muslim governments, with the stipulated condition of
receiving interest?**

A: Depositing in banks of non-Muslim countries is permissible in every
case, even if it is under the stipulated condition of obtaining
interest. As for depositing in government banks of Muslim countries
under the stipulated condition of obtaining interest, then it is
prohibited. But, if it is without this condition, then the issue is free
of interest (*riba)* but it is not permissible to spend the acquired
money without referring to *al-hakim al-shar'i* or his representative.
(FM, p. 405)

**Q63: Is there a difference here between the principal and interest
which the banks (in Muslim countries) give to the depositor?**

A: No, there is no difference between them. One is not permitted to
spend from anything taken from government banks in Muslim countries
except by referring to *al-hakim al-shar'i* or his representative. (FM,
p. 405)

**Q64: If I know that the bank will give me interest even without
stipulating the conditions, is it permissible for me to deposit in a
savings account that takes the form of a term-deposit?**

A: Yes, it is permissible, as long as you do not stipulate the
conditions of interest. (FM, p. 406)

**Q65: Is it permissible to take interest from unbelievers, especially
for those who live in their countries?**

A: Yes, apparently one is allowed to take interest from the unbelievers,
whose property is not honored. God knows best. (MMS, p. 27, Q49)

**Q66: A national bank (in a Muslim country) offers a project to its
clients in which a person deposits a sum of money in the order of 1,000
dirhams as a deposit which can be withdrawn at any time. It announces
that after a period of time, a lottery will be drawn and the bank will
grant a specific gift to the investors. Is it permissible to deposit
with this intention?**

A: Depositing with the condition of a gift is usury and therefore
prohibited. By condition is meant to make the deposit with the
requirement that the bank should give the gift. But the mere knowledge
that the bank will grant it (gift) does not harm the permissibility of
investing and the lawfulness of the granted gift. God knows best. (MMS,
p. 36, Q76)

**Q67: A person does not own a house to reside in. Is it permissible for
him to borrow from government banks with interest for the purpose of
building his own house?**

A: It is not permissible to borrow with the condition of interest for
any reason, but it is permissible to take the money from it (bank),
though not with the intention of a loan, and to legitimize its spending
by referring to *al-hakim al-shar'i* or his representative. (FM, pp.
406-7)

### Credit Cards

**Q68: Some banks distribute cards free of charge or for a defined price
such that:**

**1. It is possible to withdraw any amount from the bank without
interest except for service charges for the bank machine.**

**2. If he (user) delays repayment by a month, then he is charged
interest under the title of "late payment" and similar items.**

**What is the ruling for this in the event where repayment is delayed or
otherwise?**

A: There is no objection to withdrawing the amount with the intention of
"unknown owner" (*majhul al-malik*), and not as a loan; it can be
corrected by obtaining permission as mentioned in response No. 69 (see
next page). The person's knowing that the bank will demand repayment of
the principal and interest does not impair this, and when the bank
requests it (repayment), it should be made to it. (MMS, p. 31, Q61)

**Q69: Do you not give your followers (*****muqallids*****) a general
authorization to dispose of and deal with "unknown owner's" property,
and other transactions in it, by taking possession of the money from
government or jointly-owned (private and government) banks without
having to refer to** ***al-hakim al-shar'i*** **or his representative to
rectify it, for the ease and facility for the believers? May Allah
support and honor you.**

A: Yes, we have allowed the believers -- may they succeed in attaining
the Exalted Allah's pleasure -- to accept, through legal means from
government or jointly-owned institutions, by taking possession of it
(property) on behalf of those commissioned among the poor with the
intention of performing acts of charity upon them (the poor). Then, they
(the believers) can own it for themselves. This applies to salaries and
the like. As for interest and the like, they are allowed to own half of
it along the lines outlined, on the condition that they give in charity
(*sadaqah*) the other half to the religiously-devout poor. (MMS, pp.
32-33, Q65)

### Buying and Selling Shares

**Q70: What about buying and selling the shares of incorporated
companies or others?**

A: It is permissible to buy and sell shares of any kind of corporation
on the condition that the transactions of this company do not engage in
prohibited activities such as dealing in intoxicants or interest
(*riba*). (FM, p. 408)

### Insurance Policies

**Q71: What about insurance policies for people on their life or for
other unforeseen events or for properties such as airplanes, cars,
ships, or for fire or drowning, etc?**

A: All of them are valid and there is obligation on both parties. (FM,
p. 409)

### Copyright

**Q72: If the phrase "rights of publication are reserved to the author
or publisher" is written on some publications, is it obligatory to abide
by the content of this phrase? And with the supposition that it is
mandatory, is it permissible to print them (publications) if public
welfare or religious betterment depends on it?**

A: Abiding by it (the phrase) is not obligatory, but it is preferable to
seek permission, especially from the author. God knows best. (MMS, p.
28, Q55)

### Found Property

**Q73: Property that I find in public places like the street, market,
airport, train station, harbor or taxi and whose owner I am sure there
is no possibility of finding.**

A: Give it to charity on his behalf. (FM, pp. 420-21)

**Q74: What if a child finds a big sum of present-day currency?**

A: If there is no particular description that would make it possible to
find its owner and return it to him, then the guardian of the child is
permitted to take it and keep it for him. Otherwise, it is obligatory to
find out who (the owner) is as I mentioned to you in a previous
dialogue. (FM, p. 421)

### Working, Selling or Presence in Places that Sell Non-Ritually Slaughtered Meat, Alcoholic Beverages and Pork

**Q75: Is it permissible for a Muslim to cook that which was not
slaughtered in the Islamic manner, knowing that he has no connection to
selling or serving it? What is the ruling with respect to serving food
that is ritually impure [not slaughtered in the Islamic manner] or
conveying it to non-Muslims? Is there a difference in this between pork
and other things?**

A: There is no objection to cooking that which is not slaughtered in the
Islamic manner or serving it to those who regard it as lawful. However,
it is problematic to sell it to them. But there is no objection to
taking the money in return for the Muslim seller's relinquishment of his
right over it (foodstuff). Alternatively, by rescuing (*istinqadh*) it
(i.e. money from a non-Muslim). As for pork, it is problematic to serve
to those who regard it as lawful and without a doubt disallowed for
sale. God knows best. (MMS, pp. 12-13, Q8)

**Q76: Is it permissible for a Muslim to work in a restaurant that
serves meat that is not slaughtered in the Islamic manner?**

A: Its permissibility is not unlikely in the case where it is being
served to one who considers it lawful. Rather, it is absolutely
(permissible) as long as the status of the meat is made known to him, if
there is a possibility of influencing him to avoid its consumption. If
not, it is not obligatory. (MMS, p. 23, Q36)

**Q77: Is it permissible to work in a restaurant that serves pork and
alcoholic beverages? If it is not permissible, does the ruling also
apply to washing dishes and similar things there?**

A: Serving alcoholic beverages to others is prohibited even if the one
to whom they are served considers them lawful. It is the same for
washing dishes if they serve the purpose of drinking alcoholic beverages
in them or serving them (the dishes) to the drinker. The permissibility
of serving pork to someone who considers it lawful is not unlikely
although selling it is without a doubt disallowed. And a Muslim hiring
himself out for a forbidden task is rendered invalid and the taking of
wages for this is prohibited. There is no objection to taking possession
(of money) in return for work done as a means of rescuing it from
someone whose wealth is not honored. (MMS, p. 22, Q34)

**Q78: Is it permissible for a Muslim to work in shops that sell
alcoholic beverages or in places of entertainment without serving
alcoholic beverages or doing other forbidden things, such as cleaning
dishes or arranging the chairs and similar activities?**

A: This is not permissible in shops that sell alcoholic beverages and,
based on obligatory precaution, he should refrain also from places of
entertainment. (MMS, pp. 23-24, Q38)

**Q79: Is it permissible for a Muslim to work in a grocery store that
sells alcoholic beverages in one of its corners if his job is only that
of a cashier?**

A: It is permissible to accept the value of (commodities) other than
alcoholic beverages, and likewise the value of alcoholic beverages, if
both the buyer and seller are non-Muslims. (MMS, p. 25, Q44)

**Q80: What is the ruling on the wages that a worker claims from these
kinds of restaurants? Are they considered to be from property that is
mixed with the unlawful, as it in fact is; or are they considered lawful
for the worker since the wages are for lawful work?**

A: With regard to wages that a Muslim receives from non-Muslims in
return for work that they (non-Muslims) consider lawful, the ruling is
that they are lawful even if he has acquired them through unlawful
transactions according to our *shari'ah*, so long as these
(transactions) are lawful for them (non-Muslims), like selling alcoholic
beverages and pork to non-Muslims. And these kinds of wages are not
considered to be mixed with the unlawful on which *khums* is obligatory.
(MMS, p. 23, Q37)

**Q81: Is it permissible for a Muslim to be present in gatherings where
alcoholic beverages are served?**

A: Eating and drinking in these gatherings is prohibited. As for mere
presence, its prohibition is based on obligatory precaution. There is no
objection to it if the aim is to prevent others from reprehensible
actions, if one is able to do so. (MMS, p. 25, Q43)

**Q82: Selling the meat of inedible animals like rabbit to those whose
school of law (*****madhhab*****) permits its**

**consumption.**

A: It is permissible. (FM, p. 412)

### Shopping

**Q83: Is it permissible for a person to buy from shops owned by Hindus
if he knows that their owners help their community against the
Muslims?**

A: It is not permissible if this contributes in their aggression against
the Muslims. God knows best. (MMS, p. 18, Q20)

### Imported Meat, Fish, Cheese and Gelatine

**Q84: Is it permissible to eat, buy and sell imported chickens from
Muslim countries on which is written the phrase "slaughtered in the
Islamic manner"?**

A: It is permissible for you to eat, buy and sell them as long as you do
not know that they were not slaughtered (in the Islamic manner), whether
the previously mentioned phrase is written on them or not. (FM, p. 413)

**Q85: And if these (chickens) are imported from non-Muslim countries
and written on them is the phrase "slaughtered in the Islamic manner"?**

A: It is not permissible for you to eat them if you are not confident
that they have truly been slaughtered in the Islamic manner and not just
claimed to be. (FM, p. 413)

**Q86: The bodies of some types of fish are not fully covered with
scales. Is it permissible to eat them?**

A: Yes, it is permissible for you to eat them if they have but a single
scale. (FM, p. 414)

**Q87: Is it permitted for us to eat canned fish imported from some
European countries and America when we are not absolutely sure of its
lawfulness from two perspectives? First, we are not sure of the presence
of scales, although the name of the fish indicated on the can wrapping
is from those that have scales. The exporting countries for these types
of canned items follow the strict laws enforcing the agreement between
the item description on the packaging and the actual contents of the
can. Second, we do not know about the certainty of its (fish) having
been captured outside the water alive or of its having died in the
fishing net. However, it is known that such fish are caught by modern
fishing vessels which allow the extraction of the fish from the water in
a live state, and it is very rarely mixed with any dead (fish).**

A: If one can be confident as to its lawfulness -- even with the two
observations above -- then one is permitted to eat it; if not, it is not
permissible. (FM, p. 414)

**Q88: What about imported cheese from non-Muslim countries, if I do not
exactly know the way it was made and its ingredients?**

A: It is permissible for you to eat it. (FM, pp. 413-14)

**Q89: (In the case of) imported cheese from non-Muslim countries, if it
is known to contain rennet (*****anfahah*****) from a calf or a young
goat, or an animal enzyme, is it permissible to consume it?**

A: There is no objection if it contains the first two, and likewise for
the third (animal enzyme) if it is consumed; unless it is known that it
was taken from one that was not slaughtered in the Islamic manner. God
knows best. (MMS, p. 17, Q18)

**Q90: Gelatine substance is normally made from the bones of a cow. If
it is taken from animals not slaughtered in the Islamic manner, with the
knowledge that it is not permissible to eat it, is it ruled to be
ritually pure for external usage?**

A: Yes, because the bone is from the part in which life does not dwell;
therefore, it is ritually pure, even if it were from a dead (animal).
God knows best. (MMS, p. 36, Q75)

### Meat from Muslim Markets

**Q91: Here there are many restaurants in the Muslim markets that offer
meat to their customers.**

A: It is permissible for you to eat their meat. (FM, p. 414)

**Q92: . . . even without asking the owner of the restaurant about it?**

A: Yes, it is permissible for you to eat it and there is no need to ask
the owner of the restaurant about it, just as there is no need to ask
about the religion of the employees in the restaurant. (FM, p. 414)

2. Marriage And Divorce
-----------------------

**Q93: Civil divorce between a man and a woman is finalized according to
Western laws, but the man refuses to grant** ***shar'i*** **divorce or
provide maintenance to his wife, and refuses to accept** ***shar'i***
**mediation. What is the position of the wife knowing that her patience
in this situation is absolutely a cause of hardship?**

A: Her case should be taken to *al-hakim al-shar'i* or his
representative who would advise the husband to abide by one of the two
options -- either he provide maintenance or implement the *shar'i*
divorce -- even if it is through a representative other than himself. If
he refuses both options and it is not possible to provide maintenance
for her from his property, then the *hakim* or his representative can
divorce her. (MMS, p. 26, Q47)

**Q94: Is it permissible to have a sexual relationship without a**
***shar'i*** **contract with women who are unbelievers from People of
the Book, or without a religion, knowing that the government and state
of their country are in a state of war with the Muslims, either directly
or indirectly?**

A: That is not permissible. (MMS, pp. 26-27, Q48)

### Masturbation

**Q95: You mentioned in a previous dialogue that masturbation is
forbidden. Are the male and female alike in this ruling?**

A: Yes. As it is forbidden for the man to titillate his genitalia until
he ejaculates, so too it is not permissible for the woman to titillate
her genitalia to orgasm. (FM, p. 431)

**Q96: Certain illnesses require that the doctor may request the
patient's semen for examination, and discharging it by the**
***shar'i*** **way is difficult because it must be discharged in the
presence of the doctor.**

A: If the patient is in dire need to do so, then he is allowed. (FM, pp.
431-32)

**Q97: If a person desires to test his ability to have children and the
doctor asks him to discharge the semen to examine it.**

A: As long as he is not obliged to do that, it is not permissible for
him to masturbate. (FM, p. 432)

**Q98: A man cannot impregnate [sterile] and asks the doctor to
determine the reason for his sterility through an examination of his
sperm. The emission (of such semen) is obtained by the use of an
instrument attached to his genitals and, by its movements, causes a
discharge. Is this to be considered as masturbation and thus forbidden,
or is it allowed for the purpose of the examination? And does it matter
whether the patient is in difficulty or is acting out of necessity?**

A: Yes, it is considered as masturbation. It is not allowed unless the
examination requires it. It is equally so for reliance upon that except
under the previous two situations [difficulty and necessity], assuming,
as does your question that some definitive result can be determined from
it. God knows best. (MMS, p. 14, Q11)

### Sexual Fantasy

**Q99: Thinking intentionally about women other than one's wife with an
image in mind of having sexual intercourse, if the penis becomes erect
without discharge of semen.**

A: It is not prohibited if it does not lead to a forbidden act. (FM, p.
431)

### Looking at non-mahram Women

**Q100: These days women go out on public streets while some parts of
their body that should be covered are exposed. Is it permissible to look
at them without lust and sexual pleasure?**

A: Yes, this is permissible if they do not desist from exposing
themselves if asked to do so. (FM, p. 430)

### Mixed Swimming Pools

**Q101: Is a Muslim permitted to go to mixed swimming pools [men and
women] without a suspicious motive, especially when they (women) remove
the dress of modesty from themselves and would not desist if asked to do
so?**

A: Although looking without a suspicious motive and lust at those who
are scantily dressed and would not desist if asked to do so is
permissible, presence in these places of moral depravity is absolutely
not permissible based on precaution. (MMS, p. 25, Q45)

### Statues, Portraits and Films

**Q102: Is it permissible to make a statue in the shape of a human being
or an animal?**

A: [No, it is not permissible]. (FM, p. 410)

**Q103: What about drawing of human or animal portraits that are not
three-dimensional?**

A: It is permissible. (FM, p. 410)

**Q104: What about buying and selling statues of human beings and
animals, and displaying them for decoration?**

A: It is permissible as well. (FM, p. 410)

**Q105: Some students of the faculty of fine arts study sculpturing and
similar things relating to corporeal objects of creation that possess
souls. If they refuse to participate in making them, then they will be
prevented from passing and graduating from the faculty. Is it
permissible for them to do that?**

A: Being denied success if they abandon it (i.e. refuse to participate
in this activity) is not an appropriate justification for committing
this act [which is forbidden by *shari'ah*]. (FM, p. 434)

**Q106: Stuffing animals and placing them in the reception area or the
living room for the purpose of decoration.**

A: It is permissible (FM, p. 412)

**Q107: Is it permissible to hang portraits of the Prophet (S), and
Imams (a.s.) in the house? Is it correct to believe that they are their
(a.s.) pictures?**

A: It is permissible to hang them. But to believe that they (portraits)
are in accordance with them (a.s.) is certainly a wrong belief. (FM, p.
418)

**Q108: Some directors release historical films about the Prophet (S) or
the Imams (a.s.). Is it permissible to represent the noble Prophet (S)
before the people in his role as the Prophet (S), or to represent the
Imam (a.s.) in his role as the Imam (a.s.)? If the answer is in the
affirmative, is it necessary for the one representing them to be a
believer (*****mu'min*****)?**

A: It is permissible to represent them (a.s.) provided that it does not
impugn their noble station and sacred personalities -- be it in the
future -- in the eyes of the people. It is quite likely that the
attributes and characteristics of the one playing the role will have
some influence in this. (FM, pp. 418-19)

Hijab
-----

**Q109: Giving a film, to a** ***non-mahram*** **man for developing and
printing, that contains pictures of women who observe** ***hijab***
**but are unveiled (in the photos).**

A: This is permissible if the one who will develop and print the
pictures does not know the women pictured in the film, and such pictures
are not suggestive or will not cause any attraction. (FM, p. 420)

**Q110: Is she allowed to have a picture of herself taken without the**
***hijab*** **to place on a passport, for example?**

A: If she is forced to place the uncovered picture on her passport or
other official documents, then it is permissible. But, the one who takes
her picture must be her husband or her *mahram*. However, should the
need arise, it is permissible for her to have the picture taken by a
*non-mahram* photographer. (FM, p. 420)

**Q111: How about a woman who comes out in public and the upper part of
her feet are exposed to the sight of** ***non-mahram*****?**

A: This is not permissible for her. (FM, p. 430)

**Q112: Some husbands who are not religiously committed demand that
their wives neglect prayers, remove the** ***hijab*****, serve alcoholic
beverages to guests, participate in gambling games, shake hands with
guests, etc., forcing them (wives) to do it if they refuse. Is it
permissible for the wife to leave his house in order to preserve her**
***shar'i*** **obligatory duties?**

A: Yes, it is permissible for the wife to leave his house at that time
to the extent required by the circumstances, and in spite of that, she
is entitled to full maintenance. (FM, p. 427)

**Q113: A woman faithfully observes the** ***hijab*** **but her husband
prevents her from this and gives her a choice between abandoning the**
***hijab*** **and divorce.**

A: It is not permissible for her to abandon her *hijab* even if the
matter ends in divorce. (FM, pp. 427-28)

**Q114: But divorce would entail for some of them (women) great
difficulty, distress and hardship.**

A: She should endure the difficulty and hardship, and recollect His
saying, the Exalted: "...and whoever is careful of (his duty to) Allah,
He will make for him an outlet, and give him sustenance from whence he
thinks not..." (Qur'an, 65:2-3). (FM, p. 428)

### Beard

**Q115: Some men shave their beard and leave some hair on the chin
alone. Is this sufficient by the** ***shari'ah*****?**

A: [It is not sufficient]. (FM, p. 434)

### Cosmetics

**Q116: It is normal these days for a woman to put on mascara and
make-up, wear rings, necklaces and bracelets for beauty and then go out
in front of people in the markets and streets.**

A: This is not permissible for her except for mascara and rings provided
that she is safe from falling into forbidden activities and does not
intend by it to excite *non-mahram* men. (FM, p. 430)

**Q117: Is it permissible for a woman to go out of her house for some
errands perfumed, with the fragrance of her perfume reaching**
***non-mahram*** **men?**

A: She ought not do that. It is not permissible if it tempts a
*non-mahram* man or normally causes him excitement. (FM, p. 439)

### Miscellaneous Rulings Pertaining to Women

**Q118: Is it permissible for a woman to learn to drive a car with a**
***non-mahram*** **man, which necessitates being alone with him and
going with him to places appropriate for practice, when these places are
normally free from traffic?**

A: This is permissible for her provided that she is safe from falling
into a forbidden activity. (FM, pp. 419-20)

**Q119: Is it permissible for a woman to look at the parts of the body
of another woman between the waist and knees with the exception of the
anterior and the posterior?**

A: Yes this is permissible for her if there is no physical excitement.
(FM, p. 428)

**Q120: Embracing and kissing of women among themselves at airports, on
public streets, in** **parks and at markets.**

A: Embracing and kissing of women among themselves is permissible
provided that it does not lead to a forbidden act. (FM, p. 430)

**Q121: Does all fluid which issues forth from a woman during the state
of passion or sexual arousal require performance of** ***ghusl*** **for
her? Or are there distinguishing characteristics for it as some**
***ulama*** **have indicated? Does her** ***ghusl*** **exempt her from
performing** ***wudu'*****?**

A: It is obligatory for her to perform *ghusl* when the fluid is
discharged in a state of passion without regard to other
characteristics -- like languor -- and it exempts her from *wudu'*. God
knows best. (MMS, p. 20, Q27)

**Q122: Is it permissible for a Muslim woman to display her hair in
front of a non-Muslim woman?**

A: That is permissible, but it is discouraged (*makruh*) if it is highly
probable that she (non-Muslim) will describe the beauty of the Muslim
woman to her husband. (MMS, p. 35, Q71)

**Q123: Following the death of a beloved, women wear black as a sign of
grief and beat their faces, chests, etc. Is that permissible?**

A: Yes, that is permissible. (FM, p. 439)

3. Rights Of Parents
--------------------

**Q124: What is the degree to which a child is obligated to obey the
orders of his parents?**

A: Islam makes it incumbent on the child to deal with his parents with
kindness (*husna*). (FM, p. 435)

**Q125: Is it recommended (for a child) to obey his parents in
everything, even in matters of daily life, as when the father says to
his child "eat this fruit" or "sleep at 10 o'clock" or similar things?**

A: Yes, this is recommended for him (the child). (FM, p. 435)

**Q126: If the father prohibits his child from doing a certain thing
that may bring harm to his child if he does it, knowing that in the
opinion of his child this assessment is incorrect.**

A: It is not permissible to oppose the father in such a situation
because he will suffer from his opposition on account of his (the
father) affection for him (the child). (FM, p. 435)

**Q127: If a father says to his child: "I know that there is no danger
involved in your trip, my child, but your separation from me, your
absence and the distance are really hard for me to bear and cause me
suffering; it is for this reason that I forbid you to travel."**

Follow up: Before I respond, let me ask you this question. If the child
obeys his father and does not travel, will the cancellation of such a
trip hurt him in any way?

Response: Absolutely not. The child will not suffer in any way, but he
will be prevented from fulfilling his wish.

A: In this case then, it is not permissible for him to go on the trip,
as long as such travel causes his father suffering. (FM, pp. 435-36)

**Q128: Is it permissible for the parents to utilize the wealth of their
child who has not attained the age of puberty (*****non-baligh*****)?**

A: It is permissible for the father if its utilization is not to the
detriment of the child. As for the mother, she is not allowed to utilize
his (her child) wealth without the permission of the father or paternal
grandfather. If one of them permits her and it is not detrimental to the
child, then it is permissible. But, if it brings harm to their child,
then it is not permissible; rather, it is obligatory for them to protect
his wealth until he is grown up. (FM, p. 417)

### Gifts for New-Born

**Q129: Some gifts are offered to the family on the occasion of the
birth of a child, normally in the form of gold jewelry, food, or money.
Are they for the new-born or his parents?**

A: The gifts differ in these cases. Some are indicated to be for the
new-born, for example, gold jewelry appropriate for the baby. These are
meant for him. Others are of benefit to someone other than the baby, for
example, food and similar items, which are meant for the parents. It
seems apparent that money placed under the pillow of the new-born or
slipped into his clothes is considered of the first category and thus
belongs to the new-born himself. (FM, p. 417)

### Disciplining Children

**Q130: Is it permissible to beat pupils in school and is it obligatory
to obtain the consent of the guardian of the pupil to be beaten?**

A: It is permissible to beat pupils if they bother others or are
committing forbidden acts -- but with the permission of the guardian --
three strikes [no more]. The beating must be done in a gentle manner
such that it does not cause redness on the body, otherwise *diyah* will
be obligatory. (FM, pp. 433-34)

4. Organ Donation
-----------------

**Q131: Is it permissible to donate the eye or kidney of a living human
being for another?**

A: It is not permissible to donate the eye. As for donating a kidney,
for one who has another healthy one, it is permissible. (FM, p. 415)

**Q132: Some people stipulate in their will that some organs of their
body may be removed after death for the purpose of transplantation in
the body of another human being in need of them. Is this kind of will
correct, and is it permissible to excise those parts (of the body) in
such a case?**

A: [Certainly not. It is not correct and is not permissible] if the
testator is a Muslim, except if the life of another Muslim depends on
this, then it is permissible even if the donor has not made such a will.
But [the *diyah* will be obligatory on the one who does the excision]
except where it is done according to a will, in which case there is no
*diyah* on him. (FM, pp. 415-16)

### Post-Mortem Examination

**Q133: Dissection of a corpse after death, if it is done for a
reasonable purpose such as criminal investigation, teaching of medicine
or similar purposes.**

A: It is not permissible to dissect a Muslim corpse for these kinds of
reasons. The dissecting of the body of an unbeliever whose blood is not
protected during his lifetime is permissible, and likewise when the
protection of his blood is doubtful, if there is no *shar'i* sign of it
being so (protected). (FM, p. 416)

### Artificial Insemination

**Q134: Semen is taken from the husband and injected into his wife with
a needle or by other means.**

A: It is permissible as such. (FM, p. 432)

**Q135: Is it permissible to inject it (semen) into a woman who is not
his wife?**

A: No, it is not permissible. (FM, p. 433)

**Q136: The husband's sperm and the wife's egg are taken and
fertilization is completed in a test-tube, then the egg is returned to
the wife's womb.**

A: This is also permissible as such. (FM, p. 433)

**Q137a: The sperm of the husband and the egg of another woman who is
not his wife are taken for fertilization, then are transferred to the
wife's womb.**

A: This is also permissible as such. (FM, p. 433)

**Q137b: To whom is the child attributed in the latter case? To the
provider of the egg or to the woman in whose womb it reached full-term.
I mean, who would be his genealogical mother?**

A: There are two possible responses to this question, and it is
necessary to exercise precaution between both of them. (FM, p. 433)

**Q138: An egg is taken from a woman and fertilized with the sperm of a
man other than her husband, then it is returned to her womb.**

A: It is necessary to avoid that. (FM, p. 433)

**Q139: Sperm was taken from a man for the purpose of impregnating his
wife. By coincidence, the husband died and after his death the sperm was
implanted into the womb of his widow who bore a child. What is the
ruling with respect to the status of the child and his entitlement to
inheritance?**

A: The child is to be attributed to the donor of the sperm, but based on
this hypothetical question, he does not inherit from him (the father).
God knows best. (MMS, p. 15, Q14)

### Abortion

**Q140: It is easy to abort the foetus in the early phase of pregnancy.
Does the mother have a right to abort it?**

A: Certainly not, this is not permissible except if she is harmed by the
presence of the foetus in her womb, or if its presence causes her
difficulty to a degree that is not normally tolerable. (FM, p. 430)

**Q141: In recent times, due to modern scientific instruments, it has
become possible to know the situation of the foetus, whether it is
suffering from any physical deformity or not. If the foetus is confirmed
scientifically as being deformed and afflicted with maladies or a
malady, is it permissible to abort it?**

A: Deformity of the foetus in itself is no justification for aborting
it. Yes, if its presence in the mother's womb is harmful to her health
or causes her difficulty to an extent that cannot normally be tolerated,
then it is permissible for her to abort it and that is before the soul
enters it. After that, it is absolutely not permissible to abort. (FM,
p. 432)

**Q142: In some situations, the physicians can confirm that the foetus
is afflicted with serious physical deformities which will not be
treatable after birth, and it may not survive after birth, except for a
short while in pain (for the child), causing toil for the parents. Then
he will die. Is it permissible for the mother in such a situation to
terminate (the pregnancy)? Does it make any difference if it occurs
before or after the soul enters? And with the supposition that it is
permissible, is** ***diyah*** **obligatory and who pays for it?**

A: Abortion is not permissible in situations similar to the one
mentioned, even prior to the entrance of the soul. (MMS, pp. 30-31, Q60)

### Contraception

**Q143: Use of contraceptives is popular these days. If use of the pill
and similar things causes harm or difficulty and the only remaining
choice is (the insertion) of some devices -- by a male or a female
doctor -- which requires exposing the local area, is it permissible for
the woman, knowing that pregnancy would cause her harm or difficulty?**

A: It is permissible as long as she faces, in both the pregnancy and the
use of alternative contraceptive methods, such hardship and danger that
cannot be normally endured. If this requires, in addition to exposing
the genital organs, other parts of her body surrounding the genitalia,
then she must refer to a female doctor. If this is not possible then she
may refer to a male practitioner. (FM, p. 428)

**Q144: Some women wish to avoid pregnancy, but their husbands want
(them to get pregnant).**

Follow up: How do they prevent the onset of pregnancy?

Response: By using pills, injections or the cleansing of the vagina
after intercourse.

A: All of these are permissible if they do not entail substantial harm
to her. (FM, pp. 428-29)

**Q145: IUD?**

A: If the woman knows that it will lead to the destruction of the egg
after its fertilization with the husband's sperm [then it is not
permissible for her to use it]. (FM, p. 429)

**Q146:** ***Coitus interruptus*** **('*****azl*****), by which they
prevent their husbands from depositing the semen in the vagina during
intercourse.**

A: They do not have the right to do that. (FM, p. 429)

**Q147: Is it permissible for the husband to force his wife not to get
pregnant even though she wants to?**

Follow up: How does he force her to do that?

Response: He forces her to take pills, injections or use an IUD.

A: He has no right to do that. (FM, p. 429)

**Q148: What about practising** ***coitus interruptus*** **during
intercourse?**

A: Yes he has the right to do that. (FM, p. 429)

**Q149: Is he permitted to use a condom during intercourse?**

A: Yes [but he must obtain her consent for that]. (FM, p. 429)

**Q150: Pills that women take in order to delay the onset of their
monthly menstrual cycle.**

A: They are permitted to use them. (FM, p. 429)

**Q151: There are pills that women take to delay the onset of their
monthly cycle in the days of the month of** ***Ramadan*** **and the days
of** ***hajj*****, but sometimes intermittent blood comes out during
their cycle, but it does not have the characteristics of a cycle. What
is the ruling, if, knowing that if she stops taking the medication,
after 3 days, she will have menstrual blood, and with the medication no
menstrual blood will come out except intermittently?**

A: Based on this hypothetical question, the ruling of *hayd* is not
applicable to the intermittent blood. God knows best. (MMS, p. 19, Q24)

### Vasectomy and Tubectomy

**Q152: Is it permissible for a man or a woman to undergo an operation,
after they have had enough children, that would prevent them from ever
having children again? If this is not permissible, would the ruling
differ if they were living in an Islamic country that encourages birth
control because of public welfare?**

A: It is not free from objection, although its permissibility is not
unlikely if it does not entail substantial harm, such as removing
certain organs like the ovaries of the woman. God knows best. (MMS, pp.
19-20, Q26)

### Genetical Analysis

**Q153: Lately, science has reached a stage of being able to determine
the relationship of the father to his son through blood analysis where
their genes match. If the husband suspects that his wife has had
relations with another man and as a result has gotten pregnant, and if
the blood analysis leads to genes matching with that man, knowing that
this analysis is never incorrect, is it obligatory to act upon the
findings or should one follow the principle "the son belongs to the
marital bed," or follow the result of this proof?**

A: "The son belongs to the marital bed" is a principle made for the one
who is doubtful. Whoever arrives at a knowledge through blood analysis
or otherwise, that goes contrary to this principle should act in
accordance with his knowledge. Adultery by the wife is not confirmed by
this and the penalty of adultery cannot be implemented except after
establishing it through specific stipulated methods in the *shari'ah*.
God knows best. (MMS, pp. 14-15, Q12)

**Q154: Lately, science has reached a stage where it can identify a
murderer by analysing the blood without seeking recourse to other means.
It has reached a degree of precision that makes it possible to determine
the instrument that was used to carry out the homicide. Is it possible
to rely on this to judge a criminal and apply the penalty or not? Or
does one have to act only on the well-known principles of the**
***shari'ah*****?**

A: A murder is not proven and its ruling cannot be implemented except
through the methods of the *shari'ah* or through clear scientific means
unmingled with personal judgment. If what has been mentioned is
conducted through this established way, then it is permissible for
*al-hakim al-shar'i* to give a ruling in accordance with it. God knows
best. (MMS, p. 15, Q13)

### Medication

**Q155: Before taking medication, is it obligatory to investigate and
confirm the correctness of its components to find out whether it
contains any prohibited ingredients?**

A: Certainly not, it is not obligatory to investigate and confirm. (FM,
p. 415)

**Q156: Many medications and disinfectants contain a small amount of
alcohol. Is it permissible to use them, and are they ritually impure?**

A: They are not ritually impure and it is permissible for you to use
them. (FM, p. 415)

**Q157: Some companies experiment with medication on a patient without
informing him in order to see if the medication is effective and
successful.**

A: It is not permissible for them to do that. (FM, p. 416)

### Buying and Selling Blood

**Q158: Buying and selling blood for a remedy.**

A: It is permissible. (FM, p. 412)

### Medical Examination

**Q159: In hospitals, female nurses feel the pulse, measure blood
pressure, dress wounds, etc.**

**1. Is it obligatory for the male patient to disallow the female nurse
from touching his body?**

A: It is possible for him to request a male nurse for the aforementioned
acts or to request the female nurse to wear gloves or place a barrier
like a handkerchief to interpose without touching his body. (FM, p. 426)

**2. Sometimes out of necessity, a male patient requires direct touching
and there is no male nurse or to request one is difficult, or the female
nurse is gentler to the patient than the male nurse.**

A: If necessity requires examination or treatment, and they depend on
direct touching, then this is permissible based on the question, but
only to the extent necessary. (FM, p. 426)

**3. If the wound is in a private area, requiring bandage, what can be
done?**

A: The patient must request that the nurse -- male or female -- use
gloves or place a barrier to avoid touching the private area. If this is
not easy, then touching is permissible to the extent necessary to apply
the bandage. (FM, pp. 426-27)

**Q160: If we change the previous situations from touching to seeing,
what is the ruling on seeing?**

A: The ruling on seeing is identical to the ruling on touching and is
applied as previously covered in detail. (FM, p. 427)

**Q161: In the previous situations, if the patient is a woman and the
nurse is a man, is the ruling similar to what has been mentioned?**

A: Yes. (FM, p. 427)

### Medical Students

**Q162: Some students in the physical medical science study
physiotherapy which requires touching the body of a female patient and
handling her (body), to the extent required by the illness. Were the
student to refuse to do that, he would fail the examination. Is it
permissible to study this science and specialize in it?**

A: This is permissible for the student if he knows or is confident that
his specialization in this (field) is something upon which the
preservation of some honored lives depends, even if it be in the future.
His practice of physiotherapy should be in such a way that it does not
lead to any sexual excitement. (FM, pp. 425-26)

**Q163: In a medical college, it is necessary for the student to examine
a** ***non-mahram*** **woman and man, and it might happen that he
examines their genital organs or the anus. Is this kind of examination
permissible for the student of medicine? Is it permissible for a
graduate doctor to do this sort of examination if the preservation of
some honored lives depends on it, even if it be in the future?**

A: Yes, this is permissible for both the medical student and the doctor
if the preservation of some honored lives depends on it, even if it be
in the future. (FM, p. 426)

**Q164: You have mentioned in your practical treatise (*****al-risalah
al-'amaliyyah*****) something which can be summarized thus -- it is not
permissible for a man to look at the private parts of a woman and
vice-versa, even for treatment, except when unavoidable. Is it adequate
to consider it a necessity for a person in a position of practice, e.g.
a medical student?**

A: It is inadequate unless removing a great harm from a Muslim depends
on it (the practice), even if it be in the future. (MMS, pp. 29-30,
Q59a)

### Smoking

**Q165: Many medical bulletins clearly state the harm of smoking, among
them the fact that smoking is the primary cause of heart disease,
disease of the blood vessels and arteries, high blood pressure, lung
cancer and ulcers, in addition to the harm brought on the family and to
society.**

**Is it permissible for a non-smoker to begin smoking?**

**Is it permissible for a tobacco addict to continue?**

**Is it permissible for a pregnant woman to smoke while the doctors say
that the foetus is affected by the smoking of its mother?**

A: If smoking causes substantial harm to a male or female smoker or to
the foetus, then it is prohibited, whether he/she is a beginner or is
addicted, assuming that he/she would not suffer substantial harm by
quitting. As for the one who would suffer harm by quitting, he/she
should consider which one is less harmful: to continue smoking or to
quit, and act accordingly. (FM, pp. 416-17)

5. Music
--------

**Q166: What is the limit separating lawful from unlawful music? If the
criterion is its being labeled "entertainment or amusement," then this
is not clear according to convention because there are differences of
opinion on that.**

A: The separating limit is its being of suitable quality for the
gatherings of amusement and of immorality. (MMS, p. 28, Q53)

**Q167: Also, regarding musical tunes, what is the criterion for their
prohibition? Is the criterion their actual use in songs by people of
immorality or is it enough for them to be suitable for such purposes? Is
there any difference in situation if they are used during the
commemoration of (Imam) Husayn or Islamic songs, for example, etc.?**

A: The rule also is their being suitable for gatherings (of amusement
and of immorality) and their prohibition is absolutely not lifted by
using them during the commemoration or otherwise, based on precaution.
(MMS, p. 28, Q54)

**Q168: What is the ruling on so-called music in present customary
usage?**

A: It is of two kinds. One of them suits the places of amusement and
entertainment and thus listening to it is prohibited. The other one is
other than this and therefore is not prohibited. (FM, p. 437)

**Q169: Some types of music are broadcast before the recitation of the
noble Qur'an or the** ***adhan*****, before the religious program begins
or during. Is it permissible to listen to it?**

A: The great majority of them are of the second type and thus are
lawful. (FM, p. 437)

**Q170: Musical interludes and music that precedes announcement of the
news.**

A: The same applies. (same answer as Q169) (FM, p. 438)

**Q171: Some types of watches, in addition to specifying the time, have
musical pieces for the pleasure of the owner whenever he wishes (to hear
them). Is it permissible to buy and sell them (watches), or even to
listen to their music?**

A: It is permissible. (FM, p. 438)

**Q172: Is it permissible to listen to religious songs?**

Follow up: You mean religious phrases that are composed with musical
tunes that are common amongst the people of amusement and entertainment?

Response: Yes.

A: It is prohibited to listen to them. The same ruling applies to all
phrases that are not for pleasure and amusement -- such as supplication
or *dhikr --* but composed with these musical tunes. (FM, p. 437)

**Q173: Classical music is believed to soothe excited nerves, and is
also prescribed at times for treatment of some psychological ailments.
Is it permissible for me to listen to it?**

A: Yes, it is permissible to listen to music which is not suited for the
gatherings of amusement and entertainment. (FM, p. 438)

**Q174: Music with pictures that is associated with television films,
popular serial programs, the aim of which is to raise the degree of
excitement of the viewers in accordance with the atmosphere of the film.
For example, if the exhibited scene is frightening, then this music
helps in prompting fear and its effect on the viewers.**

A: The great majority of them are of the lawful type. (FM, p. 438)

**Q175: . . . emotional and national poetry that are at times
accompanied by music.**

A: The same criterion as was previously mentioned (in Q168). (FM, p.
438)

**Q176: The buying and selling of flutes, musical recordings and the
like, from among the instruments of pleasure and amusement, is
prohibited. However, there are instruments made for children's
amusement. Is it permissible to buy and sell them?**

A: It is permissible as long as they are not classified among the
instruments of forbidden pleasure and amusement. (FM, p. 411)

**Q177: Is it permissible for a Muslim to send his son to one of the
musical institutes to study music as a profession under the condition
that he will not use his profession for forbidden things?**

A: There is no objection to studying lawful music in itself, but in
sending children to musical institutes one should ensure that it does
not negatively affect them in their religious upbringing. God knows
best. (MMS, p. 17, Q19)

### Dancing

**Q178: Is it permissible for a wife to dance for her husband in order
to provide him happiness and to excite him?**

A: This is permissible for her. (FM, p. 436)

**Q179: . . . her dancing in front of others?**

A: It is not permissible for her to dance in front of any other but her
husband amongst the men [rather, it is not permissible for her to dance
in front of women as well]. (FM, p. 436)

**Q180: . . . a man dancing in front of men or women other than his
wife?**

A: Likewise, it is not permissible. (FM, p. 437)

**Q181: Some schools in western countries force the male and the female
students to study the art of dancing. This dancing is not linked with
the popular music and is not for amusement, but is part of the
curriculum. Is it prohibited for the parents to grant permission to
attend these lessons?**

A: Yes, if it contradicts religious training, rather absolutely, based
on precaution, with the supposition that the student has attained the
age of puberty (*bulugh*). This holds except where he has a *shar'i*
justification for studying it in the case where he is following
(*taqlid*) the one whose ruling is that it is permissible. In that case,
there is no obstacle to permit him to do this. (MMS, pp. 25-26, Q46)

### Clapping

**Q182: At a wedding and other joyous occasions, men and women clap.**

A: It is permissible for them, provided that it does not include other
forbidden things. (FM, p. 437)

6. Lottery
----------

**Q183: [Lottery] is a well-known game in America and is the closest
thing to [*****yanasib*****], if it is not exactly the same. Is it
permissible for a Muslim to engage in the sale of lotteries with special
machines with the justification that it is rescuing
(*****istinqadh*****) wealth from the hands of the unbelievers?**

A: If he is authorized by an established company to offer and distribute
them (lottery tickets) among non-Muslims, then it is permitted and he
should seize the wealth with the justification of rescuing (*istinqadh*)
it and not with the intent of selling (the lottery tickets).
Alternatively, the Muslim seller takes it (money) in return for his
relinquishment of his right (over the lottery tickets), if he had any
special right over them. (MMS, p. 12, Q7)

### Chess, Backgammon, Wrestling and Boxing

**Q184: What is the general rule for an instrument to be prohibited and
to be considered an instrument of gambling. Is it making and adopting it
(the instrument) for gambling or is it its conventional usage? Is there
a difference between its being a convention for a particular society or
its being so universally?**

A: The general rule is that it is made for gambling and used for it,
such that the term "gambling instrument" can be applied to it. It is
enough if it is regarded as an instrument (for gambling) in one
particular society. (MMS, pp. 27-28, Q52)

**Q185: (Is it permissible) to play chess and backgammon without placing
a bet?**

A: It is not permissible to play them. (FM, p. 436)

**Q186: What is the ruling on playing chess by using the customary
pieces? Is the ruling any different in the case where the game is played
by computer which employs symbols and shapes instead of the customary
pieces?**

A: Playing it (chess) is absolutely forbidden even without placing a
bet. And there is no difference in this, whether it is (played) with
customary pieces or by computer. (MMS, p. 27, Q51)

**Q187: Some people play with gambling instruments other than chess and
backgammon for enjoyment and without placing a bet.**

A: [It is prohibited to play with all that is considered a gambling
instrument even without placing a bet]. (FM, p. 436)

**Q188: Some electronic games that appear on TV with an apparatus called
"Atari" and are played with buttons for enjoyment, without placing a
bet.**

A: If the pictures that appear on the screen are pictures of the
instruments of gambling, then it is not permissible to play with them
using the "Atari" apparatus, otherwise, it is permissible. (FM, p. 436)

**Q189: Wrestling and boxing matches without placing a bet?**

A: They are permissible if they do not lead to substantial bodily harm.
(FM, p. 434)

7. Magic
--------

**Q190: Is it permissible to use white magic which is employed for good
and is the opposite of black magic which is used by evil persons?**

A: Magic in all its shapes and forms is forbidden [even that which is
used to undo magic] unless the matter rests upon a greater benefit such
as saving the life of a respected person. (FM, pp. 417-18)

### Inviting Souls

**Q191: Inviting the souls in order to ask them about their state and
the** ***barzakh*** **and other matters pertaining to the hereafter.**

A: It is prohibited to invite a respected soul whose summoning would
cause him harm. Other than these (respected souls), it is permissible.
(FM, p. 418)

### Exploiting the Angels

**Q192: Some of them claim that they exploit the angels.**

A: There is no basis to this claim. (FM, p. 418)

### Asking for Intercession

**Q193: Is it permissible to ask for sustenance, a child, protection or
intercession directly from the infallible ones?**

Follow up: Let me ask you first. Do you seek this from them because they
create, or sustain, or protect?

Response: Certainly not. But rather because they are the means to Allah
(s.w.t.), the intercessors with Him in the disposal of affairs, and
because they cannot do anything but with the permission of Allah, the
Sublime and Exalted.

Follow up: You mean that they ask Allah the Exalted and He creates, and
they ask Him and He sustains, and they ask Him and He protects, and
because they are intercessors, whose pleas or supplications are not
rejected, because of their status with Allah, the Sublime, and for their
guardianship over us?

Response: Yes, I mean that.

A: This is permissible. Allah (s.w.t.) says: "...and seek means of
nearness to Him..." (Qur'an, 5:35) and they (a.s.) are your means of
approach to Allah (s.w.t.). This is permissible. (FM, p. 421)

8. Slandering Allah (S.W.T.), Prophet (S) Or Imams (A.S.)
---------------------------------------------------------

**Q194: During verbal disputes, some people unfortunately employ words
in a non-serious manner that imply disbelief in Allah (s.w.t.) or
articulate that which is inappropriate for the infallible ones (a.s.).
Is it obligatory to impose a penalty (*****hadd*****) on them for
that?**

A: As long as they are not serious and do not mean what they are saying,
there is no *shar'i* penalty on them but they are deserving of *ta'zir*.
(FM, p. 419)

**Q195: If they are serious and intend to slander Allah (s.w.t.), the
Prophet (S), the Imams (a.s.), religion or school of law
(*****madhhab*****) and persist in this.**

A: The ruling upon them is death. (FM, p. 419)

### Gossip

**Q196: Is it permissible to gossip about a deviant (*****mukhalif*****)
Muslim?**

A: It is preferable to refrain from gossiping about him. (MMS, p. 21,
Q32)

### Stealing, Cheating and Deceiving

**Q197: Is it permissible for a Muslim to steal from the unbelievers in
their country [Europe] or to deceive them in taking their properties by
employing means that are known to them (the unbelievers)?**

A: It is not permissible to steal from their private and public
properties, and likewise to damage or destroy them (properties), if this
tarnishes the reputation of Islam and Muslims in general. Similarly, it
is not permissible even if it is not as such, but considered a deception
and breach of an implied trust given to them (the unbelievers) on entry
or on reception of a residency permit for their (the unbelievers)
country, since the prohibition of deception and breach of trust is with
regard to anyone. (MMS, p. 24, Q39)

**Q198: Is it permissible for a Muslim to provide incorrect information
to government agencies in Europe to obtain through legal channels
privileges and financial or non-financial facilities?**

A: That is not permissible for it constitutes lying and for whatever has
been mentioned, there is no justification for that. (MMS, pp. 24-25,
Q42)

**Q199: Is it permissible to cheat on school exams if some of the
teachers help the students in doing so?**

A: This is not permissible. (FM, p. 434)

### Greeting Non-Muslims

**Q200: What is the ruling on saying "*****salam*****" or replying to it
with respect to the People of the Book, or others amongst the
unbelievers? Is it permissible to congratulate them on some of their
special occasions like Christmas and the like?**

A: There is no objection to commencing with "*salam*" to them, but it is
discouraged (*makruh*) except when necessary, even if it is customary.
Their "*salam*" should be replied by saying "*'alayk*." There is no
objection to congratulating them on special occasions. (MMS, pp. 31-32,
Q63)


