Ritual Purity (taharah)
=======================

**Q1: It often happens that I shake hands with someone while my hands
are wet. I do not know whether the one with whom I shook hands is a
Muslim or an unbeliever (*****kafir*****), who is not regarded as
ritually pure (*****tahir*****). Is it obligatory for me to ask him in
order to make sure?**

A: Certainly not. It is not obligatory for you to ask him. You may say
"the hand with which I touched his hand was ritually pure." (FM, pp.
398-99)

**Q2: A university student, businessman, tourist or some such person
travels to a non-Muslim country, say, Europe, such that scarcely a day
passes without direct contact with its Christian and Jewish inhabitants,
with the attendant moisture exchange in the cafe, or at the barber shop,
doctor's office, dry cleaner's, etc. making it difficult to count (the
places). What should he do?**

A: He should assume the ritual purity of their bodies as long as he does
not know that their ritual impurity (*najasah*) was acquired from an
external source. (FM, p. 399)

**Q3: If I move into a place which was inhabited before me by people who
are not judged to be ritually pure, is it correct for me to consider
everything ritually pure?**

A: Yes, consider everything ritually pure if you do not know or are
unsure of its ritual impurity. (FM, p. 399)

**Q4: An electrically-operated washing machine can dry clothes, after
the water supply is cut off from it, due to the power of spinning rather
than squeezing. Is that enough for their ritual purification
(*****tathir*****)?**

A: Yes, that is enough for their ritual purification. (FM, p. 398)

**Q5: Some people throw newspapers, magazines and some respected books
in the garbage, although they contain some verses of the Qur'an or names
of Allah (s.w.t.).**

A: This is not permissible and it is obligatory to take them out of such
places and to purify them if they have come into contact with some
ritual impurity. (FM, p. 419)

**Q6: Some types of soap which are imported from outside contain lard in
their ingredients but at the end, only 5% remains in them. In that case,
is the ruling of transformation (*****istihalah*****) applicable (to it)
and (is the soap) ruled to be ritually pure, or does it remain ritually
impure?**

A: It remains ritually impure. God knows best. (MMS, p. 17, Q17)

**Q7: What is the ruling on blood that coagulates under the fingernail,
this being the result of a blow or some other cause? This blood then
moves gradually to the outside and it is not possible to remove it. Is
this blood ritually impure or ritually pure? And how is it treated if it
is considered ritually impure?**

A: If it does not change (into something other than blood), it is to be
considered ritually impure, and it is obligatory to remove it if there
is no difficulty in doing so. But if it presents a problem, then that
which seems apparent is to substitute *tayammum* for *wudu'* and
*ghusl*. God knows best. (MMS, p. 21, Q33)

**Q8: Some food items given to poultry are mixed with 30% pig bones
which helps the chicken gain weight at the rate of about 2 kg in 40
days. What is the ruling on this and is there any objection to it?**

A: This precludes neither the permissibility of consuming its meat nor
its ritual purity, if it is slaughtered in the Islamic manner. But it is
preferable to keep animals away from these food items. God knows best.
(MMS, p. 27, Q50)

Major Ablution (ghusl)
----------------------

**Q9: What is the ruling on someone who performs one of the obligatory**
***ghusls*** **and, after completing the** ***ghusl*** **or a few hours
thereafter, he finds something that prevented the water from reaching a
finger of his left hand or a toe of his left foot. Is he obligated to
repeat the** ***ghusl*** **of the entire left part, or is it adequate to
wash only that spot with the intention of** ***ghusl*****?**

A: It is enough to wash that spot only and, based on obligatory
precaution, he should combine it with *wudu'* if a *hadath* has taken
place during that time. God knows best. (MMS, p. 19, Q25)

Menstrual Bleeding (hayd)
-------------------------

**Q10: A woman has regular periods and on the seventh day she is free of
menstrual blood. But after relations with her husband, blood returns and
continues until the tenth day and then stops. In this case, is there any
sin or is expiation obligatory for her?**

A: There is no sin on her part and no expiation is needed in the
hypothetical question. God knows best. (MMS, p. 20, Q28)

**Q11: If a woman with regular menstrual cycle notices, during 2 or 3
days of her cycle, intermittent blood which has none of the
characteristics of** ***hayd*****. Then, she sees blood with the
characteristics of** ***hayd*** **for 5 days -- which altogether makes 7
(days). What is the ruling on her?**

A: The intermittent blood is not *hayd* because the minimum number of
days for it to be *hayd* is 3 days. However, what she sees in the 5 days
is considered *hayd*. (MMS, p. 35, Q73)

Irregular Bleeding (istihadah)
------------------------------

**Q12: Is a woman with light (*****qalilah*****) or moderate
(*****mutawassitah*****) bleeding (*****istihadah*****) obligated to
perform the** ***wudu'*** **between two prayers even if no blood is
found between them (the prayers)? How about** ***tawaf*** **and its
prayer?**

A: It is not obligatory, assuming that the blood has stopped and the
cotton was not stained by it. (MMS, p. 21, Q31)

**Q13: Is a man permitted to have relations with his wife after her**
***nifas*** **period lasting 10 days has ended, while being aware that
blood continues, with the characteristic of** ***istihadah*****, to flow
from her for more than 18 days?**

A: It is permissible, although it is preferable to take precautions from
the 10th until the 18th day. (MMS, p. 20, Q29)

Bleeding after Childbirth (nifas)
---------------------------------

**Q14: Is** ***nifas*** **applicable only upon giving birth? Or is it
deemed to occur simply because of a delivery, regardless of whether it
is full-term or not -- such as the miscarried foetus with a soul or
without a soul, or the miscarried** ***mudgah*** **(lump of flesh) or
'*****alaqah*** **(blood-clot)?**

A: The ruling of *nifas* between a full-term creation and others to
which the term "birth" can be applied do not differ in their
implementation. As for the blood that exits with the *mudgah* and
*'alaqah*, applying the ruling of *nifas* to them is problematic, rather
forbidden. (MMS, p. 21, Q30)


