Khums
=====

**Q51: A person buys a garment for an occasion. After wearing it, he
puts it away and a year passes without it being worn a second time. Is**
***khums*** **obligatory on it? Likewise, (is** ***khums***
**obligatory) with respect to jewelry temporarily used and then set
aside for more than a year without being used?**

A: If the garment is of the type customarily prepared for similar
occasions in the years that follow, then *khums* is not obligatory.
Otherwise, based on obligatory precaution, *khums* applies to it. The
same situation applies to jewelry. God knows best. (MMS, p. 18, Q22)

**Q52: Is** ***khums*** **obligatory for furnishings that the mother
prepares for her daughter [like marital gifts] when a number of years
elapse before they come into use?**

A: *Khums* is not obligatory on them if not preparing [the marital
gifts] gradually damages her prestige, because it would not be easy for
her to prepare them at the time of her marriage. God knows best. (MMS,
p. 18, Q23)

**Q53: If one year elapses on bank shares, is it obligatory to pay**
***khums*** **on them? If it is obligatory, then is it based on the
actual value or purchase price?**

A: It is obligatory to pay *khums* on the actual value. (MMS, p. 34,
Q67)

**Q54: A person builds a house on land for which he has paid**
***khums*****. During the construction of this house a year or more
elapses. He has spent money for one or two years while building it (the
house), knowing that he does not own any home besides this one. Is it
obligatory for him to pay** ***khums*** **for this house? If it is
obligatory, then is the** ***khums*** **calculation based on all the
expenditures in building the house, is it based on the market value of
the house or is it enough to negotiate with** ***al-hakim
al-shar'i*****?**

A: He should evaluate the house (excluding the land) and take out
*khums* on its value except with regard to the money expended in the
year in which he takes up residence in it (home), for there is no
*khums* on it. (MMS, p. 34, Q68)

**Q55: A person builds a house by borrowing money, repaying the state
bank in installments. He decides to settle (with** ***al-hakim
al-shar'i*****) on the** ***khums*** **of the house, knowing that this
house is not part of his necessary (annual) provision
(*****ma'unah*****). Is there any** ***khums*** **on these installments
that he has paid to the bank?**

A: On the supposition of the question, *khums* will be applied on the
house at the end of the year on the total present value (of the house)
if he has paid all his loans; however, if he has paid only part of it,
then it is applied to that proportion. (MMS, pp. 34-35, Q70)


