Hajj
====

**Q57: A man who is financially able in a particular year is prevented
from travelling because he could not obtain a visa to perform the**
***hajj*** **in that year. Then, he is forced to spend the money which
was set aside for** ***hajj*****, after the season, to fulfill his
living needs. Thereafter, he is not able to obtain the money needed to
perform the** ***hajj*****.**

A: If he acquires the ability in later years, then *hajj* is obligatory
for him, and if he does not acquire the ability, then it is not
obligatory for him. (FM, pp. 403-4)

**Q58: What if I am able to perform** ***hajj*** **this year while I am
a student at the University or high school and it happens that the time
of travelling for** ***hajj*** **conflicts with my final exams such that
the trip for** ***hajj*** **would lead to my failure and loss of a
school year, which causes me extreme material and emotional
difficulty.**

A: As long as your travel for *hajj* causes you extreme difficulty as
you said, it is permissible for you to abandon the *hajj* for that year.
(FM, p. 404)

**Q59: From which direction should one throw pebbles at**
***jamratu-l-'aqabah*** **(in Mina)?**

A: Stone it from the front [because it is not permissible to stone it
from the back]. (FM, p. 404)

**Q60: What is the ruling on one who enters the state of** ***ihram***
**from Jeddah, instead of Johfah, because of ignorance?**

A: If he made a *nadhr* for the *ihram* in Jeddah, then his *ihram* is
valid. (FM, p. 404)

**Q61: Is one permitted after** ***tawaf*** **and** ***sa'y*****, to cut
the hair (*****taqsir*****) of someone else who has requested him to do
so, before cutting his own?**

A: It is not permissible for one to attend to the *taqsir* of others
before his own. (FM, p. 404)


