Section1: Family
================

   
 Family is the nucleus of society and the first society in which we
learn social etiquette principles and cooperation. Family is the center
of protection of national and moral traditions and in one word, for the
protection of individuals. Hence, those who are deprived of family
blessings will be exposed to doom. The absence of moral values will be
the loss of cooperation and co-existence and finally the decadence of
nations and human societies.

Today, with a casual glance at the quality of life and disintegration of
families and increasing rates of divorce and parents making great
efforts to provide for the material needs of their children and
disregarding moral and human values, we see that family life is on the
decline.  
    
 Effective and social relations are waning and the relations of elders
and the young generations are strained and there is little sign of
respect. The approaches concerning marriage and the objectives of
married life and family patterns have changed because of the industrial
age.

Boys and girls who are under very serious sexual pressures try to solve
their problems within the legal and moral precincts of Islam but are
faced with the unreasonable unfounded excuses of their parents. In order
to free towards illegal and immoral methods.  
    
 It is obvious that for a girl and a boy, who marries without love but
only for satisfaction of their own sexual desires, this tie won’t last a
long time and it may not bring about peace. Today’s family pays little
attention to co-existence and divine cordiality between husbands and
wives, parents and children and also old people’s rights.

The great role of affection and understanding in marital life is
forgotten. Not being aware of the effects of affectionate smiles and
words, the young husband and wife lead the center of family towards a
dark prison. Happiness and hope will change to stress and despair.  
    
 Thus, despite recent advances in technology, industry and improvement
of cultural communications and relations, the cultural and moral
situation of families has become worse and it has made man’s future
ambiguous.

To deal with this matter, one should try to make the family a peaceful
environment and parents should spend more time with one another and
their children. In this way, parents can provide children with a safe
and peaceful environment under their own supervision, and the children
will become kind and healthy parents of the future. Some parents due to
their cultural, emotional financial inability are unable to perform
their rightful duties.  
    
 The instability of the Western families, the popularity of the families
in which men and women live with each other for sometime without any
obligations towards each other, and without any marriage contract, the
popularity of homosexuality, and the popularity of solidarity lives–all
are warning signs for man’s future.  
    
**But Islam:**  
    
 In the rich culture of Islam, marriage is considered as the best and
greatest structure, which is made of cordiality, devotion, and
self-satisfaction whose architecture places these in the nature and fate
of the workers. (I.e. husband and wife) of this structure and
insistently encourages Muslims to adopt these characteristics.  
    
 The Holy Prophet (S.A.W) has said:  
 “*A man who has no wife is poor and helpless even if he is rich. And a
woman who has no husband is poor and helpless even if she is rich”.*  
    
 In the culture of Islam in comparison to many other old and new
cultures, men cannot rule over women. And man’s supervision and
guardianship doesn’t show his superiority and authority. A woman is a
companion in times of his loneliness and she gives him comfort. A Muslim
woman who is familiar with Islam and is of a pure nature tries to obey
her husband who is of her own choice. She tries to satisfy her own
mental-spiritual needs as well as her husband’s. In this way, they can
create a pleasant family environment.  
    
 Thus, the contract of marriage is not only a legal way for satisfaction
of the sexual instinct, but also is a contract that covers all aspects
between the couples which gives beauty and harmony to their lives, and
saves them from solitude.  
    
 Disintegration of families, increase in divorce rates, moral decadence,
negligence of the needs of the young generation, lack of respect and
good understanding can be rooted out only with improving relations.
Today families are formed with the sole objective of gratifying the
sexual desires of man and woman.  
    
 The Holy Quran says:  
    
**“*****And of His sign is this:  He created for you helpmates from
yourselves that you might find rest in them and created between your
love and mercy”.  (Holy Qur’an 30:21)***  
    
 The above verse gives orientation to the life of married couples that
must always give comfort to each other and their relations should not be
summed up only in sexual pleasure. But should bring an abiding love,
sympathy so that they may live in marital bliss.  
    
 Because the family is the foundation for forming individuals and social
personalities and the very morality of parents is a very influential
factor which begins way before marriage. The level of development and
spirituality of a nation is directly related to its morality and
culture, and the roots for the formation of culture and morality can be
found in the family.


