Section 8: Islam And Manners
============================

   
 Islam has outlined good manners in a precise way. It combats vice and
moral corruption by every means. Islam has taken care of educating the
psychological talents, purifying the conscience, habituating the soul,
and training man to follow righteous moral behavior. Islam does these
things in order to produce good moral talents to man, forming a habit so
he can choose sound behavioral attitudes, and train him to adopt noble
human values. So, Islam helps man to be far away from corruption,
instinctive inclinations and immoral behaviors.  
    
 Islam has followed two constructive methods to achieve its aims. They
are:

1. Moral awareness  
 2. Moral education and behavioral exercise  
  

Moral Awareness
---------------

   
 Islam has followed the way of moral awareness forming knowledge with
noble human values and manners, limiting the quality of righteous
behavior and urging man to follow it while warning him against ill fated
moral education and behavioral exercise and estranging the believer from
them.  
    
 Islam has followed such a way to make sound moral awareness and
scientific understanding for each behavior man practices in order that
he may know its value, results and reward. So, man must pay great
attention to his behavior because it is very important.  
 Verses from the Holy Qur’an, traditions and Muslim directions have
followed in succession to emphasize that Islam has taken care of this
noble human side and urged the Muslim to adopt it. The Holy Qur’an
says:  
    
**“*****By the soul as it is perfected! And inspired unto it against its
vices and (about) its piety! Indeed succeeds he who purifies it! And
indeed fails he who pollutes it! “ (Holy Qur’an 91:7-10)***  
    
 The Holy Prophet (SAW) was asked:  
 “*Which one of the believers is the best in belief?”*  
 He answered:  
 “*The best of them is who poses good manners.”*

Concerning manners, he (SAW) said the following:  
 “*Certainly, patience, truthfulness, clemency and good manners are
among the prophets’ characteristics. On the Day of Resurrection, nothing
better than good manners will be put in one’s scales.”*  
    
 “*Certainly, Allah, be He blessed and Exalted, will give the slave a
reward as He will give the mujahid (warrior) in the way of Allah.” “I
have been sent to complete good manners.”*  
  

Moral Education and Behavioral Exercise
---------------------------------------

Islam has encouraged man to adopt good manners. It has taken care of
increasing moral awareness, moral knowledge and directing man towards
high human concepts and values. Still, it has warned man of misbehavior,
inclining towards vice and moral meanness. Islam has considered
misbehavior as corruption against man’s soul, for good manners suit the
natural righteousness of man, while bad manners are anti-Islam so; Islam
has stressed this fact through the following holy tradition:  
 “*He whose manners are bad tortures himself.”*  
    
 That is because an ill-mannered person always lives in psychopath. This
condition happens because of the tension between him and his society,
for the society turns away from him and refuses his attitudes and
maltreatment. Besides this, he is the farthest person from Allah, for
Allah, glory be to Him, has perfect attributes. Then, the more perfect
the person’s manners are, the more perfect his nearness to Allah will
be. The worse his manners are, the further he will be from Allah.
Meanwhile, he will be deprived of Allah’s love and mercy.  
    
 In Islam, good manners are an invitation to perfect the higher side in
man, namely, the side of the human qualities that are higher than the
emotions and incentives that know nothing but express themselves and do
respond to their motives. These emotions and incentives are rash, anger,
lust injustice, revenge, self-fishiness, greed, etc.  
 Allah says:  
    
**“*****And those who strive hard in us certainly will. We guide them in
our ways; and verily Allah is (always) with those who do good.” (Holy
Qur’an, 29:69)***  
** **  
**“…*****Verily Allah changes not the condition the people until they
change what is in themselves….” (Holy Qur’an, 13:11)***  
    
 Education and self-jihad are so important that Islam regards self-jihad
as a stage higher than jihad against the enemy on the battlefields. It
was reported from Allah’s Apostle (SAW) that he sent a brigade for
jihad. When they came back, he said to them: “Welcome to the people who
have finished the minor jihad, but they will continue the major jihad.”
So it was asked to Allah’s Apostle, “what is the major jihad?” he said:
“Jihad against self”.  
    
 For this reason, Islam has made self-education and developing good
manners a jihad. Jihad needs readiness, habituating the self, will
power, and endurance. All these things raise the self to the level of
the mujahid.  
    
 The mujahid who wages holy war against the internal evil disposition
and the external, corrupt powers makes efforts to support truth and
good.  
    
 These efforts are equal, in aims, sufferings and results, in waging
holy war against the enemies of Allah. So the person who tries to
habituate himself to good behavioral education is a mujahid. He is
worthy of success and guidance granted by Allah. Such a mujahid is loyal
in his search for good. Whenever a person goes on jihad, training and
educating the self in good behavior, he will be able to build a usual
moral power in himself. Such a power becomes fixed with frequent
practice. With this power, he will be able to do good and avoid evil
easily.  
    
 This is the Islamic method in building the Muslim character and turns
the principles into behavioral attitudes and practical movements.  
    
 Here are the steps Islam follows to educate the noble moral feelings
and perfect those feelings in obtaining virtue with a natural, automatic
incentive.  
    
 1. Educating the moral conscience (good and evil or internal feelings).
Such a conscience helps man to know the good attitudes and follow them.
Meanwhile, it helps him to know the evil attitudes and avoid them.  
    
 There are many factors involved in creating the moral conscience. Some
of them are: the idea of punishment and reward, the feeling of extreme
guilt while committing vice, and the feelings of happiness and pleasure
while doing good and virtuous actions.  
    
 Islam has made the moral conscience as a mark to distinguish between
the believing persons and the unbelieving ones.  
    
 2. Islam has founded stable moral values and ideals as clear moral
principles in order that the Muslim may confirm to them and regard them
as life values, such as justice, mercy, trust and truthfulness.  
    
 3. Islam has founded moral prototypes in order that the believing
person may follow them. They are the prophets and the apostles.  
    
**“*****These are they whom we gave the book and the authority and the
apostleship; so  If these (people) disbelieve in it, indeed we have
(already) entrusted it to a people who are not disbelieving in it.”
(Holy Qur’an 6:89)***  
    
 Thus Islam has made a practical moral code for man in which he will
find a unique moral model before him. This human prototype will clarify
man’s way towards moral perfection.


