CHAPTER FIVE: Intermediation through the Prophet (SAW)
======================================================

The doctrine of intermediation through the holy Prophet (SAW)
-------------------------------------------------------------

The Prophethood and Messengership of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him
and His Household)* continues uninterrupted even after his death. He
still exists among us as the Prophet and the Messenger of Allah*(Peac Be
Up Him and His Household)* and this will continue down to the Day of
Judgement, untarnished and unsullied. When all the other laws are still
valid, why shouldn’t the law of intermediation continue to be valid?
When intermediation was permissible during his physical presence among
us, there is no reason to disallow it after his death. The Qur’ān and
the sunnah do not contain any injunction and statement which disallows
the continuation of intermediation after the Prophet’s death. If it was
justified before his death, it is also justified after his death and
both the Qur’ān and the sunnah support this view.

### Four forms of intermediation through the holy Prophet (SAW)

###

There are four possible expressions of intermediation through the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* :

***Intermediation through the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* before his birth.***

***Intermediation through the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* during his physical existence***

***Intermediation through the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* after his death***

***Intermediation through the Prophet’s relics***

All the four forms of intermediation are not only proved by the Qur’ān
and the sunnah, but they are also being practised by our religious
scholars whose knowledge of Islam is unflawed and whose credibility as
human beings is impeccable. All these forms of intermediation will be
illustrated in the following pages with irrefutable arguments from the
Qur’ān and the sunnah.

Section One: Intermediation through the holy Prophet (Peac Be Up Him and His Household) before his birth
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1. Adam’s intermediation through the holy Prophet (SAW)

###

1. Adam’s intermediation through the holy Prophet (SAW)The process of
intermediation through the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* is a continuous process and changes in fashion have never
been able to hobble its popularity and effectiveness among the Muslims.
It existed before his creation and during his physical life and it has
continued to exist after his death and will continue to be popular and
effective in future. It was Adam’s practice to offer the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* as intermediary to Allah for
the forgiveness of his lapses. When he chose the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him
and His Household)* as his intermediator, Allah condoned his act of
disobedience. What could be a greater example of the immediate
effectiveness of mediation when it is channelized through the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* ?

Tabarānī, Bayhaqī, Ibn-ul-Mundhir and Suyūtī narrated this tradition
through ‘Umar bin al-Khattāb and ‘Alī that the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* said, “Adam was just about to repent for his act
of disobedience that he suddenly recalled in his state of anxiety that
he had seen lā ilāha illallāhu Muhammad-ur-rasūlullāh (there is no god
but Allah, Muhammad is Allah’s Messenger) inscribed on the Throne at the
time of his birth.” It obviously meant that the distinction the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* possesses is denied to
others. That is the reason his name was inscribed along with Allah’s Own
name. At this, he added these words of intermediation to his prayer for
divine forgiveness:

*(O Allah,) I beg Your forgiveness through the mediation of
Muhammad*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* .*

The tradition related by Ibn-ul-Mundhir has the following words:

*O Allah, I beg Your forgiveness through Your beloved and most honoured
servant Muhammad and through his distinction You have blessed him
with.[1]*

By the addition of these words of intermediation, the prophet Adam’s
repentance was accepted immediately. Allah said, “In fact, Muhammad is
the most beloved of all My creatures. Since you have intermediated your
petition through him, I have granted it. And were it not for Muhammad, I
would not have created you.” Tabarānī further adds that Allah said, “He
is the Last Prophet among your children.”

Imam Hākim has phrased the tradition in these words:

*Narrated by ‘Umar bin al-Khattāb: Allah’s Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* said: When Adam committed the error, he submitted (to
Allah): O Lord, I beg You to forgive me through the mediation of
Muhammad. Then Allah said: O Adam! How did you recognize Muhammad as I
have not created him yet? He replied: O Lord, when You created me with
Your divine hand and breathed Your soul into me, I raised my head and
saw ‘lā ilāha illallāhu Muhammad-ur-rasūlullāh (there is no god but
Allah, Muhammad is Allah’s Messenger)’ inscribed on each pillar of the
Throne. I*

*discovered that with Your name, the name of only such a person can be
associated who is Your most beloved of all the creatures. At this Allah
said: O Adam, you have said it correctly. Of all the creatures I love
him the most. Now when you offered your prayer through his mediation, I
forgave you. And if Muhammad were not there, I would not have created
even you.[2]*

The tradition was transmitted through many chains and was related by
Bayhaqī in Dalā’il-un-nubuwwah (5:489); Tabarānī in al-Mu‘jam-ul-awsat
(7:259\#6498) and al-Mu‘jam-us-saghīr (2:82-3) with another chain
containing sub-narrators unknown to Haythamī as he stated it in
Majma‘-uz-zawā’id (8:253); Ibn ‘Asākir in Tahdhīb tārīkh Dimashq
al-kabīr generally known as Tārīkh/Tahdhīb Ibn ‘Asākir (2:359-60); Ibn
Kathīr, al-Bidāyah wan-nihāyah (1:131; 2:291-2); and Ibn Hajar Haythamī
in al-Jawhar-ul-muazzam (p.61);.

This tradition is declared sahīh (sound) by Imam Hākim, though he
acknowledges ‘Abd-ur-Rahmān bin Zayd bin Aslam, one of its
sub-narrators, as weak. However, when he mentions it he says, “Its chain
is sound, and it is the first hadith of ‘Abd-ur-Rahmān bin Zayd bin
Aslam which I mention in this book.” Imam Bulqīnī also declares this
tradition sound in his Fatāwā. Subkī confirms Hākim’s authentication in
Shifā’-us-siqām fī ziyārat khayr-il-anam (pp.120-1) although Ibn
Taymiyyah’s rejection and criticism was known to him and he rejects it.

Similarly a large number of hadith-experts have related in their books
the event of Adam’s prayer and his reliance on the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be
Up Him and His Household)* as a form of intermediation. It may be noted
that there is no inconsistency or contradiction between the words cited
earlier and the words contained in these books because these words are
the incremental part of the same prayer. This proves the fact that
prayer through the mediation of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* is, first of all, the practice of Adam (عليه السلام), and
this is undeniably the holiest means for the acceptance of prayer.

Qastallānī has established in his al-Mawāhib-ul-laduniyyah (1:81-2;
4:594) with the help of various traditions the principle of prayer
through the mediation of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* . Imam Zurqānī also confirms it in his Commentary (1:118-20;
12:220-1).

Hadith-expert, Ibn-ul-Jawzī cites this tradition in the first chapter of
his book, al-Wafā bi-ahwāl-il-Mustafā (1:33) and considers it sahīh
(sound). In the introduction of the book he says, “In this book I do not
mix the sound hadith with the false.” He also mentions the version of
Maysarah on the same page whereby the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* says, “When Satan deceived Adam and Eve, and they
repented and sought intercession from Allah with my name.” Ibn-ul-Jawzī
also says in the chapter concerning “the Prophet’s superiority over the
other prophets” in the same book (1:359), “Part of the exposition of his
superiority to other prophets is (the fact) that Adam (عليه السلام)
asked his Lord through the sanctity (hurmah) of Muhammad*(Peac Be Up Him
and His Household)* that He relent towards him, as we have already
mentioned.”

Mawlānā Ashraf ‘Alī Thānwī has initiated the discussion in the second
section (fasl) of his Nashr-ut-tīb (p.20) with a reference to these
traditions.

Even at the time of Adam’s marriage with Eve, Adam (عليه السلام) was
commanded to send blessings on the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* and use them as a form of intermediation in his marriage
contract. This has been recorded in Salāt-ul-ahzān by Ibn-ul-Jawzī. And
Imam Ahmad as-Sāwī says in Hāshiyah on Tafsīr-ul-Jalālayn (1:23):

*And that (divine) command was expressly given to introduce Adam (عليه
السلام) to the glory and distinction of Muhammad*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* at the very beginning, that is, if he were not created, he
would never have been blessed with a wife. So he is the real force for
every form of intermediation, even for Adam’s act of intermediation.*

Mawlānā Ashraf ‘Alī Thānwī related this tradition in Nashr-ut-tīb
(p.21).

The tradition of Adam’s intermediation through the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be
Up Him and His Household)* is also included by Qādī ‘Iyād among the
“sound and famous narrations” in ash-Shifā (1:227-8). He says that Abū
Muhammad al-Makkī and Abū Layth as-Samarqandī mentioned it. He also
cites another very similar version through Ājurrī[3] (d.360), about whom
Mullā ‘Alī Qārī said, “al-Halabī said: This seems to be the Imam and
spiritual guide Abū Bakr Muhammad bin Husayn bin ‘Abdullāh al-Baghdādī,
the compiler of the books ash-Sharī‘ah fis-sunnah, al-Arba‘ūn, and
others.”[4] This is also confirmed by Ibn Taymiyyah: ‘it is related by
Shaykh Abū Bakr al-Ājurrī, in his book ash-Sharī‘ah.’[5]

Imam Suyūtī cites this hadith in his Qur’ānic interpretation
ad-Durr-ul-manthūr (1:58) and in al-Khasā’is-ul-kubrā (1:6) and in
ar-Riyād-ul-anīqah fī sharh asmā’ khayr al-khalīqah (pp.48-9), where he
says that Bayhaqī considers it sound.

In addition to these scholars of impeccable credibility, the narration
of this tradition by experts in the field of compilation and
transmission of tradition argues strongly in favour of the authenticity
and validity of this tradition. As Bayhaqī said in the introduction to
Dalā’il-un-nubuwwah that he only included sound narrations in his book.

The contemporary Makkan hadith-scholar Muhammad bin ‘Alawī al-Mālikī
quotes Dhahabī’s unrestrained endorsement of the traditions in Bayhaqī’s
Dalā’il-un-nubuwwah with his words, “You must take what is in it
(Dalā’il-un-nubuwwah), for it consists entirely of guidance and
light.”[6]

Zurqānī also transmitted Dhahabī’s statement about Bayhaqī’s
Dalā’il-un-nubuwwah in his Commentary (1:120).

Similarly its inclusion by Ibn Taymiyyah in his Fatāwā (2:150) is also a
clear proof of its strength and soundness, though he is generally
regarded as a controversial scholar. As he quotes this version and
another through Maysarah and says, “These two are like the elucidation
of the authentic hadiths (concerning the same topic).” About this
statement Muhammad bin ‘Alawī al-Mālikī said, “This indicates that Ibn
Taymiyyah found the narration credible enough to be considered a witness
for other narrations,

because mawdū‘ (forged) and bātil (false) are not taken as witness by
the people of hadith.[7]

In this holy tradition, when Adam (عليه السلام) uses the words as’aluka
bi-haqqi Muhammad (I ask You through the mediation of Muhammad), and
asks for the forgiveness of his error, Allah’s mercy gushes out, and in
this state of swinging upsurge, He conveys to him the glad tidings of
his forgiveness by using the words qad ghafartu laka (I forgave you).
Through this act, Adam (عليه السلام) has driven this message home to his
progeny that in case they have committed a sin they should not be
overburdened by a sense of guilt and sin and keep sulking in corners; on
the contrary, they should pray to Allah through the mediation of the
Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* in their prayer and
Allah shall forgive them. Adam (عليه السلام) is not making this
statement as an abstraction as it is based on his own experience. A
prayer is instantly granted by Allah whenever the name of the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* is invoked in it. The Qur’ān
says about it:

*(O beloved!) And if they had come to you, when they had wronged their
souls, and asked forgiveness of Allah, and the Messenger also had asked
forgiveness for them, they (on the basis of this means and intercession)
would have surely found Allah the Granter of repentance, extremely
Merciful.[8]*

### 2. The Prophet (SAW) as a source of intermediation for Jews

###

Before the birth of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
, the Jews offered in their prayers his means in order to gain victory
over the rival Arab disbelievers and as a result of their prayer, they
were rewarded with victory. The Qur’ān is a witness to this phenomenon.
Allah says:

*And when there came to them the Book from Allah (the Qur’ān) fulfilling
the book (Torah in the real sense) which was with them, and before that
they themselves had (prayed) for victory (through the mediation of the
last Prophet Muhammad*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and the Book
revealed to him) over the disbelievers. So when there came to them the
same Prophet (Muhammad) with the Book revealed to him) whom they
(already) knew, they rejected it.[9]*

The Qur’ānic verse explains that the Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* , through whom the Jews used to pray to gain victory over
the Arab disbelievers, they rejected him when he physically appeared
among them. They rejected him on the basis of prejudice and enmity
though they possessed complete knowledge of his identity from the signs
of his arrival. Since their rejection of the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* was based on deliberate arrogance, Allah cursed them as
an instant expression of the divine displeasure:

*So there is Allah’s curse on those who (intentionally) disbelieve.[10]*

Allah flared up and cursed them because their rejection virtually
amounted to the rejection of the Prophet’s distinction as His last
Prophet and Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . It is an
exceptional

divine reaction. Though the disbelievers are mentioned in the Qur’ān in
a variety of contexts, the express divine curse is not related to all
these situations. It finds expression only in situations where the
divine wrath is sparked by an unpardonable sin. The frequency and the
intensity with which the disbelievers have been condemned and cursed by
Allah in surah al-Baqarah and al-Anfāl is quite exceptional. If we study
the context and background of these Qur’ānic verses, we will come to
realize that the divine wrath is triggered on occasions where the
disbelievers have denied the Prophet’s glory and distinction, expressed
their disapproval of his high status and relied on prejudice and
jealousy in remembering him.

From the earliest times to the present-day, the meaning of this Qur’ānic
verse favoured by the majority of interpreters has actually been
attributed to Ibn ‘Abbās. He narrated it in the tafsīr of 2:89 in
Tanwīr-ul-miqbās (p.13). This verse refers to the prayer offered by the
people of the Book themselves before the arrival of the last
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . They used him as a source
of intermediation in their prayer to secure victory against the Arab
disbelievers during wars. The words of their prayer are as follows:

*O Allah, award us victory (over these disbelievers) through the
mediation of the last Prophet whose glory and distinction we see in the
Torah.[11]*

In some traditions, the Qur’ān is also associated with the name of the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . The Jews are being
particularly condemned for their self-contradictory attitude, which
borders on sheer hypocrisy. They used to offer prayers of victory over
the disbelievers through the mediation of the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* before his Prophethood, but when he physically
arrived among them, they denied him and rejected his distinction as the
last Prophet. Some of the traditions related to the issue are given
below.

#### 1. Imam Qurtubī

####

Imam Qurtubī related the tradition through Ibn ‘Abbās:

*The Jews of Khaybar were often at war with the Ghatafān (tribe). When
they confronted each other (in battle) the Jews were defeated. They
attacked again, offering this prayer, “(O Lord,) we beg You through the
mediation of the Unlettered Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
about whom You have promised us that you will send him to us at the end
of time. Please help us against them.” Ibn ‘Abbās adds: whenever they
faced the enemy, they offered this prayer and defeated the Ghatafān
(tribe). But when the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* was
sent, they denied (him). So Allah the Exalted revealed the verse: “And
before that they themselves had (prayed) for victory (through the
mediation of the last Prophet Muhammad*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* and the Book revealed to him) over the disbelievers,” that
is, through your mediation, O Muhammad.[12]*

#### 2. Mahmūd Ālūsī

####

He said:

*This (verse) was revealed about Banū Qurayzah and Banū Nadīr who used
to pray for victory over Aws and Khazraj before Allah’s Messenger’s
Prophethood. Ibn ‘Abbās and Qatādah have given expression to the same
reality. It means that they prayed to Allah through his mediation for
victory over the polytheists as also stated by as-Suddiyy: when the war
raged between them and the polytheists, they opened the Torah and placed
their hand on the spot where the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* was mentioned and prayed, “O Allah, we pray to You through
the mediation of Your Prophet You have promised with us to send him at
the end of time; today grant us victory over our enemies.” So (by the
blessing of this prayer) they were made victorious.[13]*

#### 3. Imam Rāzī

####

He states while interpreting the verse (2:89):

*Before the Prophethood of Muhammad*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
and the revelation of the Qur’ān, the Jews prayed for victory, i.e. they
asked victory and help (through their mediation) and they used these
words: “O Allah, grant us victory through the Unlettered Prophet.”[14]*

#### 4. Imam Jalāl-ud-Dīn Mahallī and Imam Jalāl-ud-Dīn Suyūtī

####

They write the Jews used to pray in these words:

*O Allah, grant us victory through the mediation of the Prophet who is
to appear at the end of time.[15]*

#### 5. Qādī Thanā’ullāh Pānī Patī

####

He says that the Jews prayed for victory over disbelievers:

*That is, they prayed for victory over the Arab polytheists and they
used to say: O Allah, give us victory over them through the mediation of
the last Prophet whom we find mentioned in our Book Torah.[16]*

#### 6. Imam Ibn Kathīr

####

He says:

*The Jews used to pray for victory over the Arab polytheists through the
mediation of Muhammad*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* .[17]*

#### 7. Imam Suyūtī

####

He narrates two traditions on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbās in this
context as follows:

*The Jews of Banū Qurayzah and Banū Nadīr used to pray for victory over
the disbelievers and the infidels before the Prophethood of Muhammad.
They said: O Allah, bless us with victory through the mediation of the
Unlettered Prophet, and they were blessed with victory.[18]*

*The Jews of Medina, before the arrival of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* , in their war against the (tribes of) Arab
disbelievers – Asad, Ghatafān, Juhaynah and ‘Udhrah – prayed for victory
over them and sought help by invoking the name of Allah’s Messenger.
They said: O Allah, our Lord, grant us victory over them through the
name of*

*Your Prophet and through Your Book to be revealed to him whose
Prophethood You have promised us at the end of time.[19]*

Similar traditions are narrated by:

‘Abdullāh bin Muslim bin Qutaybah, Tafsir gharīb-il-Qur'ān (p.58).

Ibn Jarīr Tabarī, Jāmi‘-ul-bayān fī tafsīr-il-Qur’ān (1:325).

Baghawī, Ma‘ālim-ut-tanzīl (1:93).

Abū al-Fadl al-Mībadī, Kashf-ul-asrār wa ‘uddat-ul-abrār (1:272).

Ibn-ul-Jawzī, Zād-ul-masīr fī ‘ilm-it-tafsīr (1:114).

Mujāhid bin Jubayr, Tafsīr (1:83).

Baydāwī, Tafsīr (1:122).

Nasafī, al-Madārik (1:61).

Khāzin, Lubāb-ut-ta’wīl fī ma‘ānī at-tanzīl (1:65).

Muhammad bin Yūsuf Abū Hayyān Andalusī, Tafsīr-ul-bahr-il-muhīt (1:303).

Ibrāhīm bin ‘Umar Biqā‘ī, Nazm-ud-darar fī tanāsub-il-āyāt was-suwar
(2:36-7).

Muhammad bin ‘Abd-ur-Rahmān Hasanī Husaynī, Jāmi‘-ul-bayān fī
tafsīr-il-Qur’ān (1:23).

Abū Sa‘ūd ‘Amādī, Irshād-ul-‘aql-is-salīm ilā mazāyā al-Qur’ān al-karīm
(1:128).

Ismā‘īl Haqqī, Tafsīr rūh-ul-bayān (1:179).

Sulayman bin ‘Umar, al-Futūhāt-ul-ālihiyyah (1:77-8).

Shawkānī, Fath-ul-qadīr (1:112).

Muhammad Rashīd Radā, Tafsīr-ul-manār (1:381).

Ibn Juzayy, Kitāb-ul-tashīl li-‘ulūm-it-tanzīl (1:53).

Khatīb Shurbīnī, as-Sirāj-ul-munīr (1:76).

Wahbah Zuhaylī, at-Tafsīr-ul-munīr (1:219-20).

Tantāwī Jawharī, al-Jawāhir fī tafsīr-il-Qur’ān al-karīm (1:96).

Following traditionists and biographers also narrated the same
tradition:

Hakim in al-Mustadrak (2:263).

Ājurrī in ash-Sharī‘ah (pp.446-8).

Bayhaqī in Dalā’il-un-nubuwwah (2:76-7).

Abū Nu‘aym in Dalā’il-un-nubuwwah (pp.44-5).

Ibn Kathīr in al-Bidāyah wan-nihāyah (2:274-5).

All these traditions show that, even before his Prophethood, the people
of the Book offered his name to Allah as mediation. Since these
traditions have been reproduced and recorded by scholars of spotless
repute and integrity, they also serve to remove any doubt about their
lack of authenticity or inferiority because any tradition that is
generally accepted for detailed interpretation also claims general
acceptance, and this tradition has been reproduced by all the exegetes
who have lived during the last thousand years; some of them under the
title ‘interpretation of Qur’ān through Qur’ān, while others under the
title ‘interpretation of Qur’ān through hadith.’ The consensus of these
scholars on its textual authenticity and semantic compatibility in
different periods of time is a reflection of its significance and
soundness. Those who are reluctant to accept them on the basis that they
are drawn from the Jewish source should remember that there is no

harm in drawing the truth from the Jewish sources. It is reported that
the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* said:

*Accept the traditions from Banī Israel, there is no harm in it.[20]*

### Justification for intermediation through the Prophet (SAW) after his death

###

Just as this Qur’ānic verse is a proof of intermediation through the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* before his birth, similarly
it is a proof of continuing intermediation even after his death. One may
naturally ask how do we prove the fact of his mediation after death from
this verse. The answer is simple and rational: if intermediation through
him is valid before his birth, it is equally valid even after his death.

The Jews who offered his mediation before his birth were not
disbelievers. They believed in Allah and fought wars under the
leadership of prophets and righteous people. They turned disbelievers
only when the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* graced
the earth with his illuminating presence. In the past, those people of
the Book themselves trumpeted his arrival and propagated his exceptional
qualities. They talked about him endlessly to their own children,
praised and glorified him immeasurably and eagerly awaited his arrival.
But what happened? At the arrival of the same Prophet of truth they had
waited for years, and had talked about day and night and through whose
mediation had prayed for victory, they turned against him despite their
knowledge of his truthfulness and rejected his Messengership.

To sum up, the reliance of the Jews on his mediation in their prayers
predates his arrival as the last Prophet on this earth. Therefore, the
same logic that justified his mediation in the days preceding his birth,
also justifies it in the days that follow his departure from this
fugitive world. This is the only rational conclusion we can draw from
the traditions I have cited about the relevance of the Prophet’s name
and person as a source of mediation.
