References
==========

[1]. Suyūtī cites in ad-Durr-ul-manthūr (1:60).

[2]. Related by Hākim in al-Mustadrak (2:615).

[3]. Ājurrī narrated it in his ash-Sharī‘ah (p.427).

[4]. Mullā ‘Alī Qārī stated this in his Commentary on ash-Shifā
(1:375-6).

[5]. Ibn Taymiyyah, Qā‘idah jalīlah fit-tawassul wal-wasīlah (pp.84-5).

[6]. Muhammad bin ‘Alawī al-Mālikī, Mafāhīm yajib an tusahhah (p.127).

[7]. Muhammad bin ‘Alawī al-Mālikī, Mafāhīm yajib an tusahhah (p.122).

[8]. Qur’ān (an-Nisā’) 4:64.

[9]. Qur’ān (al-Baqarah) 2:89.

[10]. Qur’ān (al-Baqarah) 2:89.

[11]. Zamakhsharī, al-Kashshāf ‘an haqā’iq ghawāmid-it-tanzīl, 1:123.

[12]. Qurtubī, al-Jāmi‘ li-ahkām-il-Qur’ān, 2:27.

[13]. Mahmūd Alūsī, Rūh-ul-ma‘ānī (1:320).

[14]. Rāzī, at-Tafsīr-ur-kabīr (3:180).

[15]. Mahallī and Suyūtī, Tafsīr-ul-jalālayn (p.14).

[16]. Qādī Thanā’ullāh Pānī Patī, at-Tafsīr-ul-mazharī, 1:94.

[17]. Ibn Kathīr, Tafsīr-ul-Qur’ān al-‘azīm (1:124).

[18]. Suyūtī, ad-Durr-ul-manthūr (1:88).

[19]. Suyūtī, ad-Durr-ul-manthūr (1:88).

[20]. Bukhārī, as-Sahīh, b. of ambiyā’ (prophets) ch.51 (3:1275\#3274);
Abū Dāwūd, Sunan, b. of ‘ilm (knowledge) 3:322 (\#3662); Tirmidhī,
al-Jāmi‘-us-sahīh, b. of ‘ilm (5:40\#2669); Ahmad bin Hambal, Musnad
(2:159,202,474,502; 3:56); Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalānī, al-Matālib-ul-‘āliyah
(1:192\#688;3:280\#3478); Ibn Abū Shaybah, al-Musannaf, 9:62 (\#6536);
and Haythamī, Majma‘-uz-zawā’id (1:151).

Section Two: Intermediation through the holy Prophet (Peac Be Up Him and His Household) during his physical existence
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is a distinction of the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* that people relied on him as a means not only before his
Prophethood but also before birth. In the last section it has been
discussed how Adam (عليه السلام) first of all and then the Jews
benefited from his mediation. When the former nations and communities
prayed through him for victory over their enemies and for their own
redemption, the Muslim community as his direct followers are far more
deserving of this privilege. This is the reason the Qur’ān has furnished
an irrefutable proof of the infinite blessings and rewards the Muslim
community received through his mediation. The Companions depended on him
as a source of intermediation and he never directed them to implore
Allah directly. On the contrary, he himself educated them in making use
of different modes of intermediation. The Qur’ānic arguments relating to
intermediation through the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* are discussed below:

### First argument: Waiving of punishment against the Ummah through the holy Prophet’s mediation

###

The Holy Qur’ān guides us in the following way about intermediation
through the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* in his
earthly existence:

*And (the fact of the matter is that) it is unbecoming of Allah to
inflict punishment on them while (O exalted friend,) you are also
(present) among them, nor will Allah punish them in a state when they
are seeking forgiveness (from Him).[1]*

From this it is evident that Allah has changed His universal system for
the sake of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . The
former nations fell victim to divine punishment when they crossed all
limits of divine disobedience and refused to embrace the message of
truth. In this way their disobedience incurred the divine wrath.
Sometimes stones were hurled at them from the skies, at other times
their faces were disfigured and at still other times, they were drowned
in floods. In short, different types of punishment were wreaked on them,
which clearly indicated that it was their outrageous act of disobedience
that had invited the divine anger. But when the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* descended on this earth, Allah changed His rules
and regulations. This reflects the glory and grandeur of the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and the divine recognition
of his exceptional status. It was for his sake alone that He waived His
earthly punishments not only against the Muslims but also against the
infidels, the Jews and the Christians. This waiver was not restricted to
a specific time or era but became a universal and integral part of his
Prophethood and Messengership. As long as his gracious presence as the
Prophet and Messenger of Allah blesses this world, punishment will not
visit the people who live on this earth. And there is no doubt that his
Prophethood will continue till the Day of Judgement because on the basis
of the Prophet’s presence amongst us (wa anta fīhim), his presence
turned into a fountain-head of divine mercy. Therefore, as long as he is
present among

us, it is guaranteed by the Lord Himself that the Community will remain
immune to all kinds of punishment. Thus the personality of the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* has become a symbol of the
absence of divine punishment.

#### Intermediation through the Prophet (SAW) is a precondition for the acceptance of repentance

####

The verse indicates two sources of access to divine nearness: one is the
source of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and the
other is the source of repentance. Both sources are means of immunity
against divine punishment. Just as diplomats enjoy diplomatic immunity,
people who repent and rely on the Prophet’s mediation enjoy divine
immunity. This immunity helps in stalling punishment. But Allah has
given precedence to the Prophet’s mediation over repentance as is
reflected in their chronological order. First, He mentions the
intermediation through the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* , and then He mentions repentance. The inference is
transparent if one studies the verse dispassionately: repentance is
actually contingent on the repentant’s relationship with the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . This relationship should
not be a mere pretense, but it should be based on sincerity and
devotion. Therefore, the repentance of only those persons will receive
divine sanction who whole-heartedly believe in the integrity and
finality of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . Thus
their repentance is conditional. People who repent should not only
believe in him as a Prophet but also sincerely believe that even today
he is with us and that he will continue to be with us till the Day of
Judgement. When this belief is deeply entrenched in our hearts and
minds, our repentance will acquire an incredible immediacy and lead to
the waiving of punishment.

#### Challenge of infidels and disbelievers

####

Strangely enough, the infidels and the disbelievers cast blatant
aspersions on the truth of the Holy Qur’ān. They flagrantly challenged
the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* by saying that they
did not believe in the Qur’ān and if the Qur’ān they denied was full of
truth, then punishment should be inflicted on them. As the Qur’ān says:

*And when they said (tauntingly), O Allah, if this (Qur’ān) that has
come from You is the truth, then hurl stones on us (on account of its
disobedience) or inflict on us some agonizing punishment.[2]*

The infidels posed this challenge to gauge the truth and veracity of the
Qur’ān. But in reply to the challenge, Allah has pointed out in the
adjacent verse: if my beloved were not among you, your arrogance and
false pride would have been quashed like that of the earlier nations.
This goes against the grain of My mercy, that on the one hand, My
Beloved is present among you, and, on the other hand, I should wreak
punishment on you. Thus the presence of the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* and the infliction of divine punishment are mutually
exclusive. The presence of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* is a divine guarantee

against the materialization of punishment because Allah has sent him as
a means of mercy for all the worlds. The Qur’ān declares:

*And (O great Messenger,) We have sent you but as mercy for all the
worlds.[3]*

Here Allah makes it explicit that the extraordinary status of His
beloved and its declaration in the 33rd verse of surah al-Anfāl, is what
prevents Him from inflicting punishment on them, despite their sin and
disobedience. Otherwise human history is a witness to the fact that
rebels and challengers like them never enjoyed any immunity against
divine punishment in any period and particularly those nations whose
arrogant and supercilious behaviour had crossed all limits of human
tolerance and decency and, therefore, invited His wrath. Some of them
were cast in the moulds of monkeys, others were drowned in water while
still others lost their lives as a result of some deafening sound. In
short, their disobedience was instantaneously retaliated with divine
punishment.

#### Qur’ānic reply

####

This is noteworthy that the infidels and disbelievers, spurred on by
their chronic philosophy of denial and denigration, challenged Allah to
wreak punishment on them because they denied the truth of the Qur’ān.
But the Qur’ānic reply, recorded in the adjacent verse, surprised them
by posing a counterchallenge. The Qur’ān not only highlighted the
dignity and merciful nature of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* but also declared his personality as a means of holding back
divine punishment against the infidels and the disbelievers in their
earthly existence.

This is endorsed by surah Āl-i-‘Imrān which stresses the guarantee of
the presence of the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* as
a means of guidance. Allah says:

*And how would you (now) disbelieve while you are (among those
fortunates) that to you are rehearsed the verses of Allah, and His
Messenger (himself) is in your midst? And whoever holds fast to Allah’s
(lap), is indeed guided towards the right path.[4]*

What precedes this verse is the Qur’ānic assertion that the Jews and the
Christians employed an assortment of devices to persuade the Muslims to
return to disbelief. The filthiest device used by them was their
tantalizing attitude which helped them generate an ambience of suspense
and uncertainty to sow seeds of doubt among the Muslims. They posed
themselves as Muslims in the morning and turned disbelievers in the
evening claiming that Islam did not suit their temper. But the
conspiracy that operated behind this line of action was based on the
belief that the weaklings among the Muslims would be inspired by their
return to disbelief and, as a result, follow in their footsteps,
jettisoning Islam and embracing disbelief. In fact, it was a heinous
strategy to disenchant the Muslims with Islam. But it was unveiled by
Allah and, on account of the presence of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* among them, the designs of these turncoats were
hopelessly frustrated. In addition, the context of the verse also serves
as a certificate of solace and consolation for those Muslims who seem
vulnerable to doubt and vacillation, and this

certificate is not a form of abstraction; it draws nourishment from the
personality of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
himself. Allah is in fact saying that those who are assailed by doubt
and suspicion and are in constant fear of losing their faith, should
turn to the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* as a source
of strength and stability. If they act on this prescription, they will
never return to disbelief after they have embraced Islam. Thus the
prescription for retaining a steady and unwavering faith is to hold on
firmly to the Qur’ān and the Messenger of Allah. The two means are the
strongest pillars on which the structure of Islamic faith can be raised.

#### Subtle point

####

In this Qur’ānic verse, the need and significance of belief in
Messengership is being emphasized. What is being emphasized here is not
the presence of the Qur’ān among them, but the presence of the
Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . The Qur’ān could have
emphasized the simultaneity of their presence: how could you return to
disbelief as the Qur’ān as well as the Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* is present among you. But this mode of presentation is
deliberately eschewed, unravelling a specific divine purpose. When He
referred to His own Book, He stated that the verses of Allah are
rehearsed to you. It means that the mere presence of the book carries no
guarantee of protection against return to disbelief, therefore, it
posits the presence of someone who will rehearse the verses, and it is
His beloved who rehearses these verses to us. Thus the Qur’ān, referring
to the Prophet’s duty of articulating these verses, claims:

*(And) a Messenger (has been sent) who rehearses to you Allah’s
verses.[5]*

Allah makes it explicit through these verses that whatever benefit you
draw from the Qur’ān is through the Messenger’s rehearsal. Thus the
benefit from the Qur’ān is operational only if it is processed through
the mediation of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* ,
otherwise, you shall be doomed forever. As Allah says:

*Allah, by means of a single act, makes many people go astray, and
guides many others.[6]*

Even in this condition, they shall have the Qur’ān, but some of them
will earn only deviation from the right path. Then He declared:

*And whoever holds fast to Allah’s (lap), is indeed guided toward the
right path.[7]*

Now the question arises how to identify Allah’s lap, that is, approach
to Him? The approach to Allah leads through the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him
and His Household)* . Any attempt to gain access to the Lord by
bypassing him is an exercise in futility. In the Qur’ānic language, the
servitude of the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* is in fact
abstaining from sin in obedience to God’s will. Therefore, if you hold
on firmly to him, you are following the will of the Lord as you cast
yourself in the Prophet’s mould and guidance becomes your destiny. Thus,
clinging to the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and
emulating his way of life is a guarantee of immunity against any return
to disbelief.

### Second argument: Forgiveness of the Companions through the Prophet’s mediation

###

The episode relates to the battle of Uhud. Some of the Companions had
been posted at a specific spot (pass) by the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* who had stressed upon them not to budge from
their place whether the Muslims scored a victory or suffered a defeat.
But some of them left their place of duty to grab the spoils of war. As
a result, the infidels of Makkah pounced upon them from behind which
bewildered the Muslims, and created a stampede in their ranks. A number
of the Companions received martyrdom on account of the unexpected enemy
attack. The Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* recalled
the scattered Companions and inspired by his motivational address, they
fought a pitched battle and inflicted a humiliating defeat on the enemy.
The next day after they had returned from the battle of Uhud, the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* asked them to get ready for
another battle. Though the Companions were lacerated with injuries and
exhausted by overexertions, unprotestingly capitulated to the Prophet’s
command. Both Allah and the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* felt pity at their spirit of sacrifice and Allah decided to
forgive them for their lapses, for example, (1) to leave the pass for
collecting the spoils of war, and (2) to leave the Prophet*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* alone and unguarded on the battlefield, which
had caused great loss to the Muslim army as well as resulted in a facial
injury to the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . It was no
doubt a grave offence, but their readiness to plunge into another battle
soon after the battle of Uhud and, inspired by the spirit of jihad,
their readiness for self-sacrifice, deeply touched the strings of divine
passion, and Allah commanded the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* :

*So you should overlook their faults and ask forgiveness for them.[8]*

This Qur’ānic verse recommends forgiveness for the Companions. It
clearly implies that the certificate of forgiveness cannot be issued to
the Companions unless it is processed through the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be
Up Him and His Household)* , that is, unless it includes the Prophet’s
mediation as an instrument of their forgiveness.

The point to be emphasized here is the reversal of priority. Allah,
being the Lord and the Master, can act independently of any creature,
and by virtue of His inherent independence, He is the Master of
forgiveness while the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* is His
creature and, by virtue of his creaturely status, depends entirely on
Him. But Allah, out of His love for the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* , has deliberately reversed the priority. The Master wants
to forgive and says to the one who is dependent on Him: O My beloved, I
want to forgive your Companions, but first of all you should forgive
them and then ask Me for their forgiveness so that I should forgive them
on your recommendation. This fact has been given poetic expression by
Ahmad Radā Khān. He has described how the Creator, in His capacity as
the Lord and the Master, is conferring special honour on His own
creature by giving precedence to His consent even over His own. He says
that here the consent of the Master

depends on the consent of the servant which turns the normal pattern of
expectation upside down by eliminating the distinction between you and
Me, between the Lover and the beloved, between the Master and the
servant. Though the status of the creature is incomparable with that of
the Creator Who is the Lord and Master of all the worlds, yet in this
Qur’ānic verse, the element of comparison is being consciously
underplayed by the Creator Himself and, through an act of voluntary
surrender, He is raising the status of His creature to extraordinary
heights of glory and excellence by the protocol of love, and not by the
protocol of grade. He has not only edged out the “you-me” distinction,
but is also giving priority to the creature’s consent even over His own.
If God had intended to retain the distinction between Himself and His
creature, He would never have made it contingent on the creature’s will.
This by no means implies that the creature has all of a sudden grown
into the Creator or surpassed Him in excellence. It only suggests the
exceptional stature of the creature, which has been conferred on him by
his Creator. It dissolves all distinctions between the creature and the
Creator as both are bonded together in the relation of love, and not in
the relation of grade.

### Third argument: Medina as the source of charity of intercession

###

The following Qur’ānic verse furnishes a strong argument in favour of
intermediation through the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
in his existence on the earth:

*(O beloved!) And if they had come to you, when they had wronged their
souls, and asked forgiveness of Allah, and the Messenger also had asked
forgiveness from them, they (on the basis of this means and
intercession) would have surely found Allah the Granter of repentance,
extremely Merciful.[9]*

Through this verse, Allah is directing the believers towards the most
appropriate mode of repentance. Whenever they commit a sin or an error,
they should ask forgiveness of Allah through the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be
Up Him and His Household)* . Allah will forgive them on the basis of
this mediation. The verse makes the divine intention quite explicit and
transparent. It also implies that, among the many modes of repentance
available to the believers, the most effective mode is to seek Allah’s
forgiveness through the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
. His intercession will be a guarantee of its immediate acceptance. And
this Qur’ānic injunction applied not only to his earthly existence but
shall remain valid even after his death.

### Fourth argument: Return of eyesight through the Prophet’s mediation

###

In addition to the Qur’ānic verses, the sayings of the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* provide a clear proof that
the believers relied on him as a source of intermediation in his earthly
life. Besides, he himself commanded people to depend on him as a source
of intermediation as has been narrated by ‘Uthmān bin Hunayf:

*That a blind man called on the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* and said to him: ‘(O Messenger of Allah,) pray to Allah to
give me solace’. The Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* said:
‘if you*

*wish, I will stall it and this is better for you.’ He said: ‘you should
pray for me to Him.’ So he asked him to perform the ablution: ‘perform
the ablution thoroughly well and then offer two cycles of optional
prayer and beseech Allah with this supplication: “O Allah, I appeal to
You, and submit to You through the mediation of the merciful Prophet
Muhammad. O Muhammad, through your mediation I submit myself to My Lord
to have my need granted. O Allah, acknowledge his intercession in my
favour.”[10]*

Ibn Mājah, Hākim and Dhahabī have declared it a sound (sahīh) tradition
while Tirmidhī graded it hasan (fair) sahīh, gharīb (unfamiliar or
rare).

Similarly, another tradition narrated by Imam Hākim is couched in
different words. In this tradition, ‘Uthmān bin Hunayf says that he was
present in the Prophet’s company. A blind person called on the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and complained about the
loss of his eyesight. He added: ‘O Messenger of Allah, there is no one
to guide me and I am in great trouble.’ On hearing his complaint, the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* said:

*Bring an earthen pot for ablution, then perform the ablution and offer
two cycles of optional prayer. Then say: “O Allah, I appeal to You, and
submit to You through the mediation of Your merciful Prophet
Muhammad*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . O Muhammad, through your
mediation I submit myself to your Lord that He should give light to my
eyes. O Allah, acknowledge his intercession in my favour and accept my
supplication also in my favour.” ‘Uthmān bin Hunayf says: I swear by
Allah that we had neither left the company nor had we carried on a long
conversation that the man entered (with his sight fully restored) and it
seemed as if he had never been blind.[11]*

In addition, a number of other traditionists of great repute have
recorded this sound tradition and their names are given below:

Nasā’ī, ‘Amal-ul-yawm wal-laylah (p.418\#660).

Bukhārī, at-Tārīkh-ul-kabīr (6:209-10).

Ahmad bin Hambal, Musnad (4:138).

Bayhaqī, Dalā’il-un-nubuwwah (6:166-7).

Ibn-us-Sunnī, ‘Amal-ul-yawm wal-laylah (p.202\#622).

Mundhirī, at-Targhīb wat-tarhīb (1:473-4).

Subkī, Shifā’-us-siqām fī ziyārat khayr-il-anām (pp.123-4).

Ibn Kathīr, al-Bidāyah wan-nihāyah (4:559).

Suyūtī, al-Khasā’is-ul-kubrā (2:201).

Qastallānī, al-Mawāhib-ul-laduniyyah (4:594).

Zurqānī, Commentary (12:221-2).

Mahmūd Sa‘īd Mamdūh has also expressed his views in his book
Raf‘-ul-Minārah (p.123):

*“All these chains are sound which have been certified by persons who
have committed the traditions to memory. Among these are also included
Imam Tirmidhī, Tabarānī, Ibn Khuzaymah, Hākim and Dhahabī.”*

This sacred tradition clearly indicates that the creature is imploring
Allah Who Alone can help him and provide relief to him. He Alone has the
power to transform non-existence into existence, non-entity into entity.
But the point to be noted here is that the words of the supplication are
being taught

by the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* himself in which
God’s attention and help are being invoked for its acceptance through
his own mediation. It may be further noted that it is not only his
person that is being relied upon for the acknowledgement of the prayer,
but also the quality of his mercy that he has been vested with through
Allah’s kindness. Thus the prayer boils down to the fact that the
petitioner is saying: O Allah, I appeal to You through the mediation of
the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* whom You have Yourself
vested with infinite mercy that You should restore my lost eyesight and
return light to my eyes which they have lost.

Since the prayer was processed through the Prophet’s mediation, the
Lord’s mercy gushed forth instantly as it is against the divine will
that some petitioner should invoke His mercy through the mediation of
the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and his petition
should not be granted. In this case the grant of the prayer was neither
delayed nor was the phenomenon of cause-and-effect allowed to interfere
in its acceptance. It was the blessing of the Prophet’s mediation which
returned the eyesight instantly as if it had never been lost.

### Fifth argument: Descending of rain through the Prophet’s mediation

###

During the life of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
whenever there was a dry spell on account of a prolonged absence of rain
and signs of drought appeared, the Companions used to request him to
pray for rain though they themselves could have done it. There is no
doubt that they were men of knowledge and possessed a greater
understanding of religion than us, but they were also deeply aware of
the difference between the ordinary servants of the Lord and His special
servants. They knew too well that the prayer of an ordinary servant can
be rejected but that of His favoured ones invariably finds His approval.
And this was the rationale behind the Companion’s request to the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* to pray for the alleviation
of their difficulties and problems. They wanted to impress upon the
believers the distinction between ordinary people and Allah’s most
favoured ones. They capitulated willingly to this divinely established
hierarchical grading and they expected all believers to recognize and
respect the special status Allah had conferred on His special servants,
and this recognition of their extraordinary status should be
ungrudgingly accepted because Islam is primarily a religion of
submission to the will of the Lord. So whenever there was shortfall of
rain and there were apprehensions of drought, the Companions approached
the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and then witnessed
the sight of God’s mercy with their own eyes. The Prophet’s prayer
brought rain in the flash of a second. There is a frequent reference to
such faith-boosting occurrences in the books on hadith. Below are
recorded some of these occurrence to illustrate the fact that
intermediation through the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* is a direct source of bliss for the helpless and embattled
people because whenever he prayed to the Lord, his prayer was
immediately granted. This is an inherent feature of the Prophet’s
supplication. It is out of the question that Allah should discard his
supplication because it is a

promise made by Himself that whenever His beloved prays to Him, his
prayer would be granted, and without any delay.

#### First happening

####

When the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* himself was a
child, there was a severe drought, not a drop of water to drink and
people only looked at the sky wistfully for the unexpected rain. They
had grown weary out of hunger. Their sobs and sighs dissolved in tears
but to no avail. Not a single cloud appeared in the sky. At last, when
all strategies to bring down the rain had fizzled out, Abū Tālib thought
of praying through the mediation of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* . He led all the people to a wide open space. Abū Tālib
held the child in his arms, lifted him towards the sky and said: “O
Lord, confer on us the gift of rain through the source of this handsome
child, we submit his means to you.” He repeated these words three times.
The sky that was used to raining fire and had been lying cloudless for a
long time, was suddenly overcast with clouds. Jet-black clouds floated
all around and it started raining. It rained in torrents and the
drainpipes of the houses started flowing like gushing rivulets.[12]

#### Second happening

####

About forty-five years after this happening when the Banī Hāshim tribe
was under house arrest in Abū Tālib’s mountain pass, Abū Tālib wrote a
passionate panegyric which also referred to this happening. He warned
the residents of Makkah that he would never hand over to them such a
blessed person. On the contrary, they would sacrifice their lives,
children and property in his defence. People who think that we will
surrender to them our most precious treasure are sadly mistaken. One of
the verses of this panegyric translates as follows:

*And the one with the illumined face, whose lighted face acts as a means
of bringing down rain, who is the supporter of orphans and a redresser
of the complaints of widows.*

Ibn ‘Umar says: ‘I often recalled this verse of Abū Tālib whenever I
looked at the face of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* praying for rain. He had hardly stepped down the pulpit that
the drainpipes started flowing.’ We come to know through Ibn ‘Umar’s
words that the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* received
frequent requests from people to pray for rain and, through the
instrumentality of his prayer, it started raining. The tradition is
recorded in these words:

*‘Abdullāh bin Dīnār is reported to have heard it from his father who
said: I heard it from Ibn ‘Umar who used to recite Abū Tālib’s verse:
“And the one with the illumined face whose lighted face acts as a means
of bringing down rain, who is the supporter of orphans and a redresser
of the complaints of widows.” And ‘Umar bin Hamzah said that Sālim has
reported to us from his father (‘Abdullāh bin ‘Umar) that I sometimes
recalled this verse by the poet and sometimes looked at the lighted face
of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* when he prayed
for rain, and had hardly stepped down the pulpit that the drainpipes
started*

*flowing gushingly. “And the one with the illumined face whose lighted
face acts as a means of bringing down rain, who is the supporter of
orphans and a redresser of the complaints of widows.”[13]*

#### Third happening

####

Different traditions are narrated through Anas bin Mālik in this
context. Some of them are:

*Once the Holy Prophet (Peac Be Up Him and His Household) was delivering
the Friday sermon among us that suddenly a man approached him and said
to him: ‘O Messenger of Allah, it has not rained since ages. You should
pray for us that Allah may saturate us with rain.’ So he prayed for them
and it started raining, we hardly returned to our homes that the rain
began to fall and it continued down to the next Friday. Again the same
person or someone else stood up and said to him: ‘O Messenger of Allah,
pray for us that Allah should divert this rain to some other place.’ So
the Holy Prophet (Peac Be Up Him and His Household) prayed: ‘O Allah,
bring down the rain not on us but on the areas around and about us.’ I
saw that instantly the cloud rolled away right and left. It rained in
all the areas except in Medina.* [14]

That a person entered the mosque through the door in front of the pulpit
and the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* was delivering
the sermon while standing. So that person took a position right in front
of him. Then he said: ‘O Messenger of Allah, the cattle have died and
the paths are disconnected. So pray to Allah that He should send rain on
us.’ (Anas says that) the Messenger of Allah*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* raised both of his hands and addressed (Allah): ‘O Allah,
send us rain; O Allah, send us rain; O Allah, send us rain.’ Anas said:
By Allah! We could see neither a cloud in the sky, nor even a fragment
of a cloud, and there was neither a house nor any other building between
us and the mountain. Then a piece of cloud, that was the size of a
shield, appeared from behind the hill. It started floating in the sky
and then it spread out, and it started raining. By God! For six days we
did not see the sun in the sky. Then the next Friday another person
entered through the same door while the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* was delivering the sermon in the standing posture. He
positioned himself in front of him and said: ‘O Messenger of Allah, the
cattle have died and the paths are disconnected, so pray to Allah that
he should stop the rain.’ Anas relates that the Messenger*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* again raised his hands and addressed (Allah), ‘O
Allah, (the rain) may fall around us, and not on us; O Allah, (the rain)
may fall on the hills, hillocks, valleys and the places where the trees
grow.’ Anas says that the rain stopped and we came out (of the mosque)
and we were walking in the sunshine. Sharīk said, ‘I asked Anas: was it
the same person who had come before?’ He said, ‘I don’t know.’[15]

*Once during the time of the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
famine gripped Medina. The Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
was delivering the Friday sermon to us that a person stood up and said,
‘O Messenger of Allah, the horses and the goats have died. So pray to
Allah that He may send us rain.’ The Prophet (Peac Be Up Him and*

*His Household) raised his holy hands and prayed. Anas relates that (at
that time) the sky was as (transparent) as cutglass. (But on account of
the Prophet’s prayer,) the breeze blew instantly and the clouds came
over. Then they grew quite dense and then the sky opened its mouth wide
(that is, it started raining in torrents). We came out from there and
(drenched in rain and) almost drowning in water, we reached our homes.
The rain did not stop till the next Friday. The same day the same person
or someone else stood up and said, ‘O Messenger of Allah, the houses
have collapsed, so pray to Allah that this may stop.’ He smiled and then
prayed (to Allah) that rain may fall around us, and not on us. So I saw
that the clouds had rolled away from Medina (and Medina appeared) as if
it was crowned by the sky.*

*In another tradition, Anas relates that Allah shows to the people the
blessing of His Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and the
acceptance of his prayers.[16]*

#### Fourth happening

####

It happened after his Prophethood. The country was in the grip of
famine. Once a villager came crying to him and pointed to him
graphically the trouble and devastation caused by the drought. He
depicted the afflictions of the affected people poetically in these
terms:

O Messenger of Allah, our miserable situation has driven us to seek your
help, to request you to pray for us. Young girls are forced to work on
account of poverty and their breasts are bleeding due to overexertion.
The sanguine situation has made people so self-centred that even a kind
and affectionate person such as a mother has grown indifferent to her
child. And on account of the physical debility caused by hunger, the
child is lying senseless and exhausted, and neither a sour nor a sweet
word is coming out of his mouth. There is nothing for people to eat
except useless wild grass or the food that has been damaged by the
affliction.

*O Master! Our struggle is confined only to you, and people have access
to no one else but the messengers.*

On hearing the complaint, the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* became restless, and he ascended the pulpit, his shawl
trailing behind and spread his hands in a posture of prayer: “O Allah,
You are infinitely Kind and Merciful. Bring down on them the beneficial
continuous torrential rain that may breathe life into the dead
skeletons, fill the breasts with milk and give vitality to the land.”

The Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* had hardly touched
his face with his spread palms to indicate the end of his prayer that
the sky was overcast with clouds and they showered rain on the land so
copiously that the entire area was saturated with water. The land wore a
spring-clean look as it had been thoroughly washed by rain. The rain
continued till people from adjacent areas came running to the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and said to him: ‘O
Messenger of Allah, everything is about to sink due to excess of rain.
Please pray that the rain should stop, otherwise, it will wash away
everything.’ People who had been deprived of water for a long time were
so saturated with the divine mercy and blessing that they started
grumbling against the narrow capacity of their

valleys and canals. On account of the immediate acceptance of his
prayer, the coming down of rain, its excess and the mixed reaction of
his followers, he felt so elated that a pleasant smile spread over his
face. It seemed as if spring had returned to the parched land. In that
joyful state he said:

*May God bless Abū Tālib. If he were here, this sight would surely have
cooled his eyes (he would have felt very happy). Who will recite to us
his verse?*

‘Alī felt overjoyous on hearing this from the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* and said to him: perhaps you would like to
listen to this verse:

*And the one with the illumined face, whose lighted face acts as a means
of bringing down rain, who is the supporter of orphans and a redresser
of the complaints of widows.*

Meanwhile, a poet from the tribe of Kinānah stood up and he expressed
his appreciation in the form of these verses: ‘O Allah, we articulate
Your praise and this praise is from Your servants who are grateful to
You because we have been blessed with rain through the lighted face of
the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . He prayed to his
Lord and at the same time he raised his eyes and looked towards the sky.
Hardly a fraction of a second had passed that we saw the pearls of rain.
He is a spitting image of the words in which his uncle Abū Tālib has
cast him – he is handsome and has a face that gives out light and
luminosity. So, whoever is grateful to Allah is ultimately blessed, and
whoever is ungrateful, is cursed with the worst.’ The Holy Prophet*(Peac
Be Up Him and His Household)* was immensely pleased by the spontaneous
expression of his sincere feelings and said:

*If poets are capable of saying fine things, you have certainly given
expression to something fine.[17]*

#### Fifth happening

####

Another similar happening is recorded in the books on tradition and the
life of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* which is
sumned up as follows:

*When the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* had returned
from the battle of Tabūk, the afflected people of Fazārah tribe called
on him and complained to him about their backwardness, poverty and sense
of economic deprivation caused by lack of rain. He*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* took pity on them and prayed to the Lord for rain. As a
result of his prayer, it rained in buckets and it continued
uninterrupted for eight days. The next Friday someone requested the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* for the rain to stop. He
prayed: ‘O Allah, let it rain around and about us but not on us,’ and
Allah granted his prayer.[18]*

Summary of the discussion
-------------------------

In the preceding pages we discussed in detail the reliance on the
Prophet’s mediation during his earthly life in the light of the Qur’ān
and the Sunnah. And this mediation was not restricted to a specific
issue but it was applied invariably to all religious and worldly matters
as the Companions

used to pray to God through his means. The traditions we have described
amply prove that the Prophet’s mediation was relied upon in all matters
ranging from disease, pain, difficulty, faith, forgiveness of sins to
the economic deprivation of the people. In short, people depended on his
mediation in all religious and secular matters and he also prayed to the
Lord for all kinds of people. He never discouraged them from coming to
him for prayer. He never told them: ‘Allah is even closer to you than
your main artery, so stay at your homes and pray to Him directly.’ On
the other hand, he commended the people for coming to the right place
which clearly indicated that Allah Himself had guided them to approach
him for the fulfilment of their wishes and the realization of their
needs. This particular guidance provided by Allah Himself to the needy
is a clear proof of the fact that intermediation through the prophets
and the messengers is a valid and commendable act.
