CHAPTER SIX: Intermediation through Persons other than Prophets
===============================================================

Some people, in spite of their awareness of the injunctions of Qur’ān
and Sunnah and the practice of the Companions, believe that it is
possible to seek means in the earthly world and therefore, it is valid
to seek means and extend help, but after death the creature has no
control over his body, so how can he be relied upon as intermediary?
Since it is beyond his control to serve as means and help others, so it
is a form of disbelief.

This pig-headedness needs a twofold elaboration. First of all, it is an
established fact that the creature, whether he is alive or resting in
his grave, has absolutely no control over his body in both cases. These
powers are only conferred on him by Allah, which we exercise during our
worldly existence to handle a variety of matters. It, in fact, is
Allah’s blessing on the creature and, if Allah decides to withdraw it
from him during his earthly life, he will be deprived even of the
capacity to pull a straw. So, just as in this world of cause-and-effect,
Allah has absolute control over all the powers of the creature, and yet
it is not a kind of disbelief to rely on his means and seek help from
him, similarly Allah does not condemn it as disbelief if someone seeks
help from another creature after death or relies on his mediation. Just
as in life it is disbelief to regard the creature as the real helper but
he can be depended upon as means and his help can be derivatively
invoked, similarly it is quite valid to regard the saints, as derivative
helpers after death and to trust as means and beseech them for help.
Disbelief whether it is associated with a living person or a dead person
remains disbelief. But to seek help from someone in his derivative
capacity whether he is dead or alive is quite valid and does not amount
to disbelief. Islam does not believe in double standards that an act is
a form of belief if you perform it in a mosque and it turns into
disbelief if you perform it in a temple. Islamic injunctions and the
consequences that follow from them display a consistent pattern. Thus,
if we treat a medical expert as the true helper and seek his assistance,
it will be considered a form of disbelief. On the other hand, if we
regard Allah as the true helper and seek the help of a virtuous person
as a form of treatment, it is quite valid and is in no way inconsistent
with Islamic Shariah.

The real purpose of a man’s life is to be included among the favourites
of God and to acquire as much knowledge of the divine springs of Power
as is consistent with human limitations. Therefore, to realize this
purpose, human beings rely on the saints and the virtuous people because
they not only themselves have cultivated divine consciousness but also
develop it in those who are closely associated with them. This is the
reason we find Ibrāhīm (عليه السلام) praying to God to include him among
His favourites so that he could persuade his followers to pursue a
similar goal:

*O my Lord! Make me perfect in knowledge and conduct and include me
among those whom You have rewarded with Your nearness.[1]*

Here, the word hukman means the acme of human capacity for knowledge and
conduct. Qādī Thanā’ullāh Pānī Patī says:

*That is, to bring knowledge and conduct to such a climactic point that
one develops the complete ability to represent the sublime office of
divinity and to provide unflawed guidance and political leadership to
humanity.[2]*

Imam Rāzī writes:

“When acquisition of knowledge as the meaning of hukman has been
established, it is equally established at the same time that he (the
Prophet Ibrāhīm) prayed to Allah for the kind of knowledge that
guaranteed his total absorption in the divine qualities and attributes,
a knowledge whose purity serves as a self-adjusting filter to drive out
all impurities.” He further comments:

*And this knowledge proves that the divine knowledge or consciousness
develops in the heart of a creature by Allah’s will and Ibrāhīm’s
supplication – and include me among those whom You have rewarded with
Your nearness – is a pointer to the fact that for a creature to be
saintly or virtuous is exclusively the outcome of Allah’s will.[3]*

Therefore, the acquisition of divine knowledge is made possible only by
means of the virtuous and pious people. To be associated with them and
to acquire divine knowledge through their mediation has been the
practice of the prophets. And any creature who desires the favour of
Allah through the means of the pious and the saintly people, never feels
frustrated and his prayer is invariably granted, and he is included
among the virtuous people. Then he attains divine consciousness as is
declared by Allah:

*And surely (even) in the Hereafter, they will be in the ranks of the
righteous.[4]*

There is irrefutable evidence of reliance on these righteous people for
the fulfilment of their needs and the relief of their pains and
troubles. In its support, the Qur’ānic verse in which Allah is
commanding the believers to associate themselves with the righteous, is
quite sufficient and conclusive. Allah says:

*O believers! Fear Allah, and remain in (the company) of the
truthful.[5]*

In this verse, Allah, on the one hand, is instructing the believers in
the uniqueness and immutability of His Power; on the other hand, He is
enjoining upon them to adopt the company of the truthful in order to
elevate themselves to a position which the truthful have already
attained. At another place, Allah says:

*And follow the path of the (person) who turned towards Us.[6]*

Similarly, the prophet Yūsuf’s prayer is also recorded in the holy
Qur’ān:

*Take my soul at death as a Muslim and unite me with the righteous.[7]*

*The holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* himself prayed to
Allah using similar words.[8]*

Some people might object to the authenticity of the tradition, picking
out flaws in its chain of transmission or coming out with some other
frivolous remarks, but no believer can deny the credibility of the
prayer by Yūsuf (عليه السلام) as it is recorded in the holy Qur’ān which
is nothing but absolute truth. Thus it is established that it has been
the practice of the prophets to mediate their supplications through the
virtuous and the righteous. The

recording of these forms of supplication in the Qur’ān is most probably
intended to persuade the believers to follow the practice of the
prophets.

Ibn-ul-Firāsī narrates that Fīrāsī said to the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him
and His Household)* : O Messenger of Allah! Shall I beg you for
something? He replied:

*No, and if you can’t help begging, then you should beseech the pious
and the righteous (for help).[9]*

Some people believe that the supplication of the pious and the virtuous
is granted during their lifetime, but after death they cannot help
anyone, as they themselves are helpless. They believe that the righteous
are a source of help but only during their earthly existence, and it is
disbelief to rely on them for help after their death.

The supporters of this view are victims of a grave misunderstanding
because the reality is just the reverse. It is true as the green of the
grass and the blue of the sky that Allah is the only source of blessing
and no creature can arrogate this exclusively divine prerogative to
himself. If he does so, he is committing unabashed disbelief. Therefore,
to think that the prayer is mediated through one of His favourites in
his life and He turns a cold shoulder to his prayer when he is dead
smacks of a self-contradiction, as it tends to identify the saint with
Allah as the source of help. The fact is that God Alone has the power to
fulfil the needs of the creatures through the mediation of the saints
whether they are dead or alive.

Those who object to making saints and the pious as means of help and
assistance after death are obviously in the wrong groove. They are only
fumbling in the dark and smashing their cluttered heads against the
slippery walls of an unlighted tunnel which leads into an even darker
dungeon. Their objections are grounded in the misconception that
reliance on the saints and the pious for the acquisition of Allah’s
blessing is contingent on their manifest life while Allah’s dispensing
of His blessings to His creatures through the saints and the pious is
absolutely unrelated to the fact of their being dead and alive. The
traditions and the quotes of the Companions that follow are purported to
eliminate the doubts raised by these objectors. A wide spectrum of
evidence is marshalled to prove the fact that it is not only valid to
rely on the saints and the pious for help after their death but it has
also been the practice of the prophets and Allah’s favourites. These are
the people who can truly guide us and lead us to our salvation. Ibn
Taymiyyah sums up the controversy at the end of his book
al-‘Aqīdat-ul-wāsitiyyah:

*Ahl-us-Sunnah wa al-Jamā‘ah are aligned to (cling to) the faith of
Islam, guarding themselves gingerly against all forms of doctoring. This
includes the truthful, the martyrs and the pious (according to their
grades). It also includes the people who are the source of guidance and
the minaret of light. These are the people who have achieved distinction
on the basis of a consistently virtuous mode of living. The Substitutes
and the Imams of dīn also belong in this category who rallied the
Muslims to (the path of) guidance. This is the group who received divine
patronage to remain (truthful) and it was about this group that the holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* had said: “A group of my
Community, who have been divinely guided to stick to the path of truth,
will not cease to exist till*

*the Day of Judgement, and those who oppose them or degrade them will
never be able to do them any harm.”[10]*

The second point revolves around the objection that the dead cannot be
relied upon as means and they lack the capacity for help. This
conclusion is also based on perverse reasoning. Allah Himself has
referred to the purgatorial life of His favourites at various places in
the Qur’ān. There is no difference of opinion among the followers of any
ideology or religion about the life of the martyrs. What luxuries must
grace the purgatorial life of the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* whose most lowly follower is guaranteed not only life till
the Day of Judgement if he dies a martyr but who also receives all the
requisite divine blessings! Therefore, by regarding the Prophet*(Peac Be
Up Him and His Household)* as a derivative helper, it is quite valid to
seek his help and assistance after his death as it was valid during his
earthly existence. Rather, his purgatorial life is as active and dynamic
as his other life because his followers are sending salutations on him
in a spirit of matchless devotion and angels have been appointed to
convey these messages of sincerity and deep attachment to the Prophet.
This symphony of sound and voice which his followers play every second
and every minute is a living proof of the blessings Allah has conferred
on him even in his purgatorial life.

If the acts of intercession, beseeching the Prophet’s help and his
mediation were acts of disbelief, then they should be indiscriminately
pronounced as forms of disbelief everywhere; they should apply equally
to his earthly existence, purgatorial life and his life in the
Hereafter, because disbelief is condemned by Allah in every colour and
hue. But the facts point in the opposite direction: Islamic teachings
unambiguously reveal that the Companions relied on the Prophet’s
mediation at various occasions in their life and besought him for help
and they will also seek his help and intercession even on the Day of
Judgement and they will seek his means, and as a result of this reliance
on his means and appeal for help, the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* will reward his followers by interceding before Allah for
their salvation. Thus, when it is valid during the earthly life and
after-life of the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* how can it
be declared invalid and a form of disbelief during his purgatorial life?

Proof of purgatorial life
-------------------------

The teachings of Qur’ān and Sunnah prove the reality of life after death
or life in the grave as clearly as they depict the reality of
resurrection of the dead on the Day of Judgement. Allah says in the holy
Qur’ān:

*How can you reject the faith in Allah? Seeing that you were without
life, (and) He gave you life; then He will cause you to die and will
again bring you to life. Then again to Him will you return.[11]*

The Qur’ānic verse makes an explicit reference to two kinds of death,
two kinds of life and finally the return of all mankind to Allah on the
Day of Judgement. In the light of the holy verse, the first kind of
death was our state of non-existence when we had not stepped into the
world of existence. The life that followed this state is our life on
earth. Then death will overreach us and people will accordingly perform
our funeral rites and bury

us. The life that will follow is called the purgatorial life which is
given to man in the grave or in his capacity as a dead person. The
angels interrogate him and open a window in the grave leading either to
Paradise or Hell. After the second life, we will be returned. Thus the
purgatorial life spans the arrival of the angels in the grave for
interrogation and the divine breath blown into the dead bodies for their
resurrection.

This relates to the purgatorial life of an ordinary human being whether
he is a believer or a non-believer. Now let us examine another verse
about the life of the martyrs:

*And say not of those who are slain in the way of Allah that they are
dead, (they are not dead) but they are living though you are not
conscious (of their life).[12]*

The same theme is expressed in different words:

*And those who are slain in the way of Allah, do not (even) think of
them as dead. But they live in the presence of their Lord, they find
their sustenance (in the blessings of Paradise).[13]*

The followers of all religions believe in the life of the martyrs.
However, besides the Qur’ānic verses, a number of traditions draw our
attention to the fact that there is life after death even for the
non-believers and infidels and they are endowed with the capacity to
respond to the words of the living. For example, after the battle of
Badr, the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* himself called the
slain infidels by their names and asked them:

*Surely, we found the promise of our Lord absolutely true. (O infidels
and non-believers!) Did you also find the promise of your lord true?*

At this juncture ‘Umar bin al-Khattāb said to the Prophet*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* : “O Prophet! You are addressing bodies which
have no soul in them.” To make it clear, the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* addressed the Companions:

*I swear by the Power Who has in His control the life of Muhammad! The
words I am speaking to these (infidels and non-believers), they far
excel you in their power to listen to them.[14]*

This agreed-upon tradition attests not only to the purgatorial life
after death of the infidels and non-believers, but it also attests to
their power of listening which excels even that of the Companions.

Similarly, the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* taught every
person passing by a graveyard of the Muslims to address the residents of
the grave by the particle “Yā (O)” and send salutations on them. This is
the reason that Muslims teach their children to say as-salāmu ‘alaykum
yā ahl-al-qubūr (O residents of graves, peace be on you) whenever they
pass by a graveyard.

When the life of the infidels and non-believers, the life of the
ordinary believers, and the life of the martyrs and the saints have been
confirmed by the Qur’ān and the Sunnah, how is it possible to deny the
life of the prophets, particularly the life of the holy Prophet*(Peac Be
Up Him and His Household)* ? Especially, when he himself has repeatedly
and explicitly declared:

*Allah has declared it forbidden for the earth to eat the bodies of the
prophets. So the prophets are living and they regularly receive their
sustenance.[15]*

This sahīh (sound) tradition conclusively proves that the absolute and
incomparable power of Allah keeps the prophets alive in their graves.
Another tradition records that the affairs of the Ummah are regularly
presented to the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* who
expresses his gratitude to Allah for their good deeds and prays for His
forgiveness for their misdeeds. The words of the tradition are as
follows:

*Your deeds are presented to me. If they are good, I express my
gratitude to Allah, and if the deeds are not good, then I pray to Allah
for your forgiveness.[16]*

The Lord, who has the power to give life and sustenance to the whole
mankind both in this world and the Hereafter, also has the power to keep
the prophets alive in the graves and give them sustenance. The unnatural
and unscientific Greek philosophical discussions, which have percolated
into Islamic literature, are no match to the natural and immutable
principles of Islam. The injunctions of Islam clearly explain different
kinds of life and the modes of addressing people in their purgatorial
life and declare categorically that the prophets, martyrs, saints and
ordinary Muslims, even infidels and non-believers, are alive in their
graves. As far as the martyrs are concerned, the Qur’ān itself is a
witness that they regularly receive their sustenance. Therefore, those
who acknowledge intermediation and appeal for help in the earthly
existence as valid but treat it as invalid, even as a form of disbelief
after death should remember that death is the taste of a moment, which
passes away. According to Iqbāl, death is “a message of awakening behind
the smokescreen of dream.”

Purgatorial life is a midway house between the earthly life and the life
after death, which will be conferred on people on the Day of Judgement.
Just as it is valid to beseech the help of a person during his earthly
life and during his life after death and to rely on his means, it is
also an equally valid act to beseech his help and to rely on his means
in his purgatorial life. This does not border on disbelief, because in
all the three kinds of life, earthly, eternal and purgatorial, Allah is
the real Helper and the creature whose help is being sought or is relied
upon as means is the derivative helper. This is in consonance with the
Islamic teaching and does not even remotely smack of disbelief. To treat
the creature as the real helper in all the three categories of life is
tantamount to disbelief. It should be noted that the cause of disbelief
is not located in the categories of life but in the division of real and
derivative.

The life and capacity of the soul
---------------------------------

After a logical and categorical proof of the reality of the purgatorial
life of human soul, it is sheer irrational stubbornness to deny the
reality of intermediation and seeking help from others after their
death. To beseech help and assistance from the souls of the prophets and
the saints or to rely upon their means is as justified as to seek help
from living persons or the angels or to rely upon their means. When we
seek help from a living being we are, in fact, seeking help from his
soul. The human body is the dressing

of the real man – soul. After death, when the soul is liberated from the
material constraints of the body and, on account of its freedom from
impurities of the flesh, then, like the angels, even more than them, it
has the power to perform non-material acts. The soul is independent of
the rules and regulations of the phenomenal world because her world –
the world of command – is different from the cause-and-effect world of
the body. Allah highlights this reality in the holy Qur’ān:

*And these (infidels) ask you questions about the soul. Tell them that
the soul is by the command of my Lord.[17]*

The souls are blessed with a greater capacity of action and performance
in their purgatorial life than they had enjoyed in conjunction with
their bodies. They live in the world of command and can come more easily
to the assistance of those who implore them for help. It may be noted
that the prophets and the saints pray to Allah for the petitioners, and
in response to their supplication, Allah fulfils the need of the
concerned person. It is just like an adult person praying for a child or
a brother praying for his brother. The problem is that those who deny
life to the residents of the graves believe that the dead are not in a
position to pray. But the true Islamic belief is that they are alive and
recognize their visitors in proportion to their consciousness and
understanding. The soul’s awareness grows even more acute after it has
been separated from the body, and by jettisoning its physical
inhibitions, it is made even more powerful.

Another way to understand the meaning of intermediation and seeking help
from others is that the power for Whom mediation is sought or whose help
is being sought is Allah Himself. But the petitioner says that he covets
Allah’s help through the mediation of the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him
and His Household)* for the fulfilment of his need. He implores Allah
through His favourites. He says to Allah: I am from among the favourites
of these saints, therefore, show special mercy to me as I am very close
to them and love them immensely. Thus Allah condones his sins for the
sake of the holy prophets and also on account of his close association
with the saints and fulfils his need.

The people who gather to offer the funeral prayer of a person pray for
his forgiveness by Allah on a similar basis. They, in fact, serve as a
means of forgiveness for the dead person and also act as his helpers.

The dead as a source of benefit for the living
----------------------------------------------

The final shot fired by these deniers of intermediation through the
saints and the pious is that the dead cannot benefit the living because
they lack the power even to shoo away a fly sitting on their body. How
is it possible that a dead person, shorn of physical power, can help the
living and that the living turn to him for help?

This hypothetical objection is actually based on their unawareness of
the Prophet’s traditions and teachings of the religious leaders. As we
have already explained, the people who die and leave this worldly life,
do not in fact die, but enter another life (purgatorial life). Though
they are dead in our eyes, they are not actually dead, only their mode
of life has changed as they have been transferred from one kind of
existence to another kind of existence.

This can be explained by another example. Suppose there are two
tubelights in a room. One of them is white and the other is blue. The
light of the white tube is spreading all around while the blue tube is
off. Now what will happen if the off-button of the white tube is pressed
and precisely at that moment the on-button of the blue tube is also
pressed? The room is the same, all the things in it are in their proper
place, its doors, windows and curtains, etc., are also intact, but there
is a change in the inner ambience of the room, that is, in the earlier
state, everything appeared in the white light in its original colour,
and now everything in the room appears to wear a different complexion on
account of the colour radiated by the blue tube. Now the question is:
Has the colour of everything in the room really changed? Has the
material composition of the objects changed? The answer is in the
negative. Every object is present in its original state. The difference
lies only in our perception. The same applies to the dead people. When
the light of their worldly life is put out, we think they are dead,
while, in reality, the tubelight of their purgatorial life is put on.
Just as the saints and the pious are relied upon during their earthly
life – while the real source of help is Allah – similarly, they can be
relied upon as a means of help to fulfil our needs and to seek the
nearness of Allah even when they have left this material world.

Suyūtī has copied in his book*Sharh-us-sudūr bi-sharh hāl-il-mawtā
wal-qubūr* (pp.257-9) fifteen traditions bearing on this theme, and
furnishing a proof of the reality of purgatorial life, he has affirmed
that the dead can benefit the living.

Ibn-ul-Qayyim has written an exhaustive book on “the soul” which is the
most authentic book on this subject. At one place he has reported from
‘Abdullāh bin Mubārak that Abū Ayyūb al-Ansārī said:

*The deeds of the living are presented to the dead. If they see virtuous
(deeds), they are pleased and rejoiced, and if they see (evil) deeds,
they say: O Allah! Return them.[18]*

Narrating another tradition, Ibn-ul-Qayyim writes:

“‘Ibād bin ‘Ibād called on Ibrāhīm bin Sālih and at that time Ibrāhīm
bin Sālih was the ruler of Palestine. ‘Ibād bin ‘Ibād said to him: give
me some advice. Ibrāhīm bin Sālih said:

What should I advise you? May God make you a pious man! I have received
the news that the deeds of the living are presented to their dead
relatives. Now you just reflect on your deeds which are presented to the
Messenger of Allah*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* .

*After relating this, Ibrāhīm bin Sālih cried so bitterly that his beard
became wet.[19]*

In addition, there are many other traditions which prove that the deeds
of the living are presented to the dead. Therefore, people, who are the
victims of doubt, should study them to correct their faith which,
according to Ibn Taymiyyah, is the faith of Ahl-us-Sunnah wa al-Jamā‘ah
as has already been explained, which leads one to the straight path and
brings one increasingly closer to the pleasure of the Lord. Exclusive
reliance on reason can prove disastrous as reason is a deceptive
chameleon and puts on a variety of guises to deceive its own followers;
it is totally undependable and those who rely

on it for true enlightenment, can never be blessed with guidance as
misguidance is their destiny. According to Iqbāl:

*Move beyond reason because this light (wisdom)*

*Is only the candle on the way; it is not the destination.*

Section One : Intermediation through the pious
----------------------------------------------

### 1. Mediation of pious parents

###

Allah says:

*And their father was a pious (person).[20]*

The backdrop of the episode narrated in this verse is that Mūsā (عليه
السلام) and Khadir (عليه السلام) stayed at a village. The natives played
host to them. When they left there, they saw the wall of two orphan
brothers caving in which harboured their treasure under it. Khadir (عليه
السلام) reconstructed the wall without any recompense. Mahmūd Ālūsī
relates that Khadir (عليه السلام) performed this act because their
father was a pious person. The obvious conclusion is that Allah saved
them on account of the mediation of their parents and some interpreters
say that the pious father belonged in the fifth generation while others
place him in the seventh generation.

We come to learn from this verse that honouring the children of the
pious persons, regardless of the worth of their personal deeds, and only
on the basis of their lineage, was the practice of the saints and the
prophets. The question arises here that in the present-day world why
should we respect the children of the pious when they themselves are
more inclined towards evil than good? It is true that, according to the
Qur’ān, the criterion of human excellence is piety, but if sense of
personal achievement or individual worth has value, one’s genealogy or
family links should also be considered valuable. Therefore, they are
being rewarded for the piety of their father. This was also the practice
of the saints and the prophets. Now suppose the children are expelled
from the fold of Islam on account of some evil act (may God forbid),
then they, according to the reservation expressed in Qur’ān:*“Surely, he
is not included among your family members,”* [21] do not fall within the
area of this qualification, like the son of Nūh (عليه السلام) as well as
Yazīd. Since the reservation applies to Yazīd, he does not deserve any
respect or regard.

### 2. ‘Abbās as a means of help

###

This is about famine and drought, which had taken a heavy toll of
cattle. The people, led by ‘Abbās, offered the prayer for rain.

#### The meaning of ‘Umar’s intermediation through ‘Abbās

####

It is reported from Anas that when ‘Umar prayed for help through the
mediation of ‘Abbās bin ‘Abd-ul-Muttalib during the time of famine, he
said:

*O Allah, we used to offer to You the mediation of the holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and You saturated us with
rain, and now we rely on the mediation of the Prophet’s uncle, so
saturate us with rain (through his mediation).[22]*

Anas relates that they were saturated, that is, it rained which put an
end to drought.

Similarly, ‘Abdullāh bin ‘Umar narrates that, during the year of famine,
‘Umar bin al-Khattāb prayed to Allah for rain through the mediation of
‘Abbās bin ‘Abd-ul-Muttalib. Then he addressed the people:

*O people, the Messenger of Allah*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
treated ‘Abbās in the same way as a child treats his father (that is,
the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* treated ‘Abbās as his
father). He deeply respected him and fulfilled the promises made by him.
O people, you should also follow the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* in the case of ‘Abbās and offer him to Allah as a means of
help and support so that He sends rain on you.[23]*

Then ‘Abbās prayed in these words:

*O Allah, calamity (and trouble) comes as a result of sin and only
penitence lifts this calamity, and the people, on account of my relation
with Your Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* , have offered me
to You as a means of seeking Your help, and these hands of ours,
besmeared in sins, are before You and our foreheads are bowed down with
penitence. So give us rain.[24]*

We learn from the narrations that when ‘Abbās offered the prayer, soon
after it, the clouds rolled up from behind the hills and spread over the
sky and the land was filled with rain. The people rejoiced, and touching
the body of ‘Abbās as a mark of respect, they said: O beloved of the two
sacred places of Makkah and Medina, we congratulate you. And ‘Umar bin
al-Khattāb added on this occasion:

*By God! This is what mediation is in the court of Allah and this is
what the ‘exalted status’ means.[25]*

Subkī comments:

*And, similarly, this (episode) justifies the act of intermediation
through the pious creatures of Allah, and this is an act which the
Muslims have never denied. But only one of the Muslim sects (inventors
of the new faith) has (denied intermediation).[26]*

Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalānī writes in the context of this tradition:

*The episode involving ‘Abbās makes it clear that to seek intercession
from the virtuous, the pious and members of the Prophet’s family is a
desirable act. In addition, this event proves the high status of ‘Abbās
as well as reveals ‘Umar’s respect for him and the acknowledgement of
his status.[27]*

Those who exploit this tradition as a negation of intermediation through
the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* after his death suffer
from a misapprehension because when intermediation was sought through
‘Abbās, it was the time of prayer. That is, ‘Umar, being the caliph,
pushed ‘Abbās forward, instead of himself leading the prayer. During his
earthly existence, the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
himself led the

prayers, and the master leading the prayer served as an act of mediation
for the Companions. Now, when the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* himself was not physically present among them, ‘Umar
requested his uncle to stand in his place and through his mediation
prayed for rain. Therefore, their objections is automatically cancelled
out. It might have sounded credible if there were some other prayer
instead of the prayer for rain as at this occasion the Prophet*(Peac Be
Up Him and His Household)* was not supposed to lead the prayer himself.

#### The blessing of the Prophet’s family

####

Being the caliph, ‘Umar was supposed to lead the people in the prayer
for rain. This was what the protocol demanded and this was what the
people expected. But he deliberately, as a token of respect for the holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and his family, sacrificed
the worldly protocol for spiritual protocol and this should be the
hallmark of all true believers who prefer collective gain to personal
benefit so he gave precedence to ‘Abbās over himself so that through his
means he could come even closer to the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* . He also prompted the people to persuade ‘Abbās to lead
the prayer. The motive behind the move was twofold; first, to further
add to the dignity of the Prophet’s family and, second, to expedite the
acceptance of the prayer. He himself had led the prayers at this spot
because, during his lifetime, this had been the practice of the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* himself and what could be
more precious for ‘Umar than to continue the practice of the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . Besides, the episode
transparently revealed the respect and honour these people extended to
the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and his family. Each
step ‘Umar took and each measure he adopted, was expressly designed to
promote the honour of the family of the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* .

‘Umar also expressed this attitude in his own prayer: ‘O Allah, we in
our prayer to You used to rely on the mediation of the Prophet*(Peac Be
Up Him and His Household)* , and You blessed us with the rain. Now we
rely on the mediation of his uncle, therefore, bless us with rain.’ That
is, during the life of the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* , we relied on his mediation. Like this, he took the people
out, led them in prayer and then prayed to You. Now all this is not
possible on account of his death, and we give precedence to the members
of his family so that our prayer is accepted by You without delay.

The prayer for rain is offered at the juncture of famine and drought. If
we reflect on the tradition deeply, we will discover that ‘Umar is
laying greater stress on the act of mediation than on the act of
supplication. He is not saying: O people, cry your hearts out, shower
Allah with your implorings and He will bless you with rain. Not once did
he say that. All his hope is focused on the act of mediation and the act
of supplication is pushed into the background. After ‘Abbās had led the
prayer, ‘Umar also asked him to supplicate before Allah and he prayed: O
Allah! This nation, on account of my blood link with the Prophet*(Peac
Be Up Him and His Household)* , has

asked me to lead them in prayer. That is, he presented to Allah the
mediation of the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* .
Therefore, his act of leading the prayer actually established the act of
intermediation through the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* .

It will be incorrect to infer from the words of ‘Umar that he relied on
the mediation of ‘Abbās and not on that of the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him
and His Household)* because ‘Abbās was alive while the Prophet*(Peac Be
Up Him and His Household)* was dead. The point to be noted is that he
relied on ‘Abbās’s mediation on account of his close link with the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* as is clearly reflected in
his own supplication. Therefore, it is clear that he is actually
depending on the Prophet’s mediation.

Those who believe in intermediation through the living and deny it after
death and accuse Muslims of disbelief on account of their reliance on
intermediation after death are, in fact, themselves misdirected. If
intermediation is disbelief, then it applies equally to the dead and the
living as no one believes that it is valid to acknowledge not-God as God
during his life and invalid after his death. This discriminatory
attitude is a reflection of their perverse mentality and is in conflict
with the spirit of true faith.

### 3. Command for supplication through the mediation of Uways Qaranī

###

The holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* , being the
greatest well-wisher of his Ummah, has opened many avenues for its
betterment and devised a number of means to facilitate this process. One
of the means prescribed by him is the act of supplication through the
saints and the righteous. The statements made by him in different
contexts imply that he himself had commanded his followers to supplicate
through the righteous as he persuaded a person of ‘Umar’s stature to
have his supplication mediated through Uways Qaranī who was one of the
Prophet’s closest proxy associates. He belonged to Yemen and could not
attain the stature of the Prophet’s Companion as he could not spare any
time from tending his old mother and call personally on the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . The Prophet*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* also loved his devotee deeply. He gave the glad
tidings of his Ummah’s salvation through his supplication and said to
‘Umar that, if possible, he should persuade him to supplicate for his
redemption. His statement has been narrated by Usayr bin Jābir:

*The residents of Kufa called on ‘Umar in the form of a delegation. One
of the delegates was a person who used to have fun with Uways. ‘Umar
asked: Is there anyone of you who comes from Qaran? That person came
forward. ‘Umar said: The Messenger of Allah*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* had said: “A person from Yemen will come to you. His name
will be Uways. In Yemen, there will be no one else besides his mother.
He was suffering from leprosy. He supplicated to Allah and Allah removed
all the spots except a white spot of the size of a dinar or a dirham. If
anyone of you comes across him, you should ask him to pray for your
redemption.”[28]*

Again, another tradition makes reference to Uways Qaranī. The
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* said to ‘Umar:

*If he swears by God and says something, Allah will keep his word. If
you can persuade him to supplicate for your salvation, you must get it
done.* [29]

Then, according to the Prophet’s prediction, a number of Muslims came
from Yemen to take part in the jihad. One of them was Uways Qaranī and
‘Umar asked him to pray for him.[30]

The conclusion to be drawn from the Prophet’s statement is that he
himself commanded his followers to depend on the mediation of the
righteous and the pious. The master for whom the whole universe was
created, who was ordained as the Prophet to introduce us to the religion
of truth, who is Allah’s most beloved creature, whose office is the
recitation of the Qur’ānic verses, he himself is saying: ask my servant
Uways to pray for your redemption. We know that Allah is even closer to
us than our main artery, He listens to our supplications but in spite of
all this, he is saying: ask Uways Qaranī to pray for you. Therefore, it
is now quite transparent that to pray through the mediation of the pious
and the righteous is compatible with the will of the Lord and His
Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and this is what
constitutes the essence of faith and religion.

### 4. Victory through the Companions and the Successors

###

Abū Sa‘īd Khudrī has reported a tradition that the Prophet*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* said:

*A time will come that groups of people will come and fight a battle. It
will be said: Is anyone among you a Companion of the Prophet*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* ? It will be said yes and then victory will be
achieved. Then a time will come that it will be said: Is there anyone
among you who was in the company of the Prophet’s Companions? It will be
said yes and victory will be achieved. Then a time will come and it will
be said: Is there anyone among you who was in the company of the
Successors of the Prophet’s Companions, it will be said yes and then
victory will be achieved.[31]*

This tradition is authenticated by a sound chain of transmission, and
besides Bukhārī, it has also been reported by Abū Ya‘lā with proper
certification through Jābir in his Musnad (4:132\#2182). Haythamī has
narrated it in Majma‘-uz-zawā’id (10:18) and has confirmed its
authenticity.

This sound tradition establishes the validity of intermediation through
the pious and the righteous.

### 5. Stalling of punishment through the mediation of the Substitutes

###

Shurayh bin ‘Ubayd narrates:

*A reference was made to the natives of Syria in the presence of ‘Alī.
At that time he was in Iraq. People said: O leader of the faithful, send
your curse on Syrians. He said: No, I heard the holy Prophet (Peac Be Up
Him and His Household) say that there will be forty Substitutes in
Syria. Whenever one of them dies Allah replaces him by another
Substitute: on account of them, the natives of Syria are saturated with
rain and they have victory over their enemies through the mediation of
these Substitutes and the curse is lifted from the natives of Syria
through their mediation.* [32]

Haythamī says that the narrators of this tradition are*sahīh* (sound)
except Shurayh bin ‘Ubayd who is *thiqah* (trustworthy).

### 6. Fulfilment of people’s needs through the mediation of the righteous

###

It is narrated by ‘Abdullāh bin ‘Umar that the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him
and His Household)* said:

*There is no doubt that there are some of Allah’s creatures that He has
especially designated them for the fulfilment of the people’s needs.
People, in a state of nervousness, take their needs to them and these
are the special creatures of Allah who are immune to His
punishment.[33]*

### 7. Intermediation through Allah’s favourites in the jungle

###

‘Abdullāh bin Mas‘ūd has narrated that the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* said:

*When you lose your means of transport in a jungle, you should call: O
creatures of Allah! Help me, recover my transport! O creatures of Allah!
Help me, recover my transport! There are many of Allah’s creatures on
this earth. They will help you recover it.* [34]

Mahmūd Sa‘īd Mamdūh writes in*Raf‘-ul-minārah* (p.225):

*“The tradition, being narrated from different quarters, transformed
itself from a weak tradition into a sound one which the Muslims have
invariably followed.”*

### 8. Subsistence through the blessing of the weak and the decrepit

###

Mus‘ab bin Sa‘d has narrated that the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* said to Sa‘d:

*It is on account of the weak that you are blessed with victory and
provided subsistence.[35]*

Summary
-------

We have relied on a few narrations from a vast treasury of traditions to
find out that intermediation through the pious and the saints is an
established fact, which has continued uninterrupted from the early days
to the present. No argument can disprove the reality of this sound
practice.

Section Two : Intermediation through the relics of the pious
------------------------------------------------------------

### 1. Intermediation through Ibrāhīm’s site

###

Just as intermediation is permitted through Allah’s favourites,
similarly it is allowed through the articles and objects associated with
them. For instance, intermediation through Ibrāhīm’s footprints is
recorded in the holy Qur’ān in these words:

*And (it was commanded that) you should make the site on which Ibrāhīm
stood into a place of worship.[36]*

Prayer is offered to Allah no matter where it is offered. In this
Qur’ānic verse the believers are exhorted to turn the footprints of
Ibrāhīm (عليه السلام) into ‘a place of worship’ because this site is
more suitable for prayer which clearly establishes the proof of
intermediation through the footprints of Ibrāhīm (عليه السلام).

#### Ibrāhīm’s site

####

The stone on which Ibrāhīm (عليه السلام) stood during the construction
of Ka‘bah is called Ibrāhīm’s site (maqām Ibrāhīm). This is the sacred
stone which etched on itself his footprints and is still preserved in a
bronze gauze in front of the door of Ka‘bah. Ibrāhīm (عليه السلام) had
completed the construction of Ka‘bah walls while standing on it. The
stone moved around the Ka‘bah in any direction Ibrāhīm needed it. So, on
account of its association with His Prophet (عليه السلام), Allah has
especially impressed upon the believers to turn this spot into a place
of worship.

It proves that the places and sites associated with any favoured
creature of Allah are elevated to a stature of respect and dignity. On
account of this association, people receive blessings from it and it
becomes a source of mediation for the acceptance of their prayers by
Allah.

### 2. Relics of the saints as a means of life

###

Sāmirī made a calf of gold and put into its mouth the dust from the feet
of Jibrīl’s horse. Mūsā (عليه السلام) felt outraged by this sight and
asked Sāmirī:

*O Sāmirī! (Tell me) what is the matter with you.[37]*

Sāmirī said:

*I saw something which those people had not seen. So I took a fistful
(of dust) from the footprints (of the angel who had come to you).[38]*

It is explained in books of exegesis that Jibrīl (عليه السلام) had come
to Mūsā (عليه السلام) in the desert of Sinai on a horseback. Wherever
the horse stamped its feet, grass sprouted from the sandy and dry earth.
When Sāmirī saw Jibrīl (عليه السلام), he at once understood that he was
one of Allah’s favourites. His feet were so exceptional that wherever
they touched the dry earth, greenery sprang up from that spot. That is
why he preserved some of this earth and when after making the calf he
put it into its mouth, it started speaking.

It proves that the relics of Allah’s favourites are a means of life.
That earth served as a means of the calf’s power of speech which made
him articulate.

### 3. Consensus of exegetes on acquisition of blessing and on intermediation through the relics of the saints

###

Allah says:

*And their prophet said to them: The sign of his kingdom (being from
Allah) is that you will receive a chest. In it there will be things for
your peace of mind, and relics (tabarrukāt) left over by the children of
Mūsā and Hārūn. The angels will be carrying it and if you are believers,
then surely there is a big sign for you.[39]*

It may be made clear that we have taken over the word tabarrukāt
(relics) from Shāh Walī Allah Muhaddith Dihlawī and its details are
found almost in all books of exegesis. For instance, Ma‘ālim-ut-tanzīl,
Tafsīr-ul-Jalālayn,

at-Tafsīr-ul-kabīr, al-Jāmi‘ li-ahkām-il-Qur’ān, Rūh-ul-bayān,
Rūh-ul-ma‘ānī, Lubāb-ut-ta’wīl fī ma‘ānī at-tanzīl, al-Madārik,
at-Tafsīr-ul-mazharī etc., may be looked through for further
information. Here, we will focus on three famous books of exegesis to
drive home the relevant point:

#### 1. Khazā’in-ul-‘irfān fī tafsīr-il-Qur’ān

####

Mawlānā Na‘īm-ud-Dīn Murādābādī has given a very comprehensive
description of the coffin. We have reproduced it from Khazā’in-ul-‘irfān
fī tafsīr-il-Qur’ān:

*“This chest was made of the boxwood and carved in gold. It was three
hands in length and two hands in width and Allah had descended it on
Adam (عليه السلام). It contained the pictures of all the prophets and at
the end it contained a picture of the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* inside a red ruby. The Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* is in a state of prayer and he is surrounded by his
Companions. Adam (عليه السلام) had a look at all the pictures. By
inheritance, this chest passed down to Mūsā (عليه السلام). He kept the
Old Testament in it. So it also contained fragments of the Old Testament
tablets as well as Mūsā’s staff and his clothes and sandals, Harūn’s
turban and his staff and a little bit of manna which soothed the hearts
of Banī Israel. After him, this coffin was inherited by Banī Israel.
Whenever they were in trouble, they placed the coffin in front of them
and offered supplications for success which was invariably granted.
Owing to its blessing, they achieved victory over their enemies. But
when Banī Israel grew morally corrupt, Allah thrust ‘Amāliqah upon them.
He snatched away the coffin from them and put it at a dirty and dungy
place. On account of defiling it and other acts of sacrilege, he
suffered from a variety of diseases. Five of his settlements were razed
to the ground and they were convinced the destruction was caused because
they had dishonoured the coffin. Thus they placed it in an ox-driven
cart, and released the oxen. The angels brought it to Tālūt in the sight
of Banī Israel. The coffin proved to be a symbol to the Bani Israel for
Tālūt’s kingship. On seeing this, Banī Israel acquiesced in his
kingship.”*

This shows that it is obligatory on us to honour and esteem the relics
of our elders. Supplications are granted and needs are fulfilled on
account of their blessing and their desecration causes the destruction
of the misdirected people. The pictures in the coffin had not been made
by any man but had come from Allah.

#### 2. Tafsīr Mājidī

####

An extract taken by Mawlānā ‘Abd-ul-Mājid Daryābādī from Tafsīr Mājidī
is given below:

“The technical name of this special chest is tābūt sakīnah. This was the
most important cultural and national heritage of Banī Israel. It
contained the original manuscript of the Old Testament as well as the
relics of the prophets intact. Israelis considered it as the source of
immense blessing and sanctity and treated it with great reverance. They
kept it with them through

war or peace, travel or rest and guarded it jealously. It was not very
huge. According to the research of present-day Jewish religious
scholars, its measurement was as follows:

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="33%" />
<col width="33%" />
<col width="33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p><em>length</em></p></td>
<td align="left"><p><em>:</em></p></td>
<td align="left"><p><em>2½ feet</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><p><em>width</em></p></td>
<td align="left"><p><em>:</em></p></td>
<td align="left"><p><em>1½ feet</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p><em>height</em></p></td>
<td align="left"><p><em>:</em></p></td>
<td align="left"><p><em>1½ feet</em></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Banī Israel linked their entire fortune with it. A long time ago, the
Palestinians had wrested it away from them. They considered it highly
ominous and were impatient and jittery for its return. Since the time of
its return to Tālūt, according to history, to the reign of Sulaymān
(عليه السلام) it remained in the possession of Banī Israel and he placed
it in the Sulaymānī Temple after its construction had been completed.
After that, it is untraceable. The Jews generally believe that it is
still buried in the foundations of the Sulaymānī Temple.

Some followers of the straight path believe that the respect accorded to
the manuscript of the Old Testament, the relics of Mūsā (عليه السلام)
and Hārūn (عليه السلام) and those of their children as well as the
saints is ultimately proved and vindicated by the story of the coffin as
it was the way of the prophets and the righteous.”

#### 3. Bayān-ul-Qur’ān

####

Mawlānā Ashraf ‘Alī Thānwī writes in his exegesis Bayān-ul-Qur’ān:

“And these people requested the Prophet (عليه السلام) that they would be
content if they could observe any visible sign that he had been sent to
them as king from Allah. At that time, their Prophet (عليه السلام) said
to them: the sign of his appointment as king by Allah is the chest that
will come to you without your effort which contains an object of
contentment and blessing from your Lord, that is, the Old Testament
which is surely from Allah, and some left-over things which belong to
Mūsā (عليه السلام) and Hārūn (عليه السلام), that is, some of their
clothes etc. In short, the angels will bring the chest, and thus the
arrival of the chest is a complete sign for you if you are believers.
The chest contained the relics. And according to the verse it contained
an original prescription for drawing blessing from the righteous.”

The purpose of this elaborate description is that when Allah had
conferred on Banī Israel, through the means of the relics of their
prophets, temporary and eternal, visible and invisible benefits, and the
Qur’ān is a witness to it and this is not self-deception or mere
superstition as some people readily and uncritically seem to suggest –
then why won’t Allah confer these visible and invisible blessings on the
followers of Muhammad*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* on account of
their deep love and

devotion for him? Surely, their blessings will be countless and far more
superior to the ones conferred on the earlier communities. But it is
unfortunate that we have developed only a speculative and intellectual
relation with the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* , thus
weakening our emotional and spiritual link with him.

But people who have developed an emotional and spiritual nexus with him
are enjoying his blessings even today. It is a fact that some people
cured their eye diseases by touching them with the sheets of paper on
which his praise had been inscribed – and these were written during the
time of the writer Sharf-ud-Dīn Būsīrī. Similarly, our elders have
mentioned countless blessings flowing from the sample of the Prophet’s
sandals. Mawlānā Aswhraf ‘Alī Thānwī has described with particular
detail the blessings of the sample in his journal Nayl-ush-shifā
bi-ni‘āl-il-Mustafā as we have already explained.[40]

### 4. Evidence from tradition about receiving blessing from the relics of the saints and the prophets

###

It is narrated by ‘Abdullāh bin ‘Umar:

*People in the company of the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* got down at Hajar in Thamūd territory. They drank water from
its wells and (also) kneaded the flour with it. Then the Prophet*(Peac
Be Up Him and His Household)* commanded them to spill the water and feed
the kneaded flour to the camels and said to them: Take the drinking
water from the well visited by Sālih’s she-camel.[41]*

### 5. Construction of mosques beside the tombs of the saints

###

Allah says:

*They (the believers) said, those who had control over their affairs
that we will build a mosque (at their door so that the Muslims should
pray in it and draw a special blessing from their close
association).[42]*

When the Companions of the Cave (ashāb-ul-kahf) woke up after 309 years,
and then died naturally later, a difference of opinion developed among
the people. Some of them expressed the opinion that the entrance of the
cave should be closed down by building a wall around it and those, who
were more influential, said that a mosque should be built near it so
that Muslims could pray there and draw blessing from their close
association. In this way, the memory of the Companions of Kahf will also
remain fresh. Qādī Thanā’ullāh Pānī Patī has interpreted the verse in
these words:

*This Qur’ānic verse favourably argues that building a mosque near the
tombs of the saints for drawing blessings from them so that Muslims
could pray there, is quite valid.[43]*

Some people, discarding the misinterpretation of others whose sole
purpose is to cast doubts in the minds of people, say:

*And the meaning of this tradition – that they converted the graves of
their prophets into mosques – is that they had started worshipping these
graves as the same meaning is established through another tradition in
which Abū Marthad al-Ghanawī quotes the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* as saying: Don’t sit on the graves nor turn toward them
while praying[44].[45]*

The tombs of the saints – where Qur’ānic verses are recited round the
clock and from where the faith-boosting voices remembering Allah issue
in high-pitched accents – when a person, immersed in prayer and the
concentration of effort it entails, submits his need to Allah, through
the mediation of His Own saints, the Lord accepts the prayer processed
through His favourites.

#### Who deserves the benefit through mediation?

####

In the earlier pages we have proved from the Qur’ān and the traditions
with reference to the prophets, relics of the prophets as well as relics
of the saints and the pious that intermediation through them is not only
valid but is also compatible with the will and desire of the Messenger
of Allah*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . This is our religious
belief and any deflection from it for a believer is simply
inconceivable. Now, winding up the debate we will prove with the help of
the Qur’ān who deserves the benefit of the act of intermediation? In
this context it may be kept in mind that both a believer and a
non-believer benefit from mediation in proportion to their grades. It is
said that not only human beings but the animals also benefit from the
mediation of the saints. This is the reason that the dog of the
Companions of the Cave benefited from them. Allah has mentioned it in
the Qur’ān:

*And their dog is (sitting) at (their) threshold, stretching forth his
two forelegs.[46]*

The divine wisdom in keeping the Companions of the Cave alive for 309
years was to make them a symbol of Allah’s might for the coming human
generations. But even more amazing is the fact that, during the same
period, the dog sat alive at their door through their blessing without
eating or drinking anything. On account of being their dog, it remained
alive for 309 years. If the dog had belonged to someone else, it would
not have survived for even a short period and died without food and
drink. Another point to note is that the dog did not even belong to
them, it belonged to their baker. When they set out on their journey, it
also set out with them and the Qur’ān has particularly stressed its
steadfastness in keeping the company of these men. The question is that
it is a natural canine posture, then what is so special about it that
the Qur’ān has laid unusual emphasis on it. It is because the dog did
not give up the company of the saints and the righteous and demonstrated
its loyalty by remaining seated at the door. The company of these pious
persons not only kept it alive for 309 years but also distinguished it
from other dogs. It is on account of these saints that Allah has
mentioned it in the Qur’ān along with them:

*(Now) some people will say: (Companions of the Cave) were three, the
fourth being their dog, and some will say they were five, the sixth
being their dog, doubtfully guessing at the unknown, and some will say
they were seven, the eighth being their dog.[47]*

In this verse, the dog is being mentioned along with the Companions of
the Cave. The dog proved its loyalty and did not desert them. The dog’s
behaviour pleased Allah so much that He has bracketed it with the

Companions of the Cave, that is, wherever He has mentioned them, He has
also mentioned the dog.

In the Qur’ānic verse, the posture of the dog is also being stressed. We
learn from this that if the dog cannot die before a specific time by
adopting the company of the pious people of Allah and its reference is
made in the Qur’ān, then how can a Muslim with correct faith be deprived
of Allah’s favour if he mediates his prayer for its immediate acceptance
through one of Allah’s prophets or saints or offers the mediation of
some object associated with them or supplicates to Allah at a sacred
spot or lives in the company of the saints and the pious, because
Allah’s favourite creatures are the divinely certified means to lead
people to the path of His pleasure and to interject in them the divine
consciousness. It is, therefore, established as an incontrovertible fact
that only a Muslim with correct faith is the real beneficiary of the
rewards that accrue to him through the mediation of the saints and the
pious people of Allah.


