CHAPTER SEVEN: Religious Leaders who believe in Intermediation: their Experiences and Observations
==================================================================================================

It is an established fact that on account of the distinction Allah has
conferred on His favourites and the blessings He has showered upon them,
it has been the practice of our religious leaders and scholars to rely
on them to resolve their worldly problems, attain salvation in the
Hereafter, make their graves and tombs the focus of their supplications
and seek help and assistance from the chosen people of Allah who are
buried in them and seek their help for spiritual and inner benefits and
blessings. These acts, which shaped the conduct and mode of living of
the saints and the scholars in the past are now the granite foundation
of the concepts and beliefs of Ahl-us-Sunnah wa al-Jamā‘ah. Moreover,
they had not moulded their attitudes and deeds on a superficial,
unconscious or sentimental basis. A great deal of reflection and
reasoning laced these modes of conduct and were framed by comprehensive
experimentation, observation and practical orientation. Therefore, on
the basis of investigation, and not mere sentiment, it can be affirmed
that their statements were sound and authentic and on account of their
immunity from doubt and ambiguity, they furnish a cogent argument for
all those believers who are blessed with sufficient wisdom and
intelligence to appraise the depth and truth of these statements.

Religious scholars, enlightened saints and our spiritual leaders have
pronounced the tombs of these favourites of Allah as inexhaustible
fountain-heads of light and blessing where our supplications are
acknowledged and robed as destinies. Reliance on these sanctified
persons opens the shuttered avenues of success. Their attention and
response unravels the tangles of the Hereafter and their spiritual help
serves as a source of salvation for our worries and all forms of
distress. To cap it all, their statements are consistent with the
criterion of experience and observation, which is the basis of the
modern inductive method of all scientific progress. Therefore, they
cannot be brushed under the carpet as mere hearsay and deserve our
positive response as they are grounded in facts and proved by
experience.

This world is inhabited by two sets of people. The first set of people
are those who are rebellious and disobedient, and on account of their
law-breaking tendencies, they form a coterie of persons who are
hell-bent to protect and promote the interests of the devil and are a
cause of constant torture for Allah’s creatures. On the other hand are
those who are good-natured, pure, and well-behaved and with a positive
outlook and are determined to promote the welfare of the people. Such
noble persons and untainted souls form their own fraternity and come
closer to one another through mutual interaction, following the
axiomatic principle that “birds of a feather flock together.” These
courageous, highly determined and spiritually motivated people, through
sheer hard work and concentration, leave behind indelible tales of
sincerity and honesty, patience and steadfastness, love and sacrifice
that the readers are simply stunned by their exceptional nature.

These holy personages have graced every period of human history.
Outwardly, they live on the sidelines but they are easily placed on
account of their habits and manners, their character and mode of
conversation. Their

love and concern for the creatures of Allah is so gushing that it cannot
be contained like the perfume of flowers. The chain of their blessing is
continuous, because it goes against the divine grain that His creatures
are deprived of the benefit and blessing of His chosen people in any era
of human history. Therefore, these favoured servants of Allah are not
only a source of blessing for the people in their manifest life but also
benefit them after death; rather their blessings acquire greater
frequency and intensity when they are transferred to another mode of
existence after leaving this phenomenal world. They bless the seekers of
their help as effectively as they did during their earthly sojourn. The
one who seeks their help instinctively knows that he has been helped by
them. In the context of intermediation and help, we propose to cast a
cursory glance at the conduct, experiences and observations of these
righteous people who have provided glimmers of light and guidance to the
creatures of Allah groping in the amorphous shades of darkness and
depression.

Ideas and beliefs of religious leaders
--------------------------------------

### 1. Imam Zayn-ul-‘Ābidīn

###

Imam Zayn-ul-‘Ābidīn supplicates to the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* for help and intercession in these words:

*O mercy of the worlds! You are the intercessor for the sinners.*

*On account of your infinite generosity, mercy and magnanimity,
intercede for us on the Day of Judgement.*

*O, who has come to all the worlds as a source of mercy! Help
Zayn-ul-‘Ābidīn.*

*Who is confined by the party of the oppressors (and beseeches your
help).*

### 2. Imam Mālik

###

Imam Mālik’s prominence as one of the four jurists of Islam is
well-established. Once caliph Abū Ja‘far Mansūr visited Medina and he
asked Imam Mālik: “While supplicating, should I turn my face to the
prayer niche [and turn my back to the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* ] or should I turn my face to the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be
Up Him and His Household)* (and turn my back to the prayer niche)?” On
this interrogation, Imam Mālik replied: “(O caliph!) Why do you turn
your face from the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* , as
he is the source of mediation for you and for your ancestor Adam (عليه
السلام) on the Day of Judgement? Rather you should (pray and supplicate
by) turning towards the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and
seek his intercession so that he intercedes for you before Allah on the
Day of Judgement. Allah has declared:

*(O beloved!) And if they had come to you, when they had wronged their
souls, and asked forgiveness of Allah, and the Messenger also had asked
forgiveness for them, they (on the basis of this means and intercession)
would have surely found Allah the Granter of repentance, exteremely
Merciful.[1]*

This incident has been narrated by Qādī ‘Iyād in his ash-Shifā (2:596)
with a sound chain of transmission. Besides, it has been related by a
number of other traditionists of impeccable credibility. Subkī in
Shifā’-us-siqām fī ziyārat khayr-il-anām, Samhūdī in Khulāsat-ul-wafā,
Qastallānī in al-Mawāhib-ul-laduniyyah, Ibn Jamā‘ah in Hidāyat-us-sālik
and Ibn Hajar Haythamī in al-Jawhar-ul-munazzam.

### 3. Imam Qurtubī

###

He has mentioned intermediation in the interpretation of the verse 64 of
surah an-Nisā’ in his al-Jāmi‘ li-ahkām-il-Qur’ān (5:265-6).[2]

### 4. Imam Hākim

###

In his book al-Mustadrak (2:615) he has mentioned the tradition relating
to Adam’s intermediation through the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* and has pronounced it as sound.[3]

### 5. Imam Bayhaqī

###

He has related in his book Dalā’il-un-nubuwwah (5:489) the tradition in
which Adam (عليه السلام) relied on the mediation of the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . He has painstakingly
avoided reference to any disconfirmed (mawdū‘) tradition in his book.[4]

Imam Bayhaqī in his book Dalā’il-un-nubuwwah (6:166-7), has also
recorded a tradition attributed to ‘Uthmān bin Hunayf.[5] In addition,
in the same book (p.147) and in as-Sunan-ul-kubrā (3:352) he has also
narrated the incident of ‘Umar bin al-Khattāb seeking ‘Abbās’s mediation
for rain.[6]

### 6. Qādī ‘Iyād

###

He has, in his book, ash-Shifā (1:227-8) narrated Adam’s intermediation
through the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* with the
help of sound and famous traditions.[7] In addition, in the chapters on
‘visiting the Prophet’s grave,’ ‘virtues and merits of the Prophet*(Peac
Be Up Him and His Household)* ’ and in many other chapters in his book
he has referred to the qualities and attributes of the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* .

### 7. Imam Nawawī

###

Imam Nawawī in the sixth chapter of his book al-Īdāh has mentioned the
issue of intermediation.[8] Besides, he has recorded in al-Adhkār a
number of supplications which prove the reality of intermediation.[9]

### 8. Imam Ibn Taymiyyah

###

Ibn Taymiyyah in his book Qā‘idah jalīlah fit-tawassul wal-wasīlah,
commenting on the Qur’ānic verse:

*O believers! Fear Allah and seek means (of approach to) His (presence
and to His nearness and accessibility).[10]*

writes:

“Offering mediation in the court of Allah springs from one’s faith in
the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and in his
obedience. And it is by virtue of this obedience and faith that it is
obligatory for every believer under any circumstances, outwardly or
inwardly, during and after the Prophet’s life, and during his presence
or absence. Once this condition is

laid down, it cannot be voluntarily discontinued by any person on any
excuse or pretext. And the only way to escape the divine wrath and
punishment is to make the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* a means of salvation by obeying him and by reposing his
trust in him, because the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* is
the owner of the highest station of distinction in Paradise and he is
the intercessor for his followers and the former and the latter ones
will envy his position. His stature is the highest in the court of Allah
and he is the greatest among the intercessors. Allah has declared about
Mūsā (عليه السلام):

*And with Allah, he was highly dignified (and respectable).[11]*

And about ‘Īsā (عليه السلام) Allah has declared:

*He will enjoy respect and status (both) in this world and the
Hereafter.[12]*

*“While the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* is blessed
with the highest distinction among the prophets, his supplication and
intercession will benefit only the person for whom he will pray and
intercede. When he prays and intercedes for a person, he will make his
prayer and intercession a source of mediation in the presence of Allah,
as was the practice of the Companions.”[13]*

Once he was questioned whether it was valid or invalid to depend on the
mediation of the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* , he
replied:

*“All praise for Allah! By the consensus of the Muslims it is quite
valid and proper to rely on the means of faith in the Prophet*(Peac Be
Up Him and His Household)* , his obedience, his remembrance, his
supplication and intercession, similarly his deeds and the deeds of his
followers, which they have performed in obedience to the Prophet’s
commands. And the Companions used to depend on his mediation during his
life on earth and after his death, they depended on the mediation of his
uncle, ‘Abbās as they used to rely on his mediation during his earthly
life.”[14]*

### 9. Subkī

###

He has discussed at length the question of intermediation in his book
Shifā’-us-siqām fī ziyārat khayr-il-anām and has proved its relevance as
a vibrant concept in Islam, as we have mentioned at different places in
the course of the book.

### 10. Imam Ibn Kathīr

###

Imam Ibn Kathīr has commented on verse 64 of surah an-Nisā’ in his book
Tafsīr-ul-Qur’ān al-‘azīm (1:519-20) and raised the issue of
intermediation. He has not levelled any objection against ‘Utbī’s
tradition in which a Bedouin supplicates at the Prophet’s tomb for his
intercession.[15] In his book al-Bidāyah wan-nihāyah (1:131; 2:291-2) he
has related the event of Adam’s reliance on the Prophet’s mediation and
expressed no reservations about the tradition.[16] Imam Ibn Kathīr has
related in al-Bidāyah wan-nihāyah (5:167) the episode of the man who
visits the Prophet’s grave and prays for rain through his means and he
has pronounced this tradition quite sound.[17] In addition, he has also
related in the same

book (5:30) that during the battle of Yamāmah, the battle-cry of the
Muslims was yā Muhammadāh (O Muhammad! Help us).[18]

### 11. Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalānī

###

He has in his books al-Isābah fī tamyīz-is-sahābah (3:484) and
Fath-ul-bārī (2:495-6) narrated the incident of the man who visited the
Prophet’s grave for rain through his mediation.[19]

### 12. ‘Abd-ur-Rahmān Jāmī

###

He enjoys enviable reputation in the fields of poetry, mysticism,
philosophy and tradition. Besides, his burning and yearning love for the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* bubbles up in his verses. He
expresses his faith in intermediation in these words:

*It was the manifestation of the blessing of the Prophet’s name that
Adam (عليه السلام) received pardon and Nūh was saved from the
devastating impact of the tempest.*

### 13. Suyūtī

###

He has related the tradition of Adam’s intermediation in
ad-Durr-ul-manthūr (1:58) and al-Khasā’is-ul-kubrā (1:6) in addition to
narrating it in ar-Riyād-ul-anīqah fī sharh asmā’ khayr-il-khalīqah
where he spells out its soundness by endorsing the view expressed by
Bayhaqī.[20]

### 14. Qastallānī

###

The qualities and accomplishments of a special group of saints are
recorded in the traditions. The blessing of their supplication causes
rain and brings victory and triumph to the Muslims. Qastallānī’s views
about them are given below:

*When ordinary people fall into trouble, first of all, the Heralds
supplicate for them, then turn by turn the Nobility, Substitutes, the
righteous and the ministers (supplicate for them). If their supplication
is granted, well and good, otherwise, the saint of the highest rank,
ghawth (who is all the time engrossed in Allah’s worship,) supplicates
for them, and before he winds it up, his prayer is granted. (This is
Allah’s special blessing on them.)[21]*

Qastallānī has also mentioned intermediation in the beginning of
al-Mawāhib-ul-laduniyyah.[22]

### 15. Ibn Hajar Haythamī

###

Ahmad Shihāb-ud-Dīn Ibn Hajar Haythamī Makkī, who possesses an eminent
position among experts on Islamic jurisprudence and tradition, has
proved on the basis of the experience and observation narrated by Abū
‘Abdullāh Qurayshī that Allah’s favourites help people after death as
they help them during life and the value of their benefit is not in the
least reduced. Produced below is an incident attributed to Abū ‘Abdullāh
Qurayshī:

A severe drought had enveloped Egypt in its grip and the people’s
distress caused by hunger and thirst remained unrelieved inspite of
their prayers and supplications:

*So I journeyed towards Syria, when I reached near Allah’s friend
(Ibrāhīm’s) tomb, he met me on the way. I said to him: ‘O Messenger of*

*Allah! I have come as a guest. You should show your hospitality in the
form of a supplication for the natives of Egypt.’ He prayed for them, so
Allah drove their famine away from them.[23]*

In this extraordinary reference, the description of the face-to-face
meeting with Ibrāhīm (عليه السلام) has been commented upon by Imam
Yāfi‘ī in these words:

*The statement made by Abū ‘Abdullāh Qurayshī that he had a face-to-face
meeting with the Friend is based on truth. Only an ignorant person can
deny it who is unaware of the mode of living and status of the saints
because these people observe the earth and the heavens and see the
prophets in their living condition.[24]*

In addition, Ibn Hajar Haythamī has penned down a special treatise
al-Jawhar-ul-munazzam on the theme of intermediation. On its page 61, he
has spelled out intermediation through the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him
and His Household)* as a fair (hasan) act.

### 16. Nūr-ud-Dīn Qārī

###

He is generally known as Mullā ‘Alī Qārī. He has discussed this issue in
his book Sharh ash-Shifā.

### 17. Ahmad Shihāb-ud-Dīn Khafājī

###

Khafājī has justified intermediation in Nasīm-ur-riyād, an exegesis of
ash-Shifā.

### 18. Muhammad bin ‘Abd-ul-Bāqī Zurqānī

###

He has proved the relevance of this issue in his Commentary (1:118-20;
12:220-3).[25]

19. Muhammad bin ‘Alī Shawkānī
------------------------------

Shawkānī has expressed the relevance of intermediation through the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* in his book
Tuhfat-udh-dhākirīn (p.195).[26]

### 20. Ibn ‘Ābidīn Shāmī

###

The reputation of Ibn ‘Ābidīn Shāmī as an eminent religious scholar has
spread far and wide. His intellectual subtlety and juristic expertise
have added many extra feathers to his illustrious cap. His intellectual
and investigative masterpiece Radd-ul-muhtār ‘alā Durr-il-mukhtār
provides food for thought even today for scholars in the form of its
hefty volumes and reveals his analytical vision. A number of traditions
relate that when he decided to take up the burden of such a stupendous
work, which amounts to enclosing an ocean within a teapot, he, instead
of relying on his invaluable intellectual ability and subtlety, prayed
to Allah through the mediation of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* . His mode of presentation was as follows:

*And I beg Allah through the means of His exalted Prophet*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* , His high-ranking obedient servants, and
especially the truthful Imam A‘zam (Abū Hanīfah) that he should ease my
problem by His kindness and enable me to complete it.[27]*

This form of supplication proved so effective and the blessing of
mediation gave him such power that he composed the record-breaking book
on Islamic law. It is so authentic and so well-documented that no other
book has excelled it in repute and popularity.

The encouraging factor in this context is that it is an exegesis of the
book called Durr-ul-mukhtār and before he started writing the book, he
had written its holy pages relating to Jibrīl (عليه السلام) after he
received permission from the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
which Ibn ‘Ādidīn Shāmī has mentioned in these words:

*And the exegete had clearly received the Prophet’s permission either in
the form of an inspiration or a dream. It was by virtue of the Prophet’s
blessing that this exegesis edged out the interpretations of
others.[28]*

If we reflect on the backdrop of these events, we will find that it is
more a product of faith than labour, obedience than hardwork.

### 21. Mahmūd Ālūsī

###

Commenting on the earlier verses of surah an-Nāzi‘āt, he explains in
these words the justification of reliance on Allah’s favourites and
seeking help and support from them:

*It is said: In the introductory sentences of this surah, the separation
of the souls of pious persons from their bodies at the time of death is
described and Allah has sworn by these different states of the souls.
These souls have to be wrenched out of the bodies because, on account of
their long and deep association with their bodies, they are disinclined
to leave them. The reason for this disinclination is that, in order to
earn virtues, the body acts as a means of transport, and it is on this
count that there is a greater possibility of adding to the score of
one’s virtues. Then these souls fly to the world of angels and reach the
sanctuary of purity, and on account of their force and nobility, they
blend with the elements that help decide the destinies of the creatures,
that is, they are included among the angels, or they acquire
administrative capability. That is why it is said: ‘when you are invaded
by troubles, you should seek help from the residents of the tombs, that
is, from the favourites of Allah who are embodiments of virtue and
purity, and those who have left us.’ There is no doubt that a person who
visits their tombs, receives spiritual help by virtue of their
blessings, and on many occasions, the knots of difficulties unwind
through the mediation of honour and reverence they enjoy.[29]*

He adds:

*It is also said that in these sentences Allah has sworn by these
good-natured people, who step into the field of virtue and sanctity and
try to purify both the inner and the outer self through worship,
persistent practice and a concerted confrontation with the evil and, as
a result, are permeated with immediate divine consciousness. (These
sentences may be applied to these holy persons in the sense that) they
control their own instinctive cravings and concentrate all their
energies on the world where holiness prevails, and finally achieve
perfection after passing through the evolutionary phases so that they
can guide those who are stuck up in their*

*flawed schedules and invest their lives with a sense of purpose and
direction.[30]*

### 22. Shāh ‘Abd-ul-Haqq Muhaddith Dihlawī

###

Shāh ‘Abd-ul-Haqq Muhaddith Dihlawī comments in his exegesis of Shaykh
‘Abd-ul-Qādir Jīlānī’s book Futūh-ul-ghayb that when the saints cross
into the area of divine knowledge and consciousness, which is immune to
the exigencies of mortality, they are blessed with a special power which
enables them to perform acts unmediated through external causes, and
they are transformed into embodiments of exceptional light and
cognizance as they have arrived from the mortal world into the the world
of immortality. In this way they achieve that level of perfection which
the common believers will receive in Paradise.

### 23. Muhammad Zāhid Kawtharī

###

In his Maqālāt, he has dilated upon the theme of intermediation and
proved its practice and efficacy by refuting the objections of those who
are opposed to it. In his view, intermediation through the prophets and
saints during their lives and after their death is not only valid but
dates back to the days of early Muslims whose integrity was inviolate
and whose understanding of the faith was unquestionable.

### 24. Mawlānā Ashraf ‘Alī Thānwī

###

Mawlānā Ashraf ‘Alī Thānwī, commenting on the blessings of the holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* in his book Nashr-ut-tīb,
writes: It was transparently reflected from the foreheads of his
ancestors. It was his universal light that persuaded Allah to accept
Adam’s repentance; again it was his light that salvaged Nūh (عليه
السلام) from the tempestuous waves and transformed the glowing coals of
fire into the blossoms of flowers for Ibrāhīm (عليه السلام).

The panegyric that his uncle ‘Abbās composed in his praise has some of
the verses as follows:

*And you were with Allah’s Friend when he faced the ordeal of the fire.
How could your light in his back burn him out?*

*And when you were born, The earth was lighted up and the cosmos turned
into a place of radiance.*

*So we in this light And illumination are passing through the way of
guidance.*

The holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* listened to these
verses by ‘Abbās with rapt attention and expressed his appreciation
instantly. If they were grounded in mere fantasy, he would have stalled
him in his tracks. Since he did not do so, it proves that he was in
agreement with the substance of the verses and therefore, this is a form
of tradition which is embodied in the form of address or delivery.

Besides, Mawlānā Ashraf ‘Alī Thānwī, has named the thirty-eighth part of
his book as “intermediation through the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* at the time of supplication.” In this part, after mentioning
a tradition attributed to ‘Uthmān bin Hunayf, he writes: “It proves that
just as

intermediation through someone’s supplication is valid, similarly,
reliance on someone in the supplication for intermediation is also
valid.” When during the period of ‘Uthmān bin ‘Affān, ‘Uthmān bin Hunayf
asked a petitioner to utter the same supplication which the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* has taught to the blind
Companion, Mawlānā Ashraf ‘Alī Thānwī makes it the basis of establishing
the validity of intermediation after death. In addition, he has proved
the relevance of intermediation through someone other than a prophet
(عليه السلام) by ‘Umar’s intermediation through ‘Abbās. Mawlānā Thānwī
has also declared the act of intermediation through the Prophet’s grave
during the time of ‘Ā’ishah as valid. Finally, after reproducing ‘Utbī’s
tradition in which a bedouin had called on the Prophet’s grave for the
repentance of his sins, as we have explained in reference to the 64th
verse of surah an-Nisā’ in the 3rd section of chapter five, he writes:
“As it happened in the early days, and there is no contradiction of it,
it has acquired the status of a proof.

### 25. Ahmad bin Zaynī Dahlān

###

A Makkan jurist of Muslim law, Ahmad bin Zaynī Dahlān in his journal
Fitnat-ul-Wahhābiyyah, has established the legality of intermediation,
beseeching the prophets and saints for help and intercession, and he has
cogently refuted the doubts and allegations of those who are opposed to
these perfectly legal acts.

### 26. Muhammad bin ‘Alawī al-Mālikī

###

A well-known contemporary religious scholar posted at Makkah Muhammad
bin ‘Alawī al-Mālikī in his book Mafāhīm yajib an tusahhah has conducted
well-documented research on the concept of intermediation. In addition,
in his book Shifā’-ul-fu’ād bi-ziyārat khayr-il-‘ibād he has proved the
relevance of intermediation in a comprehensive manner.

### 27. Muhammad Hishām Kabbānī

###

He is a famous contemporary religious scholar and he has written a book
comprising seven volumes Encyclopedia of Islamic Doctrine on the beliefs
of Ahl-us-Sunnah wa al-Jamā‘ah. In the fourth volume of his book he has
justified the belief in intermediation on the basis of a vast array of
historical and rational arguments.

### 28. Mahmūd Sa‘īd Mamdūh

###

He has compiled a book on the genesis and exegesis of a large number of
traditions relating to the theme of intermediation. It is called
Raf‘-ul-minārah. He has established the truth of intermediation by
refuting the objections of its denigrators in reference to the sound
traditions they have adduced against the relevance of intermediation.

Experiences and observations of the great saints
------------------------------------------------

The secrets of the worlds of purgatory, angels and divinity are revealed
to Allah’s saints in a manner and style that is denied to the common run
of people. Their opinion is authentic in all human and non-human fields
of activity and it can neither be challenged nor any flaws found in its
inherent cogency. Therefore, it is quite rational, and a recognition of
human

limitations, to believe in their opinions because their statements are
not based on any inanity or triviality but have been derived through
extra-ordinary observation and supported by the ballast of divine
sanction, as no one can deny that “what is heard cannot equal what is
seen.”

Given below are some of the experiences of the great saints who have
attaind Allah’s pleasure through worship, concentration and exceptional
deeds of piety and human services:

### 1. The tomb of Umm Harām bint Milhān

###

Umm Harām bint Milhān accompanied the Muslim army that invaded Cyprus.
The Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* had predicted that she
would participate in the naval war. It so happened that she fell down
from a horse boarding a ship or just her foot slipped and she died as a
martyr and she was buried at that spot and her blessings were revealed
to the people. Her grave came to be known as the grave of a pious woman,
and people supplicate at her grave, their supplications are granted by
Allah and people also supplicate for rain through her mediation.[31]

### 2. The tomb of Abū Ayyūb al-Ansārī

###

He was one of the great Companions. He took part in the battle of
Constantinople. Near the enemy border he fell ill. As the illness grew
worse, he dictated his will as follows:

*When I die, take my dead body with you, when you line up against the
enemy, bury me in your feet.[32]*

So, acting on his will, the Islamic soldiers buried him at the foot of
the fort and warned the enemies that in case they tried to desecrate his
grave, no church in the Islamic country would remain safe. Thus, even
the enemies were forced to revere his grave, and people soon came to
know the blessings emanating from the grave. Whatever they prayed for at
the grave was immediately granted.

*And Abū Ayyūb’s grave lies near the ramparts of the fort and everybody
knows it... When people pray for rain there, it starts raining.[33]*

Mujāhid says:

*Whenever there is famine, people expose the grave, so it starts
raining.[34]*

### 3. Ibn Abū Hātim Rāzī

###

The famous traditionist Ibn Abū Hātim Rāzī has recorded his observation
about the tomb of Imam ‘Alī bin Mūsā Radā:

*Whenever I was staying in the city of Tūs and had a problem, I called
on the tomb of Imam ‘Alī bin Mūsā Radā and prayed to Allah to solve that
problem, the prayer was invariably granted and the problem was solved.
And this is an experience I have had repeatedly.[35]*

### 4. Imam Shāfi‘ī

###

Imam Shāfi‘ī describes his own experience about the blessings of the
tomb of Imam Abū Hanīfah:

*I derive blessing from the person of Imam Abū Hanīfah and I visit his
grave everyday. When I face a problem, I offer two optional cycles of
prayer*

*and visit his grave and (while standing) I pray to Allah to solve my
problem. And I have not even left the place that my problem is
solved.[36]*

This was the statement and practice of such a great Imam whose status
and scholarly stature had been acknowledged by the entire world of
Islam. His conceptual and intellectual integrity was simply
unassailable. When he himself is saying that visiting the tombs of
Allah’s favourites is a source of blessing, then there is hardly any
justification for denying its credibility.

Shāh ‘Abd-ul-Haqq Muhaddith Dihlawī has reproduced a statement by Imam
Shāfi‘ī in his book Ashi‘‘at-ul-lam‘āt (2:923):

*“The lighted grave of Mūsā Kāzim is a patent antidote for the
acceptance of prayer.”*

It was Imam Shāfi‘ī’s practice that he called on the tombs, supplicated
extensively and his supplications were accepted. From this he drew the
correct inference that these places were patent or elixir for the
acceptance of prayer. That is why he pronounced the tomb of Imam Mūsā
Kāzim as a patent antidote.

### 5. Ibn-ul-Jawzī

###

In the biography of saints Sifat-us-safwah (2:266), he writes about
Ibrāhīm bin Ishāq Harabī:

*And his grave is open to everyone. People receive blessing from it.*

He has also described Adam’s intermediation through the holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* in the first chapter of his
book al-Wafā bi-ahwāl-il-Mustafā (1:33).[37]

### 6. ‘Abd-ul-Ghanī Maqdisī Hambalī

###

A swelling appeared on the upper side of his arm. He rubbed the affected
part against the grave of Imam Ahmad bin Hambal and the swelling
subsided.

Muhammad Zāhid Kawtharī says: “This incident is recorded in Diyā’
Maqdisī Hamblī’s book al-Hikāyāt-ul-manthūrah and I have seen it in his
handwritten manuscript.[38]

### 7. Abū al-Qāsim Qushayrī

###

He is included among the great mystics and traditionists. In the third
and fourth centuries he acted as a source of inspiration for scholars
and intellectuals. He has described his personal experience of the
famous saint Ma‘rūf Karakhī in these words:

*He was one of the eldest holy persons and his supplication was
unexceptionally granted. Even now supplication is offered while standing
by his grave for recovery from an illness. The natives of Baghdad say:
Ma‘rūf (Karakhī’s) grave is patent medicine.[39]*

### 8. Mujaddid Alf Thānī

###

Mujaddid Alf Thānī mentions one of his own perplexities:

“I was involved in a problem but there seemed to be no way out. A
considerable period of time elapsed but the problem refused to be
solved. A worry constantly niggled me that I may not be held accountable
for this lapse, therefore, I should try to get rid of it as soon as
possible. I felt quite

uncomfortable and I prayed to Allah repeatedly to help me out of this
state of anxiety.” His own words are as follows:

*By chance, I happened to pass by the tomb of a relative, and I also
sought his help in this matter. Meanwhile Allah’s blessing also helped
me and the reality of the matter was unravelled, and the spiritual
relation I have with the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* stood me in good stead and consoled a sorrowful heart.[40]*

### 9. Shāh Walī Allah Muhaddith Dihlawī

###

He was one of those great saints who, on account of his God-given vision
and divine knowledge, could see the inner reality with his naked eye and
then proclaimed it publicly. He has written a matchless book
Fuyūd-ul-haramayn based on observations. The gist of its ninth and tenth
chapters is as follows. He says:

"We called at Medina, and we clearly saw with our own eyes the soul of
the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and on that day
this reality was revealed to us that the pure soul can also be seen like
the body and the secret of the life of prophets after death was also
disclosed to us.

On the third day we called and sent salutations on the Prophet*(Peac Be
Up Him and His Household)* , and also visited the graves of Abū Bakr
as-Siddīq and ‘Umar Fārūq.

Then we humbly submitted: we have called on you with great expectations
to receive your mercy and blessing. Have mercy on us."

He adds:

*The holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* expressed great
joy and I felt that the sheet of his kindness had wrapped and covered
me. Then he embraced me, and appeared before me, disclosed many secrets
and personally informed me and briefly helped me and told me how I could
seek his help for my needs.*

A brief summary
---------------

These are a few of the observations and experiences which span centuries
of human existence. They clearly prove that the graves and tombs of the
chosen people of Allah are a steady source of divine blessings and
benefits for mankind. The discerning persons do not treat these spots of
the saints as worthless or as mere heaps of mud and mortar; rather they
believe that they are men of distinction and Allah has specially
rewarded them for their piety and human service. Some of these saints
are looked upon as ultra-magnanimous. Therefore, no one should entertain
any doubt or reservation about their purity and exceptional status.

A person, who himself is stripped of spiritual vision, has no right to
misguide people about these favourites of Allah. He has no right to say
that these people are dead, lying inert and lifeless in their graves,
and therefore, lack the power and the energy to help anyone. His
statement is completely baseless and is justified neither by historical
precedent nor by rational argument.

An important point to be noted in this context is that only those
residents of the tombs deserve our reverence who had attained access to
the nearness and the pleasure of Allah and whose pious acts and virtuous
deeds had made

them popular during their lives. Only such persons are to be implored
for help. This point has been clarified by Shāh ‘Abd-ul-‘Azīz Muhaddith
Dihlawī in unmistakable terms. He says:

*Help should be sought only from the famous saints.*

as the public opinion is the litmus test of the popularity or
unpopularity of a saint. He has also prescribed a method for discovering
the stature of a saint and for seeking help from him. This can be looked
up in Fatāwā ‘Azīzī.

The Last Word
-------------

In the earlier pages we have established the reality of intermediation
with cogent reasoning and solid evidence from the Qur’ān and the Sunnah.
The evidence, and a rational interpretation of the evidence, clearly
prove that intermediation is a correct, valid and legal way to attain
access to Allah’s favour and for the instant acceptance of our
supplications. The evidence is mainly drawn from the Qur’ān and the
Sunnah, which are the basic dependable sources of knowledge for the
believers. Allah and His beloved Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* have commanded us to seek means of help and assistance. From
the time of the Companions to the present-day, the Muslims collectively
relied upon all the valid forms of intermediation, and to cap it all,
the Companions themselves relied on the Prophet’s mediation. He never
discouraged them or told them at any occasion: ‘you are indulging in
innovation or disbelief on account of intermediation as it violates the
basic principle of your faith.’

On the other hand, to suit their needs, he himself encouraged and
persuaded them to rely on his mediation, as we have described the
incident of the blind Companion in a tradition attributed to ‘Uthmān bin
Hunayf whose eyesight had instantly returned through the mediation of
the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* along with many
other irrefutable examples.

It has been the cherished practice of the early believers, the
Companions, the Successors and their Companions to rely on the
intermediation through the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* and the great Companions. If someone denies intermediation
and tries to misinterpret the statements and acts of the Prophet*(Peac
Be Up Him and His Household)* , he should keep in mind the Prophet’s
saying in which he had pronounced his Companions as the most honoured
ones among the believers. He said:

*The best people are those who are in my time, then the people who will
come after them, (and) then the people who will come after them.[41]*

The tradition clearly indicates that the act of the Companions,
Successors, and then their Companions, the early believers and the
religious leaders is far more reliable, dependable and commendable than
the act of those who deny the relevance of intermediation and cook up
spurious explanations to refute its legality. Obviously, the denier,
like the proverbial liar, has no legs, not even the crutches, to stand
upon because props of sand are no substitute for the staves of ballast
and concrete which derive their strength not only from correct faith but
also from its equally sensible and rational interpretation.

It is also quite true that Allah is even closer to us than our main
artery, and anyone who denies this reality in fact denies a Qur’ānic
injunction. But, along with it, we should also concentrate on His
Sunnah. If Allah had willed, He could have sent His Word and commands,
unmediated and unfiltered, but He has not opted for this course of
action or mode of revelation. He chose His revered prophets as the
carriers of His Message. This is the established divine practice. Then
how is it possible to attain access to Him or win His pleasure by
ignoring His practice, that is, without relying on the means of His
prophets and messengers? Is it possible without them to act on His
revealed commands in the way He desires us to act? If Allah had desired
that His creatures should have direct access to Him and witness His
blessings upfront, He would never have sent the honoured messengers and
commanded the believers through the holy Qur’ān to seek means of help
and support.

This can be illustrated by a simple example. Dams generate electricity
but from there it cannot be directly supplied to houses and factories.
If anyone tries to obtain electricity directly from a dam, he will be
burnt into cinders. First of all, electricity is supplied to the grid
stations from the power station and then it is supplied to different
places in varying voltage with the help of a variety of transformers.
People do not rely on this alone, but they use other gadgets, like
stabilizers etc., to make its domestic and industrial supply as safe and
secure as possible. All these precautions are taken to ensure regular
supply and minimize risk.

When we cannot operate our domestic and electric outfits by obtaining
electricity directly from the power station, how is it possible to draw
Allah’s blessings directly from Him. How is it possible for us sinners
to have unveiled and unscreened access to the glory of Allah when His
honoured Prophet Mūsā (عليه السلام) and his seventy Companions could not
stand even a reflection of His glimpse? Mūsā (عليه السلام) fell
unconscious while his seventy Companions, overawed and overdazzled,
collapsed dead as doornails on the spot, as it is revealed in the
fifty-fifth verse of surah al-Baqarah. When His own chosen Psrophet
(عليه السلام) fell unconscious by the sight of even the faintest
reflection of His splendour and seventy of His Companions lost their
lives, how is it possible for us creatures of sin and guilt of the
fifteenth century to even dream about an access to His uncurtained
glory?

Unfortunately, today, we have tailored religious injunctions to our
nature and convenience. Whatever caters to our temperament and pampers
our mood is faith; and whatever goes against our grain and is in
conflict with our liking and inclination, even though it is established
by sound traditions and the practice of the favourites of Allah, we
throw it into the dustbin as a piece of discarded toast. This is sheer
expediency and fundamentally incompatible with the universal principles
of our faith. Therefore, the imperative need of the times is not to
follow a calculus of compromise but to understand the essence of our
faith, which is the faith of Ahl-us-Sunnah

wa al-Jamā‘ah, and follow its principles without any attempt at
self-indulgence and self-gratification.

*May Allah bless us with the power and ability to understand our faith
correctly!*


