Glossary
========

**Ādam (** **عليه السلام** **):** name of the first Prophet of Allah,
i.e. Adam.

**Athar:** pl. āthār. lit. relating. Generally used for a hadith related
by one of the Companions, as distinguished from one of the Prophet’s
own.

**da‘īf:** an inaccurate narration which does not qualify to be either
sahīh (sound) or hasan (fair), and hence cannot be used as a basis of an
Islamic opinion.

**dīn:** it is an Arabic word for religion. It is more specifically used
for the religion and revealed books of the prophets and the messengers.
It is a comprehensive term covering not only religious rites and rituals
but also applies to all aspects of life and provides guidance in all of
its pursuits, while madhab (religion) is restricted to man’s spiritual
life and regulates its relationship with God alone.

**dinar:** an ancient gold coin.

**dirham:** a silver coin weighing 50 grains of barley with cut ends. It
equals to one-twelfth of ūqiyah (128 grams) of gold in value.

**du‘ā’:** lit. to call someone; making supplication to Allah.

**Fajr:** dawn or early morning before sunrise; morning prayer.

**gharīb:** a hadith or version reported by one reliable or unreliable
narrator which differs in context with another hadith or version
reported by a group of reliable narrators. A gharīb hadith can be sahīh
(sound) or da‘īf (weak).

**ghawth:** lit. one to whom we can cry for help. A mediator; a title
given to a saint of the highest order.

**hadith:** pl. hadiths. The sayings, practice and approved traditions
of the Prophet Muhammad*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* .

**hāfiz:** lit. a guardian or protector. (1) one of the names of God,
al-Hāfiz. (2) a governor, guardian of the Makkan temple. (3) one who has
committed the whole of the Qur’ān to memory. (4) one who has committed 1
lakh hadiths to memory.

**hajj:** the yearly pilgrimage of the Muslims to Makkah.

Hārūn (عليه السلام): the prophet Aaron.

**hasan:** a hadith, narrated by a reliable chain of transmission though
not approaching the grade of sahīh (sound) hadith, but records a
complete chain of narrators up to the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* .

**Imam:** one who leads people in prayers; an eminent Islamic scholar.

**‘Īsā (** **عليه السلام** **):** name of Allah’s penultimate messenger,
Jesus.

**Isrāfīl (** **عليه السلام** **):** name of an angel of high rank.

**istighāthah:** to ask someone for help.

**Jibrīl (** **عليه السلام** **):** the archangel Gabriel who brought
the revelations of Allah to His messengers.

**jihad:** the word jihad, in terms of the acquisition of a desirable
and commendable objective, carries a number of meanings. Jihad is
striving against the evils of the self, and it is also the struggle
waged for the propagation of Islam and the integrity of Ummah. For
example, to launch

jihad through tongue and pen for the improvement and development of the
Islamic society; an armed struggle against the exploitive forces is also
jihad but this is ‘minor jihad’ while a perpetual struggle against the
evil wishes of one’s self is ‘major jihad’. Jihad is one of the cardinal
articles of Islam.

**Ka‘bah:** a cube-shaped building at the centre of al-Masjid-ul-Harām
(the great mosque at Makkah) towards which all Muslims face in prayer.
It is also known as the House of Allah.

**kawthar:** lit. abundance. A pond in Paradise.

**lahd:** the hollow made in the grave on the Ka‘bah side, in which the
corpse is placed.

**maqām Ibrāhīm:** the place at Makkah within the boundary of
al-Masjid-ul-Harām, to have the impression of the footprints of the
Prophet Ibrāhīm (عليه السلام). There is a stone on which Ibrāhīm (عليه
السلام) stood while he and his son, the Prophet Ismā‘īl (عليه السلام),
were building the Ka‘bah.

**Maryam:** the Prophet ‘Īsā’s mother; Mary.

**mawdū‘:** a mawdū‘ tradition narrated by a liar, a narrator whose act
of lying in relating traditions has been proved.

**Mīkā’īl (** **عليه السلام** **):** name of an angel, Micheal.

**mu’adhdhin:** one who gives the adhān, the call to prayer, loudly
calling people to come and perform the prayer.

**Mūsā (** **عليه السلام** **):** the prophet Moses.

**nawāfil:** pl. of nafl, a voluntary act; a work of supererogation.

**Nūh (** **عليه السلام** **):** the prophet Noah.

**Rabb:** one of the names of Allah; Sustainer.

**sahīh:** sound. A hadith with an unbroken chain of narrators ranging
from the Prophet Muhammad*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and
approaching an era through reliable narrators without being shādh (odd)
or mu‘allal (faulty) in between the two cross relaters.

Sālih (عليه السلام): the prophet Salih.

**Shariah:** lit. road. It is a legal modality of a people based on the
revelation of their prophet/messenger. The last Shariah is that of Islam
that abrogates all previous shariahs.

**Sunnah:** pl. sunnahs. lit. the path, way or a form, the customary
practice of a person or a group of people. It has come to refer almost
exclusively to the legal way or ways, orders, statements and acts of
worship, etc., of the Prophet Muhammad*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* which have become the models to be followed by the Muslims.

**surah:** a chapter of the holy Qur’ān. There are 114 chapters in the
holy Qur’ān.

**taqwā:** lit. it means abstinence; piety. In its technical sense, it
means to abstain from dubious acts for Allah’s pleasure and for fear of
His displeasure.

**‘Uzayr (** **عليه السلام** **):** name of the prophet Ezra.

**Ya‘qūb (** **عليه السلام** **)** : the prophet Jacob.

**Yūsuf (** **عليه السلام** **):** name of the prophet Joseph.

**Zakariyyā (** **عليه السلام** **):** Arabic name of the prophet
Zachariya.

**zakat:** a yearly fixed percentage of wealth and property of the
Muslims liable to zakat to be paid to the poor and the needy of the
Muslim Community. It is obligatory, as it is one of the five
indispensable pillars of Islam.


