CHAPTER ONE: Reality of Intermediation
======================================

Section One: Basic conceptions of intermediation (Tawassul)
-----------------------------------------------------------

The relevance and wholesomeness of the concept of intermediation is an
established fact. The negation of this reality is in fact the negation
of the Qur’ānic injunctions. This attitude is simply inconceivable for
any Muslim, irrespective of his group affiliation. Intermediation is a
twofold act: on the one hand, it acknowledges the humility and
helplessness of the creature who has a pressing need to be fulfilled; on
the other hand, it asserts the superiority of an act which has been
hallowed by divine sanction, or of a personage who enjoys divine
approval through a series of noble deeds. The idea behind intermediation
is not to vitiate or supplant divine authority but to facilitate the
acceptance of human needs through the act of prayer. Thus the act of
intermediation involves a sliding-scale of graded functions: at the
bottom is the humble creature who hopes for a favourable divine
response; in the middle is the sanctified act or the personage who has
developed closer affiliation with God through meditation, prayer and
human service and at the top is God Himself Who Alone possesses the
power to grant the prayer.

The concept does not imply that the intermediary will grant the prayer
or that he will pressurize God to grant the prayer of an individual or
condone his sins. This is an egregious misconception, which haunts the
minds of a number of people. In fact, the prayee believes that when he
mediates his prayer through divinely blessed persons, after positing his
own helplessness and after articulating the praise of God, He will
fulfil his need as a token of courtesy to the intermediary. He does not
even have the creeping notion that the intermediary is a partner in
divinity. It is, therefore, vitally significant to grasp the reality of
intermediation to obviate any misunderstanding, especially on the part
of those who are prone to interpreting it in a characteristically
un-Islamic sense.

It should be understood at the very outset that intermediation is only a
form of prayer to be answered by God Alone. The intermediary is only a
medium who serves as a means to activate the process of its fulfilment.

It should also be noted that the choice of an intermediary depends on
two vital factors; first he is loved by the prayee and secondly he is
also loved by God. Therefore, to love someone simply because he is loved
by God is in itself a virtuous act, so his choice as an intermediary
becomes indisputable. This is the factual position and if someone harps
on another string, he is not only mistaken but is also committing an
ignominious deed. This contention is easily endorsed by the logic of
commonsense. If the prayee believes that the intermediary can harm or
benefit like God, he is guilty of a heinous sin and will be dismissed as
a believer on the basis of this erroneous belief.

Besides, it is not necessary that mediation alone should serve as a
guarantee for the realization of prayer, because Allah says:

*And (O beloved,) when My servants ask you about Me, (tell them,) “I am
Near.”[1]*

*(O beloved,) say, “Call upon Allah or call upon ar-Rahmān (the most
Merciful), by whichever name you call on Him, His are the most beautiful
names.”[2]*

The misunderstanding that intermediation is a form of coercion should
end now as the intermediary cannot force God to grant a prayer against
His Own will. No one can dictate to Him, we can only beseech Him. It is
only an expression of His infinite mercy that he has upscaled some of
His creatures on the grounds of their love and obedience and turned them
into agents of redemption for millions of ordinary people who, without
their mediation, might have drifted in sheer hopelessness and
frustration. This is an indirect divine recognition of their services
that God puts a positive spin on whatever is associated with them. It is
for the same reason that sacred places and objects are offered as means.
The purpose is to boost human expectation for the divine reprieve.

### Different views about intermediation (Tawassul)

###

There is complete agreement on some aspects of intermediation while a
fractious climate of opinion marks its other aspects.

The Muslim scholars agree that virtuous deeds like prayer, fasting,
pilgrimage to Makkah, zakat and recitation of the holy Qur’ān can serve
as legitimate means of intermediation. There are, of course, some people
who deny intermediation without action (passive intermediation) i.e.
through prophets, righteous ones, saints and relics, though the Muslim
scholars have affirmed the possibility of intermediation through these
means. These differences have been eloquently highlighted by Muhammad
bin ‘Alawī al-Mālikī:

“The conflicting view relates to intermediation without action (passive
intermediation), i.e. when individuals and personalities are taken as
means, for example, to say, “O God, I take Your Prophet Muhammad*(Peac
Be Up Him and His Household)* as an intermediary to You,” or “I take Abū
Bakr as-Siddīq or ‘Umar bin al-Khattāb or ‘Uthmān or ‘Alī as
intermediaries to You.” Some scholars treat it as forbidden. I believe
that this difference is only superficial because in intermediation
through an individual, the intermediary powers are vested in that
individual on the basis of his deeds and intermediation through action
is unanimously acceptable. People who deny intermediation have adopted a
stubborn posture. If they had cared to look at the problem perceptibly,
it would have cleared up, the doubts would have vanished and the
conflict would have resolved which has led them to hurl unsavoury
allegations against the Muslims. Intermediation without action is
actually attributed to the intermediary and he has acquired this status
on the basis of his actions. A man tends to choose someone as his
intermediary because he loves him and reposes unqualified trust in his
spiritual superiority as a consequence of this love, or he believes the
intermediary is loved by Allah Himself. As He says:

*(Allah) loves them and they love Him.[3]*

Or he believes that all these qualities are found in the intermediary.
If you reflect on it, you are bound to find this matrix of love. And
this belief is the action of the intermediary because belief is a form
of action, which grips his heart. The intermediatee seems to say:

*“O, my Lord! Undoubtedly, I love such and such person and I truly
believe that he also loves You, he is Your loyal servant and he wages
jihad for Your sake, and I believe You love him too, and You are pleased
with*

*him, and I offer him as an intermediary on account of my love for him,
and I believe You will grant my prayer.”*

*“But there are a number of religious scholars (intermediationists) who
limit its scope to the One Whose knowledge spans the secrets of the
heavens and the earth and Who can detect the waywardness of the eyes and
penetrate the secrets of the hearts. A person who says, “I take the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* as my intermediary,” and the
other who says, “I take the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
as my intermediary because I love him,” are both on the same footing
because he has chosen the first source of intermediation on the basis of
his trust in the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and his
love for him. If the prayee had not loved and trusted the Prophet*(Peac
Be Up Him and His Household)* , he would not have chosen him as his
intermediary. The same applies to the saints and the holy personages.*

*“This discussion lifts the haze off of the concept of intermediation.
It clearly shows that the difference is only superficial and does in no
way insinuate that the prayees (intermediatees) should be maligned as
non-believers and chucked out of the fold of Islam. It is a moral
stigma.”[4]*

### True sense of the concept of intermediation (Tawassul)

###

Some people are reluctant to pray through the mediation of the holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* on account of lack of
knowledge. They think that praying through mediation is incompatible
with praying directly to Allah. This attitude is grounded in a
misunderstanding of the Qur’ānic verses, which enjoin upon the believers
to pray directly to Allah and to eschew associating partners with Him.
As a result of misinterpretation they believe that to approach Allah
through an intermediary amounts to a denial of divine unity. This
conception is based on ignorance and misunderstanding and we should try
to correct it. To approach Allah while praying, through a prophet or a
messenger, a holy person or a pious deed, is neither a denial of the
oneness of Allah nor is it inconsistent with an unmediated appeal to
Him.

In spite of the intermediation, we pray to Allah directly and not to the
intermediary. One commits the act of denying Allah only when he, in
opposition to Him, regards someone else as the arbitrator of profit and
loss, as the absolute power and as the granter of prayers. But the
situation here does not warrant any such development. The prayer is
submitted only to Allah, and while appealing to Him to grant these needs
and desires, the mediation of the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* , a saintly person or a pious deed is cited because they
enjoy Allah’s love and favour and, therefore, He has greater regard for
them than for other creatures. So such form of intermediation not only
makes the words of prayer more effective but also raises its chances of
acceptance by Allah. Now his prayer is not a simple prayer, it is rather
a blend of his request and divine love. The urgency of his need combines
with Allah’s magnanimity and acquires a holier complexion. It should be
noted that the grant of prayers is not contingent on mediation but it
definitely expedites their fulfilment. The holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him
and His Household)* himself instructed his companions to pray through
his mediation as we come to

know through a tradition narrated by ‘Uthmān bin Hunayf that the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* taught a blind man to pray:

*O Allah, I appeal to You, and submit to You through the mediation of
the merciful Prophet Muhammad. O Muhammad, through your mediation I
submit myself to my Lord to have my need granted. O Allah, acknowledge
his intercession in my favour.[5]*

*‘Umar used to pray for rain through the mediation of the Prophet’s
uncle ‘Abbās as is attributed to Anas.[6] Once when Medina was in the
grip of a severe drought, ‘Ā’ishah asked some of the Companions and
residents of the city to visit the holy Prophet’s grave, and on account
of his blessings, it rained in buckets.[7]*

In short, this blessed act has been popular and prevalent from the days
of Adam (عليه السلام) and other prophets to the period of the holy
prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* , the Companions and the
Successors and right down to the present-day Muslims. Now some people,
hopelessly deficient in a correct understanding of dīn, are raising
unfounded objections against its efficacy, and treating it as a
challenge to the uniqueness of Allah. Therefore, it is imperative that
the injunctions of Shariah should be understood in their true essence
and perspective so that we do not distort them for lack of knowledge and
understanding.

### Important terminology about Tawassul

###

Whenever we discuss the concept of intermediation we should take into
account four factors, which are interlinked:

***Wasīlah:** mediation; the means of approach.*

***Mutawassil:** intermediatee; the prayee who chooses his own pious
deed or a personage or a place as a source of intermediation in his
prayer.*

***Mutawassal bihī:** intermediary; intermediator; an object that is
offered as a source of intermediation to Allah, for example, virtuous
deeds, saintly personages and hallowed signs and acts associated with
them.*

***Mutawassal ilayh:** Allah is the Focus of all intermediation because
it is submitted to Him Alone.*

Section Two :Literal meaning of Tawassul
----------------------------------------

Tawassul (intermediation) and wasīlah (means) are similarly used.
Lexicologists think that wasīlah is a means of achieving an objective.

1. Imam Rāghib Asfahānī comments:

*Wasīlah means to seek willingly access to something and since it is
based on willingness, it is related to wasīlah, the means of
approach.[8]*

2. Ibn Manzūr, in his research conducted on the word wasīlah, writes:

*In fact, wasīlah is a means of approach to something to attain nearness
to it.[9]*

3. Imam Zamakhsharī says:

*Everything that helps in seeking means of approach, that is, nearness
to Allah, is wasīlah.[10]*

### Technical meaning of Tawassul

###

Tawassul carries multiple meanings. It is used in the sense of need,
inclination, stature and nearness; three of these senses are consistent
with its technical usage:

#### 1. Highest station

####

Wasīlah is the highest station in Paradise, which is reserved for the
intercessor – the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* – on
the Day of Judgement. It is usual for Muslims to pray, after the call to
prayer, that Muhammad*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* may obtain
this station. It is related to Bukhārī that the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him
and His Household)* himself persuaded his followers to offer the
following prayer:

*Allah’s Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* said as reported
by Jābir bin ‘Abdullāh: Anyone who prays after the call to prayer, “O
Lord, in exchange for this complete invitation and standing prayer, make
Muhammad*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* a source of intermediation
and superiority and appoint him to the highest station in Paradise as
promised by You,” my intercession for him on the Day of Judgement will
be obligatory.[11]*

In this supplication (du‘ā’), al-wasīlah means ‘a spot which is a
special grade of excellence in Paradise,’ this is also the highest
station reserved for the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* .
Whenever we invoke the mediation of the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* , we have in mind this specific place in Paradise.

#### 2. Proximity to Allah

####

The nearness to Allah is in itself a source of intermediation. When a
creature comes close to Allah through the perfection of his faith,
obedience to His rules and prescriptions, observance of forms of
worship, following the sunnah and avoiding sins, this nearness to Allah
in itself becomes a source of intermediation. Similarly those who work
with sincerity of intention acquire close access to Allah and are
elevated to the stature of His favourites. Their sincerity and
affiliation keep them steadily glued to the right path and serve as an
mediation to counter the tricks of the devil. According to Allah
Himself, Satan has sworn to lead the believers astray:

*(Satan) said, “I swear by Your honour that I will mislead all of
them.”[12]*

But he will never be able to mislead those who have attained nearness to
Allah.

#### 3. Source of intermediation

####

All objects, which are a means to attain the nearness of Allah, also
serve as sources of intermediation whether they are related to
individuals or deeds. The Qur’ān has made it permissible to seek the
means of approach, and what is permitted cannot be waived without proper
shar‘ī argument or convincing proof. The Qur’ān says:

*O believers! Fear Allah and seek means (of approach to) His (presence
and to His nearness and accessibility).[13]*

This verse does not stress any specific application and includes both
acts and individuals. The same verse acts as an explicit justification
of intermediation.

Shāh Ismā‘īl Dihlawī interprets the Qur’ānic verse as the direction
provided by the spiritual guide:

*People who are in search of the true conduct mean by wasīlah a kind of
guide. Search for the guide should necessarily precede the hard struggle
that is required for the attainment of true success, and Allah has
prescribed this method for the seekers of the true path. Therefore,
without the direction of the guide, its acquisition is almost
impossible.[14]*

### Kinds of Tawassul

###

Tawassul may be divided into the following kinds:

*at-Tawassul lid-du‘ā’*

*at-Tawassul fid-du‘ā’*

*at-Tawassul bid-du‘ā’*

*at-Tawassul bin-nidā’*

*at-Tawassul bil-a‘māl-is-sālihah*

*at-Tawassul bi-āthār-is-sālihīn*

#### 1. at-Tawassul lid-du‘ā’

####

This (kind of intermediation) seeks nearness of Allah through a source
approved by Shariah.

#### 2. at-Tawassul fid-du‘ā’

####

When a need or worry is submitted to Allah for its relief, the help of
an intermediary is sought to fulfil the need or remove the worry.

### Difference between the two

###

The first kind of intermediation is a means of drawing near to Allah
while the second kind of intermediation serves to fulfil the need of an
individual or to eliminate a specific anxiety.

#### Kinds of tawassul fid-du‘ā’

####

This kind of intermediation is further divided into two kinds:

A: Intermediation through words, and

B: Intermediation without words.

#### A. Intermediation through words

####

In this form of intermediation, the name of the intermediary is
mentioned (for the acceptance of a prayer and the fulfilment of a need
and) to acquire the close access to Allah.

During prayer to Allah, reference to a good deed or a saintly person
serves as a kind of intermediation for the acceptance of that prayer.
The petitioner does not need to specify the name of the intermediary, a
mere reference to him is enough as is endorsed by Bukhārī, which is
summarized below:

*“During journey, the entrance of the cave closed on them. All the three
were virtuous men, one of them prayed to Allah by referring to his
kindly*

*treatment of his parents. The second man prayed by suggesting how he
had managed to escape committing a sin though it was the easiest thing
for him to do. The third man talked about how he had guarded the wages
of a labourer for many years and paid him the money after a lapse of
considerable time and then prayed. Their prayers were accepted as Allah
removed the heavy stone that had closed the entrance of the cave.”*

#### B. Intermediation without words

####

When a good deed or a sacred place serves as a means of approach at the
time of prayer to attain the nearness of Allah, this deed or place is
endeared to Him. Even though these are not given a strictly verbal form,
they automatically serve as a source of intermediation.

It is also known as intermediation through action. It eliminates the use
of the words during prayer. The petitioner either prays in the company
of a saintly person or prays at a sacred place or he places a hallowed
object in front of him and then prays to Allah for a favourable
reception of his prayer.

The first instance of intermediation through action is attested by
Zakariyyā’s prayer at Maryam’s place of worship, as it is stated by the
Qur’ān:

*At this place (Maryam’s place of worship) Zakariyyā prayed to his Lord.
He besought, “O my Master, bless me with children who are of sound moral
character. There is no doubt that You hear our petitions.”[15]*

In this verse, Allah has pinpointed the blessed act of Zakariyyā (عليه
السلام). When he observed out-of-season fruit and other prized objects
at Maryam’s place who was being groomed by him as a trainee, he chose
that particular spot for the submission of his prayer. Allah responded
positively to his plea and he was blessed with Yahyā (عليه السلام)
especially at a time when it was almost impossible for his wife to
conceive a child.

The second example is that of Yūsuf (عليه السلام) dispatching his shirt
to his father Ya‘qūb (عليه السلام) for the restoration of his eyesight
through the mediation of the shirt. Besides good deeds of the prophets
and the righteous people, the relics associated with these personages
can also act as instruments of intermediation, a topic that is proposed
to be dealt with at length in the course of the book.

### 3. at-Tawassul bid-du‘ā’

###

In this kind of intermediation a person who is very close to Allah is
requested to pray for the petitioner in order to relieve him of the
worries and troubles that have turned his life into sheer torture. When
this saintly person raises his hands in prayer, Allah, out of His
infinite mercy, does not turn down his request, but acknowledges it as a
proof of the fact that He holds His loyal servants so dear. Allah says:

*And remember when you said, “O Mūsā, surely we will not remain content
with only one kind of food (manna and quail), pray, then, to your*

*Lord for us that He may bring forth for us of what the earth grows – of
its herbs, and its cucumbers and its wheat and its lentils and its
onions.”[16]*

In this verse, the words fad‘u lanā rabbaka (pray, then, to your Lord
for us), are the source of intermediation. The followers of Mūsā (عليه
السلام) are clearly asking him to pray for them to Allah. Since here
Tawassul is being relied upon through Mūsā’s prayer, this act is known
as tawassul bid-du‘ā’.

### 4. at-Tawassul bin-nidā’

###

The petitioner himself submits his request to the Prophet*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* and uses him as a means in his supplication to
seek Allah’s help. When he processes his petition through the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* , it becomes a source of
intermediation for Allah’s help. Ibn Kathīr says that on the occasion of
the battle of Yamāmah, yā Muhammadāh (O Muhammad, help us), was the
battle cry of the Muslims. He adds that during the war, Khālid bin Walīd
picked up the flag, and passing through the army positions, set out
towards the mountain of Musaylimah, the Liar. He waited there for him to
turn up so that he could kill him. Then he returned and, standing
between the two armies, he shouted:

*“I am the son of Walīd. I am the son of ‘Āmir and Zayd.” And then he
raised the battle cry current among the Muslims which was “yā
Muhammadāh” (O Muhammad, help us).[17]*

In this tradition the Muslims are relying on the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him
and His Household)* as a source of intermediation, and the Muslims who
are committing this act are the Companions themselves. Thus to use the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* as an intermediary was a
practice of the Companions. Similarly, it is narrated by ‘Abdullāh bin
‘Abbās that Allah’s Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* said:

*Undoubtedly, there are some of Allah’s angels on the earth who are in
addition to the guardian angels. They note down each leaf that falls
down from a tree. If anyone of you is being tortured in the jungle, you
should cry, “O servants of Allah, help me.”[18]*

Here, the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* himself and in his
own words instructs the Muslims to adopt intermediation as a means of
seeking Allah’s help through His angels. He is advising us not to delink
ourselves from those who not only believe in Allah but also practice
their belief. In case there is no human figure to come to your rescue,
you should pray to Allah through the mediation of the angels. Allah will
command them to come to your help and fulfil your need. This universe is
not a meaningless vacuum as many atheists in their ignorance tend to
assume; it is filled with flights of angels though they remain invisible
to the naked eye and whenever human beings under duress invoke the help
of Allah, the angels practically demonstrate the merciful presence of
Allah by meeting human exigencies. Thus the words falyunād a‘īnū
‘ibādallāh are a clear proof that intermediation through the Prophet’s
intervention is permissible.

On the Day of Judgement, when the first and the last among the Muslims
are in distress on account of the gruelling heat and judgement is yet to
be

pronounced, they will all rally round the prophets including the holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* , and in their supplication
to Allah will ask for their help. The tradition cited in different books
bears testimony to the propriety and efficacy of this kind of
intermediation. If this is permissible on the Day of Judgement, this
should be equally permissible during our stay in this world. This
reflects the kind-heartedness and benevolence of the prophets that the
believers can depend on their mediation as a means of approach to the
infinite mercy of Allah, whether we are on the earth or in the
Hereafter.

The text of the tradition is as follows:

*Narrated by ‘Abdullāh bin ‘Umar that the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* said, “A person constantly begs from other people till
he on the Day of Judgement has no flesh on his face.” He added, “The sun
will come closer to the people on the Day of Judgement. It will be so
close that half of one’s ear will be drenched in sweat. In this
condition, people will first seek the mediation of Adam, then of Mūsā
and finally of Muhammad*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* .” And
‘Abdullāh – the sub-narrator –added, “Layth narrated to me that Ibn Abū
Ja‘far had narrated: He (the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
) will intercede with Allah to judge amongst the people. Then he will
leave here until he will hold the arc of the gate of Paradise. On that
day, Allah will make him ascend the glorious station and all the people
present there will sing his praises.[19]*

### Mutual relation between intermediation, intercession and seeking aid

###

Another point worth noting in the context of intermediation is that when
we request someone to act as our intermediary to Allah, it also seems to
support the relevance of the related concepts of intercession and
seeking help from Allah’s favourites. It means that when the relevance
of intermediation has been proved, the relevance of other two concepts
is automatically established. The following Qur’ānic verse clearly links
the three concepts by explaining their mutually reinforcing role:

*(O beloved!) And if they had come to you, when they had wronged their
souls, and asked forgiveness of Allah, and the Messenger also had asked
forgiveness for them, they (on the basis of this means and intercession)
would have surely found Allah the Granter of repentance, extremely
Merciful.[20]*

This Qur’ānic verse clearly argues in favour of intermediation. It means
when people have committed sin, they should seek the mediation of the
holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* in their supplication
to Allah and the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* also prays
for their forgiveness, then they will find Allah Compassionate and
Merciful.

Fastaghfarullāh argues for intercession. When Allah condoned their sin
through the intercession of the Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* , it means that intercession is validated by the Qur’ānic
text. And the third concept of istighāthah is in fact a proof of seeking
someone’s assistance. When a man returns to the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* for the forgiveness of his sins, it clearly
means that he is asking for his intercession: “O, Messenger of Allah, I
am a sinner. Have mercy on me and intercede for me before Allah so that
He may condone my sins.” This desire of the sinner, in fact, amounts to
istighāthah (seeking help from others) while the Prophet’s readiness to
implore Allah for the forgiveness of his sins is intercession.


