CHAPTER TWO: The Doctrine of Tawassul (In the Light of Qur’ān)
==============================================================

In the last chapter it was discussed that*tawassul* and*wasīlah* ,
semantically speaking, are a means of approach to something; they are
also instrumental in achieving nearness to someone. Since the object of
life of a believer is to attain the proximity and pleasure of Allah, He
has guided them at many occasions in the Holy Qur’ān to gain access to
Him; and in the process, not only to satisfy their quest for truth but
also to seek His pleasure. The search for truth and Allah’s pleasure are
interrelated. It obviously implies that the believer is not seeking the
philosopher’s truth, which is more or less abstract and lacks personal
involvement. The truth that a believer is seeking must reflect his
emotional involvement. This is a precondition for any favourable divine
response, and when this condition is fulfilled, his quest is positively
rewarded. He achieves three targets in a single leap of faith; he comes
closer to truth, he satisfies his own craze for truth and at the same
time he is able to receive Allah’s pleasure, which is the ultimate aim
of his life. Some of the Qur’ānic verses given below clearly prove how
explicitly and without any ambiguity Allah has enjoined upon the
believers to seek means of accessibility to Him for the fulfilment of
their needs and desires and for leading a contented life on this earth.

Argument No. 1: Injunction for seeking means of approach
--------------------------------------------------------

It is commanded by Almighty Allah as the holy Qur’ān states:

*O believers! Fear Allah and seek means (of approach to) His (presence
and to His nearness and accessibility) and strive in His way so that you
may prosper.[1]*

The Qur’ānic verse stresses four things:

faith,

piety,

search for means of approach, and

struggle for Allah’s sake.

First of all, the Qur’ān mentions faith. After faith it enjoins piety
upon the believers because a heart laced with fear of Allah, is in fact
a heart laced with His obedience. A man who possesses piety never
disobeys Allah. Each moment of his life is spent in pleasing Him and,
incidentally, all of his other concerns are pushed into the background.
As a matter of fact, obeying the divine regulations becomes a part and
parcel of his existence. Virtue and good deeds shape up as inseparable
parts of his character and conduct. His desire to be close to Allah
elevates him in His eyes. He is always engaged in acts that will earn
him the pleasure of Allah and nearness to Him. The word ittaqū
[derivative of taqwā (piety)] is a comprehensive word and it embodies
all acts that save him from Allah’s displeasure and bring him closer to
Him.

The third regulation stresses the search for means of approach. The
Qur’ān says, “Seek means (of approach to) His (presence and to His
nearness and accessibility).” Some of the religious scholars have
interpreted wasīlah (the means of approach) mentioned in the Qur’ānic
verse as faith and good deeds while others, who are in the majority,
have explained the word as the prophets, the righteous and the
favourites of Allah. They argue

that the expression ittaqullāh subsumes faith, good deeds and all forms
of worship. But the fact is that the verse enjoins upon the believers to
search means of approach to Allah’s presence. As far as faith and
virtuous acts are the means of drawing close to Allah, the prophets and
His favourites are ranked above all others. Thus, Shāh Walī Allah
Muhaddith Dihlawī has explained wasīlah as allegiance to the guide[2]
while Shāh Ismā‘īl Dihlawī believes that wasīlah is the guide himself.
He says:

*It is almost impossible to receive (divine) guidance without the
direction (provided) by the guide.[3]*

*Referring to the same situation, Mawlānā Rūm believes that he has
attained nearness to Allah on account of the company of Shams
Tabrīzī.[4]*

The fourth regulation relates to jihad. Jihad also serves as a means to
promote Islam, to strengthen and consolidate it and to implement divine
injunctions. When, in the same Qur’ānic verse, faith, piety and struggle
in the way of Allah are vested with legitimacy, the fourth regulation
relating to wasīlah becomes automatically legitimate. Thus wasīlah does
not amount to associating partners with Allah. Instead of encouraging
polytheism among the believers, it rather reaffirms the Oneness of
Allah. And, besides, when reliance on it is being confirmed by the
Qur’ān itself, any objections or reservations against it are in fact a
denial of the Qur’ānic truth.

Argument No. 2: Search for means of approach is a valid act
-----------------------------------------------------------

The holy Qur’ān has stated in another context:

*Those, whom they worship (that is, the angels, jinn, ‘Īsā (عليه السلام)
and ‘Uzayr (عليه السلام) etc., - they make their portraits and statues
and worship them), they (themselves) seek nearness to their Lord,
through those who among them are the nearest (to Allah’s presence), and
they (themselves) hope for His mercy, and (themselves) fear His
punishment. (Now you tell how can they deserve to be worshipped, they
themselves are bowing before the truthful Lord.) Surely, the punishment
of your Lord is a thing to be feared.[5]*

During the era of ignorance, the non-believers used to worship the
angels, the jinn, ‘Īsā (عليه السلام) and ‘Uzayr (عليه السلام) by making
their statues and portraits. Before the advent of Islam, the jinn had
spared no effort to misguide human beings. They entered the statues and
played bizarre tricks. The simple and naive people worshipped the
statues when they saw them moving and smiling. But when the light of
Islam dawned, the jinn sought forgiveness of Allah for their deeds of
deviance and embraced Islam. They discarded their false notions and
practices and followed the right path. They turned into loyal and
obedient followers of Allah and were constantly in search of finding
means of access to Him.

*‘Abdullāh bin Mas‘ūd comments that this Qur’ānic verse was specifically
revealed in favour of an Arab community who worshipped a particular
group of jinn. When these jinn converted to Islam and their worshippers
were unaware of the fact of their conversion, Allah reminded them that*

*those they used to worship were now prostrated before Him and were
seeking means of approach to gain His nearness.[6]*

This elaboration makes it clear that it is valid to rely on those who
are near to Allah through their obedience and acts of virtue. And those
who are near to Allah further rely on those who are even nearer to Him,
and it is a continuous process because the quest for nearness to Allah
is an unending process. This also clearly implies that there are
different degrees of nearness to Allah, the nearest degree enjoyed by
the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* .

This Qur’ānic verse clarifies beyond any particle of doubt that the gods
worshipped by the non-believers and who called on them in their hour of
distress are not in fact gods because they themselves are busy seeking
the pleasure of Allah. If they had been gods themselves, as the
non-believers ignorantly believed, they would not have been in need of
worshipping someone else to seek his goodwill. In fact, they are as
helpless as their worshippers and the obvious proof of their
helplessness is their lack of self-reliance. The verse also clarifies
the point that to seek access to Allah through those who have already
attained nearness to Him is a valid act as this has also been the
teaching and practice of these divine favourites. A question arises here
how can those who themselves are seeking means of access to Allah
possibly serve as means of approach to Him? A reflection on this
Qur’ānic verse itself provides the answer: to worship anyone except
Allah is forbidden but to rely on Allah’s favourites and to request them
to pray to Him for the fulfilment of one’s needs is quite valid. It is a
negation of worship, not a negation of means of approach to Allah. While
it is valid only to worship Allah and no one else, it is also valid to
seek the means of coming close to Him. Allah’s favourites serve only as
the means; they are not substitutes for Him. Therefore, it is correct to
believe that all favourites of Allah are only means of access to Him as
it is Allah Alone Who is to be worshipped.

Argument No. 3: Intermediation through the holy Prophet (SAW)
-------------------------------------------------------------

There is another verse, which makes permissible to seek means of
approach to Allah. As it is said:

*(O beloved!) And if they had come to you, when they had wronged their
souls, and asked forgiveness of Allah, and the Messenger also had asked
forgiveness for them, they (on the basis of this means and intercession)
would have found Allah the Granter of repentance, extremely
Merciful.[7]*

This Qur’ānic verse commands all the believers to rely on the mediation
of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* in order to have
their sins and lapses condoned by Allah. The relevance of this verse is
not limited to his actual life on this earth but it also applies to his
life after death. The exegetes and other leading scholars have also
explained the meanings of the verse at length which will be dealt with
elaborately in the third section of fifth chapter.

Argument No. 4: Relief from distress through the holy Prophet (SAW) on the Day of Judgement
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* is the dearest of
Almighty Allah. That’s why He blesses him the most. As it is stated:

*Soon your Lord shall appoint you to the highest station in Paradise
(that is, that high place of intercession where the former and the
latter ones will return to him and glorify him).[8]*

Maqām mahmūd is the high and exalted place which is specified for the
Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* on the Day of Judgement
as a divine acknowledgement of his glory and excellence. The purpose of
his elevation to the high station is his intercession for the believers.
It is proved by the Qur’ān and hadith that this form of intercession is
the exclusive prerogative of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* . On the Day of Judgement all the people, suffering from the
agony of pain, will rally round the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* . They will request him to plead their case before Allah in
order to expedite the process of their accountability to relieve them of
the agonizing punishment. The undoubted and authentic traditions support
the view that Allah, for the sake of His Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* , will accelerate the act of accountability. Thus it is
clear that even on the Day of Judgement all the people will make him as
their intermediary to place their plea before Allah. This is the main
object of his appointment to the specified high station in Paradise
which is mentioned in this verse.

Argument No. 5: Steadfastness in guidance through the holy Prophet (SAW)
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Allah says in surah Āl-i-‘Imrān:

*And how would you (now) disbelieve while you are (among those
fortunate) that to you are rehearsed the verses of Allah, and His
Messenger (himself) is in your midst? And whoever holds fast to Allah’s
(lap), is indeed guided towards the right path.[9]*

This Qur’ānic verse also pleads for intermediation. When we reflect on
the words wa fīkum rasūluh, we come to realize that the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* is such source of
intermediation who is blessed by Allah Himself to intercede for the
people. It is on account of his God-given stature that he can persuade
Allah to draw people out of the darkness of disbelief and bless them
with the light of guidance. Wa kayfa takfurūna makes it further clear
that to refrain from returning to disbelief is also made possible
through the Prophet’s mediation. The verse stresses two things, which
are interlinked. People receive guidance through the mediation of the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and this guidance is
strengthened and fortified again, through the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* . That is, both the reception of guidance and
its sustenance are possible through the mediation of the Prophet. Allah
is All-Powerful and it is within His power to guide anyone directly if
He likes. But when he Himself says that He will keep us steadfast in
guidance through the means of the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* , it is surely a clear proof of the fact that intermediation
is a legitimate act.

Argument No. 6: Stalling of punishment through the mediation of the Prophet (SAW)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Allah says in the Qur’ān:

*And (the fact of the matter is that) it is unbecoming of Allah to
inflict punishment on them while (O exalted friend,) you are also
(present) among them, nor will Allah punish them in a state while they
are seeking forgiveness (from Him).[10]*

In this Qur’ānic verse the divine punishment may be stalled for two
reasons:

The presence of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
among them.

Seeking forgiveness from Allah.

First of all, Allah stresses the point that He does not want to punish
them because the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* is
present among them; and second, He withholds the punishment because they
seek His forgiveness. What is to be noted here is the ordering of the
two reasons. Allah gives priority to the presence of the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . The verse clearly argues
that as long as the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* is
present among them, Allah would withhold the punishment, which would
have surely gripped them in his absence. Here the Prophet*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* is acting as an intermediary for his Ummah. Not
only does Allah accept his mediation, but He also accords it primacy
even over His Own forgiveness, and this is clearly supported by the way
the two reasons for warding off punishment are arranged in this Qur’ānic
verse. Some people, who interpret the word presence as mere physical
presence, that is, his actual life-span on this earth, are quite
mistaken. It is nothing but hair-splitting. Allah is not making any
distinction between his life on this earth and his life after death. The
word presence is in fact used in an inclusive sense. In the following
pages I shall try to explain that this applied to his presence even
before he was actually born into this world. Even before his birth, the
Jews used to pray to God for their victory over the unbelieving Arabs
through the mediation of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* as pointed out by Allah Himself:

*Though before this they themselves (through the mediation of the last
Prophet Muhammad (Peac Be Up Him and His Household) and the Qur’ān that
was revealed to him) offered (the prayer) for victory over the
non-believers.* [11]

This Qur’ānic verse illustrates a Jewish practice, which is endorsed by
the Qur’ān and all the exegetes and experts on hadith have made it as a
basis of their arguments.[12]It means that the fact has been
collectively acknowledged that if the people in the past could rely on
the mediation of the Holy Prophet *(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
for the fulfilment of their needs, it becomes not only valid, but even
more strictly binding, for the Muslim community to continue a
time-hallowed tradition.

Argument No. 7: Zakariyyā’s use of Maryam’s place of worship as means
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Allah says:

*And her supervision was given to Zakariyyā. Whenever Zakariyyā entered
her place of worship, he found with her (the latest and freshest) items
of food. He asked, “O Maryam, where do these things come to you from?”
She said, “This (food) comes from Allah.” Surely, Allah gives to
whomsoever He wishes without measure.[13]*

In the next verse Allah has mentioned Zakariyyā’s prayer at this very
spot:

*At that very place Zakariyyā prayed to his Lord. He requested, “My
Master! Give me from Yourself pure offspring. Surely You are the Hearer
of prayer.”[14]*

Rectification of an error
-------------------------

It may be assumed here that whenever Zakariyyā (عليه السلام) visited
Maryam’s room to ask about her health, he found all kinds of
out-of-season fruit and one day he just thought of praying, presuming
that the Lord, who could send out-of-season fruit to Maryam, had also
the power to bless him with the offspring in his old age, and as he
thought of this, he there and then offered prayer. One can say he had
prayed to Allah and it had nothing to do whatsoever with the spot at
which he prayed. But this view appears to be unreasonable as it gives
rise to a number of questions:

Had Zakariyyā (عليه السلام) never prayed in the past?

Why had Zakariyyā’s prayer been granted only then?

Why had Zakariyyā (عليه السلام) chosen that particular spot for his
prayer? Did he consider it more sacred than some other spots?

Why did the Qur’ān stress praying at that very place?

Qur’ān itself has rectified the error and eliminated uncertainty by
using the word hunālika (there). When we reflect on the words of the
Qur’ānic verse, we realize that it was Zakariyyā’s routine that he woke
up in the later part of the night and prayed to his Lord. According to
his routine, even on that day he woke up to offer his prayer, but
instead of praying at his usual place of worship, he chose specifically
the chamber in which Maryam lived. If he had offered his prayer only by
accident and not by design, the insertion of the word hunālika would
have been superfluous and insignificant. Such an interpretation is not
only a misreading of the Qur’ānic message but also a violation of its
spirit, which discourages and condemns all forms of superfluity. Thus
the choice of that particular spot is an act of intermediation and at
the same time it is a confirmation of the fact that a sacred spot can
also serve as a source of intermediation.

Immediate acceptance of prayer through mediation
------------------------------------------------

Allah has described the acceptance of prayer through mediation in the
following Qur’ānic verse:

*He still stood praying in the chamber (or he was simply imploring the
Lord) that the angels called to him: surely, Allah gives you glad
tidings of (son) Yahyā.[15]*

When Zakariyyā (عليه السلام) chose that sacred spot for his prayer, and
then offered his prayer, his prayer was instantly granted. This fact
clearly proves that Allah likes intermediation through his favourite
servants and the proof of His appreciation appears in the form of the
paryer’s acceptance. The stress is laid not only on acceptance, but also
on the immediacy of acceptance. It means that the prayer through
mediation is not only granted, but it is also immediately granted.

Argument No. 8: Return of Ya‘qūb’s eyesight through the mediation of Yūsuf’s shirt
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Allah says in surah Yūsuf:

*(Yūsuf said,) “Take my shirt and lay it on the face of my father
(Ya‘qūb), he will regain his sight.”[16]*

The Qur’ān has expressed the later development in these words:

*When the bearer of glad tidings arrived, he laid the shirt on the face
of Ya‘qūb and his sight returned immediately.[17]*

This Qur’ānic verse clearly proves that intermediation through any
object associated with the prophets and the saints does not negate the
Islamic concept of divine unity. In this case the sender of the shirt is
a prophet, the one who is benefiting from this act of intermediation is
also a prophet and the one who is describing the act, are all parts of a
sacred phenomenon authenticated by the Qur’ān itself. Therefore, to
express any doubts and reservations about its authenticity is to deny
the sanctity of an act which is being sanctified by no less an authority
than the Qur’ān. This Qur’ānic verse actually stresses the following
points:

First, though from the point of view of jā’-al-bashīr, this form of
intermediation is apparently without the direct involvement of a
prophet, it actually takes place through the physical use of one of his
relics, i.e. one of the objects associated with him.

Second, since the bearer of glad tidings did not utter a word as he laid
the shirt on the face of Ya‘qūb (عليه السلام), therefore, the return of
the eyesight through the means of the shirt is a form of intermediation
without words.

Third, to rely on someone who is not a prophet is also one of the
traditional practices of the prophets and to declare the practice of the
prophets as a form of disbelief is nothing but a reflection of malice,
ignorance and lack of understanding on the part of those who boastfully,
and sometimes out of sheer flaunting arrogance, indulge in fabricating
such false allegations. In the Qur’ānic verse Allah is expressing the
form of intermediation practised by two great prophets, Ya‘qūb (عليه
السلام) and Yūsuf (عليه السلام). No Muslim can deny the reality of
intermediation in the presence of such a clearly described tradition. If
there had been any ambiguity or semantic twist in its expression, they
might have had some basis of doubt. But when the argument is so
explicit, any doubt about its veracity is nothing but an ugly
concoction. Besides, the most significant

point stressed by the Qur’ānic verse is that one prophet, Yūsuf (عليه
السلام), is issuing the injunction of intermediation and the other
prophet, Ya‘qūb (عليه السلام), is receiving the benefit from this act of
intermediation. It means the shirt here serves as the source of
intermediation. Therefore, if it is valid to practice intermediation
through a prophet’s shirt, its practice through the relics of the
prophets and the saints is automatically validated.

Real meaning of supernatural causes
-----------------------------------

It means that if an act takes place without the factors or causes which
are necessary for its manifestation or occurrence, it is called a
supernatural act, for example, the birth of ‘Īsā (عليه السلام), because
the birth of a person is caused by a number of factors. If these factors
are absent, the question of birth does not arise. But in the case of the
birth of ‘Īsā (عليه السلام), these factors are glaringly absent, i.e.
the fact of birth without the presence of the opposite gender and,
therefore, it can be explained only as a result of supernatural causes.

It is generally said that mediation for supernatural acts is disbelief
while it is permissible in the case of natural acts. This concept
derives from the ignorance of people about the true definition of
supernatural causes. These people are guided only by a superficial
definition, which suggests that any phenomenon that is not adequately
explained by the world of causes is supernatural and that which falls
within its scope is natural. In order to understand its true nature the
example of the return of Ya‘qūb’s eyesight seems to be quite apt. If the
restoration of vision comes about as a result of medical treatment or
surgical operation, it will fall within the ambit of the causes and if
the rehabilitation of eyesight takes place as a result of merely placing
the shirt on the face, it will fall beyond the influence of causes which
is generally described as a supernatural phenomenon. This brief
discussion proves that:

If an effect occurs without causes, it is a supernatural effect.

Intermediation through the supernatural causes is endorsed by the Qur’ān
and proved by the practice of the prophets.

Idhhabū bi-qamīsī does not rely on any kind of supplication nor on any
medicine; it only records the recovery of eyesight through the physical
application of the shirt. Therefore, it provides an illustration of
intermediation through the supernatural causes. If this kind of
intermediation were a negation of beliefs the Qur’ān would never have
permitted it because it condemns all kinds of disbelief.

Here another point is clamouring for our attention, and that is to
declare valid an act of intermediation which is engineered by natural
cause and to declare it invalid because it is brought about by
supernatural causes is in itself a kind of self-invented classification,
which is supported neither by the Qur’ānic verses nor by the authentic
traditions of the prophets. The correct Islamic belief is that the real
cause and helper is Allah Himself. No one shares His qualities and
attributes because, in view of His uniqueness, any

effort to associate partners with Him is not only impracticable but also
inconceivable. Disbelief is disbelief at any place and in any context of
situation. Whether you sugar-coat it or present it as an ambiguous
temptation, it remains disbelief.

Natural and supernatural causes operate on entirely different planes:
while natural causes relate to outward effects, supernatural causes
relate to inner and spiritual effects. There are a large number of
issues in our lives, which are resolved through natural causes, but
there are some issues, which are resolved internally and spiritually
without any recourse to outer and material causes. The fact is that no
effect is without a cause; only in some cases the cause is manifest
while in other cases it remains hidden and it is revealed only to
persons with gifted insight. If an act happens without any apparent
reliance on visible causes, it is also really not without a cause; only
the cause remains generally invisible.

The gist of the discussion is that if we condemn intermediation as a
form of disbelief in supernatural matters, it would be a direct
violation of the Qur’ānic injunctions and the traditional practices of
the prophets. For example, when Jibrīl (عليه السلام) at Allah’s behest,
appeared before Maryam in human guise in connection with the birth of
‘Īsā (عليه السلام), he addressed her in these words:

*I have been only sent by your Lord. (I have come because) I should
bless you with a pure son.[18]*

In this Qur’ānic verse Jibrīl (عليه السلام) is attributing to himself
the blessing of the son which is absolutely unsupported by external
causes, i.e. to bless her with a son without the presence of a father
with just a puff of air is only a supernatural act. But in this
dialogue, one of Allah’s superior angels is performing the act of
intermediation. Therefore, Qur’ānic verses cannot be falsified on the
basis of a self-coined belief. Intermediation is a Qur’ānic fact and it
is a legal act.

Argument No. 9: Self-humiliation and helplessness as a form of means
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Extreme self-humiliation, self-deflation, modesty and helplessness are
recommended means to crush one’s ego. If someone prays to Allah in a
state of self-laceration, his emotional and mental state serves as a
means to gain access to Allah Who is deeply moved by the purity and
intensity of his prayer and grants his request.

The prayers of the Companions and the saints were invariably effective
because in their prayers they demeaned themselves, lowered their egos
and approached Allah in an absolutely humble frame of mind. They shed
all their pretensions and placed themselves completely at the will and
mercy of their Lord. The prayers of Abū Bakr, ‘Alī, Zayn-ul-‘Ābidīn and
‘Abd-ul-Qādir Jīlānī gush out of a similar state of humility and
self-lashing.

The same philosophy forms the basis of intermediation. Something is
offered to Allah in one’s prayer as a support to enhance its chances of
acceptance, rather it persuades Allah to grant it even when He is
disinclined

to do so. It awakens His mercy and He softens towards the prayee and
fulfils his desire. Anything which acts as means must either be a sacred
deed or some righteous person who enjoys Allah’s blessings. It is on
account of his personal sanctity as an intermediary that Allah is moved
to accept the prayer, as Allah befriends those who seek His pleasure and
He never lets them down. So the granting of the prayer through such an
intermediary is an indirect acknowledgement of his virtue and piety.
Therefore, those who try to raise these agents of intermediation to the
level of divine partners are the victims of rational purblindness. How
can a person, who himself is a humble servant of the Lord, and whose
very survival and integrity depends on His pleasure, ever imagine to
excel Him? This is only a malicious disfigurement of reality.

It is recorded in the Qur’ān that when Adam (عليه السلام) committed the
error, he besought Allah, stressing his helplessness and his lowly
state:

*O our Lord! We have committed excess against our lives. If You did not
forgive us and (did not) take mercy on us, we will surely be among the
losers.[19]*

In this prayer, Adam (عليه السلام) has offered his own helplessness and
his utter sense of alienation as a source of intermediation and asked
for Allah’s mercy and forgiveness. The authentic traditions also
indicate that Adam (عليه السلام) also offered the mediation of the holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* for the acceptance of his
prayer and, as a result, he was blessed with Allah’s forgiveness.

Argument No. 10: Prayer for the entire Ummah as a source of intermediation
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

If one does not pray only for oneself as expressed in the words ‘O
Allah, have mercy on me,’ but prays for the entire community as
expressed in the words ‘O Allah, have mercy on us – the entire
community,’ this mode of prayer in itself becomes a source of
intermediation. It is stated in the holy Qur’ān:

*O our Lord! Now forgive our sins and efface our mistakes (from our
recorded deeds) and give us death in the company of virtuous
people.[20]*

Argument No. 11: Addition of the word Rabb to the names of the righteous as a form of means
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The prayer proves effective if the word Rabb is added to the name of a
righteous person. For example, if one addresses Allah as Muhammad's Lord
or as the Lord of some saint or virtuous person, the prayer gains in
effectiveness and itself becomes an agent of intermediation. The Qur’ān
says:

*And, through your mercy, make me among the righteous who are close to
You.[21]*

Allah says in regard to those who have attained His pleasure through
noble acts and pious deeds and, therefore, have achieved a level of
self-contentment rarely available to human beings on this earth. These
are the

people who remain unruffled and unhinged even when the winds blow
harshly, the heat wave is sizzlingly inhospitable and the cold is
biting. As the Qur’ān states:

*O contented self! Return to your Lord in such a state that you should
seek His pleasure as well as be the object of His pleasure (as if you
desire His pleasure and He desires your pleasure). So join My tested
servants and enter My Paradise (of nearness and presence).[22]*

This Qur’ānic verse relates to a person who is about to hear the glad
tidings of Allah’s mercy, kindness and nearness. Allah is proud of his
obedience. He actually gloats over his perseverance and sincerity in His
service. This man does not indulge his desires, rather he sacrifices
them for the collective happiness of the people. Each moment of his life
is focused on seeking Allah’s pleasure. He crushes all those desires
which tend to deflect his concentration from righteous and pious deeds.
Each phase of his life is a confirmation of his faith in Allah, not a
deviation from it. He is not under the thumb of his self, rather his
self is under his thumb and even the devil is scared of seducing him
because he knows that all his efforts to derail him from the track of
virtue are doomed to failure. He sacrifices his comforts to win Allah’s
pleasure. He is totally in the infinite goodness of his Lord and this
immersion in virtue becomes a guarantee of his survival and a source of
that self-renewing contentment which brings him increasingly closer to
Allah. He achieves a level of self-satisfaction which is denied to the
common run of people and he presents a perfect model of submission to
the will of the Lord. His own desires, which are usually self-seeking,
are pushed into the background and his leading light is the will and
pleasure of Allah. He is, in reality, one of those honoured and exalted
persons with whom Allah is totally pleased. As a result, there is no
dividing line between such a person and the Lord Himself. When he
speaks, it seems as if the Lord is speaking through him; when he talks,
it sounds as if the Lord is talking through him; when he walks, it
appears as if the Lord Himself is walking; even his hearing turns into a
divine act of hearing. In short, there is complete identity between him
and the Lord because a person who has achieved this level of
self-control shall never indulge in an act that can clash with the will
and pleasure of the Lord. He has been tested and retested by Allah; as a
result of his stresses and tribulations Allah has vested him with such a
high status. Therefore, if one approaches Allah through people like him
and say, “O Lord of the righteous,” His mercy bubbles over and grants
the prayee’s wish. At that time He is not concerned about the status of
the petitioner; He is rather concerned about the status of His own loyal
servants who have attained His pleasure. Therefore, to approach Allah
through the righteous people is also one of the practices of the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . After the Fajr prayer, the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* used to pray:

*O Lord of Jibrīl, and Mīkā’īl, and Isrāfīl and Muhammad! I seek Your
protection from the fire of Hell.[23]*

*Shaykh Muhammad bin ‘Alawī al-Mālikī said, “Its specific mention in his
du‘ā’ is understood as Tawassul, as if he were saying, “O Allah, I ask*

*You and I seek Jibrīl (Gabriel), Isrāfīl, Mikā’īl (Michael) and
Muhammad the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* as means to
You.”[24]*

Argument No. 12: Intermediation through remembering the Lord
------------------------------------------------------------

Allah says:

*And (such) are these people that when they commit a foul deed or wrong
their own lives, remember Allah and implore forgiveness for their sins.
And who can forgive sins except Allah?[25]*

This Qur’ānic verse proves that when a man commits sins and his life is
soiled with smutty deeds, then intermediation through the remembrance of
Allah can serve as a source of forgiveness of his sins.

Argument No. 13: Intermediation through remembering the prophets and the saints
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To remember people whom Allah loves and who are very close to Him on
account of their virtuous acts is also a form of intermediation. Surah
al-Fātihah has listed a number of righteous persons who can serve as
intermediaries for Allah’s blessings because these are the people whom
He has rewarded with special gifts – they are, in fact, the prized ones
in the divine estimation. The Qur’ān states:

*The path of those on whom You bestowed blessings.[26]*

At another occasion, the holy Qur’ān describes the details of the people
on whom His blessings have been bestowed:

*And whoso obeys Allah and Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
shall be among those (on the Day of Judgement) upon whom Allah has
bestowed His (special) blessings – the prophets, the truthful, the
martyrs and the righteous – and they are an excellent company.[27]*

Surah al-Fātihah contains all forms of intermediation. As a matter of
fact, the entire surah is an act of intermediation as it is the essence
of the Qur’ān. It encourages the followers to approach Allah through the
divine unity, Prophethood and other pious persons. But, here, in this
verse, intermediation through the righteous people is recommended
because these are the ones with whom Allah is pleased.

Argument No. 14: Intermediation through Allah’s blessings
---------------------------------------------------------

Allah says:

*And remember Allah’s that blessing on you. When you were (each other’s)
enemies but He created love in your hearts and you became brothers on
account of His blessing.[28]*

And another occasion, He says:

*And if you wish to count Allah’s blessings, you won’t be able to count
them completely. Surely, Allah is infinitely Forgiving, extremely
Merciful.[29]*

You should remember Allah’s blessings and after remembering these
blessings seek His forgiveness and you will find Him infinitely
Forgiving. The Qur’ānic verse elucidates the fact that the remembrance
of Allah’s blessings activates His attribute of mercy. A prayer,
therefore, which is

based on recalling His blessings and His kindness, can serve as an agent
of intermediation by offering itself as the petitioner’s expression of
gratitude for the inexhaustible kindnesses of the Lord and is finally
granted by Him. The Qur’ān itself bears witness to its effectiveness:

*If you are grateful, then I will increase (blessings) on you.[30]*

Argument No. 15: Intermediation through the Lord’s promise
----------------------------------------------------------

Allah has made a number of promises to the followers of the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . If these promises are
remembered in a mood of concentration and offered as means while
praying, the prayer will be granted by Allah. The holy Qur’ān states:

*O our Lord! Bless us with all that which You have promised through Your
messengers, and do not humiliate us on the Day of Judgement. Surely You
do not go back on Your promise.[31]*

The petitioner in his prayer addresses the Lord. He has committed many
sins and perpetrated a number of foul deeds but he is now conscious of
his sullied career and in a spirit of total humility surrenders himself
to the overflowing mercy of the Lord saying: O Allah! Our deeds are not
such that we deserve Your mercy and forgiveness, therefore, we pray to
You through Your messengers that may You keep us safe from the gruelling
and scorching heat and horrors of the Day of Judgement. We are holding
fast to your exalted prophets, we are following in their footsteps and
we are following the faith they have taught us. Your prophets have also
taught us that keeping on to our faith is a means of our salvation and
we believe in it sincerely. Therefore, show us Your promise as daylight
because You always fulfil Your promises.


