CHAPTER THREE: Rejection of Objections against Tawassul
=======================================================

In the last chapter I have made reference to only a few verses out of
hundreds of Qur’anic verses to explain the concept of Tawassul, which
have helped in removing the film of confusion and misconception that had
enveloped it over decades of prejudiced and semi-scholarly fumbling. If
we reflect on these divine injunctions in the light of a correct
understanding of the spirit of our religion, we will not only be able to
grasp the crux of Islamic faith but this will also automatically serve
to clarify a number of misunderstandings that have gathered round the
concept. It will sort out the grain from the chaff, differentiating
people with correct and balanced understanding from those whose
interpretation is askew and exclusive. In this chapter I shall attempt
to answer the baseless objections which have been levelled against the
validity of Tawassul as a religious concept and establish its true
meaning in the light of the reasoning furnished by the Qur’an and the
hadith. Therefore, this chapter is divided into two sections. In the
first section, correct meanings of the Qur’anic verses are given which
are made a basis of arguments against Tawassul through flagrant
misinterpretation. In the second section, a correct assessment shall
emerge as a result of the form of intermediation followed by the
prophets and the saints, particularly in response to an objection, but
strictly in the light of the reasoning provided by Shariah.

Section One :Rectification of doubts and errors
-----------------------------------------------

### First objection: Tawassul is not valid through another person

###

Some people deny the valid status of intermediation through the holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* by suggesting that it is not
an act performed by the petitioner himself. It is invalid because it is
not based on a personal act. These people believe that only a personal
good deed can act as a source of intermediation. They cite the following
Qur’anic verses to justify the invalidity of intermediation through
another person:

*Each man gets what he strives for.[1]*

*And anyone who bears a burden shall not bear the burden of another
man.[2]*

*It is rewarded for whatever good it earned and it is punished for
whatever sin it earned.[3]*

### Correct Stand on Tawassul through another person

###

This is based on the valid premise that in addition to the petitioner,
another’s act can also serve as a source of intermediation. The Qur’anic
verses which are marshalled as arguments against the reality of
intermediation are all related to deeds and the reward or punishment for
those deeds. They are not related to prayer, the acceptance of prayer
and struggle to attain the nearness of Allah by seeking means of
approach to Him. In the case of intermediation, a beloved object or a
sacred person is offered as a means for the fulfilment of one’s need.
But these Qur’anic verses are not even marginally concerned with the
theme of intermediation. Therefore, to quote them as a justification for
the irrelevance of

intermediation is both a logical and a semantic error. Besides, their
transposition from one context to the other also leads to their
contextual distortion, which amounts to disrespect and sacrilege. In
fact, to fit a Qur’anic verse into a preconceived slot is the height of
perversity and is not becoming of any well-meaning Muslim.

The verse mentioned first simply means that whatever man receives is a
consequence of what he has done. It is a reward or punishment for his
actions, it does not involve any other person as it revolves around the
acts of a single individual. No other individual, whether he is a
relative or a stranger, is associated with these acts. Their commission
and their consequences, whether they are favourable or unfavourable,
exclusively apply to the individual concerned. While, in a discussion of
intermediation, the act and its implications of reward and punishment do
not come into the picture at all: it is only related to prayer; and at
the time of prayer seeking someone else for its acceptance constitutes
an act of intermediation.

Similarly, the second mentioned verse relates to the burden of sin. It
highlights the theme of accountability. It means that we all bear
burdens but these burdens are our own. They relate to our own selves, to
our own errors, and to our own sins, and we cannot bear the burden of
others. They are accountable for their sins while we are accountable for
our sins. The two kinds of burden are not interchangeable; they are
mutually exclusive. Thus the Qur’anic verse transparently applies the
process of accountability, which will be based on a comprehensive
evaluation of our acts. It has nothing to do whatsoever with the act of
intermediation. Therefore, to spin it out unnecessarily and to fit it
into the straitjacket of intermediation with which it is not even
remotely related, is to disfigure its application, which comes close to
a form of heresy.

The third verse relates to commission and consequence. This brief
explanation makes it clear that all these Qur’anic verses, from the
thematic as well as the semantic point of view, are extraneous to the
discussion of intermediation. The following tradition is an irrefutable
argument in support of the act of intermediation:

*It is attributed to Abū Hurayrah that Allah’s Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him
and His Household)* said: When a person dies, his acts are disconnected
but three acts are not disconnected: continuing charity, knowledge that
benefits mankind and pious children who pray for him.[4]*

From the point of view of the tradition, even death cannot terminate
these three human acts and man will continue to receive their reward and
recompense even after his death:

The first of these acts is the continuing act of charity. For example,
someone constructs a mosque or an educational institution or a road or
hospital; or finances a campaign or an organization for the
dissemination and resurgence of Islamic faith; or funds a struggle for
the welfare of the poor and the needy, he will continue to receive their
reward as long as they survive.

Similarly, beneficial knowledge. For example, a scholar teaches someone
and he continues to teach others, or he writes a book on religion or
some branch of knowledge or does research for any useful work for
Allah’s

pleasure. As long as his ideas are transmitted to mankind through his
pupils and work, and human beings benefit from them or that book remains
a part of the syllabi of various universities in the world and the
people find it positively rewarding, he will continue to reap the reward
of his efforts.

There is an agreement on the continuing act of charity, and beneficial
knowledge that they can act as sources of intermediation but the
tradition also refers to pious children. They can also serve as an act
of continuing charity for their parents. Their good deeds are a source
of benefit to the parents even after death. As a matter of fact, the
acts of the pious children constitute an act performed by someone else
but they serve as a source of intermediation for the parents.

It should be noted here that good deeds are being performed by the
children but they are serving as a means of salvation for the parents
after their death. This example proves that the act of one man benefits
another man. The act of continuing charity was his personal act, which
will continue to benefit him as long as the act continues. Similarly,
through his knowledge and research, he disseminated virtue and guidance.
This was also his personal act and he will continue to receive its
reward, both in this world and the next. But the good deeds of his
children are not his deeds, and yet he is garnering their reward. Those
pious deeds are now serving as the means of the parents’ redemption.
Thus, this tradition proves the fact that one’s own good deeds are not
the only means of intermediation but the deeds of others can also play
this role and benefit the other person.

### Second objection: Good deeds of one’s children are not deeds of others

###

Those who cling to the principle that only one’s own acts are the valid
means and the acts of others are invalid as means, interpret the
tradition in a different sense altogether. They say that a good child is
surely his son and shares his lineage, but it is the upbringing of his
father that has turned him into a pious person. Therefore, whatever the
son does will be directly considered his own act. Whatever good deeds he
performs will automatically benefit his father and, therefore, they will
be regarded his own unmediated deeds. And they cite the following
tradition as a clinching argument for their interpretation:

*Whosoever sets a good precedent in Islam, there is a reward for him for
this (act of goodness) and the reward of that also who acted after him
according to its subsequence.[5]*

### Correct view

###

This is in fact a misinterpretation of the tradition. This is their
modus operandi in understanding the import of traditions. They twist
their meanings out of shape and focus on the sense that suits their
fallacious point of view. It is their normal practice to decontextualize
the traditions and dress them in robes tailored by their whims and
runaway fancies. Thus the meanings they draw out of the traditions are
absolutely unrelated to their themes. If the reader or the listener is
mentally alert, he/she will at once come to know the reality of the
situation, but a common reader or listener is generally flustered by
these misinterpretations.

This is part of their conscious design to mislead the credulous people.
The common man, on account of his ignorance and lack of understanding,
is easily swayed by their highly capricious, rather malicious,
explanations, and treats them as correct interpretations of the Qur’anic
verses. In such a state of affairs he will remain a victim of ambiguity
or uncertainty unless he turns for clarification to a religious scholar
who is gifted with both vision and knowledge to interpret them correctly
and in the right spirit in which they were revealed. Allah says:

*So you should ask people of knowledge if you yourselves do not know
(about something).[6]*

It is not being discussed in this tradition whether the good deeds of
the children are also the good deeds of the parents or not. What is
being discussed is the clear and untwisted fact that the good deeds of
the children not only benefit themselves but they also benefit their
parents although these have not been performed by them. It makes it
further clear that after the death of the parents, children will perform
good deeds for their personal benefit alone (which of course is the
motive behind these deeds). But their parents will also receive a share
of the reward which logically ensues from the commission of good deeds.
Similarly, a number of Qur’anic verses are cited by these malevolent
scholars to reject the concept of intermediation and to bring home to
the gullible people that it is not permissible in Islam. One of these
verses is as follows:

*And (O beloved,) when My servants ask you about Me, (tell them,) “I am
Near. I answer the caller whenever he calls Me. So they should obey and
have (firm) faith in Me so that they may find the (right path).”[7]*

To draw the inference from this Qur’anic verse that to call anyone
except Allah is improper as Allah Himself hears the call and
acknowledges it with His blessing, is quite incorrect. The correct
position is that it is Allah Alone Who listens to people’s prayers and
grants them; it is He Alone Who fulfils our needs. But it is also quite
proper to process these prayers through some prophet or saint to
expedite their acceptance as it has been debated in the last chapter at
length.

The following Qur’anic verses are also offered as argument against the
validity of intermediation and intercession:

*And fear the day when no soul shall serve as a substitute for another
soul, nor shall intercession (of a person) be accepted for it (who does
not have Allah’s permission), nor shall any money (as ransom) be taken
from it, nor shall (against Allah’s will) they be helped.[8]*

You should keep in mind that all the Qur’anic verses, which are supposed
to deny the relevance of intercession are meant only for the
non-believers and hypocrites who are the fuel of the hell. These are not
meant for the believers, as the theme of intercession is relevant only
to them. The non-believers are not even marginally concerned with them
because the fact of intercession is, first of all, related to belief.
And if one is deprived of this precious asset either through perversity
or as a result of some divine curse, or if someone possesses it but it
fluctuates like the flame of a flickering candle or it is wobbly as
jelly, intercession will have no value for him. Therefore, intercession
is being devalued or negated for the non-believers.

The implication is, and there is sound logic behind it, that when these
non-believers do not subscribe even to the basic values of Islam, how
can they be expected to appreciate the phenomena like intercession and
intermediation. Therefore, the value of intercession is directly based
on the value of faith. Since the non-believers reject the faith, it is
only logical for them to reject intercession. But the believers accept
faith as well as what is derived from it. Thus, on the Day of Judgement,
the prophets and the righteous will intercede for their followers, the
Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* will be appointed to
the highest station to make intercession a reality and the non-believers
will be wailing and crying in an agony of repentance, ignorance and
missed opportunities. As it is stated:

*So (today) we have no intercessor nor any bosom friend.[9]*

They have no one who will intercede on their behalf, nor anyone who can
put in a word of recommendation for them. They are friendless on a day
when the need for a friend is agonizingly felt. They are stranded and
completely alienated. All they can do is cry and wail. Their cries are a
proof of the fact of intercession on the Day of Judgement. If there were
no intercession, the non-believers would not have cried; on the other
hand, they would have exulted in the baseless expectations of the
believers, their cries would have been replaced by fits of ridicule and
sarcasm. Thus their moaning and wailing proves the truth of intercession
through this Qur’anic verse. It means all the promised and positive
things will be there, but the non-believers will look only wistfully at
them, as they will be inaccessible to them. Only the believers will
benefit from them.

Therefore, to apply the Qur’anic verses to the believers, which were
actually revealed for the non-believers and were meant to be applied to
them is both improper and perverse. Our sense of propriety demands that
we should distinguish between believers and non-believers because it is
this basic distinction that decides the division and distribution of
rewards and punishments. Therefore, these verses cannot be made as the
basis of arguments against the reality of intercession. If intercession
is not allowed to the non-believers as a favour and a concession, it
does not follow that it is also disallowed to the believers. Thus
intercession is a fact but it is exclusively reserved for the believers.

### Need for a correct understanding of Qur’anic verses

###

It is extremely vital to clearly grasp the meanings of Qur’anic verses,
especially those which deal with delicate problems. To determine their
context and then to explain their genesis and application within these
contextual bounds results in a sound interpretation of these verses as
well as a clarification of the niggling issues they are revealed to
explicate. To fix these bounds of sanity is even more relevant in the
present sectarian and polemical environment where each sect tries to
browbeat the other sect, and does not hesitate to twist the meaning of a
Qur’anic verse out of shape to make his opponent lick the dust. In their
sectarian frenzy they do not seem to realize that they are doing a great
disservice to their faith. In most cases, their egotistical concerns
drive out religious concerns and they bend and twirl the meanings of
these verses to pamper their bloated selves. Therefore, in such a
situation it is necessary to determine the contextual and semantic

range and relevance of a Qur’anic verse. In this regard the collective
consensus of sound religious scholars and exegetes should be kept in
mind, and any interpretation that strays too far from the text or
highlights only marginal issues as a purely innovative exercise, should
either be discarded altogether or downplayed to minimize its
significance. Such interpretations, posing to be modernistic, are
generally inspired by malicious motives to strike at the solid moorings
of our faith. Therefore, all such interpretations should be discouraged
and one way to discourage them is to be indifferent to them. In this
way, the Muslims will learn to follow the correct interpretation and
gradually this attitude will moderate the unnecessary tensions that
exist between various sects.

### Third objection: To attain nearness to Allah, Tawassul is invalid as worship of anyone except Allah is invalid

###

One objection against Tawassul is based on the following reasoning:

The non-believers used to say, while worshipping the idols, that they
worshipped them to attain nearness to Allah. Just as worshipping idols
in order to be close to Allah is an invalid act, similarly if someone
relies on an intermediary to be near to Him, it will also be regarded as
invalid. In support of their argument, they offer the following Qur’anic
verse:

*We worship them merely because they may bring us near to Allah.[10]*

This holy verse makes it clear that the non-believers worshipped the
idols to attain nearness to Allah; they did not treat them as the
creator. It only served as a means of accessibility to Allah but Allah
rejected this form of intermediation.

### Reply: Worship of non-Allah cannot be proved by the argument for intermediation

###

The fact is that the Qur’anic verse neither denies nor rejects
intermediation. This kind of reasoning against the validity of
intermediation is based on sheer ignorance and prejudice. This Qur’anic
verse is specifically revealed to reject the worship of anyone except
Allah, and no form of reasoning can convert the illegal nature of such
an act into a legal injunction. The non-believers worshipped the idols
but Islam declared it illegal and equated it with disbelief. When Islam
condemned their worship of idols as forbidden, they argued in favour of
the sanity of their traditional practice. Instead of accepting their
worship of idols as an illegal act as declared by Islam, they started
looking for lame justifications, i.e. they did not worship the idols as
the creator but they worshipped them to acquire nearness to Allah. They
used the idols only as a form of intermediation and their target was
only to come close to Allah.

The Qur’anic verse rejects this argument. Even if someone worships
non-Allah as a means to come closer to Allah, it is treated by Islam as
a kind of disbelief and a forbidden act and no argument can make it
valid.

Now the question arises why did the non-believers rely on mediation to
legalize their illegal acts? It is an established fact that the one, who
is arguing, is arguing on the basis of the beliefs and convictions of
his addressee. In his discussion he brings forward an argument which is
not only acceptable to his opponent but is also a part of his belief.
Relying on

this argument, he tries to argue with him so that he may accept the
legality of his act on the basis of his argument. On the contrary, if he
knows that idol worship is a form of disbelief for the addressee and he
has a similar attitude towards all forms of intermediation, in that
case, the non-believer would never have relied on idolatry and
intermediation as justifications for their idolatrous practice.
Therefore, for the non-believers to argue for the legality of their
illegal acts on the basis of intermediation is an ugly attempt to
legalize the forbidden act of idol worship. They were well aware of the
fact that the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and the
Companions regarded it as valid practice. If they had known that Islam
treated intermediation as an invalid act, they would never have argued
with the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* and the
Companions on its basis to justify their idolatry. Thus the very fact of
their reliance on intermediation for the vindication of their idol
worship clearly proves that intermediation is a legal act in Islam.

But Allah rejected their argument. Even though the form of
intermediation practised by them was popular and valid, it could not
transform disbelief into a legal act as all forms of disbelief are
strictly forbidden. Thus even an argument based on the noble concept of
intermediation cannot purify idolatry from the virus of disbelief. Thus
disbelief is disbelief, and even if it takes a billion somersaults, and
changes colours like a chameleon, it will remain disbelief. Allah
refused to accept the argument in its favour. As the holy Qur'an states:

*Surely Allah does not forgive that a partner be associated with Him but
a smaller (sin whatever it is,) He forgives for whomsoever He
pleases.[11]*

He forgives every sin except the sin of associating partners with Him.
The commission of this kind of sin is an act, which is unacceptable and
unpardonable under all circumstances. Thus the gist of the holy verse is
that Allah rejects disbelief, no matter what robes it is dressed in or
what language it is phrased in; He does not reject intermediation
because it is an absolutely valid act in Islam.

### First similitude

###

Suppose a son is giving shoe beating to his mother. The father catches
hold of him and asks him why is he beating up his mother. The son says
he would never have done it, as he knows it is an uncivilized act, but
he has done it because she was hurling filthy abuses at him. His
argument is based on the psychology of his father. He knows that his
father is allergic to filthy abuses, and he thought that an argument
based on filthy abuses would cool down his father’s boiling anger and he
would say to him, “Well, son, you have done the right thing. A person
who pours out filthy abuses at others must be given such lesson.” But,
instead, he gave him a few slaps and said to him, “There is no doubt
that hurling abuses is bad, but after all, she is your mother and you
have no right to beat her.” Thus his argument based on abuse was
rejected. But the rejection of the argument does not imply that throwing
abuses at others is a valid act. It does not justify the act of shoe
beating. Similarly, the argument based on its defence is also discarded.

In the same way when the non-believers and infidels were asked, “Why do
you worship the idols?” They replied, “We worship them as a form of

intermediation, we do not regard them as the creator or as worthy of
worship in themselves.” But their argument that justified the worship of
non-Allah as a form of intermediation was refuted. Thus their argument
in favour of intermediation cannot justify their idol worship.

### Second similitude

###

An impure object cannot be made pure by giving an argument based on a
pure object, nor can a forbidden act be legalized by simply fabricating
an argument for its justification. Suppose someone says that he drinks.
When someone asks him why does he drink and he replies that he drinks to
dilute his grief. He can be told that there are countless ways to
relieve one’s grief or the intensity of one’s sorrow. Drinking, which is
a forbidden act, is not the only way; for example, he may stroll in a
garden, do some exercise, inhale the cool morning breeze, remember
Allah, concentrate on prayer, in short, he has a wide range of valid
choices on hand to find solace for his grief.

Now as far as the argument of finding relief for one’s grief is
concerned, it is quite valid but how can it validate the act of
drinking? One finds it difficult to swallow the inference. The argument
does not mellow the evil act of drinking, the argument based on relief
cannot legalize it. Similarly, the argument of the non-believers was
fallacious to justify their idolatry. Since idolatry is essentially an
un-Islamic act, it could not be justified by any means, not even by an
argument grounded in intermediation, which is otherwise an Islamic act.

As far as soliciting nearness to Allah is concerned, there are numerous
valid means to achieve it. Idol worship is not a valid means. It is
forbidden, as it is a form of disbelief. Therefore, only valid means
must be employed to attain the nearness and pleasure of Allah. Idolatry
is not a means of His nearness; it is rather the cause of His
punishment.

### Fourth objection: Prophets and saints were themselves in search of mediation

###

One objection that flows from their slick tongues as coffee from a
press-button percolator is that those who are close to Allah, and on
whom we tend to rely as intermediaries, are themselves in search of a
means to gain close access to Allah. Since they themselves are looking
for support, how can they be expected to support others? On the basis of
this reasoning, they declare that reliance on the prophets and the
saints as intermediaries is invalid. And to validate their invalid
viewpoint they rely on the following Qur’anic verse by misrepresenting
its essence:

*Those, whom they worship (that is, the angels, jinn, ‘Īsā (عليه السلام)
and ‘Uzayr (عليه السلام) etc., - they make their portraits and statues
and worship them), they (themselves) seek nearness to their Lord,
through those who among them are the nearest (to Allah’s presence).[12]*

### Proof for the justification of Tawassul in the holy verse

###

This Qur’anic verse furnishes a strong argument in favour of
intermediation. To infer from it that the prophets and the righteous are

themselves in search of mediation to have access to Allah and,
therefore, they cannot serve as means of nearness to Him is invalid. The
question arises if they themselves are pious and, therefore, near to
Allah on account of their piety, then what other means are they seeking
to possess what they already possess. The answer is provided by the
Qur’an itself. Ayyuhum aqrab are the people who are nearer to Allah and
the prophets and the righteous rely on them as intermediaries. This
shows that intermediation is a graded process. There are those who are
the nearest to Allah and there are those who are less near, while still
there are others – who are on the periphery. Thus there are different
grades of nearness and the process of drawing near to Allah is infinite.
Those who are the closest to Him are trying to be still closer and those
who are closer to these are trying to be closer to the ones who are the
closest to Him. Thus, if intermediation is being practised by Him on
intimates, how can it be declared invalid for the common man?

Section Two : Tawassul through the prophets and the righteous (In fact Tawassul through virtuous deeds)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Objection

###

Those who are against intermediation through the prophets, the righteous
and the saints, argue that it is their deeds that particularize them
and, therefore, serve as a source of intermediation for them. How can an
intermediatee whose own salvation depends on his good deeds serve as a
means of redemption for another man? Therefore, only good deeds serve as
the basis of intermediation, not the personalities of the righteous
people.

### Answer

###

I do not consider this stand as valid. We rely on the prophets, the
righteous and the saints and offer them as a means of access to Allah on
account of our limitless love and devotion for them. The choice of means
is justified only by the presence of love. It is also an established
fact that to love those who are near and dear to Allah is in itself a
virtuous act and this is obviously an argument which cannot be rebutted
by any other argument, no matter how subtle or elaborate or tantalizing
it may be.

### 1. Love of Allah’s favourites as a form of mediation

###

The petitioner is acting for himself because he loves those whom Allah
loves. He is in fact saying: ‘O Lord, I love Your friend, the holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* , and I love the orthodox
Caliphs, the Companions, the Successors and their followers, the saints
and the righteous. I offer this love to You as the source of
intermediation so that You grant my prayer and fulfil my need.’ It means
love of Allah’s favoured ones becomes a means of the prayer’s
acceptance. There is no doubt that love of Allah’s favourites is not
only the fulfilment of a divine command but is also a great virtuous
deed. It is narrated by Abū Hurayrah:

*Allah’s Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* said: When Allah
loves some person, He sends for Jibrīl and commands him: Verily, I love
such and such person; you should also love him, so Jibrīl loves him as
well. Then Jibrīl proclaims in the heavens that Allah loves such and
such*

*person; you should also love him. Then the residents of the heavens
love him as well. Then his love is sent down to the earth (the
world).[13]*

First of all, Allah elevated His Own obedient servant to the status of
His beloved, then He commanded Jibrīl and all other angels that they
should love His servant. The angels, following the divine command, also
made him their beloved. In this all the heavenly creatures shared the
divine love for His beloved servant. But the matter does not end here.
Allah descended this love for His servant down on this earth and then
created a niche for the love and popularity of His servant in every
heart and every creature fell in love with him. It follows that to love
those who are loved by Allah is a divine command. From this point of
view this act of loving is in itself a virtuous act in which Allah is
not only Himself involved but He has also involved His angels as well as
the creatures of the earth. When this act is endorsed not only by the
practice of the prophets but also a popular act performed by the
creatures of the earth and the heavens, then what could be a better
virtuous act in favour of the petitioner.

### 2. Reciprocal nearness of lover and beloved on the Day of Judgement

###

True love is that virtuous act which draws the lover increasingly closer
to the beloved. It is narrated by Anas bin Mālik:

*A person called on the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
and said to him: O Messenger of Allah, when is the Hour (the Day of
Judgement)? The Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* stood
up for prayer. After performing the prayer he said: where is the person
who had asked about the Hour? That person replied: O Messenger of Allah,
I am here. He said: what preparation have you made for that (Hour)? He
submitted: O Messenger of Allah, I have offered neither many prayers nor
kept many fasts, but I know that much that I love Allah and His
Messenger. On hearing this, Allah’s Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* commented that (on the Day of Judgement) a person will be
with him whom he loves and you will be judged along with him. It is
reported that, after accepting Islam, this made the Muslims happier than
anything else had made them in the past.[14]*

This tradition proves that whereas prayer, fast, zakat and hajj are
virtuous acts and their performance entitles a man to a set of rewards,
similarly love is also an act of virtue, which results in nearness to
his beloved. The words of the tradition themselves endorse love as a
virtuous act. When the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
asked the petitioner: what preparation have you made for the Day of
Judgement? He replied: ‘O Messenger of Allah! My acts do not include
big-ticket deeds like prayer and fast, but the act of loving Allah and
His Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* is one of my deeds.’
The Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* replied that as each act
has a reward, similarly the act of loving has also a reward. A person
will be judged along with the man he loves and you will be judged on the
Day of Judgement along with the man you love. It means that this man,
simply on account of his love for the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* , will be judged with him. He will be in the Prophet’s
company and this is a promise made by the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* himself and this is Allah’s promise as well.

Besides, this promise is not restrictive; it has a general application;
it applies to the Companions, the Successors, their followers, even the
entire Muslim community.

Love of Allah’s Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* is an act,
which not only earns the lover a number of blessings through the agency
of his beloved on this earth but also brings him closer to his beloved
in the next world. Since the word hubb (love) here is used in a generic
sense, it equally applies to all forms and grades of love. Its litmus
test is sincerity as insincere love is a travesty of true love and,
therefore, not only repulsively hideous but also morally revolting. This
comment is vindicated by the words of Anas bin Mālik that after
accepting Islam, he had never found the Muslims happier than he found
them on hearing this explanation.

This tradition conclusively proves that the love of Allah’s favoured
people serves as a source of intermediation for divine blessings. And
when the servant prays to Allah, he, in fact, is saying: My Master, the
love I have for Your beloved Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
, and the love I have for the Companions, the Successors and the
righteous on account of You, I offer this act of love as mediation to
You and request You to grant my such and such need for their sake. The
servant’s love for Allah’s favoured ones is an act that enjoys Allah’s
blessings and this very act becomes a source of intermediation for the
servant.

### 3. Love for Allah’s lovers is the cause of divine love

###

The servant, following the divine commands, performs all kinds of
worship: he offers prayer, keeps fast, performs hajj and pays zakat. In
short, he fulfils all his obligations. These acts have a twofold
significance. On the one hand, he is implementing the divine commands;
on the other hand, he earns the reward for these acts. The range and
scope of these rewards include a place in Paradise for him. But the
highest and the most cherished prize is the pleasure of Allah. To secure
this prize, he spends every moment of his life in doing things which
please Allah. And he does not restrict his remembrance of Allah only to
a specific schedule or timetable but it straddles his entire life. No
matter where he is, or what he is doing, he never forgets the Lord. The
focus of his love or enmity is Allah Alone. The following tradition is
about such lovers of Allah:

It is narrated by Mu‘ādh bin Jabal that he heard the Messenger of
Allah*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* saying:

*Allah the Exalted and Almighty said: My love has been made obligatory
for those two persons who love each other on My count and spend time
together for My sake, and see each other for My sake and give money to
each other generously for My sake.[15]*

Allah states in this tradition: those of My servants who love one
another on My count, and also love those who love one another for My
sake, then My love for them becomes mandatory and obligatory. I own them
as my beloveds. Their object is not any ulterior gain. They spend time
together in search of My pleasure. They spend money because they want
only to please Me and not to display their riches and they call on each
other, not out of any personal or selfish motive, but only out of their
love for Me. Such are the people who deserve My love and uncounted
blessings. Now a petitioner

loves the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* , members of
the Prophet’s family, the Companions, the saints and the righteous
people simply because the basis of his love is the love of Allah. By
loving these people, he himself in return is loved by Allah. Thus all
these forms are various links in the chain of love which is ultimately
the love of Allah, and these expressions and acts of love eventually
draw him closer to Allah and he acquires a favoured status. Thus the
petitioner’s act of love is regarded by Allah as a virtuous as well as a
favourite act and it is graded higher than the other virtuous acts
mainly because in this act the Lord Himself is one of the participants
and it is uncertain whether the other acts will find divine acceptance
or not. But love of the saints and the favourites of Allah is an act
which transforms the petitioner into Allah’s beloved. In this way its
acceptance is guaranteed.

### 4. Love for the sake of Allah results in higher grades

###

Love of the servants of Allah brings one not only nearer to Him but also
helps him in securing higher grades.

It is narrated by ‘Umar bin al-Khattāb that the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him
and His Household)* said:

*Among Allah’s servants there are some who are neither prophets nor
martyrs but on the Day of Judgement the prophets and the martyrs will
envy their grades. The Companions asked: O Messenger of Allah, tell us,
who are those people? He replied: ‘those are the people who love one
another on Allah’s count. They are neither related to one another nor do
they have any property to exchange. I swear on Allah that they will have
faces of light, they will be on pulpits of light. They will not have any
fear when others will be afraid, they will not have any grief when
others will be aggrieved.’ Then he recited the verse: Beware! No doubt,
there is no fear for the friends of Allah nor shall they be sad and
sorrowful. [Qur’an (Yūnus) 10:62].[16]*

On the Day of Judgement when people will be scrambling selfishly for
personal safety and survival, everybody will be overawed by the
overwhelming presence of Allah, there will be a few people untouched by
this pushing, shoving and jostling. They will be content and an
unbelievable serenity will be visible on their faces. Everyone will envy
their unruffled calmness; even the prophets and the saints will be
deeply impressed by the halo of tranquillity hovering around their
faces. Their highly-graded position will be a feast for every eye. The
Companions asked in amazement: O Messenger of Allah, who are these
people? The Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* replied:
these are the people who love one another and the basis of their mutual
love is neither blood relationship nor abundance of wealth, they love
one another only for the sake of Allah. Thus the basis of their love is
in fact their shared love of Allah. Their rewards and grades derive
directly from this source. On this day their faces will emit rays of
light and they will be seated on pulpits of light.

The tradition has clearly established the fact that people who love one
another simply because they love Allah deserve high rewards and grades
on the Day of Judgement and they will receive these precious gifts
through the mediation of Allah’s favourites because their love of these
intimate friends

is based fundamentally on their love of Allah from which basic source it
draws its strength and influence.

### 5. Love of Allah’s friends is the cause of Allah’s love

###

Love of holy men and saints is an act which earns the servant not only
the love of Allah but also draws him closer to Him.

It is reported by Abū Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allah*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* said:

*If two persons love each other on Allah’s count, and if one of them is
in the east and the other in the west, Allah will bring them together on
the Day of Resurrection and He will say: This is the man you loved on my
count.[17]*

It is now established that intermediation through the prophets, the holy
persons and the saints is quite valid whether it is by invoking their
name in prayer, or by physical presence in their companionship or
through expressions of love for them. This act of intermediation is
correct and legally permissible. A detailed discussion on this issue
will be found in the sixth chapter. For the time being, in the light of
Qur’anic injunctions and relevant traditions, it should be kept in mind
that intermediation through the servants of Allah, who are His
favourites and who are the righteous, is quite valid and is compatible
with Islamic teachings. The doubts and objections expressed against this
form of intermediation are baseless and grounded in prejudice. People
who oppose intermediation through Allah’s favourites and holy men need
to revamp the very basis of their faith. I have made it clear that we
rely on holy persons as sources of intermediation on account of our love
for them and loving a holy person is in itself a virtuous act.
Therefore, intermediation through these holy men is in fact
intermediation through virtuous deeds and this kind of intermediation
based on righteous deeds is universally permissible in Islam.


