CHAPTER FOUR: The Doctrine of Tawassul (In the Light of Sacred Traditions)
==========================================================================

Purging disbelief in Muhammad's followers
-----------------------------------------

Allah has conferred infinite blessings on the followers of the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . One of these blessings is
their impossibility to return to disbelief after embracing Islam. It
happened in the past that the followers of a particular prophet returned
to their earlier state of ignorance and disbelief after his death. But
this shall not happen to the followers of the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up
Him and His Household)* . The Prophet of Allah*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* in the last days of his earthly sojourn had himself declared
that he had no fears that his followers will relapse into disbelief
after his death. As Muslims, we should reflect on his words. The
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* who was sent to this world
to quash disbelief and all forms of impermissible innovation, who is our
primary source of guidance and who is our ultimate means of salvation,
is saying that he has no doubts lurking in his mind about their steady
and irreversible belief, while we are hurling allegations of disbelief
at one another to cater to our false sense of superiority or to pamper
our egotism based on prejudice and sheer stubbornness. What could be
more unfortunate than this mutual incrimination?

It is narrated in a tradition:

*‘Uqbah bin ‘Āmir has narrated: The Prophet (Peac Be Up Him and His
Household) one day went to (Uhud) and offered prayer for the natives
(martyrs) of Uhud as it is (generally) offered for the dead. Then he
returned to the pulpit and said: I am your forerunner and I am a witness
on you. By Allah! I am right now seeing the basin of my fountain
(kawthar), and I have been handed over the keys of the treasures of the
earth (or the keys of the earth). I swear on Allah, I have no fears that
after me you will return to disbelief but I am apprehensive that you
will try to outdo each other in acquiring worldly goods.* [1]

This is a statement made by the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* himself. He has sworn on Allah about his followers that they
will not revert to disbelief. The Prophet’s words call for deep
reflection and serious soul-searching. We brush aside the Prophet’s
statement when we accuse one another of disbelief. This tradition has
been reproduced by Imam Muslim[2]and Imam Ahmad bin Hambal [3]. Repeated
references to this tradition by people of such calibre and prestige, and
our dogged defiance of its contents are nothing but harrowing
unawareness of the real spirit of our faith.

Intermediation, which has been established as a valid act in Islam by
countless Qur’ānic injunctions and authentic and certified traditions
and which has been practised by the large majority of Muslims, is now
turned into a matter of dispute and controversy, and is now being used
as a convenient ploy to not only indulge in incriminating one another in
disbelief but also to give vent to our personal frustrations. If we care
to reflect on his words and statements, we will come to realize that to
insist on the illegality of intermediation, either as a doctrine or in
some of its actual applications,

especially when its legality has been conclusively established both by
the Qur’ān and the hadith, is nothing but religious perversity. Tens of
statements made by the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
are witness to the fact that to rely on valid forms of intermediation in
order to come closer to Allah is quite consistent with Qur’ānic commands
and the Prophet’s statements.

As it is reported by ‘Amr bin Shu‘ayb that his grandfather says: we were
present in the company of the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* when messengers from Hawāzin tribe came and said: O
Muhammad! We belong to the same origin and tribe, and the trouble we are
facing is not hidden from you, therefore, have mercy on us. The holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* replied: opt one of the two
choices; either take away your property and wealth or have your women
freed. They opted for their women and children. Then the Messenger of
Allah*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* added: as far as my share and
the share of ‘Abd-ul-Muttalib and his children (in the spoils) is
concerned, I have already given it to you. But when I have performed the
noon prayer, you should all stand up and say:

*Through the means of the Messenger of Allah*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* we seek help for our women and children from believers (or
Muslims).[4]*

The narrator says that when people had finished their prayer, they
repeated the same words as the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* had advised them. Now these words were uttered by the sacred
tongue of the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* himself
and he uttered them in the form of a command. Therefore, this tradition
furnishes a cogent justification for the act of intermediation.

In the following pages I will draw upon some of the statements made by
the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* , which clearly
prove that intermediation is neither a form of disbelief nor a forbidden
act. On the contrary, it is quite valid and one of the permissible ways
to seek the nearness of Allah.

Section One : Intermediation through good deeds
-----------------------------------------------

Good deeds are called virtues. To pray through the means of these deeds,
“O Allah, through my particular act which I performed purely for Your
pleasure, I beseech You that my need be fulfilled,” is quite valid. A
few statements that support the act of intermediation are given below:

### 1. Deliverance from trouble through mediation

###

A tradition recorded in as-Sahīhayn[5] furnishes clear evidence of the
use of intermediation through virtuous deeds which delivers individuals
from tension and anxiety or from an actual calamity. ‘Abdullāh bin ‘Umar
cites the Messenger of Allah*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* to have
said:

Once upon a time three travellers were passing through a jungle. All of
a sudden the sky was overcast with jet-black clouds. They were thinking
of seeking shelter that it began to rain in buckets. They had no other
choice but to take shelter in a cave. So they scraped into the cave. The
entrance of the cave was quite small. Suddenly a heavy stone came
sliding down and

covered the entrance. They were trapped inside the cave. They could not
move the stone even with their collective might. Therefore, they lost
all hope of survival. They felt that the cave would prove to be their
grave.

The three of them were religious persons and had an optimistic outlook
on life. They had complete faith in the glory and grandeur of God, so
the spell of hopelessness did not last long. They chuckled to themselves
as they thought of a plan. The clouds of frustration rolled away. Since
the plan derived from their strong religious conviction, they readily
decided to implement it. They said to one another: there is only one-way
to escape the present crunch. We should offer to Allah as a form of
intermediation the acts we have performed for His exclusive pleasure and
implore Him through their blessings. They said:

*Remember the deeds you performed purely for (the pleasure of) Allah,
then pray through them to Allah. He may open it (and deliver you from
this calamity).*

Since the plan was sound and suited the occasion, they all expressed
willingness to put it into action. Each one of them offered his virtuous
acts turn by turn and using it as a form of mediation, prayed to Allah
to deliver them from their misery.

#### The virtuous act of the first man—Service of parents

####

One of them related his virtuous act in this way: O Lord, my parents
were very old and weak. I considered it my duty to serve them sincerely.
I worked hard the whole day. When I returned home, first of all I milked
the cow and served the milk to my mother and father. Then I attended to
my wife and children and other people. This was my daily routine. One
day I was delayed and arrived home late. My mother and father had waited
themselves to sleep. However, I milked the cow, poured the milk into a
cup and stood by their bedside. I did not like to disturb them in their
sleep as I respected them too much; at the same time I could not bear to
feed my children before feeding them (my parents) first. Thus I stood
there, holding the cup in my hand that I will make them drink it as soon
as they woke up. My wee little children kept crying and sobbing bitterly
but I ignored it and did not like to break my principle, and in this
very state of tension, the night lapsed into day.

*(O Allah,) You know it. If I had done this deed purely for Your
pleasure, then remove the stone from the entrance so that we can see the
sky.*

As soon as he ended his prayer, the stone slid a little on one side and
the sky appeared, but the gap was not wide enough to let a man pass
through.

#### The virtuous act of the second man—Self-purity

####

The second person narrates his act in these words: I was emotionally
attached with my first cousin but that pure and innocent girl was
completely unaware of my feelings. She snubbed me once when I tried to
convey to her my emotional plight and after that I never dared do so.

Then once there was a severe drought. The shadows of poverty and hunger
began to hover around her. Driven by starvation, that innocent girl came
over to me and sought my help. I decided to take undue advantage of

her helplessness; I seduced her as she was in a vulnerable condition. I
piled up a big sum of 100 dinars in front of her and she half-willingly
agreed to cater to my emotions. When I tried to give it a practical
shape, tears welled up in her eyes. She became restless with shock and
said: don’t be cruel and don’t take undue advantage of my helplessness.
Fear Allah and don’t make this immoral move. On hearing her words, my
hair stood on their ends and, on account of fear of the Lord, the organs
of my body began to tremble. My evil intentions were buried and the
human being sleeping inside me became awake. I left her there and did
not pick up the money either.

*O Allah, if, in Your knowledge, I did so only to seek Your pleasure and
if You like my act, then You should open our way (so that we can look at
the world outside).*

As he ended the prayer, the stone slid a little farther but the gap was
still not wide enough for them to come out.

#### The virtuous act of the third man—To return to the deserving what belongs to him

####

The third man offers his good deed as his mediation in this way: O Lord,
once I had employed a few labourers. I paid their wages as soon as they
completed their work. But one of the labourers, for no apparent reason,
did not take his wages and went away. His wage was a measure of rice. I
planted the rice and when the paddy was blooming, I sold it and bought a
goat with the money I made out of the bargain. Through Your blessing,
more goats were born out of her. Then I bought a cow and through Your
blessing the number of cows multiplied. Thus with the help of a
labourer’s wages, there were so many cattle that the valley was filled
with them and I had to keep a shepherd to look after those animals. One
day the same labourer returned and said to me:

*“Fear Allah, don’t be cruel and pay me my wages.” Then I said (to him),
“Go and take those cows and their shepherd.”*

He said, “Fear Allah and do not ridicule me.” I told him everything with
a grim face and he went away with all the goods.

*(O Lord,) if I did all this for Your pleasure alone, then, through its
blessing, deliver us from this trouble and remove the remaining part (of
the stone from the entrance of the cave so that we could come out of
it).*

As soon as their prayer ended, Allah granted it unhesitatingly, and
their virtuous acts changed their dark night of disappointment into a
bright day of hope. Through them, they received a new lease of life.
Since the basis of their good deeds was the pleasure of Allah, He
granted their prayer and the stone at the entrance of the cave skidded
aside and all three of them slipped out of it easily and comfortably and
went on their way.[6]

### 2. Prayer as mediation

###

Five-time prayer is mandatory for every Muslim. It is a pious act
through which the servant practically demonstrates his servitude to
Allah in a state of prostration. Since Allah likes humility in his
servants, prayer is a form of worship, which represents the climax of
humility. That is why Allah loves the act of prayer very much. Allah
condones the lapses of His servants through the means and blessing of
prayer.

It is narrated by Abū Hurayrah that the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* said:

*Tell me if someone among you has a canal at his doorstep, and he has a
bath in it five times a day, will any speck of dirt remain on his body?
The audience replied: No dirt will remain on his body. He said: The same
applies to five prayers. God erases sins through their (blessings and
means).[7]*

Here five prayers are acting as a form of mediation. Through them, man
achieves his salvation:

### 3. Nearness of Allah through voluntary prayer

###

The purpose of a true believer is to seek access to the nearness and
pleasure of his real Lord and Master, and the servant gains the nearness
as well as the pleasure of his Lord through optional prayers (nawāfil).
It means the servant attains the nearness of the Lord through the
mediation of optional cycles of prayer.

It is attributed to Abū Hurayrah that Allah says in a divine hadith:

*And My servant keeps coming closer to Me through his voluntary acts of
prayer until I love him. So when I love him: I become his sense of
hearing with which he hears and I become his sense of sight with which
he sees and I become his hand with which he holds and I become his leg
with which he walks.[8]*

### 4. Deliverance from the hellfire through better upbringing of daughters

###

During the era of ignorance, people generally disfavoured their
daughters. At the birth of a daughter, they felt extremely worried. The
Qur’ān has very clearly depicted their typical attitude: whenever
someone is given the glad tidings of the birth of a daughter, his face
becomes black with anger.[9] This is how the non-believers expressed
their disapproval on the birth of their daughters. But Islam placed the
fair sex on such a pedestal as is simply inconceivable in any other
social system. Mother, sister, daughter and wife, all are sacred
relations. Islam not only sanctified these bonds but also spelled out an
unmistakable reward for all those who practically realize the value and
sanctity of these relations, that is, who protect them and bring them up
decently. We realize from a number of statements made by the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* , that proper upbringing and
education of the daughters is such a virtuous act that it serves as a
form of mediation for the parents and delivers them from the fire of
Hell. It is narrated by ‘Ā’ishah:

*A woman came to see me (and) she had two daughters with her. She had
come to beg something from me but she found nothing with me except a
date. I gave the same to her. She divided the date between her two
daughters. Then she stood up and left. (After this,) the Holy Prophet
came over. I related to him the whole story. Then he said: Whoso was
tested through the daughters and he treated them well, then this will
turn for him into a veil against Hell.[10]*

### 5. Deliverance from punishment through the mediation of the penitent

###

To worship Allah, to love one another for the sake of Allah, and
remember Him while others are sleeping, are such virtuous acts, which
are

highly favoured by Allah. Those who are penitent and ask for His
forgiveness in the silence of the nights are His favourites and through
the blessing of their mediation, He delivers other creatures from
punishment though otherwise they might have ended up in Hell.

It is attributed to Anas bin Mālik that once the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be
Up Him and His Household)* said:

*Verily, Allah the Glorious says, “Surely I want to punish the residents
of the earth but when I look at the people who populate My places of
worship, who love one another for My sake and who ask for forgiveness in
the later part of the night, then I turn (My wrath) away from them.[11]*

Section Two: Mediation in supplication
--------------------------------------

### 1. Intermediation through Allah’s names and attributes

###

Just as the acts of a petitioner serve as a form of mediation for the
redress of his ills and problems, similarly a reference to Allah’s
various names becomes a means for the acceptance of his supplication.
The theme of the initial verses of surah al-Fātihah, for instance, is
focused on the praise and glorification of the Lord:

*All praise is for Allah Who is the Lord of all the worlds, (and) is
infinitely Kind and Merciful, (and) is the Master of the Day of
Judgement.[12]*

After enumerating the praises of Allah, the petitioner places before Him
his request:

*(O Allah,) we worship only You and we seek only Your help.[13]*

This is the relationship of service, the bond of servitude. The servant
affirms not only his own low status, but also the highest status of
Allah Who is Unique and Unrivalled, and in his prayer based on humility
and self-negation, he seeks His help.

Here the question arises why worship has been given precedence over
help? An act of worship can be performed only with Allah’s blessing.
Without His help, it remains unrealised. Therefore, the order of
priority should have been reversed. First of all, Allah’s help should
have been sought and then with His help the servant should have engaged
himself in worship, so the request for help should have preceded the
request for worship. But Allah’s commands have logic of their own and
this is inherently built in the divine statements. Sometimes they appear
to defy human expectation, which is invariably superficial and scratches
only surfaces. But the divine logic is deep, and in order to realize its
depth, one has to shed this casual sense of expectation. This is in fact
the privilege of those human beings who are deeply impressed by divine
logic and who staunchly believe that all divine utterances are logically
justified as they appeal to our deeper sense of wisdom. Thus the answer
to this question has been furnished by Imam Baydāwī while interpreting
the verse. He says that the act of worship precedes the act of help to
facilitate the acceptance of prayer. This also shows Allah’s concern for
His creatures; it is, in addition, the expression of His pervasive and
extensive sympathy for His servants that He Himself is showing them the
light to make their prayers effective:

*And worship has been given precedence over the request for help so that
a sense of compatibility is created between the last letters of the
verses.*

*Besides, it also suggests that the means (of worship) is given
precedence over the request (for help) so that it may be granted.[14]*

Then the prayer is followed by another request:

*Show us the right path.[15]*

The servant, through his mediation as a servant of Allah, implores Him
for guidance. Thus a reference to Allah’s names, to the words that
describe his own status as His servant, and to his request for guidance,
serve as a source of intermediation for the acceptance of his prayer.
The servant, by referring to the names of Allah and by lowering his own
status to the trough of the wave and confessing his own faults and
weakness, prays to Allah and this prayer acts as a form of mediation for
the immediate fulfilment of his need or the elimination of his problem.

### 2. Prayer through the mediation of Allah’s Personal names

###

Sometimes we use the personal names of Allah as a kind of mediation to
process our petition and to ensure its effectiveness. This form of
intermediation has been validated by the Prophet’s own practice and it
is supported, inter alia, by a tradition reported by Ibn Mājah. The Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* said:

*O my Lord: I beg from You through the means of Your being Allah.[16]*

### 3. Prayer through the mediation of divine acts and attributes

###

Sometimes an act or attribute of Allah is invoked in the prayer as a
form of mediation, as it is endorsed by a tradition of the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . This prayer is attributed
to him:

*O Allah! I seek refuge in Your pleasure against Your wrath, and in Your
exemption against Your punishment.[17]*

These traditions clearly establish the fact that it is quite valid to
beg Allah’s protection and help for the fulfilment of one’s needs
through the mediation of His Acts and Attributes.

### 4. Intermediation through the Prophet’s high station

###

The prayer for the Prophet’s appointment to his high station and to use
it as mediation earns one not only Allah’s blessings but also guarantees
the Prophet’s intercession for him on the Day of Judgement. The Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* said:

*When you hear a mu’adhdhin calling out for prayer, you should also say
what he says, then send blessings on me. Surely, whoso sends blessings
on me (once), Allah sends His mercy on him ten times. Then ask Allah for
the wasīlah to be granted to me. It is a position in Paradise which is
reserved for His special servant and I’m hopeful that I’m that special
servant. So anyone who asks (Allah) the wasīlah for me, my intercession
for him will be obligatory (on the Day of Judgement).[18]*

If someone sends salutations on the holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* once, he is rewarded with Allah’s mercy ten times. And
similarly if someone prays to Allah for appointing the Prophet*(Peac Be
Up Him and His Household)* to the promised high station in Paradise,
that person is entitled to his intercession on the Day of Judgement.

### 5. Sending blessings on the Prophet (SAW) as mediation for the acceptance of prayer

###

Sending blessings on the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* is highly cherished by Allah. The popularity and propriety
of this act can be gauged from the fact that even if the person who is
performing it happens to be a confirmed liar and a dyed-in-the-wool
sinner, his act is not rejected. When he sends salutations on the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* , it is not only appreciated
by Allah but is also given proper recognition.

One may ask what is the justification for accepting salutations on the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* from a person who is
generally known as a blackguard and a sinner. The answer is that this
act carries a variety of meanings, some of which are given below.

For example, to send mercy, to confer nearness on someone, to mention
someone at a highly audible pitch of voice and to give blessing. Now if
we reflect on these meanings, we come to realize that none of these
blessings were denied to the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
; he already possessed all of them. Allah’s blessings are being showered
on him all the time and it is a continuous act. These blessings were
showered on him at the beginning of time and will continue to visit him
till the end of time, and there is no possibility whatsoever of the
termination of this process. As far as nearness is concerned, the night
of ascension is the most authentic witness to this phenomenon when all
the distances between Allah and His beloved evaporated into thin air:

*So when the distance between them was of two bow-lengths or even less
than that.[19]*

When this is the state of union during a single night, who could compute
the grades of nearness which are being conferred on him without break or
interruption. The height and glory of his stature is also unmatched. So
the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* already embodies the
entire spectrum of meanings associated with sending blessings on him.
Therefore, when man sends his blessings on the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him
and His Household)* , he is in fact saying: O Allah, send blessings on
Your beloved. Allah says: O my servant, I am already sending blessings
on him, conferring My mercy on him, glorifying him and drawing
continuously closer to him. You need not stress it, it is already in
process. Since you have not asked anything for yourself, you have not
prayed for wealth and children, you have not prayed for recuperation
from illness, and there is no personal motive behind your prayer but you
have only expressed blessings for My beloved and implored Me to send
these blessings on him, so I grant your prayer.

Since the process is going on even before the prayer, therefore, even if
the person who is sending blessings on him happens to be a sinner, his
prayer is accepted. This is the reason that this act is absolutely
acceptable and, therefore, totally immune to any form of rejection or
disinclination.

#### How to turn presumptuous worship into absolutely acceptable worship

####

All forms of worship are tentatively acceptable as they are based on the
presumption that they will be accepted by Allah. Since an act of worship
involves rigorous preparation and conformity to a set of conditions and
prerequisites for which he has to spare time and sacrifice his personal
comforts, therefore, it is his natural wish that his worship should be
accepted and his labour should not go waste but Allah has His own way.
It is stated:

*To Him ascend pure words and He exalts righteous deed.[20]*

Therefore, driven by his physical nature, man explores excuses and
pretexts which may elevate his deeds to the level of divine
acceptability and they may be acknowledged by Allah in spite of his
weakness, flaws and lapses. Divine mercy has not left his natural desire
in the lurch but, as an expression of His infinite mercy, He Himself has
shown him the way that can transform his tentative acts of worship into
an absolutely acceptable reality. And the way is that at the start and
conclusion of each act, he should send blessings on the Holy
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* . Since this act is
absolutely acceptable, therefore, whenever it is submitted to Allah, it
will surely be acknowledged by Him, and it is beyond divine mercy that
it should accept his blessings on the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* and reject his acts that lie between the two salutations.
Therefore, the most effective way to make one’s acts absolutely
acceptable is to start and conclude them by sending blessings on the
Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* .

#### Sending blessings on the holy Prophet (SAW) as the last act in the universe

####

Almighty Allah says in the Holy Qur’ān:

*All that is on earth will pass away, and there will abide forever the
Person of Your Lord, Master of glory and honour.[21]*

*Every soul shall taste of death.[22]*

When everything is reduced to extinction, only the Person of the Lord
shall remain and there will be no one to praise and glorify Him, but the
act of sending blessings on the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* will continue uninterruptedly as it is endorsed by Allah
Himself:

*Surely Allah and His angels invoke blessings on the Holy Prophet (and
they will continue to do so).[23]*

Each living being has to die. Each creature in this universe has to
taste death. Allah Alone is eternally Existent. Since invoking blessings
on the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* is also a divine
act, and since Allah is immune to extinction, His Act also is eternally
surviving. That is why the word yusallūna has been used by the Qur’ān
which includes both the present and the future and, therefore, is
translated as “eternal”. The present never ends and each existing moment
is the present and each moment that is to come is the future. Thus
Allah’s invocation of blessings on the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* is a continuous act and will continue forever. It has
never been interrupted in the past nor will it be interrupted in the
future. Therefore, it is conclusively established

by the Qur’ān that sending blessings on the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him
and His Household)* is the last act in the universe and only this act
has permanence on account of its divine orientation. And when we adopt
it as a form of intermediation, our prayer will surely be granted.

### 6. The Prophet’s supplication through the mediation of his own person and other prophets

###

According to an authentic tradition the Holy Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and
His Household)* himself prayed through the mediation of other prophets
as well as of his own person. Following are the words of the tradition:

*It is narrated by Anas bin Mālik. He said: When the mother of ‘Alī bin
Abū Tālib — Fātimah bint Asad bin Hāshim — died, Allah’s Messenger*(Peac
Be Up Him and His Household)* called on her and sat down by the head of
the bed and said, “O dear mother, may Allah have mercy on you. After my
mother, you were the one I regarded as my mother. When I was hungry you
fed me to the point of saturation while you yourself remained hungry.
Then you helped me put on clothes and instead of eating yourself, you
gave me nice things to eat. You did all this for Allah’s pleasure and
for a good reward in the Hereafter.” Then he (the Prophet) commanded to
bathe her three times. When camphor water was brought, Allah’s
Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* poured some water into his
hands. Then Allah’s Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* took
off his shirt and clothed her with it and used his own sheet of cloth as
her coffin. Then Allah’s Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)*
sent for Usāmah bin Zayd, Abū Ayyūb al-Ansārī and ‘Umar bin al-Khattāb
and the negro slave to dig up the grave. So they dug her grave. When
they reached near the lahd, Allah’s Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* dug it up and drew the soil out with his own hands. When he
finished, Allah’s Messenger*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* entered
and lay down in (the grave), and said, “It is Allah Who controls life
and death, and He is Ever living and will never die. (O Allah,) forgive
my mother—Fātimah bint Asad— and help her answer properly at the time of
questioning and through the mediation of Your Prophet (Muhammad) and the
former prophets, make her grave capacious. Surely You are infinitely
Merciful.” Then he repeated, “God is Great” four times (i.e. led the
funeral prayer). Then he, ‘Abbās and Abū Bakr as-Siddīq lowered her into
the grave.[24]*

### 7. Intermediation through the supplicant

###

Abū Sa‘īd Khudrī has narrated:

*The Messenger of Allah (Peac Be Up Him and His Household) said: A
person who comes out of his house with the intention of prayer and
prays, “O Allah, I beseech You through the mediation of those who always
crave Your (mercy) and I beg You through the mediation of my these steps
(moving towards prayer). Surely I am heading neither towards any evil,
nor out of pride or arrogance, nor out of a sense of self-display, nor
for the sake of any world reputation. I have come out of my house to
escape Your displeasure and to earn Your pleasure. So I beg You to save
me from the fire of Hell and forgive my sins. Surely, You are the Only
One Who forgives sins.” Then Allah turns towards him and seventy
thousand angels ask for his forgiveness.* [25]

The chain of the tradition is consistent with the requirements of hasan
hadith (fair tradition), and five different huffāz[26]of hadith graded
it hasan. They are:

Hāfiz Dimyātī in al-Mutajarr-ur-rābih fī thawāb al-‘amal-is-sālih.

Hāfiz Mundhirī in at-Targhīb wat-tarhīb.

Hāfiz Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalānī in ‘Amāl-ul-adhkār.

Hāfiz ‘Irāqī in the Takhrīj ahādīth al-Ihyā’.

Hāfiz Būsīrī in Misbāh-uz-zujājah.

Ibn Khuzaymah graded it sahīh (sound) in his as-Sahīh through Fudayl bin
Marzūq.[27]

### 8. Intermediation through the weak

###

In addition to the righteous, intermediation through the travellers, the
sick and those on whom Allah has shown His mercy or about whom He has
said that He is with them, that He helps them and He blesses them with
His mercy, is quite consistent with the various statements made by the
Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His Household)* himself.

Abū Sa‘īd Khudrī relates that the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* said:

*Surely, only because of the supplication of the weak and their prayer
and their sincerity, Allah helps this nation (Ummah).[28]*

Abū ad-Dardā’ has related that the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* said:

*Look for me among the weak. Surely, it is on account of the weak that
you are blessed with (Allah’s) bounty and helped.[29]*

It means that, through the mediation of the weak and the poor, Allah not
only blesses a Muslim nation with His help and assistance, but also with
resources and wealth. Therefore, any prayer mediated through them is
also graced with acceptance by Allah.

### 9. Intermediation through the supplication of the prophets

###

Sa‘d bin Abī Waqās relates that the Prophet*(Peac Be Up Him and His
Household)* said:

*Dhun-Nūn (the Man in Fish, i.e. the prophet Yūnus) prayed in the belly
of the fish, “(O Allah,) there is no deity except You. Glory be to You!
Surely I was from those who wronged (their souls).” So any Muslim person
who uses these words in his prayer for a (fair) purpose, finds a
favourable response from Allah.[30]*

A prophet is far more deeply and sensitively aware of the subtleties and
nuances involved in his relationship with Allah than His saints and
favourites, and as we descend down the sliding scale of divine
preferences, this awareness decreases in direct proportion to the grades
of the people who are seeking Allah’s nearness and recognition. The
divine hierarchy is based on these grades and the distinctions between
these grades are meticulously drawn and followed.

Therefore, when a prophet of Allah, with his complete and unflawed
awareness and understanding of divine pleasure and displeasure and in a

posture of self-effacing courtesy and humility, prays to Allah, He
graces each word uttered by him with recognition and fulfilment. And, if
the prayer of a petitioner is processed through the prayer of the
prophets, then it is not rejected as it is supported by the guarantee of
a prophet’s articulation; on the contrary, it finds immediate fulfilment
and the prayee is relieved of his sense of anxiety and tension.

This phenomenon draws a clear distinction between two kinds of prayer:
unmediated prayer and mediated prayer. In the case of unmediated prayer,
the petitioner is like a lone ranger, he relies on his personal
relationship with Allah, which is in itself invaluable because any
creature can establish a hotline with Allah. But there is no divine
guarantee for its acceptance, which may relate to his weak faith, lack
of concentration or a number of other factors. But in the case of
mediated prayer, there is a divine guarantee and it is the nature of
divinity that its guarantee never fluctuates as it is immune to all
glitches and other human uncertainties. Allah loves His favourites and
His love increases in direct proportion to the graded distinction of His
favourites. Prophets are the most favoured ones, therefore, any prayee
that uses their prayer as a form of mediation is blessed with immediate
acceptance.


