Introduction:
=============

When we mention psychology today, the first thing that comes to the mind
of a great deal of Muslims, particularly those who are not specialized
in the field, is 'Freud'; from then on a succession of ideas leads to
the fact that this 'Freud' was born a Jew, and is furthermore, an
atheist who wrote books against religion. As for sociology, when it is
mentioned, it is instantly associated with Durkheim and Marx, and the
fact that they were also Jewish, atheist, and against religion, is also
recollected.

This kind of relationship between certain branches of the social
sciences and religion, which is so palpably engraved in the minds of our
intellectuals and Muslim thinkers, explains the reason why some of these
thinkers, and some of the Muslim scholars ( *ulema* ) have taken a
negative stand, if not an opposing one, vis-a-vis the social sciences;
especially towards psychology and sociology. Undeniably, quite a number
of psychologists and sociologists are in fact atheists, and have indeed
made religion the object of their criticism, disrespect, and have
assigned themselves the task of refuting all that appertains to
religion, whether it be institutions or thought. Whereas some have
extended their negative position towards religion, and have disputed its
origin, function and the role it plays in society altogether. We will
exhibit some of these views in the forthcoming pages

However much this may be true, we should not brand all psychologists,
sociologists and social scientists as being atheistic, irreligious and
determined to fight religion; neither should this state of affairs, in
my opinion, allow us to not  distinguish between the social sciences on
the one hand, with the subject matters and methodologies pertaining to
them; and the thinkers on the other hand, as people with their own
tendencies, beliefs, ideologies, and even desires and caprices. So, the
aim of this study is confined to the nature of the relationship between
the social sciences and religion, within the framework of Islamic
thought, and also in Western thought. It takes into account the
intellectual changes that have taken place in the West and in the Muslim
world throughout the course of history, especially in those aspects
related to the progress of the sciences, and their subsequent attempts
at separating themselves from philosophy and religion. It also looks at
the intellectual changes that began in the nineteenth century and
reached their peak in the twentieth. During this process we will look
closely at the high status enjoyed by the social sciences, and the role
they have played in society, especially in the West.

To delineate the core of this relationship (i.e.. between the social
sciences and religion) I envisage the following questions to be relevant
to our topic:

1) What relationship is there between the social sciences and philosophy
in the context of Islamic civilization?

2) What relationship is there between the social sciences and the
Islamic  sciences?

3) What type of relationships do the social sciences and religion enjoy
in the context of Western thought?

4) What relationship is there between the social sciences and values in
general?

5) What is the future of the relationship between the social sciences
and religion overall?

I would like to quickly draw your attention to the fact that the answers
to these questions require long discussions and exhaustive research. My
aim is only to raise these issues to be debated amongst the specialists,
in the hope that Muslim scholars specializing in the field of social
sciences would, on the one hand, provide us with ways to get out of the
Lizard's hole; and on the other would keep us from erring into
nonsensical myth, delusion and obscure Sufi 'theopathetic locutions' and
babble talk; all of which do not provide Muslims with the framework with
which to surmount long centuries of underdevelopment.

This brief study is, actually, an introduction to auto-criticism of
academic theses that are brought forward today by Muslim scholars and
specialists in social sciences. This criticism is not aiming to
underestimate these efforts, nor is it aiming to refute them. On the
contrary, these steps are taken in an endeavor to try to urge those
endowed with enthusiasm to increase their efforts towards producing more
scientific and practical alternatives, to enable us to diagnose our
shortcomings. Also for them to suggest ways of advancement to us, rather
than us being led  up the garden path and being presented with empty
slogans, which only cause us to stray further away from our final
aspirations and goals. Aspirations and goals can be shown to be within
arm's reach, when in fact what is really being shown is a mirage, and
only a mirage.

Before undertaking this task, I should emphasize that what is meant by
religion in this study is Islam, whenever we are discussing religion in
the context of Islamic thought; whereas in the context of Western
thought, it refers then to any belief system. Furthermore, the approach
of this study is not based upon unilateral visions and opinions, neither
is the bilateral approach applicable. What we have here is, in fact, an
attempt to examine the social sciences and their relationship with
religion, from various angles, through discussing views in relation to
Islamic thought and Western thought, using relevant examples.


