The nature of the relationship between the social sciences and philosophy.
==========================================================================

What is agreed between men of science, scholars and philosophers alike,
is that philosophy was the 'mother of science'. However, this belief
which prevails in Western culture does not have a place in an Islamic
setting. Thus, philosophy has never been regarded as the 'mother of
science' in the field of Islam. Here it is the judicio-religious
sciences based on the Qur'an and the example of the Prophet
(the*sunnah),* which are the supreme sciences, and the basis of all the
sciences.

Greek philosophy passed through many phases during the course of
history, i.e.. during the pre-Christian period, the post-Christian
period, the Islamic period, and finally its recent development during
the contemporary Western period. We will confine our attention to the
latter two phases. In the following paragraphs a brief account of the
position of philosophy and its relationship with the other sciences
during these two phases is given.

1) Philosophy's status within the Islamic civilisation framework.
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Philosophy or wisdom (*hikmah)* had not gained much importance in the
history of the Arabs prior to Islam. As a matter of fact, philosophy did
not occupy any scientific seat during the first chapter of Islamic
history, which covered the Prophetic period and the Caliphates of the
rightly guided Caliphs. This was simply because the Holy Qur'an and the
honorable*sunnah,* as origins of faith and jurisprudence, amply sufficed
the early Muslims to answer their questions related to the universe, its
Creator, life and death, the creation of man, and his nature and his
mission. However the rapidly spreading conquests, and extensions of the
boundaries of the Caliphate resulted in the Arab Muslims coming in
contact with a number of different cultures and philosophies, such as
the Greek, Persian, Indian, and Judeo-Christian philosophies and  other
religions and philosophical sects. It is against this background that
the science of scholastic theology (*kalam)* emerged during the Abbasid
period. Indeed, the Mutazilites came into existence in response to the
deviated streams and false trends that appeared as the Muslims came in
contact with the Magians of Persia and the Hindus. In order to defend
the Islamic beliefs (*aqida)* the Mutazilites resorted to Greek
philosophy, which was at the time gradually being translated into Arabic
(Kasim, 1969). Whilst there is no need to dwell upon the various schools
of*kalam* here, it is perhaps worth noting that their intellectual
exertions and struggles ended with the loss of the Mutazilites to the
Asharites, the victory of the  'People of the*sunnah'* (*Ahli
al-sunnah),* and the Jabarite (determinist) trend succeeding over the
supporters of the rationalist school and the school of free arbitration
(Kasim, 1969. Bintu Shati, 1983). This win has been one of the biggest
causes of the underdevelopment amongst the Muslims during the last few
centuries.

The nature of the struggle between the various schools was such that
the*ulema* , being so absorbed in the issue of*aqida* , did not show
enough interest in the psychological, sociological, economic and
political problems of the Muslim society. Instead, more often than not,
their intellectual exertions served as a disguise for a struggle for
power and a concealment of real social and economic issues. Kasim
(1969)  pointed to this fact when he said: "The Ummayad sided with the
Jabarites because their protagonist views suited, and endorsed the
ruling class against their opponents, explaining that the transition of
the Caliphate to them was only by  God's Destiny." (p.7)

Coincidentally, these were the same tactics followed by the French
colonialists in Algeria, as they too mobilized the Sheikhs of some Sufi
orders to spread the*Jabarite (determinism)* trend among the population,
to make them believe that the French colonization was a predestined that
could not be revoked, a*fait accompli!* Imam Abdul-Hamid ben Badis
fought with great courage and decisiveness against the defeatist
attitude which was predominant as a result of that campaign.

The position of philosophy in comparison to the other sciences remained
weak in the context of Islamic thought, until the time of*Maimonides*
who founded a library,*Dar-al Hikmah* , for the translation of the Greek
philosophical heritage, which, as it is known, was an ensemble of
philosophy, medicine and mathematics. There is no doubt that the logic
of Aristotle and his views on the soul, the physical world and
metaphysics, ran through the works of many Muslim philosophers, doctors
and mathematicians. However, despite the indisputable impact of
Aristotle, Plato and other Greek philosophers, we find that a number of
Muslim philosophers found the courage to be critical of these great
masters, and, being inspired by the Qur'an, the*sunnah,* and also by the
civilization progress, they added to their works concepts that could
never have occurred to the Greeks. Admittedly, it was the topics related
to metaphysics and the unseen that the Muslims were most fervent about;
but the topic of the soul (*al nafs* ) gradually gained momentum among
the philosophers and doctors, some of whom had different concepts of the
soul from Aristotle's. Thus, Al-Kindi, in opposition to Aristotle,
asserted that  the soul is an entity separate from the body  (Kasim,
p.15). Similarly, Al-Farabi whose opinion on the soul combines both the
views of Aristotle and Plato, as, in his eyes, the human being is made
up of two entities: the body and the soul. Al-Farabi however did not
agree with Plato's position regarding the transmigration of the souls
(ibid, p.16). Yet, despite these additions made by the Muslim
philosophers particularly by Razi and Ibn Al-Qiyam on the concepts of
the soul and the spirit, their addendum were not considered as topics
that stood apart from philosophy. The same happened to Muslim scholars
who wrote about ethics, for example Ibn-Miskawayah's in his*Tahdib Al -
Akhlaq wa Tatyib Al - A'raq,* and Ibn-Hazm in his*Mudawatu - nufus* ,
although the influence on these subjects derived more from the Qur'an
and the*sunnah,* than from Greek philosophy.

What I am trying to convey through this brief account of the status of
philosophy in the domain of Islamic thought, which started with
Al-Kindi, Al-Farabi and Ibn Sina, and ended with Al-Ghazzali, Ibn Tufayl
and Ibn Rushd, is the emphasis that was placed on science during this
period of Islamic civilization, which demarcated their place from those
established during the reign of Greek philosophy. At this time there
were also developments in the fields of mathematics, logic, natural
sciences, and theology by Muslim philosophers using as their main
sources the Qur'an and the prophetic traditions (Hadith). In addition to
the gains made from Greek and other philosophies, there appeared new
disciplines in the sciences of the Qur'an  and Hadith, and other
disciplines that developed from them, for example, the study of the
Arabic language and literature. While some philosophers like Al-Farabi
and Ibn Sina were trying to reconcile the views of Aristotle with the
Islamic*aqida* , others such as Al-Ghazzali accused this group of heresy
and disbelief. After refuting the science of*kalam* and philosophy, he
concluded that the Sufi path was the way to attain 'true knowledge'
(Kasim, 1969); whereas Ibn Rushd endeavored to reconcile philosophy with
religious law (*shari'a* ).

Whilst*ulema* like Ibn Taymiyyah, who concentrated on jurisprudence,
refuted Greek logic, he said: "I always knew that Greek logic is not
needed by an intelligent person and not beneficial to a stupid one."
(p.29)

Ibn Taymiyyah criticized the Greek philosophers by showing the
corruption of their ideas in metaphysics and logic, due to the
corruption of their principles, and their restricting the means to
achieve knowledge to definitions and 'syllogistic demonstrations'. He
goes even further and refutes their arguments about 'the definitions'
with which 'concepts' are known and also the various forms of
'syllogisms' and their components 'the invariables'. Ibn Taymiyyah also
criticized the use of Greek logic by Al-Ghazzali in such works
as*Al-Mustasfa* and*Mi'yar Al-ilm* and*Mihaku Nadhar* . Briefly, Ibn
Taymiyyah's refutation of Greek logic is specifically a refutation of
Greek "formal logic", due to its sterility, a view that has just
recently been agreed to by Western scholars, too.

When we look at Ibn Khaldun's work, we see that he reserved a whole
chapter of his*Al-Muqadima* to "the refutation of philosophy and the
corruption of its source." He highlighted the predicament in which
Aristotle, his disciple Plato and the Muslim philosophers who followed
them, fell into, especially those Muslim philosophers who shaped their
metaphysics obsequiously on Aristotle (excepting Al-Farabi and Ibn
Sina).  Ibn Khaldun dismissed the philosophers' contention glorifying
reason and rational thinking, summing up his views he said that
"Philosophy does not correspond with its aims, furthermore, it
contradicts Divine law."

Despite his harsh criticism, he does remain objective, and fair towards
philosophy by stating the positive aspects of this science such as:

- Nurturing mind,

- Training in organizing one's argumentation,

- Training in arriving to the point of an intellectual discussion, by
means of arguments and proofs (critical thinking).

In his final point, however, he advises the students of philosophy to
resort to the status of  "religious" law, and to adhere to Qur'anic
exegesis (*tafsir* ) and jurisprudence (*fiqh* ). If such was the
position of Ibn Taymiyyah and Ibn Khaldun vis-a-vis philosophy and Greek
logic, what place then did they, and other Muslim thinkers reserve for
sciences in their classifications of knowledge?

The classification of knowledge in Islamic thought.
---------------------------------------------------

After Ibn Khaldun insisted that sciences prosper when urbanization and
civilization develop, he produced a classification of knowledge
organizing the sciences of his time. According to his classification,
sciences form into two groups: one is natural, human beings attain it
through intellectual acquisition; the other is traditional, they inherit
it from revealed sources. The first one refers to philosophical sciences
and the second one refers to natural sciences transmitted through
revealed knowledge information. Following this overview, he delved into
the details of these sciences and organized them as follows:

1)Traditional religious sciences, which are divided into: exegesis,
Qur'anic recitation, science of the Hadith, science of the foundation of
the law (*usul al fiqh)* and he adds to them mysticism (*tasawwuf)* and
dream interpretation.

2)Kalam *,* which explains religious beliefs and defends them by means
of rational arguments.

3)Linguistics , the study of language, grammar, rhetoric, and
literature.

4)Rational sciences , which he classified as those sciences, known
(during his time) under the name of the 'philosophical sciences', into
four groups: logic, physics (to which is attached medicine and
agriculture), metaphysics, and mathematics (to which is attached
arithmetic, geometry, astronomy and music). To these groups Ibn Khaldun
added the science of magic and talismans, and the science of chemistry.
After he identified all of these sciences and exposed their benefits and
their harms, only then did he reserve a chapter to "The refutation of
philosophy and the corruption of its origin" as mentioned above.

What we observe regarding this classification is as follows:

1) Ibn Khaldun classified the various sciences of his time into two
distinct groups by virtue of the source (revealed and rational), by
virtue of the topic (law,*aqida* , language, logic, physics, astronomy,
geometry, music, agriculture etc.) and finally by virtue of their
methodology (based on revealed knowledge or reflection).

2) Despite Ibn Khaldun's distinction between the "revealed sciences" and
the "rational sciences", it is worth noting that he does not, however,
separate the natural sciences from philosophy and*hikmah* .

3) Ibn Khaldun invented a new science, with its own subject matter and

method (sociology), but he did not mention it in his classification.

There are, however, a great many Muslim thinkers who, in producing their
classifications of knowledge, have shown that the majority of
non-religious sciences and linguistics are intimately attached to
philosophy. When speaking of the classification of knowledge in the
field of Islamic thought, Al Najjar (1987) commented that the final
purpose of science was "to be a servant of religious truth, which is the
ultimate objective for the emergence of sciences and their progress."
This seemingly elegant expression leaves us, in actual fact, with a
number of unanswered problems that Al Najjar did not attend to.

1) He did not explain the concept of 'religious truth' in his paper.

2) He asserted that this 'truth' "is the ultimate objective for the
emergence of sciences and their progress." Which sciences are referred
to here? and have all sciences really progressed to the level of this
ultimate truth "the service of religious truth"?

After describing the classification of knowledge of numerous Muslim
thinkers such as Ibn Nadim, Ibn Hazm, Ibn Khaldun and Ahmed ibn
Mustapha; Al Najjar raises questions and levels a criticism at these
classifications and claims that in the main they were based on
descriptions of science as they "were in reality", and not as "they
really ought to be."

The crux of the problem here is Al Najjar's desire for pure rationality
which revolves around 'how things ought to be'. This is an instance of
philosophical and ethical reasoning, being to the detriment of attempts
to come to terms with reality, and trying to change it or reform it in
the light of "how things really are". In fact, this escapism from
reality and its portrayal in the above terms, as well as escapism  from
the study of  causal and correlational relationships among the different
phenomena, amounts, although indirectly, to a refutation of the
inductive experimental method which is founded upon investigation. The
renunciation of the experimental method, dwelling upon Greek logic or on
Sufi thought, limiting ourselves to interpretation of the sacred texts
(i.e.. the Qur'an and the*sunnah* ) are factors which have led to the
underdevelopment of the Muslim nations,  and is still draining their
mental energies.

These energies and efforts that often start with good intentions, end up
generating ethical and idealistic concepts that are far from the reality
of the Muslim society at large. They are also far from providing us with
practical means to escape this retrogressiveness, and tackle the issues
through a grasp of the psychological and sociological aspects of the
Muslims' condition as it is today.

Therefore, the majority of publications now tend to come under the
heading of "the way things ought to be", thereby ignoring reality.
However, it is impossible to alter behavioral and social phenomena to
"the way things ought to be", if these phenomena are not comprehended
"as they really are".

Perhaps, mentioning psychology as an example of a social science that
endeavors to study and describe "reality as it is", as much as possible,
may assist us in discerning the aims of philosophy and ethics from those
of social sciences when analyzing behavioral phenomena.

Some of the aims of psychology as mentioned by Zimbardo (1980) are as
follows:

1) To describe behavior, activities and experiments following gathering
the data and information related to the area which is under study.

2) To interpret given behavior within either a cultural framework or
model, or a particular theory.

3) To predict anticipated behavior based on prior information and data,
and then to understand the possible relationships between them to enable
conception of new relationships between certain variables.

4) To control behavior so that it becomes possible to monitor different
variables and also to change some types of "deviated" or abnormal
behaviors.

5) To ameliorate people's standard of living starting with an
improvement in the various sectors including: the health, education and
social sectors.

Thus, although psychology is a science that occupies itself with the
study and reporting of behavior 'as it is', it should not be labeled as
a science that cannot actually help in modifying behavior, and elevating
it to the level of 'the way things ought to be'. Altering and improving
behavior is precisely one of its aims and that is achieved by means of
training, education, learning and at times, treatment.

At this conjuncture I would like to indicate that one of the aims of
psychology from an Islamic viewpoint, may well be to fill the gap
between that which is 'ideal' and that which is 'real', primarily at the
conceptual level, and secondly at the behavioral level.

Before embarking on the topic of psychology in general, and psychology
from an Islamic perspective in particular, I wish to make reference to
the classification of the sciences by Ibn Khaldun and others. The topics
which form the social sciences at present, were not, in the estimation
of the early*ulema,*   topics which were distinguished from philosophy,
ethics, or religious sciences. On the contrary, we notice that  subjects
relevant to the social sciences were scattered either under the category
of*kalam,* as in the case of the concepts of freedom and responsibility;
or under the category of philosophy and ethics, as in the concept of the
soul, its potentialities, its actions, and the scope of its knowledge;
or in the case of  "illnesses of the heart", they were included under
the headings of ethics or*tasawwuf* .

Although this may have been the general trend, we know that tentatively
some topics began to enjoy increasing appeal to the point that they
appeared as categories of their own. This included tax and financing in
economy, and power, its delegation and execution in politics. Others
dealt with various psychological and spiritual disturbances and their
respective cures (spiritual healing), as well as topics covering the
field of nature, education and sociology. This specialization and show
of interest, and most importantly innovation in some cases, reflects (as
Ibn Khaldun indicated) the spread of civilization in the Islamic cities,
as well as an expressed need to arrive at practical solutions to the
diverse problems faced in these cities, in the intellectual fields and
other areas of life.          Despite there being no conflict to speak
of between science and religion as such in Islamic civilization; we find
that there were some major differences between some*ulema* in the field
of*fiqh* and some philosophers, and that these were not rare. These
conflicts however need to be viewed in the context of intellectual
exchange. We have for instance, the discussion between Imam Ahmed ibn
Hanbal and the Mutazilites over the issue of the creation of the Qur'an,
and the arguments that took place between Imam Al-Ghazzali and Ibn-Rushd
which were compiled in the famous*Tahafut al-falasifa* (The Refutation
of the Philosophers) and*Tahafut-u-Tahafut*  (The Refutation of the
Refutation). Some scholars like Ibn Taymiyyah may have, indeed, accused
scholars like Al-Farabi and Ibn Sina of disbelief, but this charge was
not put forward during the philosopher's lifetime, nor did it lead to
punishment.

What we hope to retain from these discussions is the manifestation of
different subjects and methods of dealing with them from the examples of
the Muslim scholars, as they studied the situations that were facing
them; especially in the areas of*aqida* , *fiqh* , logic and situations
related to political power. In the field of physics, there was no
fundamental conflict between Muslim thinkers, as they did not mix
matters of faith with those that pertained to the physical sciences. In
the domain of history, the innovation of Ibn Khaldun for instance,
revolves primarily around his criticism of the methods followed by his
predecessors. He presented their mistakes and mishaps objectively and
eventually suggested a new subject and method for study, which he called
the sciences of civilization (sociology).

Interestingly, scholars like Ibn Khaldun, innovators of new topics and
disciplines, who extended their own ideas, as well as gaining expertise
in the field of education and learning, did not call for a detachment or
a separation between their area of specialization and the rest of the
sciences, such as the religious sciences. In spite of the lack of a
background to the claim for separation in the history of Islamic
thought, the dismemberment of the various disciplines of knowledge is,
however, being proposed today.

Is it really their detachment from other disciplines that has impeded
the advancement of the social sciences in the Muslim world? Is there a
definite need to detach the social sciences from the rest of the Islamic
sciences? And what is the real difference between 'detachment' and the
'dismemberment' of the sciences?

To answer these questions, however, briefly, we need to address the
following issue of the relationship between the topics of modern social
sciences and those of religious sciences (*aqida* , law and*fiqh* ) in
the Islamic setting.
