The relationship between social sciences and religious sciences.
================================================================

The understanding of the Holy Qur'an and the honorable Hadith, and the
application of their teachings are, undoubtedly, the platforms from
which are launched the religious and the linguistic sciences in the
world of Islam. Nevertheless, throughout Islamic history what has
actually happened is that excessive attention, a plethora we might say,
has been paid towards ritual jurisdiction, to the detriment of
jurisdiction which regulates the relationships between the Muslims
themselves, and with their environment. This plethora has its own
political and psychological motives. Al-Banna tackled these motives in
1996, in his book*For a New Jurisdiction* .

I, myself, in fact, offered this as a subject for discussion to the
students of post-graduate studies in the Institute of Fundamental
Religious Studies*(M'ahad usul al din)* in Algiers  several years ago;
as this topic has great relevance to the advancement of the sciences
from an Islamic viewpoint in the past, the present and also in the
future. The aim was not merely discussion of the topic for the sake of
discussion, but to show ultimately that it was necessary not to opt for
a cut and dry separation of the sciences, but rather to opt for a
separation of purpose. What is inferred by a separation of purpose is
the study in depth of a given science after defining its topic and its
methodology with precision. In no way should this suggest a divorce
between the religious sciences and the social sciences as was suggested
in the West, in order to separate religion from science on the one hand,
and philosophy from the rest of the sciences on the other.

What we are calling for in the context of*Islamization of knowledge* is
for the sciences to be “integrative” once their philosophical
frameworks, topics and methodologies are clearly defined, and not
allowing one science to reign over another unless due to the criterion
of law, reason or a combination of both. Failing to achieve the above
mentioned “integration” could result in:

1) The sad separation of the sciences from each other in general and in
particular science from religion, as is already the case in a number of
Western and Muslim countries. This is most noticeable at the university
level and in specialized institutes in the Muslim World, where the
specialist in religious sciences barely knows about psychology and
sociology, and similarly the specialist in the social sciences knows
precious little about the religious sciences.

2) The jumbling up of the topics and the methodologies of these sciences
and their aims; in addition to the possibility of experiencing the
domination of the methodology pursued in some sciences over that of
others, for example,  the possibility of experiencing the hegemony of
the religious scholars and scholars of jurisprudence (the*fuqahah)* over
the other scientists. This would freeze any amelioration in these areas.

To avoid such a sad separation or domination, a number of
recommendations have been proposed to tighten the gap between the
Islamic sciences and the*ulema* on one hand, and the modern social
sciences and their specialists on the other, in the Muslim world. The
following are a number of recommendations that have been put forward in
the Muslim world as models in social sciences. They explain the
positions of different scholars and their endeavors to tackle this issue
from an Islamic perspective.

In a short epistle (1989), Al-Faruqi endeavored to give social sciences
an Islamic tone. After he had shown the shortcomings of Western
methodology in the study of  Social Sciences and of their scholars; for
example the fact that they had overlooked spiritual aspects, their
biases, and the fact that they had distanced values from the field of
social science. Al-Faruqi then moved on to elaborate on the issue of how
to give the social sciences an "Islamic tuning." To realize this, he
suggested the following:

1- The “re-integration” of all studies and sciences under the banner of
'Unity' (*tawhid* ).

2- The need for social sciences to focus on Allah's vicegerency, which
implies man's vicegerency. Following which these sciences could be
called "Sciences of the*Ummah* ." Al-Faruqi stressed that the study of a
society cannot be free of judgmental values.

3 - Sciences of the*Ummah* should not be neglected in favor of natural
sciences, they should occupy the same position of importance.

4 - The study of reality should not lead to the neglect of "how things
ought to be."

After this appeal, Al-Faruqi goes on to explain the principles that a
scholar of social science should abide by, the first of which is Islam
and what it aims for; then, to keep close to the Divine Model which
manifested in human terms by the Prophet; to take heed of values; to
work to search for the truth in the light of that Divine Model; and,
whenever it is possible, to produce a new format of criticism in the
social sciences; Are these pre-requisites sufficient to secure the
casting of an Islamic tone over the social sciences? Can we generalize
Al-Faruqi's criticism about the Western social sciences?  And can we
validate the application of individual Western social scientists to the
social sciences as a whole?

I will not pretend that I am able to give answers to these questions in
this short study. However, I would like to share an opinion that the
nature of the relationship between the social sciences and religion in
the West may shed a light or give an indirect answer to these questions
and that, as we are aware, will demand engagement in debates, and lucid
answers from the Muslim thinkers and researchers, without prejudice or
reticence. Al-Faruqi sowed the initial seeds in the field of the
'Islamization of Knowledge', and on the very sensitive topic of 'casting
social sciences with an Islamic tone'. He also opened the door to
whoever followed him to organize conferences and congresses in order to
deepen the study and form different viewpoints. Thus, the International
Institute of Islamic Thought held many conferences with the object of
cementing this idea, and bringing it to the verge of practice and
scientific theorizing. However, these attempts have not been made
without enduring some superficial and simplistic approaches to the issue
at stake; neither did it go without causing negative reactions nor
having to face opposition, at least in some aspect of the project, as
expressed in the views of Burhan Ghalion (1993). I will skim over these
opinions as the subject does not require a profound study or a full
appraisal here.

In 1992, during a conference which was held in Cairo, under the auspices
of the International Institute of Islamic Thought and the Architects
Union, the problem of differentiating between the social sciences was
again raised. A number of related issues were raised, such as 'social
sciences at the cross-roads of westernisation and modernization' by
Rafik Habib; and 'features of prejudice and objectivity in the Western
human social thought and in the Khaldunian thought' by Mahmud
Al-Dhawadi, to name but two.

If we consider this last topic as a sample of the  many theses forwarded
during that conference, we note that Al-Dhawadi defined the concepts of
'objectivity' and 'subjectivity', he then moved on to elucidate the
motives for subjectivity in the social sciences in the West. He argued
that the crisis that has been endured by man and social sciences for the
last two decades at least, is by and large referred back to the issue of
objectivity and subjectivity (p.7) and to consolidate this view, he
discussed the increasing amount of criticism from Western scholars and
specialists, directed at social and human sciences in the West.

Al-Dhawadi is undoubtedly has a right to proceed by giving the claims
and views that support his position; however, the mere listing of claims
without arguing them, and not giving the counter-arguments could also be
seen as a bias that Muslim scholars should avoid. As to the crisis of
the social sciences in the Muslim world; in his opinion it can be
traced  back to two problems 1) our uncritical acceptance of concepts of
man and society that stem from the experimental, materialist Western
mind, and 2) the fact that since coming under the spell of the West, we
have not continued the study of Ibn Khaldun's idea, to gain and access
the sources of experimental intellectual knowledge on the one hand, and
the sources of psychological, spiritual, and transcendental knowledge on
the other.

For my part, I have no objection to adopting Ibn Khaldun's model for the
study of civilization, the analysis of history, on the basis of the
descriptive and historical model that he adopted. However, I have
reservations concerning the first problem identified by Al-Dhawadi,
which is based on our uncritical acceptance of concepts of man and
society which stem from the experimental and materialist Western mind.
Firstly,  this claim cannot be generalized, as it does not apply to all
of us; and secondly, the effects of this wholesale adoption of Western
concepts is not obvious. If this adoption had taken place we would have
noticed the spread of empirical thought among the Muslim social
scientists, however this is not the case. There is, in fact, such a
general and complete withdrawal from experimentation that one worries
whether we might be suffering from 'experimentation phobia'.

After this, Al-Dhawadi addressed the field of psychology, and commented
on its use of mice, pigeons and monkeys for the purpose of conducting
laboratory behavioral experiments which, in his words, has become
"commonplace in Psychology and the results are applied to human
behavior. This means that psychologists do not differentiate between man
and animals,"(p.19)

Again, I have no qualms with this being applicable, to a certain extent,
on the followers of the behaviorist school; but how can it be extended
to all the branches of psychology (of which there are almost fifty
today), and to individual psychologists who belong to different schools
which have completely different methodologies?

In addition to the potent efforts of the late Al-Faruqi in highlighting
the serious issue of the necessity to cast the social sciences with an
Islamic tone; and efforts made by scholars in The Association of Muslim
Social Scientists and other institutions and individuals; there appeared
in 1979 an article by Malik Badri from his book*The Dilemma of Muslim
Psychologists* . In my estimation, Badri's work made an unquestionable
contribution to show the position of ethical and religious aspects in
the study of psychology. Laying bare the dilemma of Muslim psychologists
is, needless to say, of great necessity but remains insufficient in the
face of the problem. Should we not, perhaps, refrain from being obsessed
with our problems and rise above our constraints, taming our criticism
of Western social sciences? Should our endeavors not converge towards
developing the social sciences with precise topics and strict
methodologies, to enable us to obtain a clear understanding of Muslim
realities, and to stimulate us to resolve the problems in a scientific
way that does not uproot our faith nor our consciousness? Thus, in Dr.
Badri's work we have been, indeed, warned against the dangers of being
in the 'Lizard's hole', but we are still left short of finding ways to
get out of it.

The majority of the exertions made by Muslim scholars working on the
issue of knowledge, could be reduced to superficial claims about Western
social sciences being in a crisis, that they are prejudiced, against
values, have ignored the spiritual aspect, are not humane, and finally,
that they are also secular. Sadly, apart from some rare exceptions, one
does not often come across scholars who discuss the*raison - d'etre* of
these sciences, the actual part they play in diagnosing problems, and to
solving some of them, or any other positive factors.  (See Rajeb, 1996)

It is true that some institutions, universities and colleges begin to
appear here and there in the Muslim world with intentions to devise
curricula that will assure the “integration” of instruction in "revealed
knowledge" with instruction in modern social science, in the hope that
this would ease the reticence felt by both parties. Despite these
exceptions, one still witnesses that proposals put forward by Muslim
scholars to overcome this crisis are still, to my understanding, far too
idealistic and not scientific. One cannot but hold in deep respect, the
candid endeavors of the scholars, but I question whether this pattern of
thought should become our way of legitimizing the social sciences.

The reality is, that the origins of these ventures, that aim at
subjugating all sciences to the methodology and the fundamentals of
religious sciences are not recent. They can be traced back to the middle
period of the Islamic civilization, when the doctors of *kalam* were
immersed in the acute question of the relationship between reason and
revelation (Attiya, 1980), for example, Ibn Rushd discussion in his book
*Final conclusions and accounts of the connections of Philosophy and Law
(Fasl al-magal, wa taqrir ma bayna al-shariati wal hikmati min itisal*
).

Recently Dr. Jamal Attiya held a seminar on the issue of jurisprudence
and the social sciences during which he asked these two questions:

1) Is it within the means of jurisprudence to make contributions towards
the development of methodologies in social sciences?

2) Can jurisprudence gain something from the methodologies of the social
sciences?

According to Attiya there are two groups with two different answers to
these questions. One that emphatically rejects the methodology of
jurisprudence, this is the view of the specialists in the social
sciences, (but he did not specify whether he was alluding to Muslims or
non-Muslims ): and a second that believes that "the social sciences
cannot develop if they are tied to strict criteria" (p.11)  As for Dr.
Attiya himself, he is of the opinion that the science of jurisprudence
was originally designed to make the orders of Allah precise and clear,
and subsequently to deduct rules from them. It was not designed to
explain social phenomena and causal relationships, nor to find the rules
which control these phenomena. It is therefore unjust to ask the science
of jurisprudence to bear a burden that it cannot take. (p.12)

Dr. Attiya's input to finding way for possible cooperation and
“integration” between jurisprudence and the social sciences is not to be
discredited. It is just as he himself pointed, that jurisprudence is
founded on deductive methods. I would like to add here, that the social
sciences are founded on both the deductive and the inductive methods;
generally making more use of the latter.

The desire to subjugate the social sciences to jurisprudence, whether it
be from the aspect of methodology or content, is still luring Muslim
researchers up until now. The periodical of Islamization of
knowledge*Islamiyat al Marifa* , in its first edition (June, 1995),
published an article by Doctor Louay Safi, the title of which
was*Towards a fundamentalist methodology for social studies* . Safi
asserts that "Conflict between sciences and religion is not a
deterministic conflict that applies to all human culture," and he adds
"but it is specifically related to the Western historical experience."
He also points out that any attempts to reproduce the same conflict
within the Islamic culture are invented attempts. After this assertion
he continued to the topic of the source of knowledge, and explains that
"The efforts of early Muslim scholars were  limited to the development
of instruments for, and methods of text research, consequently they did
not develop a high-standard of methodology to study historical and
social phenomena; thus their social and historical knowledge was lacking
in scientific precision and methodological cohesion."

This unconditional criticism which spared none of the scholars, with the
exception of Ibn Khaldun, is difficult for me to accept. Nevertheless, I
find myself in agreement with Safi when he attested that "Development of
textual methodology, to the detriment of historical methodology led to a
clear theoretical and conceptual dysfunction, especially in those areas
where precision concerning a society structure and social organization
is needed."

Disregard for inductive methodology was common among Muslim scholars,
excepting the efforts of Razi and Jaber ibn Hayan in medicine and
science, and Al Shatibi in *shari'a,* who all contributed to the
development of induction as a methodology for research. Despite the
efforts of these scholars, exceptional as they were, they were unable to
lead to the propagation of the experimental spirit, nor to the
establishment of inductive methods to conduct and execute experiments
among the Muslim nation. After a critical review of methodology in the
Muslim context, Safi, (as do most modern Muslim scholars,) moves on to a
criticism of Western thought, drawing attention to the 'methodological
mishap' that is reverberating in the Western scientific milieu due to
"the gradual estrangement from revelation."

In reference to the fundamental methodology proposed by Safi, it is
regarded as a "balanced methodology" which aims at realizing
"“integration”" between the rules and regulations deduced from revealed
sources and those induced from historical sources.

When we ponder over endeavors that hope to legitimize social sciences,
by creating bridges between them and the sciences of the*shari'a,*
especially with jurisprudence, we will notice; unfortunately, that the
Muslim mind is infatuated with the power of its heritage, and finds
itself fettered by its own manacles*.* Some of the leading figures in
the Islamization of knowledge movement have indeed been alerted to the
hindering weight of heritage, which, if mishandled, reinforces the grip
of its traditional concepts and methodologies on the Muslim mind. These
scholars, despite regarding the Muslim heritage as one of the richest of
all human heritage, insist that we should see to it that it is filtered,
as it cannot  be followed 'through thick and thin till death do us
part'.

This is perhaps what led Dr. Alouani (1993) to affirm that Islamization
of knowledge as a methodology of knowledge revolves around the six main
axes, i.e..: the methodological treatment of the Qur'an, the*sunnah* ,
Islamic heritage, and human heritage, the formation and building of a
Qur'anic methodology, and lastly the building of a contemporary Islamic
knowledge system. Without a positive and conscientious intercourse with
the heritage, it could become a factor that may become a stumbling block
to what could otherwise be discovered by the Muslims about the universal
knowledge contained in the Qur'an. Consequently this heritage may
produce another heritage that might be considered by a thirsty person as
water, when in actual fact it is only a mirage. This type of heritage
cannot effectively motivate a society.

During a seminar on the Islamization of knowledge (June, 1996 in
Malaysia) Dr. Alouani insisted on a sober criticism, and a revision of a
number of matters related to perception, timing, and movement towards
religion, innovation and change. He drew attention to three steps:

- The revision of the studies based on the Qur'an.

- The revision of the studies of the*Sunnah,* and their interpretations.

- The revision of heritage studies.

Besides the hegemony of fundamental methodology (i.e.. that based on
deductive Qur'anic analysis); its impact and grip on the minds of many
contemporary Muslim thinkers; and the weight of jurisdictional,
theological and political pressure they have been subjected to,
contemporary Muslim thinkers have to also face the looming danger of the
'normative theory' with its jurisdictional values, and other impending
complications that are often presented in the form of dualisms, e.g..
true and the false. We do not hesitate to say that these looming
dangers, and the excessive desire to criticize the West as a way of
trying to dispel Western domination, will have grave consequences on
theorization and diagnosis operations, and ultimately on the ability to
provide solutions for the underdeveloped state of the*Ummah* .

Abu Sulayman (1992) stated that one of those consequences would be the
'live burial of social sciences'. He explained that the development of
events and political conflicts in Muslim countries had brought about a
separation between the political leadership and the intellectual
leadership. He said that immersion in descriptive and traditional
studies; living meagerly on the literalism methodology and the sciences
relevant only to the Qur'an; as well as the separation of the
intellectual leadership (especially the jurisdictional) from the
political leadership are, among the factors that have hindered the
progress of social sciences, and led to the plethora of doctrinal
writings on ritual jurisprudence (*Fiqh al-Ibadat* ) to the detriment of
transactional jurisprudence ( *Fiqh al-Muamalat).* This was explained by
Al-Banna (1996), who demonstrated that the political factors which had
prompted the accumulation of *Fiqh al-Ibadat* , continue until today.
One of the worst sequels of this 'ritualistic accumulation', to use
Al-Banna's words, is the fact that it is causing a distortion so
profound and so  pervasive, that it is virtually becoming synonymous
with today's Muslim personality.

For even though this unrestrained attack on traditional jurisdiction,
blaming it for the backwardness and the distortion of the personality of
Muslims, could be regarded as harsh, the fact remains that Al-Banna and
Abu Suleyman, among others, have somehow put their finger right on the
long malady which has made the Muslims be unable to progress. This has
been epitomized in the intellectual aspect, particularly in regard to
methodology, due to the importance of the  categorization of the
sciences being based on the criteria of their content and methodology.
In fact, to make the utilization of these sciences feasible for Islamic
societies, it is incumbent on us to by-pass the unrealistic intellectual
problematic of 'reason and revelation', 'the Qur'an and actuality', 'the
true and the false', 'normativism and positivism' and 'certitude and
speculation' and so forth. It is unrealistic that all our energies be
expended on the treatment, repetition and reiteration of these
problematic from centuries ago, and them still consuming so much of our
time and efforts. It has almost become like an obsession ruling over
conscious and subconscious alike, despite the existence of guidance in
the Qur'an and the vast amount of literature left behind by many
thinkers in the league of Ibn Rushd or Ibn Taymiyyah.

Adding to these problematic issues is the question of ethics or*aqida*
and their influences on the sciences. One can hardly read anything today
that does not refer to the prejudice of Western social sciences, the
fact of their being driven by Western values, or their overlooking the
issue of 'values' altogether! It is worth saying here, that the nature
of knowledge or science is impartial it is rather its usage and the
direction taken by human beings that produces prejudice.

In other words objectivity and subjectivity are qualities that pertain
to humans, and not to sciences, or even to art. Those who claim that the
social sciences have overlooked, for example, values, often said this at
a time when it had become a major theme in psychology and sociology,
enjoying discussion in a number of books and studies being published.
Moreover, there is nothing to prevent us from studying values ourselves
from an Islamic perspective, and including it in our psycho-social
studies? Hand-cuffing the social sciences to the statute laws of values
will not give birth to social sciences, but rather to ethics, Sufism,
religious sciences and so forth.

Indeed, the subjugation of social sciences to fundamental methodology,
or chaining them to the laws of ethics would, inevitably be conducive to
the investigation of the true and the false; and the question of belief
and disbelief. This in turn, would hold us hostages under the uneasy
weight of heritage; where as a practice, all differences in the
traditional sciences are to be sent back with immediacy to ethical law,
as Dr. Alouani pointed out. It is because Islamic sciences are based on
the fundamentals of religion and jurisdiction, which are both
established on the same ethical laws that some serious dualism have
emerged in Islamic thought i.e..: those who are right and those who are
wrong; the saved sect and the damned sect, etc. So as to avoid such
intellectual standards, it is more laudable to refrain from our
obsession with this dualism (Alouani, 1996), and practice the famous
Arabic saying: "Savor that which is clear from that which is unclear."

It goes without saying that, we as specialists of social studies, are
under the obligation to promulgate these sciences to the service of
religion and the Islamic nation, in the light of this I would like to
suggest the following principles:

1) To avoid, as much as it is possible, reference to ethical laws during
the study of  psychological, sociological and historical phenomena. This
does not insinuate estrangement of the topic of ethics, nor to rejecting
Islamic values. On the contrary, the topic of ethics ought to be
regarded as a specific one in psychology, and ought to enjoy scientific
study with the aim of showing the gap that exists between the world of
ethics in Islam, and the world in which the Muslims are behaving. This
could be done in the light of some major factors such as personality,
age, sex, environment, culture and history.

2) To avoid being engulfed by heritage, and being maladroit in its
application to contemporary psychological phenomena, especially with a
heritage that is strongly influenced by Greek philosophy and medicine,
and by bygone conceptions.

3) To avoid extreme positions vis-a-vis that which is not Islamic, and
benefit from the heritage of humanity, with justice and good faith.
Needless to say, heritage is not just Western, but also Eastern,
Southern and Northern also!

4) To avoid a blind imitation of the West in all its theories,
philosophies, and ideological backgrounds.

5) To sanction the Holy Qur'an and the*sunnah* as the two sources of
knowledge that are complementary to the universal knowledge which man
has formulated by way of using deductive, inductive and other methods of
scientific research; maintaining these two sources as the main
references in matters of*aqida* , ethics, morals and conduct.

6) To refer to the social sciences and their various branches to
describe Muslim problems, psychological, sociological and educational
etc.. Thereby creating a description endowed with such precision that it
should enable us to adopt strategies and plans relevant to Muslim
society, and in accordance with its environmental, cultural and
historical conditions.

7) To establish Islamic institutions specializing in social sciences,
and to form organizations and bodies which would set up networks
enabling Muslim specialists to exchange experiences and cooperate in
various fields, and for the publication of specialized journals.

8) At the university level, there is a need to devise methodologies that
will help us to secure the “integration” of Islamic knowledge with
specialization in social sciences, as well as a need for experts and
specialists to contribute to the publication of books and reading
material for the various specialties.

What I am attempting to say briefly is, that our criticism of the West
is marred by emotionalism and reductionism, as we are inclined to view
human heritage as connoting Western heritage only. Due to this attitude,
we show either a feigned ignorance or a lack of awareness of the
multiplicity and variety in Western, as well as universal thought. We
also ignore the criticism of Western thought from within itself; and not
only that, failing to grasp new specialties in the West, we are likely
to reduce the meaning of science in the West, to secularism, in the same
way that we have reduced psychology to 'Freudianism' The truth of the
matter is that there are many sub-schools even in 'Freudianism'. The
number of specialties in psychology alone is now more than fifty, and
the American Psychological Association is one century old. It is true
that these specialization's are there for the service of man and
society, and that some of them are also devised to exert their influence
on us, to oppose us, and to invade us culturally and psychologically,
and they might, indeed, work to deepen our conflicts and sectarianism
and busy us more and more with deadly superficialities.

If this happens, on what grounds do we have for putting the blame, of
our own incompetence and failure, on the West, or other than the West;
and reducing ourselves to playing the victim, simply turning a blind eye
to the fact that the terms of defeat lie within our own hands.

We can summarize the different positions and attitudes to moving
foreword in the following way:

1) Religious thinkers and scholars of jurisprudence (the*fuqaha* ) in
particular, should cooperate with specialists in the social sciences.
This recommendation was included in Malek Bennabi's book*The Muslim in
the Economic World* (1979 edition). In this work he appealed to the
experts in economics to cooperate with the*fuqaha* , in economic
matters. According to Bennabi the specific function of the*fuqaha* is to
restrict themselves to saying whether or not the proposals put forward
by the specialists are acceptable, according to the principles of
Islamic jurisprudence.

2) What is being proposed in the field of social sciences should be
publicized. It is from this point of view that the scholar of religion
or jurisprudence is able to ascertain whether there is any contradiction
between the intellectual findings of the social sciences; the
fundamentals of faith; the principles of religious law; and matters of
jurisprudence. One of those scholars that made this point recently is
Ibrahim Rajeb (1996), and his view is not unlike Bennabi's.

3) Studies should rely on methodology properly suited to the social
sciences (see Safi,1995 and Attiyya,1988).

Although I am happy to present these views to you, and to read about
them for my own knowledge, I do not support these proposals, as they
appear to promote the religious scholar to the status of a final judge.

Nevertheless, I feel that cooperation should start at the grass-roots to
avoid falling into circumstances which facilitate the monopoly and
domination of the former over the latter, and even reach the stage where
the religious scholar would actually refuse from the outset, a great
many psychological and sociological theses.

Dr. Rajab mentioned that in a private encounter, one religious scholar
had asked him about his field of specialization, and that when he had
told him that he was a specialist in social sciences, the scholar turned
away murmuring "I seek refuge in Allah from this" !!! Now, how can it be
conceived that a specialist would exhibit the cream of his work to this
'pseudo-scholar'? This attitude is fortunately a rare one.

Moreover, these trends, in particular the third, aims at, I am afraid,
to propagate the domination of the science of jurisprudence's
methodologies over social sciences, which is a methodology that is more
suited to deal with theoretical texts and forms. Thus, to avoid these
same dilemmas, and to bring the social sciences and religious sciences
closer, it is important that the specialist in religious sciences should
undertake some psychological and social studies, as is happening at the
Islamic University of Qucentina (Eastern Algeria), the Institute of
Fundamental Religious Studies in Algiers, and the International Islamic
University of Malaysia. Likewise, the specialist in social sciences
should undertake some religious studies (again this is being practiced
at the International Islamic University of Malaysia), but unfortunately
this second combination is very rare.

Once the appropriate methodology and curriculum to achieve these goals
have been established, some results are anticipated as a consequence of
the closure of this gap:

1) The development of future generations of multi-accomplished scholars,
who besides mastering their specialty, do not suffer from  ignorance,
nonchalance, shortcomings or incompetence in other fields, especially
not in those that are related to their fields of specialization.

2) The development of future generations of scholars and researchers who
will not only assert the position, and epitomize the methodology of
intellectual “integration” between the Islamic sciences and the social
sciences, but also the “integration” and the interaction of the various
factors that contribute to the formation of psychological and social
phenomena.

3) The development of future generations of scholars and researchers who
are able to make personal efforts in elaborating on the field of
religious sciences, based on a sound interpretation of the sources, and
an ability to decipher reality at the same time. This would revive the
exercise of personal judgment based on the Scriptures (*ijtihad* ) and
would assist in intellectual exertion in the field of*Fiqh al-Muamalat*
rather than adding to the already existing surplus in*Fiqh al-Ibadat* .

4) The  development of future generations of specialists in social
science who are well informed about the place of revelation as a source
of knowledge, and who are also well aware of psychological and social
realities when studying any phenomena related to their field.


